A History of the New World Order ""And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free"" Final Warning ""reflects an amazing digest of monumental resource material involving a multitude of viewpoints and positions on the conspiratorial concept of history.
It was just so incredible, so inconceivable, that it couldn't be true; but I couldn't get it out of my mind.
As it ended up, I wasn't able to make any conclusions regarding his authenticity, however 90% of what he said about the Illuminati was true, and had been documented.
I continued my research, and the deeper I got, the more disturbing it became.
When I sat in church as a child, and would hear of what the Bible said about what was going to happen in the ""last days"", it was really hard to imagine how that all could be possible.
Somehow, the information I was finding out about the Illuminati was putting all of this Eschatology into perspective.
Now, not only did it appear possible, it became an undeniable fact, that an unsuspecting world was being driven towards the fulfillment of prophecies that had been made nearly 2,000 years ago.
For six years, I devoted hundreds of hours into finding out all I could concerning the Illuminati.
Because of some interest concerning this project, a few copies were printed and sold.
I contacted a few publishers hoping to get it published on a larger scale, but none wanted to commit to a book of this size that would only appeal to a small segment of people.
That, and a job where I worked six days a week, pushed this book to the back burner.
This, and new information which had come to light in the past couple of years, prompted me to dust off my manuscript, and rework it.
What emerged is an astonishing compilation of history and facts which support my theory concerning this developing New World Order.
My goal was to self-publish the book to show that there was a market for this information.
The book was sold in most Christian book stores in the central Pennsylvania area, was available by mail order, and was carried by four distributors around the country.
Yet, the 100+ publishers that I contacted chose not to consider it for publication.
In the past year, an increasing number of people have heard about the book, and contacted me through the original publisher, hoping to get copies.
While there is still hope that it could be published by a national publisher, I would be remiss in my responsibility as a writer and researcher, if I did not make an effort to distribute this book.
In fact, the manuscript contains an additional 75 pages of information not found in the original book.
Many people have told me that reading my book is like reading an encyclopedia, or a college term paper.
I wanted to present each aspect in a dossier-style, so that you would have a concise overview of the most important areas of what has come to be known as the New World Order.
Yet together, they reveal the existence of a power that has been at work behind the scenes for many years.
Since much of the original research was done in the early 1980's, some of the material is dated; however, this historical tour-de-force provides the best introduction available on the subject.
Although it may be difficult for some people to read, just remember that this is a reference work.
It was very important to provide enough information to present a convincing argument.
For non-Christians, it is to let you know, that there is something really wrong here.
Abraham Lincoln's pledge of ""government of the people, by the people, for the people"", has become a joke.
After reading this book, you will know why things are the way they are.
Many churches have lost that sense of urgency, and the need to prepare for the fulfillment of all things.
We are about to plunge into the midst of what has been foretold many years ago.
The Bible which you have been reading for years will come alive like never before.
You knew why it was going to happen, now you will know how it's going to happen.
There was never really an explanation as to what the term meant, only that it represented a new spirit of cooperation among the nations of the world in order to further the cause of peace.
And peace is good, so therefore the New World Order is good and should be accepted.
Like the old saying, you can't tell a book by its cover, I feel there is more here than meets the eye.
Edward VIII became King of England on January 20,1936, but he was forced to abdicate the throne eleven months later, when he married a commoner.
He became the Duke of Windsor, and in July, 1940, became the governor of the Bahamas.
When peace comes this time there is going to be a New Order of social justice.
Richard Gardner, former deputy assistant Secretary of State for International Organizations under Kennedy and Johnson, and a member of the Trilateral Commission, wrote in the April, 1974 issue of the Council on Foreign Relation's journal Foreign Affairs fpq.
The man who put the New World Order in the limelight, and did more than anyone to bring about its acceptance, was President George Bush.
On Saturday, August 25,1990, the United Nations Security Council voted unanimously to allow a joint military force to use whatever means necessary to enforce a UN blockade against the country of Iraq.
The crisis in the Persian Gulf, as grave as it is, offers a rare opportunity to move toward an historic period of cooperation.
In an interview with CNN at the height of the Gulf War, Scowcroft said that he had doubts about the significance of Mid-East objectives regarding global policy.
A world where the United Nations, freed from cold war stalemate, is poised to fulfill the historic vision of its founders.
Somehow, the implications from these quotes, lends a sinister overtone to this New World Order.
After over 15 years of research, I have come to the conclusion that this country has been infiltrated by conspirators.
Members of an organiaation who are dedicated to establishing a one-world socialist government with them in control.
Introduction sounds unbelievable, like something out of a James Bond movie, yet it is a fact.
A fact that the media has refused to publicise, even attempting to cover it up and deny its very existence.
One of the documents that provided evidence concerning this, has been proven to be a complete fabrication.
Although some of the International Bankers which actually control this group are Jewish, there is no basis for indicting the entire Jewish race.
In the interest of truth, and accuracy, I must denounce this theory, and tell you that this book does not pursue that line of thinking.
In fact, there is plenty of evidence to the contrary, which is referred to in this book.
I know of the operations of this network because I have studied it for twenty years and was permitted for two years, in the early 1960's, to examine its papers and secret records.
Introduction acceptance speech at the Democratic Convention, said: ""As a teenager, I heard John Kennedy's summons to citizenship.
This is where Clinton received his indoctrination as an internationalist favoring one-world government.
This political action group has its own local political support organizations, its own pressure groups, its own vested interests, its foothold within our government.
Russell Long of Louisiana, who for 18 years was the Chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, said that our ""government is completely and totally out of control.
We do not know how much long term debt we have put on the American people.
We have created a bureaucracy in Washington so gigantic that it is running this government for the bureaucracy, the way they want, and not for the people of the United States.
Years ago, your mental system was ""programmed"" to think of the F in ""OF"" as a V, so it seems to disappear when you look for F's.
It was easy enough to see the ""real"" F's in FINISHED, FILES and SCIENTIFIC, but a conditioned ""blind spot"" blocked your awareness of the other three F's.
That is how the men working behind the scenes have been maneuvering and manipulating events and situations to achieve their goals.
That even though a new President is elected and a new Administration takes over, executive policy does not change, nor does the State of the Nation which continues to get worse.
To trace the origin and growth of the group which has come to be known as the New World Order, and why there is such a massive campaign to accept it.
You need to know just exactly what these changes are, and how they will affect the lives and you and your family.
Changes like the ones which have, and are occurring do not take place overnight.
We are dealing with a group which must have been growing for a long period of time, in order to obtain the power and influence necessary to achieve the global control now being exercised.
Adam Weishaupt, who was born on February 6,1748, the son of a Jewish rabbi.
When his father died in 1753, he was converted to Catholicism by Baron Johann Adam Ickstatt, who turned the early training of the boy over to the Jesuits.
Although Weishaupt later became a priest, he developed a distinct hatred for the Jesuits, and became an atheist.
Given access to the private library of Ickstatt, his Godfather, the young man became interested in the works of the French philosophers, and studied law, economics, politics, and history.
It is believed that Weishaupt got his ideas concerning the destruction of the Church from Voltaire's writings.
He studied in France, where he met Robespierre(who later led the French Revolution), and became friends with a few people in the French Royal Court.
It is believed, that through these contacts, he was introduced to Satanism.
Chapter One four years as a tutor until he was promoted to Assistant Instructor.
In 1770, he was chosen by Mayer Amschel Rothschild to develop an organization that he could use.
In 1773, he was made Professor of Canon Law, a post which had been held by the Jesuits for 90 years.
They had founded most of the Universities, and kept strict control of them in order to eliminate Protestant influence.
In 1773, Weishaupt got married, against the wishes of Ickstatt, who denounced him.
Two years later, at the age of 27, he was made Dean of the Faculty of Law.
The Jesuits, worried about his quick progression, tried to thwart his influence by secretly plotting against him, and his liberal thinking.
Not wanting to become a martyr for his free-thinking ideas, he began focusing on establishing his organization.
To confuse his detractors, he based the organizational structure on the one used by the Jesuits, however, his intention was to have a secret coalition of liberalism.
He studied the anti-Christian doctrines of the Manicheans, whose teachings revolved around astrology, medicine, and magic.
He had been indoctrinated into Egyptian occult practices by an unknown merchant named Kolmer, from Jutland(in the area around the border of Denmark and West Germany), who had been traveling around Europe since 1771.
He studied the power of the Eleusinian mysteries and the influence exerted by the secret cult of the Pythagoreans.
Pythagoras was a sixth century, B.C., philosopher who taught that men and women should combine their belongings which became the basic philosophy behind Communism.
Weishaupt also studied the teachings of the Essenes, and acquired copies of the 'Kabala', The Major Key of Solomon' and 'The Lesser Key of Solomon', which revealed how to conjure up demons and perform occult rituals.
He studied the various Masonic writings after meeting a Protestant Freemason from Hanover.
At first he thought about creating a superior Masonic-like organization, that would be made up of men possessing superior abilities in all fields, but concluded that Masonry was too open.
Weishaupt was instructed by the Rothschilds, to leave the Catholic Church, and unite all the different occult groups.
He created the coven called the 'Golden Dawn' which, till this day, is allegedly the Rothschilds' private coven.
Weishaupt spent five years working out a plan through which all of his ideas could be reduced to a single system which would be used to fight the oppression of religion, thereby loosening social ties.
Chapter One In 1774, he published a fictitious article called ""Sidonii Apollinarus Fragment"", which he said, was to prepare the people for the doctrine of reason.
On May 1,1776, under the direction of the newly formed House of Rothschild (and Wessely, Moses, Mendelssohn; and the Bankers, Itzig, Friedlander, and Meyer), who instigated the American Revolution to weaken Great Britain, Weishaupt founded the Ancient Illuminated Seers of Bavaria, which became known as the Order of the Illuminati.
It refers to someone who is enlightened, spiritually and intellectually.
Satan, when he was an angel, was known as Lucifer, the 'Bearer of Light', and being that the group's name evolved from this, we can see the underlying nature of its goals.
In addition, May 1st was a great day for all communist nations, where it was known as May Day; and it is also known as a special day to witches.
The Rosheniah, or ""Illuminated Ones"", was a group in Afghanistan during the 16th century, who sought the 'illumination' from the Supreme Being, who wanted a class of perfect men and women.
After reaching the fourth degree, ""Enlightened One"", the initiate would receive mystical powers, and when the eighth and final degree was reached, they were told they had achieved perfection.
An Afghan scholar said that their purpose was to influence people of importance to establish harmony in the world, and were devoted to fight the tyranny of the Moguls, who were the rulers of India.
The group survived until the 1700's, and gave birth to a couple offshoots, the Alumbrados of Spain, and the Illuminated Guerinets in France in 1654.
They claimed, that once perfection had been, they would experience a vision of God, and would enter into achieved direct communication with the Holy Spirit.
Once they had received the ""light"", they would possess superior human intelligence.
Their unusual claims resulted in the Inquisition issuing Edicts against them in 1568,1574, and 1623.
Ignatius de Loyola, the founder of the Jesuits, was put in jail for being a member.
Chapter One The ""Illuminati"" was a name used by a German sect that existed in the 15th century.
They practiced the occult, and professed to possess the 'light' received from Satan.
The name was also used by another group in 1760 at Avignon, who was influenced by the writings of philosopher Emanuel Swedenborg, which led to the Illuminated Theosophists in 1766 at Paris, then later in London.
There is no evidence to suggest that Weishaupt's Order of the Illuminati is a continuation of any of these groups, however, whether their teachings and philosophy had an influence on him, is another question.
Starting with only five members, the Illuminati wasn't fully operational until 1778.
Novice, Minerval, and Illuminated Minerval; and organized in a manner similar to Freemasonry and the Jesuits.
Even though he admired the structure of the Jesuit hierarchy, he wrote that no ex-Jesuits were to be admitted, except by special permission.
Their aim, he said, was to have a one-world government, to allow the elite to govern the world, thus preventing future wars.
Their new year began on March 21st, which some sources say is New Years Day for witches.
In 1777, Weishaupt joined the Eclectic Masonic lodge ""Theodore of Good Counsel"" in Munich, and towards the end of 1778, he came up with the idea of merging the Illuminati and the Masons.
Zwack became a Mason on November 27,1778, and working with a brother Mason, Abbe' Marotti, he divulged the secret of the Order.
By the middle of 1779, the Munich Masonic lodge was under the complete influence of the Illuminati.
During the first four years, about sixty active members had been recruited by a committee known as the ""Insinuators"", and close to 1,000 had become indirectly affiliated with the Order.
Soon, three more lodges were established Few knew the supreme direction of the Order.
Only those within the inner circle, known as the ""Areopagite"" , were aware of their true purpose.
To all others, Weishaupt said that he wanted a one-world government to prevent all future wars.
Chapter One original liberty and equality they had lost in the Garden of Eden.
Weishaupt said that Christ exhorted his disciples to despise riches in order to prepare the world for the community of goods that would do away with property ownership.
The Illuminati also used monetary and sex bribery to gain control of men in high places, then blackmailed them with the threat of financial ruin, public exposure, and fear of death.
Internal fighting soon developed because of Weishaupt's thirst for power.
Besides that, because only nominal dues were collected, the Order suffered financially.
He studied law at Gottingen, served in the courts of Hesse-Cassel and Weimar, and was a well-known writer of romance, poetry and philosophy.
He joined the Masonic lodge of Strict Observance, which was dedicated to the elimination of the occult sciences, which were widely practiced.
Knigge achieved the rank of Brother Commander, and had the title of Knight of the Swan.
Because of his developing exposure and interest in the occult, magic and alchemy, he joined the Rosicrucians, a secret organization that dated back to the fourteenth century, and reportedly was an occult group who participated in human sacrifice rituals.
He later renounced alchemy, and devoted his studies to the development of a form of Masonry that would allow man to regain the perfection they once had before the fall of Adam and Eve.
His idea was to reform Masonry, and he was going to make these proposals at the Congress of Wilhelmsbad.
However, the Marquis of Constanza (known as ""one of the most notorious of the Illuminati"") informed him that the Illuminati had already done that.
Chapter One Since this fell in line with Knigge's thinking, he was drawn into the Order.
Knigge was definitely a catch, because he had a talent for organization, and soon became the head of the Westphalia Circle.
He was instrumental in pushing for a merger between the Masons and the Illuminati.
Knigge was firmly supported by members of the Areopagite who felt that Weishaupt's supreme authority should be delegated to others, and they agreed with Knigge's proposed modifications for the organization.
Knigge was able to recruit the most effective propagandists, and from 1780 on, the growth of the Order was very rapid because its expansion was facilitated through its affiliation with the Masonic lodges.
Their goal was now to achieve their aims by splitting mankind into opposing ideologies, and for them to fight among themselves, thus weakening national governments and organized religion.
An understanding was finally reached between the Masons and the Illuminati, and on December 20,1781, a combined Order was proposed, which would add to the Illuminati organization, the first three degrees of Masonry.
It wasn't until the Congress of Wilhelmsbad from July 16th to August 29th, 1781 (which was attended by Masons, Martinistes, representatives from other secret organizations from Europe, America and Asia), that the alliance was official.
I can only tell you that all this is very much more serious than you think.
Because of a movement begun by Dohm's book Upon the Civil Amelioration of the Condition of the Jews m 1781, and a book by Mirabeau in London, a resolution was passed at the Congress to allow Jews into the Lodges, It was obvious that it was done for financial reasons, because the Illuminati moved their headquarters to Frankfurt, Germany, a stronghold of Jewish finance.
As the Order spread throughout Germany, money was contributed from such leading Jewish families as the Oppenheimers, Wertheimers, Schusters, Speyers, Sterns , and of course, the Rothschilds.
It is believed that the Rothschild family used the Illuminati as a means to achieving their goal of world-wide dominance.
Mayer Amschel Rothschild was born in Frankfurt-on-the-Main in Germany, the son of Moses Amschel Bauer, a banker and goldsmith.
Their name was derived from the 'red shield'Crotschildt') that hung over the door of their shop, and had been the emblem of revolutionary Jews in Eastern Europe.
A few years after his father's death, he worked as a clerk in a Hanover bank, which was owned by the Oppenheimers.
He became a junior partner, and soon left to take over the business started by his father in 1750.
He bought and sold rare coins, and later succeeded in buying out several other coin dealers.
In 1769, he became a court agent for Prince William IX of Hesse-Kassel, who was the grandson of George II of England, a cousin to George III, a nephew of the King of Denmark, and a brotherin-law to the King of Sweden.
Soon Rothschild became the middleman for big Frankfurt bankers like the Bethmann Brothers, and Rueppell & Harnier.
After expanding his business to antiques, wineries, and the importing of manufactured materials from England, the Rothschild family began to amass a sizable fortune.
Prince William inherited his father's fortune upon his death in 1785, which was the largest private fortune in Europe.
Some of this money had come from Great Britain paying for the use of 16,800 Hessian soldiers to stop the revolution in America, because the money was never given to the troops.
In 1804, the Rothschilds secretly made loans to the Denmark government, on behalf of Prince William.
In June, 1806, when Napoleon's troops pushed their way into Germany, Prince William fled to Denmark, leaving his money with Mayer Rothschild.
History tells us that Rothschild secretly buried William's ledgers, which revealed the full extent of his wealth, a list of debtors and the interest required from them, and 600,000 pounds, to keep Napoleon from confiscating it.
Buderus von Carlhausen, the Treasury official who handled William's finances, was given 'power of attorney', and he in turn made Rothschild his chief banker, responsible for collecting the interest on the royal loans.
Napoleon announced that all debts being paid to Prince William, were to go to the French Treasury, and offered a 25% commission on any debts that he would collect.
Developing circumstances soon allowed the Rothschilds to formulate a plan which would guarantee them the financial control of Europe, and soon the world.
It began with taking advantage of the outcome of the Battle of Waterloo, which was fought at La-BelleAlliance, seven miles south of Waterloo, which is a suburb of Brussels, Belgium.
Early in the battle, Napoleon appeared to be winning, and the first secret military report to London communicated that fact.
Chapter One under Gebhard Blucher, the tide turned in favor of Wellington.
On Sunday, June 18,1815, Rothworth, a courier of Nathan Rothschild, head of the London branch of the family, was on the battlefield, and upon seeing that Napoleon was being beaten, went by horse to Brussels, then to Ostende, and for 2,000 francs, got a sailor to get him to England across stormy seas.
When Nathan Rothschild received the news on June 20, he informed the government, who did not believe him, so with everyone believing Wellington to be defeated, Rothschild immediately began to sell all of his stock on the English Stock Market.
Everyone else followed his lead, and also began selling, causing stocks to plummet to practically nothing.
At the last minute, his agents secretly began buying up the stocks at rock-bottom prices.
On June 21, at 11 PM, Wellington's envoy, Major Henry Percy showed up at the War Office with his report that Napoleon had been crushed in a bitter eight hour battle, losing a third of his men.
This gave the Rothschild family complete control of the British economy, and forced England to set up a new Bank of England, which Nathan Rothschild controlled.
However, that wasn't the only angle he used to profit from the Battle of Waterloo.
Buderus was made a Baron, and the Rothschilds were the richest bankers in Europe.
In 1817, France, in order to get back on their feet again, secured loans from a French banking house in Ouvrard, and from the Baring Brothers in London.
The Rothschilds saw their chance to get a firm grip on the French economy, and on October, 1818, Rothschild agents began buying huge amounts of French government bonds, which caused their value to increase.
On November 5th, they were dumped on the open market, creating a financial panic as their value declined.
Mayer Rothschild had established banks in England, France, and Germany.
His sons, who were made Barons of the Austrian Empire, were set up to continue and expand his banking empire.
Chapter One once said: ""I care not what puppet is placed upon the throne of England to rule the Empire on which the sun never sets.
Rothschild and Sons(and has occupied the same premises since 1809, at 2 New Court, St.
This was the beginning of the House of Rothschild, which controlled a fortune estimated to be well over $300,000,000.
Soon the Rothschilds spanned Europe with railroads, invested in coal and ironworks, financed England's purchase of the Suez Canal, paid for oil exploration in Russia and the Sahara Desert, financed the czars of Russia, supported Cecil Rhodes' diamond operations, aided France in creating an empire in Africa, financed the Hapsburg monarchs, and saved the Vatican from bankruptcy.
In this country, through their American and European agents, they helped finance Rockefeller's Standard Oil, Carnegie Steel, and Harriman's Railroad.
In 1913, the family fortune was estimated to be over two billion dollars.
The oldest son of the oldest son was to be the head of the family, unless otherwise agreed upon by the rest of the family, as was the case in 1812, when Nathan was appointed as the patriarch.
For example, his son James Mayer married the daughter of another son, Salomon Mayer.
This rule became less important in later generations as they refocused family goals and married into other fortunes.
Chapter One Rothschild, and other International Bankers, have financed both sides of every war, since the American Revolution.
Financier Haym Salomon, who supported the patriots during the American Revolution, then later made loans to James Madison, Thomas Jefferson, and James Monroe, was a Rothschild agent.
As explained earlier, during the Napoleonic Wars, one branch of the family funded Napoleon, while another financed Great Britain, Germany, and other nations.
Their boldest maneuver came prior to the Civil War, which will be covered in a later chapter.
It is here that you will find the Bank of England, the Stock Exchange, Lloyd's of London, the Baltic Exchange , Fleet Street , the London Commodity Exchange (to trade coffee, rubber, sugar and wool), and the London Metal Exchange.
In 1215, its citizens received a Charter from King John, granting them the right to annually elect a mayor , a tradition that continues today.
Knuth, in his book ""Empire of the City,"" and Des Griffin, in his book ""Descent into Slavery,"" stated their belief that 'The City' is actually a sovereign state (much like the Vatican), and that since the establishment of the privately owned Bank of England in 1694, 'The City' has actually become the last word in the country's national affairs, with Prime Minister, Cabinet, and Parliament becoming only a front for the real power.
According to Knuth, when the queen enters 'The City', she is subservient to the Lord Mayor , because this privately-owned corporation is not subject to the Queen, or the Parliament.
There seems to be little doubt that the Rothschilds continue to influence the world economy, and it is known that they are squarely behind the movement to unite all the western European nations into a single political entity, which is just another step towards one-world government.
Chapter One Free and Accepted Masons, whose goals are, supposedly, to promote brotherhood.
According to early Masonic manuscripts, its origins can be traced back to Adam, who was said to be the first Mason.
The apron of Masonry allegedly represents the fig leaves worn by Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden.
The knowledge received by Adam after eating from the forbidden tree, was carried on by his son Seth, and then Nimrod(who was responsible for the Tower of Babel), the great-grandson of Noah.
When King Solomon was building the Temple, it is taught that Freemasonry was revived.
However, Martin L Wagner revealed in An Interpretation of Freemasonry that the ""name Solomon is not the Israelitish king.
A story recounted in Masonic tradition, has to do with Hiram Abiff, a Syrian Master Mason, known as the architect of Tyre, who was said to be hired by Solomon to build the Temple.
He was killed by three Fellow-Crafts, when he would not reveal the secret Masonic word, which was engraved on a gold triangle he wore around his neck.
Solomon found the triangle, and had it placed in a secret vault under the Temple.
Another Mason, Daniel Sickles, correlates him with an Egyptian god, and Pierson's Traditions of Freemasonry said that he actually represented all of the pagan sun gods, as does Mackey's Lexicon of Freemasonry.
What this does, is to relate the message that it was the sun god who was the builder of the Temple, which makes this Temple symbolic, and not to be confused with the Jewish Temple.
These groups who were the forerunners of the Masons, were the draftsmen, builders, carpenters, and craftsmen who erected the huge cathedrals, castles, abbeys and churches during the Middle Ages.
Because they ""lodged"" or lived together during the construction, this is where the term ""masonic lodge"" was originated.
The First Grand Lodge of England met at York in 926, where they adopted handsigns and passwords to identify themselves.
Their workplace, or Lodges, was where their initiations, rites, rituals and ceremonies took place.
In the 13th century, they formed an association, headquartered at Cologne, with Lodges at Strasbourg, Vienna, and Zurich.
Near the end of the 16th century, people who weren't builders, were admitted into the fraternity, and were called ""Accepted"" Masons.
They were usually distinguished members of the community, or in short, a source of funding.
Becoming more symbolic, the working masons and builders eventually quit, as did the Accepted Masons, who had become disappointed at what the organization really was.
He had been initiated by a secret society of intellectuals dedicated to civil and religious freedom.
It is believed that Bacon wrote a sequel to New Atlantis , which included details and timetables of how his Great Plan was to be accomplished.
Researchers believe that Thomas Jefferson was the last to examine the contents of this vault.
Inigo Jones reorganized the Lodges, introducing the Descartes rationalism, and they were now known as the Free and Accepted Masons.
Chapter One called the Grand Mother Lodge) by three members who met at the Apple-Tree Tavern, thus beginning the era of modern Freemasonry.
Rather than being a guild of stone masons and builders, they altered their philosophy and became a pseudo-religion who ""tried to cooperate with the Church so as to be able to work from the inside, rationalize the doctrine of Jesus and empty it gradually of its mystical content.
The members of the Grand Lodge of England brought their fraternity to America.
The Masons were firmly entrenched in the eastern colonies, but since 95% of the population identified themselves as Christians, they had to modify their philosophies to include Christian teachings.
The Grand Lodge of the United States was established in 1777, which officially cut all ties to their British counterparts.
France, Ireland , Spain, Holland, Germany, Africa, Scotland, Portugal , Switzerland , ltaly, Russia, Canada, Sweden(173548), Prussia, Austria, Poland, and Mexico.
Originally against the Masonic Order, Benjamin Franklin became a Mason in 1731, at the age of 25.
He became the Provincial Grand Master of Pennsylvania in 1734, and was the ""appointed spokesman"" of the secret societies.
As ambassador to France, he was honored there at a major Masonic lodge.
It is believed that while he was on a diplomatic trip to Paris to seek financing for the Revolution, he was initiated as a member of the Illuminati.
He took his Oath of Office on a Masonic Bible, as did his Vice-President, John Adams, who was also a Mason.
This Masonic Bible has an introductory section that explains that Masonry is not a Christian fraternity, but in fact supports all religions.
Eight of the signers of the Declaration of Independence were also members of the Fredericksburg Lodge.
Chapter One signers were believed to be Masons; however, only 8 were known to be members, while another 24 were suspected of being members.
It is also believed that 8 to 10 signers of the Articles of Confederation were Masons.
There were 9 Masons that signed the Constition, while 6 others later became members.
Other sources have used the figure of 13, while some have said there were as many as 28 members who signed the Constitution.
Because of the disagreement between various books and on-line sources, representing Masonic and non-Masonic sources, its easy to see how erroneous information becomes perpetuated as fact, and truth.
If the Masons can't even nail down the specifics of their own history, then, the only thing I can hope to do, is to produce as accurate of a picture as possible, based on the facts.
It was actually the Masons who instigated and carried out the American Revolution.
The secrecy of the Masonic lodges allowed the Colonial patriots to meet and discuss strategy.
It was commonly believed that the reason for the Revolution was ""taxation without representation"", when actually it was because the Parliament in the 1760's passed a law that no colony could issue its own money.
The colonies had to issue bonds, and sell them to the Bank, who would then loan them money.
Andrew Lodge in Boston, who dressed up as Mohawk Indians, and went aboard the Dartmouth, which was anchored in the harbor, and dumped its load of tea overboard.
The British government responded by closing the port, and sending in British troops.
Empress Catherine the Great of Russia, who wasn't controlled by the International Bankers, refused to send in 20,000 Russian troops against the colonists, when asked by King George III of England.
The Supreme Council of Scottish Rite Freemasonry was established in Charleston, South Carolina in 1801, because that area was geographically located on the 33rd parallel.
In 1755, the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry had expanded to 32 degrees, and now they added a 33rd degree.
In 1813, the Northern Supreme Council was established, consisting of 15 states, and was headquartered in Boston.
The Supreme Council, which represented the Southern jurisdiction, relocated to Washington, D.C., and covers the remaining 35 states, the District of Columbia, and United States protectorates.
Many State Governors, United States Senators and Congressmen are Masons.
There are about 16,000 Blue or Symbolic Lodges, with a Grand Lodge in every state, which represent more than four million members.
Members must be 21 years old, however, sons of members can be initiated at 18.
The Order of Demolay, The Order of Rainbow for Girls, and The Order of Job's Daughters, which allow children as young as 11 to become indoctrinated in Masonic teaching.
The Order of the Eastern Star, Ancient Arabic Order of Nobles of the Mystic Shrine, and Daughters of the Nile are organizations closely aligned with the Masons.
Any organization which strives to adhere to such a high moral standard certainly should deserve our admiration and respect.
Pope Clement XII in 1738, Pope Benedict XIV in 1751, Pope Plus VII in 1821, Pope Leo XII in 1825, Pope Plus VIII in 1829, Pope Gregory XVI in 1832, Pope Plus IX in 1846 and 1873, and Pope Leo XIII in 1884 and 1892.
In 1784, and again in 1845, the Bavarian government considered Masonry a danger to the state.
In 1814, The Regency of Milan and Governor of Venice echoed these same sentiments.
King John VI of Portugal issued orders in 1816, and again in 1824, prohibiting the operation of the fraternity.
Bataille, said that Masonry was just a cover organization for Satan worship, which occurred within its higher degrees, and was unknown to the ordinary member.
In France, a number of the Masonic sects dabbled with magic and occultism.
Many Druid ceremonies and witchcraft rites have been incorporated into Masonic rituals.
Their literature claims that Jesus was just a man, equal to Mohammed and Krishna, the Hindu God.
Chase said that the Bible is just one of the ""holy books"" of man, equal to the Koran, Hindu Scriptures and others.
Humanity therefore is the only personal God that there Masonic philosophy is that God is whatever you want him to be and is referred to in general terms as the ""deity"" and the ""Great Architect of the Universe"", but in higher degrees, he is identified as a force of nature, usually the sun.
No masonic prayers in monitors, handbooks and guides, end in Jesus' name, and if it is discovered that they do, the Grand Lodge of that state will revoke their charter.
Norman Vincent Peale, author of The Power of Positive Thinking was a 33rd degree Mason, and his name appeared in many Masonic publications.
In May, 1991, at a Dallas, Texas seminar for Christian writers, Dina Donahue, a contributing editor for Guidepost magazine, said that any submission to the publication can never refer to the deity of Jesus, and claim that He is the only means by which salvation can be achieved.
He can only be presented in a historical context as a prophet and philosopher.
She said that the reason for this was that "" Guidepost is an interfaith magazine, and Dr.
High level Masons believe that Lucifer never fell to earth, and that Lucifer is really God, and refer to Jehovah by the name of ""Adonay"", saying that he is the god of evil because he forces men to be subservient to his repressive dictates.
Chapter One handpicked members of the 32nd and 33rd Degrees, say that Jesus was an impostor, and that Lucifer is the true God.
He wrote that ""every man's conception of God must be proportioned to his mental cultivation, and intellectual powers, and moral excellence.
I think these various passages should settle any arguments concerning the antiChristian nature of the Masons.
Their role in history seemed to be to act as a diluting factor, to lessen the impact of Christianity through tolerance, and to politically work towards the goals established by the Illuminati.
It is not intended that he shall understand them; but it is intended that he shall imagine he understands them.
Andrew 30) Grand Elect Knight of Kadosh Consistory of Sublime Princes of the Royal Secret 31) Grand Inspector Inquisitor Commander 32) Sublime Prince of the Royal Secret Supreme Council 33) Sovereign Grand Inspector General The Mother Supreme Council of the World in Washington, D.C., awards all 33rd Degrees.
Mark Master Past Master Most Excellent Master Royal Arch Mason Royal Master Select Master Super Excellent Master Order of the Red Cross Order of the Knights of Malta Order of Knights Templar THE ILLUMINATI GROWS From Bavaria, the Order of the Illuminati spread into the Upper and Lower Rhenish provinces, Suabia, Franconia, Westphalia, Upper and Lower Saxony; and outside Germany into Austria and Switzerland.
By 1786 they had numerous lodges across the various German provinces, Austria, Hungary, England, Scotland, Poland, France, Belgium, Switzerland, Italy, Holland, Spain, Sweden, Russia, Ireland, Africa, and America.
Students who were members of wealthy families, with international leanings, were recommended for special training in internationalism.
Those trained at such schools were placed behind the scenes as experts and advisors to perpetuate Illuminati goals.
Weishaupt, worried that his control of the Order was diminishing, argued repeatedly with Knigge.
While he preferred to work in secrecy, Knigge wanted to move on to more substantial things.
On April 20,1784, Knigge quit, followed by Baron Bassus, Count Torring, Prince Kreitmaier, and others.
In July, Knigge signed an agreement promising to return all documents in his possession, and to keep quiet on what he knew about their plans and activities.
He resumed his work as a writer, later becoming an inspector of schools at Bremen, where he died on May 6,1796.
To insure that the activities of the Order would remain a secret, a warning as to the consequences of betraying the Order was including in the ceremony of initiation.
Chapter One would point a sword at the initiate and say: ""If you are a traitor and a perjurer, learn that all our Brothers are called upon to arm themselves against you.
In October, 1783, Joseph Utzschneider, a lawyer, who had dropped out of the Order in August, presented to the Duchess Maria Anna, a document which detailed the activities of the Illuminati.
He was upset because he had been promoted too slow, and was constantly prodded to prove his loyalty.
On June 22,1784, Duke Karl Theodore Dalberg, the Elector Palatinate of Bavaria, after discovering from the information that the goals of the Illuminati were to ""in time rule the world,"" by overthrowing all civil government, criticized all secret societies, and groups established without government sanction.
On March 2,1785, he issued a proclamation identifying the Illuminati as a branch of the Masons, and ordered that their Lodges be shut down.
The government began a war against the Order by initiating judicial inquiries at Ingolstadt.
In an attempt to preserve the secrecy of their motives, the Areopagite burned many of their documents, however, the government was able to seize many of their papers when they raided the Lodges.
In April, 1785, Utzschneider was able to convince three other members to come forward.
They were fellow professors at the Marienburg Academy who had doubts about the validity of the organization's principles when they discovered that they would receive no mystical powers.
The purposes of these six points were to divide the people politically, socially, and economically; to weaken countries and create a one-world government.
The government pardoned all public officials and military leaders who publicly admitted membership.
Those who didn't, and were discovered to be members, lost their rank and standing, were removed from office, and openly disgraced and humiliated.
Weishaupt was preparing to set his plans into motion for the French Revolution, which was slated to begin in 1789.
This book contained a history of the Illuminati, and many of their ideas for expansion and future endeavors.
However, after leaving Frankfurt, as the courier rode through Regensburg on horseback, he was struck by lightning and killed.
The authorities found the document and turned it over to the government.
Another source indicates the possibility that he may have been murdered, and the documents planted on him.
Xavier Zwack, a government lawyer, and one of the Order's most prominent leaders, whose name was on Renner's list, had his house in Landshut illegally searched by the police in October, 1785, and his papers seized.
Needless to say, all of this information shed more light on the Order, and the danger first realized by the government, had now become a national emergency.
In 1786, the government gathered all of the confiscated documents, and published them in a book called Original Writings of the Order and Sect of the Illuminati , which was circulated to every government and crowned head in Europe, including France, to warn them of the impending danger.
The leaders of the Order who appeared before the government's Court of Inquiry, testified that the organization was dedicated to the overthrow of church and state.
However, these revelations, and the publication of their documents did little to alert the public, because of their unbelievable claims.
The leaders of the Order were arrested and formally interrogated, then forced to renounce the Illuminati.
The final blow came on August 16,1787, when Dalberg issued his final proclamation against the Illuminati.
Anyone found guilty of recruiting members were to be executed, while those who were recruited, would have their property confiscated and then be deported.
Zwack, who was banished, sought sanctuary in the Court of Zweibrucken, where he was later appointed to an official position in the principality of Salm-Kyburg.
He was later summoned by Dalberg, as the government tried to deal with the problem of fugitives who might attempt to reorganize the Order.
On November 15,1790, another Edict was announced against the members of the organization.
The following year, a list of 91 names of alleged members was compiled.
The apparent demise of the Order was taken into stride by its highest members, who continued to operate underground.
In this manner, and by the simplest means, we shall set in motion and in flames.
To hide their subversive activities, the highest members of the Order began to masquerade as humanitarians and philanthropists.
Weishaupt fled to Switzerland, later returning to Germany, when the Duke of Saxe-Gotha gave him sanctuary.
The Order moved their headquarters to London, where it began to grow again.
Weishaupt told his followers to infiltrate the lodges of Blue Masonry, and to form secret circles within them.
Only Masons who proved themselves as Internationalists, and were atheists, were initiated into the Illuminati.
Chapter One advantage of the Illuminati's apparent demise by recruiting several of its members for his so-called ""German Union"" in 1787.
Bahrdt, the son of a minister, called his group the German Union for Rooting Out Superstition and Prejudices and Advancing True Christianity.
That same year, he was visited by an Englishman who urged him to establish the Union, promising to link it with the British masonic structure.
In 1787, he received another letter containing more details and organizational details.
Bahrdt had done some religious propaganda work for Weishaupt, ""to destroy the authority of the Scriptures"", and it was commonly believed that it was Weishaupt who was directing the activities of the organization behind the scenes in order to carry on the goals of the Illuminati.
The German Union appeared to be a Reading Society, and one was set up in Zwack's house in Landshut.
The membership initially consisted of 17 young men, and about five of Bahrdt's friends.
In a pamphlet entitled To All Friends of Reason, Truth and Virtue , Bahrdt wrote that the organization's purpose was to accomplish the enlightenment of people in order to disseminate religion, remove popular prejudices, root out superstition, and restore liberty to mankind.
They planned to have magazines and pamphlets, but by 1788, Bahrdt had sunk over $1,000 into the group, and was spending all of his time working on it.
Bahrdt responded by anonymously writing another pamphlet of the same name to satirize it.
Chapter One the German Union of XXII, a New Secret Society for the Good of Mankind"", in which he revealed that the group was a continuation of the Illuminati.
The German Union, which represented Weishaupt's ""corrected system of llluminism"", never really got off the ground because of its openness, which provoked hostile attacks from the government and members of the clergy.
THE FRENCH REVOLUTION The Illuminati had secretly spread to France by 1787, through French orator and revolutionary leader Count Gabriel Victor Riqueti de Mirabeau who had been indoctrinated by Col.
Jacob Mauvillon while he was in Berlin on a secret mission for King Louis XVI of France in 1786.
The initiations took place at the Illuminati's Grand Lodge, about 30 miles from Paris, in the Ermenonville mansion owned by the Marquis de Gerardin.
The famous impostor Saint Germain presided over the initiation ceremonies.
Germain was believed to be a Portuguese Jew, who was a member of the Philalethes Lodge.
He was a Mason, a Rosicrucian, and belong to several other occult brotherhoods.
He spoke Italian, German, English, Spanish, French, Greek, Sanskrit, Arabic, and Chinese.
He was arrested in London in 1743 for being a Jacobite spy, and he took credit for establishing Freemasonry in Germany.
As an impostor, he posed as Comte Bellamarre, Marquis de Montferrat, and Chevalier Schoening.
During the initiation, new members were sworn to ""reveal to thy new chief all thou shalt have heard, learned and discovered, and also to seek after and spy into things that might have otherwise escaped thy notice... avoid all temptation to betray what thou has now heard.
Chapter One Count Alessandro de Cagliostro, a Jew from Sicily, who was said to be one of the greatest occult practitioners of all time, was initiated into the Illuminati at Mitau in 1780, in an underground room.
The book was an outline of their plans, which included an attack on Rome.
He discovered that they had money at their disposal in banks at Amsterdam, Rotterdam, London, Genoa, and Venice.
He found out that the Illuminati had 20,000 lodges throughout Europe and America, and that their members served in every European court.
Cagliostro was instructed to go to Strasbourg, France, to make the initial contacts necessary for the instigation of the French Revolution.
Identified as a Grand Master of the Prieure' de Sion, it is believed that he was the liaison between them and the Illuminati.
The French Masons had committed themselves to a plan for overthrowing the government, under the guise of liberty and equality; ending the autocratic regimes, in order to have government by and for the people.
Jeremy Bentham and William Petty(Earl of Shelburne) planned and directed the French Revolution, then later directed the plot towards America.
In 1788, at the request of Mirabeau and Talleyrand, Johann Joachim Christoph Bode, a lawyer at Weimar, and a Mason, was summoned to France.
He had been initiated into the Illuminati at the Congress of Wilhelmsbad, and later took over the Order in the absence of Weishaupt.
Bode and Baron de Busche , a Dutch military officer in the service of the Landgrave of Hesse-Darmstadt, in order to conceal the purpose of their presence in France, said they were there to investigate the influence of the Jesuits on the secret societies.
However, the real reason for them being there, was to further the goals of the Illuminati in France.
Intellectuals known as ""encyclopedists"" were instrumental in spreading Illuminati doctrine.
Soon other lodges become aligned with the Philalethes, such as the Nine Sisters; the Lodge of Candor, which included members like Laclos, Sillery, D'Aiguillon, the Lameth Brothers, Dr.
The Illuminati created situations in order to create dissention among the people.
For instance, the Duke of Orleans instructed his agents to buy up as much grain as they could, then the people were led to believe that the King intentionally caused the shortage, and that the French people were starving.
Thus the people were manipulated into turned against a king whose reign had strengthened the middle class.
When they needed a larger meeting place, they used the hall of the Jacobin's Convent, thus this revolutionary group of 1300 people emerged on July 14,1789 as the Jacobin Club.
The Illuminati controlled the Club, and were directly responsible for fermenting the activities which developed into the French Revolution.
Through all the fire and smoke, we perceived the evidence of calculating organization.
In the playing out of a plan which called for the population to be cut down by one-third to one-half, over 300,000 people died, plus, King Louis and his family were executed.
Those who responded with the proper Masonic handsigns, had their lives spared.
The Jacobins controlled the National Assembly, and for all intents and purposes, Mirabeau became France's leader.
The Revolution was considered at an end on July 28,1794, when Robespierre was guillotined.
Thomas Jefferson, who served as minister to France for three years, described the events as ""so beautiful a revolution"" and said that he hoped it would sweep the world.
Treasury Secretary Alexander Hamilton said that Jefferson helped start the French Revolution, and wrote in a letter to a friend, dated May 26,1792, that Jefferson ""drank freely of the French philosophy, in religion, in science, in politics.
An Illuminist, and member of the revolutionary French National Assembly, Vicomte de Barras, witnessed a 24 year old Napoleon repelling a siege at Toulon in 1793 by English and Spanish military forces.
Barras, appointed by the Assembly as the Commander-inChief of the French military, in 1795 became a member of the five-man Directory, which began to govern France, and soon became the most powerful political figure in the country.
However, in 1799, Napoleon(a Knights Templar) broke his ties with Barras, because he feared Barras was attempting to restore the Monarchy.
Napoleon eliminated the Directory, and in 1804, with the support of Talleyrand, became Emperor.
Unwittingly, as a puppet of the Illuminati, his reign brought about the total disruption of Europe, which was needed for the Illuminati to get control and unify it.
He ended the Holy Roman Empire, and made his brother Joseph, the King of Naples in 1806.
Joseph was replaced by Napoleon's brother-in-law Murat, when Joseph became the King of Spain in 1808.
His brother Louis was made the King of Holland, and another brother Jerome, the King of Westphalia.
In 1810, Napoleon confiscated the contents of the Vatican archives, which amounted to 3,000 cases of documents, and took it to Paris.
By this time, Napoleon had changed the face of Europe, but, he settled his warring ways and ultimately the French Revolution had failed, because Europe had not been fully conquered.
In order to get money to Wellington's English forces, Nathan Rothschild tunneled money to his brother James(who handled financial transactions for the French government), in Paris, who got it to Wellington's troops in Spain.
In addition, the Illuminati secretly worked to make agreements that shifted national alliances against France.
Upon his defeat at Waterloo, Napoleon was again exiled, this time, to the island of Saint Helena in the south Atlantic, which is where he died in 1821.
He referred to himself and other members as ""the enlightened ones"", and said that the United States Constitution was a ""leaky vessel"" which was ""hastily put together when we left the British flag,"" and therefore needed revision.
In 1786, a lodge was started in Portsmouth, Virginia, where allegedly, Thomas Jefferson was a member; followed by fourteen others in different cities of the thirteen colonies.
In April, 1793, France sent new ambassador Edmond Genet to America, so he could collect payment for the American debt incurred during the American Revolution, so the money could be used to finance France's war with England.
Thomas Paine, author and political theorist, helped the Illuminati infiltrate several Masonic lodges.
He revealed his loyalty to them when his book The Age of Reason was published in 1794, which dealt with the role of religion in society.
Although he believed in God, he could not accept the entire Bible as being fact.
Examination of the Prophecies) also appeared, which seriously questioned the deity and existence of Jesus.
The Jacobins are nothing more nor less than the open manifestation of the hidden system of the Illuminati.
The Order has its branches established and its emissaries at work in America.
I hold it a duty, my brethren, which I owe to God, to the cause of religion, to my country and to you, at this time, to declare to you, thus honestly and faithfully, these truths.
My only aim is to awaken you and myself a due attention, at this alarming period, to our dearest interests.
When he went to Germany, he was given Weishaupt's revised conspiracy plans to study, in order to expand the Illuminati's influence in the British Isles.
Both books sought to warn America about the Illuminati conspiracy, but the warnings were not taken seriously.
Snyder, a Lutheran minister, wrote a letter to President Washington and included a copy of Robison's book, expressing his concern about the Illuminati infiltrating the American Masonic lodges.
The idea I meant to convey, was, that I did not believe that the lodges of Freemasons in this country had, as societies, endeavored to propagate the diabolical tenets of the first, or pernicious principles of the latter.
Chapter One Shortly before his death, Washington issued two more warnings about the Illuminati.
These letters were allegedly kept at the Rittenburg Square Library in Philadelphia, but have mysteriously vanished.
Adams also wrote to Washington, saying that Jefferson and Alexander Hamilton were misusing Masonic lodges for Illuminati purposes and the worship of Lucifer.
Benjamin Franklin was also accused of being a member of the Illuminati, but there is no substantative proof of this.
There is some evidence to indicate that he did use the Democratic Societies and Jacobin Clubs in his 1796 battle with John Adams for the Presidency.
They are doubtless secretly striving to undermine all our ancient institutions, civil and sacred.
These societies are closely leagued with those of the same Order, in Europe; they have all the same object in view.
Should infidelity generally prevail, our independence would fall of course.
It has been suggested, that one of the reasons that the British looted and burned Washington in 1812, was to destroy secret documents that would have exposed the treason against the United States, by various people high within the government.
Chapter One strongly opposed a strong central government as set forth in the United States Constitution of 1789, and succeeded in getting the Bill of Rights added.
They were against a single, national government, upper class rule, and a weak program for the separation of powers.
The Jeffersonian Republicans, so named because of the anti-monarchy views of the AntiFederalists, had power from 1801-1825.
In 1826, the Democratic-Republicans became known as just plain Democrats, while the National Republicans became identified as only Republicans in 1854.
PHI-BETA-KAPPA The fraternity known as Phi-Beta-Kappa was organized in 1776 by students at the College of William and Mary in Williamsburg, Virginia(the second oldest in the country, founded in 1694), as a secret debating club.
It was later infiltrated, and used to introduce Illuminati principles to America.
Open only to university students, their goal was to make philosophy, not religion, the guiding principle of man's actions.
They had secret hand signals and handshakes up to 1830, when it was reorganized and changed from a social organization, to an honorary society for upper classmen with high scholastic standing.
During the 1700's, when it looked as through the fraternity would fold, one of its members, Elisha Parmele, received a grant to establish chapters at Yale in 1780, and in Harvard in 1781.
Russell had visited Germany that year, where he was exposed to the Illuminati, and possibly initiated.
He wanted to establish a similar group in America, where their sons could become members of a secret Order that would give them a favored status.
In 1873, some Yale students broke into their headquarters, a windowless building called ""The Tomb"" adjacent to the campus, where they discovered their insignia the skull and bones, along with some real skulls and bones.
The Russell Trust is endowed by $54 million in alumni grants, and it is the alumni who control the group.
Its members have assimilated themselves into every area of business and government.
Chapter One government, in various capacities, From these positions, they can use their influence to work towards their common goal of one-world government.
Both the Skull and Bones, and Phi-Beta-Kappa, are indicative of the way the Illuminati functions.
They know that if they can grab, control, and mold young minds, then they will have unwitting pawns to do their bidding, and could be called upon to contribute to their efforts.
The early history of the Illuminati was nothing more than a seed that was planted.
That is why there was a big emphasis on infiltrating educational institutions with their doctrine.
As each class graduated through the educational systems of the world, the more people there were to perpetuate their plans.
In time, the Illuminati knew they would have enough of the right people, in the right places, for them to secretly further their goals.
CONGRESS OF VIENNA In 1802, Europe was made up of several hundred states, which were dominated by England, Austria, Russia, Prussia and France, which was the most powerful country.
In 1804, when Napoleon Bonaparte took over France, his military exploits had led to the complete control of virtually all of Europe.
Even today, France has more land than any other country in western Europe.
In 1812, when Napoleon moved against RussiaEngland, Spain and Portugal were already at war with France.
In 1814, the coalition defeated France, and in March of that year, marched into Paris.
France's borders were returned to their original 1792 location, which had been established by the First Peace of Paris, and Napoleon was exiled to Elba, a small island off the Tucson coast of Italy.
After the Napoleonic Wars, the Illuminati thought the world would be tired of fighting, and would accept any solution to have peace.
Through the Congress of Vienna, the Rothschilds hoped to create a sort of League of Nations.
From September, 1814, to June, 1815, the four powers of the allied coalition, winners of the Napoleonic Wars, met at the Congress of Vienna, along with a large number of rulers and officials representing smaller states.
The main concern of the Congress was to redistribute conquered territories, create a balance of power, restore the pre-Napoleonic order through King Louis XVIII, return the power to families who were ruling in 1789, and to return the Roman Catholic Church to its former power.
Discussion revolved around the creation of a Federation of Europe that would establish a group of independent kingdoms which would be tied together through an administrative governing body that would, among other things, provide military defense.
In their plan, Switzerland was made a neutral state that served as a repository for their finances.
In March, 1815, Napoleon left Elba, because the pension promised him by King Louis XVIII was discontinued, and he believed that Austria was preventing his companion, Marie Louise, and his son, the former King of Rome(who became the Duke of Reichstadt in Vienna) from being able to join him.
The coalition at the Congress put aside their diplomatic business, and joined in the battle.
Shortly before Napoleon's defeat at Waterloo, negotiations at the Congress of Vienna were completed, and the treaty was signed on June 9,1815.
Helena, an island 1,000 miles off the African coast, where he died in 1821.
The Russian czar saw through the planned European federation, recognizing it as an Illuminati ploy, and would not go along with it.
On September 26, 1815, the Treaty of Holy Alliance was signed by Alexander I of Russia, Francis II of Austria, and Frederick William III of Prussia, while the allies were negotiating the Second Peace of Paris.
The Treaty guaranteed the sovereignty of any monarch who would adhere to Christian principles in the affairs of State.
Alexander claimed he got the idea from a conversation with Castlereagh.
Prussia and Austria claimed they went along with it, out of fear of Russian retaliation.
Although the Alliance had no influence on matters, it did indicate to other countries that they had banded together against them, and it succeeded in temporarily crushing Europe's growing liberal movement.
The whole purpose of the Congress of Vienna, was for the Illuminati to create a Federation, so they would have complete political control over most of the civilized world.
Many of the European governments were in debt to the Rothschilds, so they figured they could use that as a bargaining tool.
The Illuminati, in their first attempt, had come terrifyingly close to gaining control of the world.
The head of the family, Nathan Rothschild, awaited the day that his family would get revenge by destroying the Czar and his family, which they did in 1917.
Shortly afterward, he was arrested and charged with stealing and indebtedness, and put in jail.
The Illuminati tried him in absentia, convicted him of treason, and ordered five men, led by Richard Howard, an English Illuminist, to execute him.
When he was released from jail, he was warned, and he attempted to flee to Canada.
Howard caught him at the border, and took him to Fort Niagara, where he was held for a couple of days.
The Freemasons that accompanied Howard, carried him off in a boat, and drowned him in the Niagara River.
One of the three men who carried out the assassination, confessed on his deathbed in 1848.
Masonic leaders refused to cooperate with the lengthy investigation, which didn't get anywhere, since many of the police officers were Masons.
However, the press, religious leaders, temperance and anti-slavery groups, united to condemn the apparent murder.
The murder caused over half of the Masons in the northeastern United States to break off their alignment with the Illuminati.
They wanted to stop the aristocratic conspiracy, and prevent all members of Masonic organizations from public service.
A National Convention was held in 1830 in Philadelphia, and another in Baltimore in 1831, where they nominated William Wirt, former United States Attorney General (under Monroe and John Quincy Adams, 1817-1829), as a Presidential candidate.
The movement caught on mainly in New England and the Mid-Atlantic states.
Even though they won quite a few Congressional seats in 1832, Wirt only carried the State of Vermont, while Andrew Jackson, a Mason, won big.
In the grave was a piece of paper that had the name John Brown written on it.
In 1828, she became the co-editor of the New Harmony Gazette with Owen.
At the meeting, she spoke of equal rights, atheism, and free love, as she promoted a Women's Auxiliary of the Illuminati.
Those present were told that an international movement of subversives was being developed along the lines of Illuminati principles, who would be used to ferment future wars.
Chapter One In 1843, poet Heinrich Heine, revealed the knowledge he had about this new group, when he wrote a book called Letece, which was a compilation of articles he wrote for the Augsburg Gazette from 1840-1843.
In 1872, he ran for the Presidency, against Ulysses S Grant, on the Liberal Republican ticket.
In 1841, Clinton Roosevelt wrote a book called The Science of Government Founded on Natural Law , which was the blueprint of the conspiracy to eliminate the United States Constitution, and to communize the country, based on the principles of Weishaupt.
It contained the detailed plan for the New Deal and the National Recovery Act, that was implemented 92 years later by his direct descendant Franklin D Roosevelt.
With their political strength concentrated mainly in the Northeast, their goals were to establish an independent treasury and to enact anti-monopoly legislation.
Their main complaint was President Andrew Jackson's refusal to Charter the Second Bank of the United States.
WEISHAUPT DIES After Weishaupt died on November 18,1830, at the age of 82, Giuseppe Mazxini, an Italian patriot, and revolutionary leader, was appointed head of the Illuminati in 1834.
It was believed that Weishaupt rejoined the Catholic Church with a deathbed repentance.
In 1831, he was exiled to France, where he founded the ""Young Societies"" movement, which included Giovane ltalia, Young England, etc.
This group united those who wanted to achieve unification through force.
Mazzini moved to England in 1837, then returned to Italy in 1848 to lead the revolution against the Austrians.
In the 1850's, he led more revolutionary activities, and through his actions, Italy became united in 1861, as a single kingdom, rather than the republic envisioned by Mazzini.
Mazzini, who became known as the ""Evil Genius of Italy"", tried to carry on the activities of the Illuminati through the Alta Vendita Lodge, the highest lodge of the Carbonari.
From 1814-48, the group known as the Haute Vente Romaine led the activities of most of Europe's secret societies.
Mazzini likes to talk about a great many things, about himself above all.
About 1,000 AD, after the Normans had driven the Arabs out of Sicily, they established a feudal system.
It was this band of criminals that Mazzini gave the name ""Mafia"", which was an acronym for Mazzini, Autorizza, Furti, Incendi, and Avvelengmenti.
Known as the Mafiosi, they were authorized by Mazzini to commit thefts, arson and murder.
It was this organization that came to America during the 1890's with the beginning of Italian immigration.
In 1859, Albert Pike, a lawyer, and leader of the United States Scottish Rite Masonry(who was called the ""Sovereign Pontiff of Universal Freemasonry"", the ""Prophet of Freemasonry"" and the ""greatest Freemason of the nineteenth century.""), who was fascinated with the idea of a one-world government, was chosen to coordinate Illuminati activities in the United States.
He said they needed to create a political party that would keep the world fighting, until they could bring peace.
Pike was born on December 29,1809, in Boston, went to Harvard, then later served as a Brigadier-General in the Confederate Army.
He was appointed by the Confederacy to be the Indian Commissioner in order to create an army of Indian warriors.
He became Governor of the Indian territory, and succeeded in creating an army consisting of Chickasaws, Comanches, Creeks, Cherokees, Miamis, Osages, Kansas, and Choctaws.
The savagery of their attacks caused Jefferson Davis, the President of the Confederacy to disband the Indian army.
After the Civil War, Pike was found guilty of treason and jailed, only to be pardoned by President Andrew Johnson on April 22,1866, who met with him the next day at the White House.
On June 20,1867, Scottish Rite officials conferred upon Johnson, the 4th 32nd degrees, and he later went to Boston to dedicate a Masonic Temple.
A 33rd degree Mason, he was one of the founding fathers, and head of the Ancient Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry.
Pike was said to be a Satanist, who indulged in the occult, and possessed a bracelet he used to summon Lucifer, with whom he had constant communication.
He was the Grand Master of a Luciferian group known as the Order of the Palladium(or Sovereign Council of Wisdom), which had been founded in Paris in 1737.
Palladism had been brought to Greece from Egypt by Pythagoras in the fifth century, and it was this cult of Satan that was introduced to the inner circle of the Masonic lodges.
Chapter One Baphomet to Charleston, South Carolina, where he helped established the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite.
Pike, his successor, changed the name to the New and Reformed Palladian Rite.
Pike's right-hand man was Phileas Walder, from Switzerland, who was a former Lutheran minister, a Masonic leader, occultist, and spiritualist.
Pike, along with Mazzini, Lord Henry Palmerston of England, and Otto von Bismarck from Germany, intended to use the Palladian Rite to create a Satanic umbrella group that would tie all Masonic groups together.
Because of Mazzini's revolutionary activities in Europe, the Illuminati had to again go underground.
He set up 23 subordinate councils in strategic places throughout the world, including five Grand Central Directories in Washington, DC, Montevideo, Naples, Calcutta, and Mauritius, which were used to gather information.
All of these branches have been the secret headquarters for the Illuminati's activities ever since.
With regard to our brothers in Masonry, these men must be pledged to the strictest secrecy.
The first world war was to enable communistic atheism to destroy the czarist government in Russia.
The second world war was to begin by pitting Great Britain against Germany, in order to destroy Naziism, and advance the cause of Zionism, so that Israel could become a nation.
After this war, Communism was to be made strong enough to begin taking over weaker governments, in 1945, at the Potsdam Conference between Truman, Churchill, and Stalin, Russia was given a chunk of Europe, and that helped to sweep the tide of Communism into China.
The plan also called for a third world war, which is to be ignited by firing up the aggression between the Zionists and the Arab world, who will destroy each other, bringing the rest of the world into a final conflict.
This conflict will be engineered to produce complete social, political, and economic chaos; out of which will emerge an llluminati-controlled world government.
For a short time, this letter, had been on display in the British Museum Library in London.
After Mazzini's death on March 11,1872, Pike appointed Adriano Lemmi(1822-1896, 33rd Mason), a banker from Florence, Italy, to run their subversive activities in Europe.
Lemmi was a supporter of patriot and revolutionary Giuseppe Garibaldi, and may have been active in the Luciferian Society founded by Pike.
The Rothschilds found out early, that when you control the money, you basically control everything else.
So, while their political plans were being thwarted, they began to concentrate on tightening their grip on the financial structure of the world.
In the mid 1700's the Colonies were prospering because they were issuing their own money, called Colonial Scrip, which was strictly regulated, and didn't require the payment of any interest.
When the bankers in Great Britain heard this, the British Parliament passed a law prohibiting the currency, forcing them to accept the debt money issued by them.
Contrary to what history teaches, the American Revolution was not ignited by a tax on tea.
After Great Britain tried to destroy and control the currency of our new country, Congress realized the danger of fiat, or paper money created by law.
In 1775, paper money had been issued to finance the war, and independent state legislatures passed laws requiring citizens to accept it as legal tender.
Since it was created from nothing, and not backed by any precious metal, inflation developed.
Alexander Hamilton, an Illuminist, and agent of European bankers, had immigrated to the colonies in 1772 from the British colony of Nevis, on the Leeward Islands in the British West Indies.
Hamilton and Robert Morris successfully convinced the new Congress not to take this power literally, enabling the Bank of North America to be established in 1781, which was similar to the Bank of England.
At the time, America had a foreign debt of $12,000 (in money borrowed from Spain, France, Holland, and private interests in Germany), and a domestic debt of $42,000.
In 1790, Hamilton, who favored Central Banking, urged the Congress to charter a privately owned company to have the sole responsibility of issuing currency, in order to handle the country's financial situation.
His Plan called for Congress to create a Central Banking system, with a main office in Philadelphia, and smaller branches located in important cities throughout the country.
It would be used to deposit government funds and tax collections, and to issue bank notes to increase the money supply needed to finance the country's growth.
It would be administered by a President, and 25 Board of Directors, with 20 to be elected by the stockholders, and 5 appointed by the government.
Central Banking was initiated by international banker William Paterson in 1691, when he obtained the Charter for the Bank of England, which put the control of England's money in a privately owned company who had the right to issue notes payable on demand against the security of bank loans to the crown.
One of their first transactions was to loan 1. million pounds at 8% interest to William of Orange to help the king pay the cost of his war with Louis XIV of France.
If we run into such debts, we be taxed in our meat and our drink, in our necessities and in our comforts, in our labor and in our amusements.
Even though Thomas Jefferson, and James Madison opposed the Bill, Washington signed it into law on February 25,1791, Alexander Hamilton became a very rich man.
It would later be controlled by Warburg-Kuhn-Loeb interests, and in 1955 it merged with Rockefeller's Chase Bank to create the Chase Manhattan Bank.
When Jefferson became President, he opposed the bank as being unconstitutional, and when the 20 year charter came up for renewal in 1811, it was denied.
This brought on the War of 1812, our second war with England, which facilitated the rechartering of the Bank of the United States.
On May 10,1816, President James Madison signed the Bill which created the second Bank of the United States.
Inflation, heavy debt, and the unavailability of an entity to collect taxes, were some of the reasons given for its rechartering.
The new charter allowed it to operate another 20 years, raised its capital stock to $35 million, authorized the creation of bank branches, and the issuing of notes with denominations no smaller than $5.00.
Chapter Two Mason), who said that Congress had the implied power to create the Bank.
People began to see how much power the Bank really had, and the voter backlash led to the election of Andrew Jackson as President in 1828.
After fiscal mismanagement by its first President, former Secretary of the Navy, Captain William Jones, the Bank was forced to call in loans and foreclosed on mortgages, which caused bankruptcy, a price collapse, unemployment and a depression.
However, the Bank began to flourish under its new President, financier Nicholas Biddle, who petitioned the Congress for a renewal of the Bank's Charter in 1832, four years before its current charter expired.
He ordered the Secretary of the Treasury to remove all Government deposits from United States Banks and deposit them in state banks.
On January 8,1835, Jackson paid off the final installment on our national debt, and it was the only time in history that our national debt was reduced to zero, and we were able to accumulate a surplus, $35 million of which was distributed to the States.
The Boston Post compared it to Christ throwing the money-changers out of the Temple.
The Bank continued to operate until 1836, and it was used by Biddle to wreak havoc upon the economy by reducing loans and increasing the quantity of money.
Chapter Two obvious that he did it because of the ""abuses and corruptions"" of the Bank, and the censure was later reversed by the Senate in 1837.
President John Tyler vetoed two bills in 1841 that would have rechartered the Bank of the United States.
In 1829, as a 15 year-old, he started working for the bank in Frankfurt, and proved himself to be a financial genius.
In 1832, he was promoted to the Bank at Naples, so he could be fully integrated into international banking.
His mission was to stir up financial trouble within the southern banks.
They had to create an incident which would allow the establishment of a Central Bank, and that had to be a war, since wars are expensive, and governments have to borrow to pay for them.
Canada and Mexico, weren't strong enough, as evidenced by Santa Anna's defeat in Texas the year before; England and France were too far away, and Russia wasn't under their control; so they decided to ""divide and conquer"", by fermenting a conflict between the North and the South.
The North was to become a British Colony, annexed to Canada, and controlled by Lionel Rothschild; while the South was to be given to Napoleon III of France, and controlled by James Rothschild.
Bickley, to spread racial tension from state to state, using slavery as an issue.
The Ku Klux Klan, formed in 1867, were the military arm of the Knights.
The states which seceded, united into the Confederate States of America, which meant they maintained their independence, and that if the South would win, each state would be like an independent country.
He had coastal ports blockaded to keep supplies from being shipped in from Europe.
Chapter Two was commissioned to sell bond issues, arranging with Belmont to sell Union bonds in Europe), J and W Seligman and Company, and Speyer & Co.
Judah P Benjamin of the law firm of Slidell, Benjamin and Conrad, in Louisiana, was a Rothschild agent, who became Secretary of State for the Confederacy in 1862.
Slidell's daughter was married to Baron Frederick D'Erlanger, in Frankfurt, who were related to the Rothschilds, and acted on their behalf.
Slidell was the representative of the South who borrowed money from the D'Erlangers to finance the Confederacy.
Towards the end of 1861, England sent 8,000 troops to Canada, and in 1862, English, French and Spanish troops landed at Veracruz, Mexico, supposedly to collect on debts owed them by Mexico.
On June 10,1863, French General ElieFrederic Forey, with the help of 30,000 additional French troops, took over Mexico City, and controlled most of the country.
Through his representatives in Paris and London, Czar Alexander II in Russia discovered that the Confederates had offered the states of Louisiana and Texas to Napoleon III, if he would send his troops against the North.
Russia had already indicated their support for Lincoln, but wanted something more to send their large navy to defend the country.
On January 1,1863, as a gesture of goodwill, Lincoln issued his Emancipation Proclamation to free the slaves, just as the Czar had done with the serfs in 1861.
On February and March, 1862, and March 1863, Lincoln received Congressional approval to borrow $450 million from the people by selling them bonds, or ""greenbacks"", to pay for the Civil War.
They were not redeemable until 1865, when three could be exchanged for one in silver.
Thus, Lincoln solved America's monetary crisis without the help of the International Bankers.
It will become prosperous beyond precedent in the history of the civilized governments of the world.
They understood at once, that the United States would escape their grip.
Before the Lincoln administration, private commercial banks were able to issue paper money called state bank notes, but that ended with the National Banking Act of 1863, which prohibited the states from creating money.
A forerunner of the Federal Reserve Act, it began the movement to abolish redeemable currency.
A system of private banks were to receive charters from the federal government which would give them the authorization to issue National Bank Notes.
This gave banks the power to control the finances and credit of the country, and provided centralized banking, under Federal control, in times of war.
Salmon P Chase, Secretary of the Treasury under Lincoln, publicly said that his role ""in promoting the passage of the National Banking Act was the greatest financial mistake of my life.
It has built up a monopoly which affects every interest in the country.
It is more despotic than monarchy, more insolent than autocracy, more selfish than bureaucracy.
I see in the near future a crisis approaching that unnerves me and causes me to tremble for the safety of my country.
On April 14,1865, Lincoln was shot by John Wilkes Booth, and that same evening, an unsuccessful attempt by his fellow conspirators was made on the life of Seward.
In 1866, an attempt was made to assassinate Czar Alexander II, and in 1881, the Czar was killed by an exploding bomb.
In Booth's trunk, coded messages were found, and the key to that code was found among the possessions of Judah Benjamin.
It was always known that Lincoln's death was the result of a massive conspiracy.
Chapter Two found the 18 pages that were removed from Booth's diary, which revealed the names of 70 people who were directly or indirectly involved in Booth's original plan to kidnap Lincoln.
Besides Stanton's involvement in the conspiracy, Charles A Dana, Assistant Secretary of War; and Major Thomas Eckert, Chief of the War Department's Telegraph Office, were also involved.
Journals and coded papers by Colonel Lafayette C Baker, Chief of the National Detective Police, detailed Lincoln's kidnap and assassination conspiracy, and subsequent cover-up.
The plot included a group of Maryland farmers; a group of Confederates including Jefferson Davis and Judah Benjamin; a group of Northern Banking and Industrial interests, including Jay Cooke, Henry Cooke, Thurlow Weed; and a group of Radical Republicans who didn't want the south reunited with the North as states, but wanted to control them as military territories, and included Sen.
All of these groups pooled their efforts, and used actor John Wilkes Booth, a Confederate patriot.
The original plan called for the kidnapping of Lincoln, VicePresident Andrew Johnson, and Secretary of State Seward.
The National Detective Police discovered their plans, and informed Stanton.
Captain James William Boyd, a secret agent for the Confederacy, and a prisoner of war in the Old Capitol Prison, was used by the National Detective Police to report on the activities of the prisoners, and to inform on crooked guards.
Stanton had him released, and Boyd took over the Northern end of the conspiracy, which had been joined by the Police and the War Department.
The North wanted to kill Lincoln, while Booth wanted to kidnap him and use him as leverage to get Confederate prisoners of war released.
Booth failed twice in March, and then ended up shooting Lincoln at Ford's Theater.
Boyd, warned that he could get implicated, planned to flee to Maryland.
Boyd was the one who was shot at Garrett's farm, and identified as Booth.
The Police and Stanton discovered that it was really Boyd, after it was announced to the nation that it was Booth.
The only picture taken of Boyd's dead body was found in Stanton's collection.
Lafayette Baker, to the old Arsenal Penitentiary, where it was buried in an unknown place, under the concrete floor.
Baker and Detectives Luther and Andrew Potter, knew the case wasn't closed, and had to find Booth to keep him from talking.
Chapter Two States, where in Enid, Oklahoma, he revealed his true identity on his deathbed.
The mortician who was summoned, instead of burying the corpse, had it preserved, and it is still in existence today.
Baker broke off relations with Stanton, who was discharged from the Army,and as head of the Secret Service in 1866.
In 1867, in his book, the History of the United States Secret Service , he admitted delivering Booth's diary to Stanton, and on another occasion, testified that the diary was intact when it was in his possession.
This means that Stanton did remove the pages to facilitate a cover-up, because the pages were found in his collection.
Andrew Johnson, who became President, issued the Amnesty Proclamation on May 29, 1865, to reunite the country.
It stipulated that the South would not be responsible for the debt incurred, that all secession laws were to end, and that slavery was to be abolished.
Needless to say, the Rothschilds, who heavily funded the south, lost alot of money.
In addition, the cost of the support of the Russian fleet cost the country about $7. million.
Johnson didn't have the constitutional authority to give money to a foreign government, so arrangements were made to purchase Alaska from the Russians in April, 1867.
It was labeled as ""Seward's Folly"" because it appeared that Seward purchased what was then a worthless piece of land, when in fact it was compensation for the Russian Navy.
In August, 1867, Johnson, failed in an attempt to remove Stanton from office, and impeachment proceedings were begun against him in February, 1868, by Stanton and the Radical Republicans.
Johnson was charged with attempting to fire Stanton without Senate approval, for treason against Congress, and public language ""indecent and unbecoming"" as the nation's leader.
Benjamin F Wade, President pro tempore of the Senate, next in the line of Presidential succession, was so sure that Johnson would be impeached, that he already had his Cabinet picked.
Lafayette Baker, who threatened to reveal the conspiracy, was slowly poisoned till he died in 1868.
Chapter Two succeeded in establishing itself, and they had elected governors and congressmen.
They advocated a progressive income tax; for railroads, communications, and corporations to be regulated by the Federal government; the right to establish labor unions; and government mediation to stabilize falling commodity prices and the initiation of credit programs.
They were against the gold standard, and the country's private banking system, which was centered at Wall Street.
They were impressed with Lincoln's ""greenbacks"", because of its ability to adapt in order to meet the credit needs of the economy.
They wanted the money supply to be controlled by their elected representatives, and not the money interests of Wall Street.
And in 1896, they hitched their wagon to the campaign of Democrat William Jennings Bryan, who lost to McKinley, effectively ending the Populist movement.
This political movement created the initial stirrings for what eventually became the Federal Reserve Act.
THE FEDERAL RESERVE ACT The end of the Civil War in 1865, ruined the Illuminati's chances to control our monetary system, as they did in most European countries.
Instead of tearing down from the top, they were going to start at the bottom to disrupt the foundation of our monetary system.
The instrument of this destruction was a young immigrant by the name of Jacob Schiff.
The Schiff family traced their lineage back to the fourteenth century, and even claimed that King Solomon was an ancestor.
His father, Moses Schiff, a rabbi, was a successful stockbroker on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange.
In 1865, he came to America, and in 1867, formed his own brokerage firm with Henry Budge and Leo Lehmann.
Kuhn and Loeb were German Jews who had come to the United States in the late 1840's, and pooled their resources during the 1850's to start a store in Lafayette, Indiana, to serve settlers who were on their way to the West.
Later, they added pawn broking and money lending to their business pursuits.
He became a millionaire by financing railroads, developing a proficiency at railroad management that enabled him to enter into a partnership with Edward Henry Harriman to create the greatest single railroad fortune in the world.
He married Solomon Loeb's oldest daughter, Theresa, and eventually bought out Kuhn's interest.
For all intents and purposes, he was the sole owner of what was now known as Kuhn, Loeb and Company.
Robert L Owen of Oklahoma indicated that Kuhn, Loeb and Company was a representative of the Rothschilds in the United States.
Although John Pierpont Morgan , the top American Rothschild representative, was the head of the American financial world, Schiff was rapidly becoming a major influence by distributing desirable European stock and bond issues during the Industrial Revolution.
Besides Edward H Harriman's railroad empire, he financed Standard Oil for John D Rockefeller , and Andrew Carnegie's steel empire.
By the turn of the century, Schiff was firmly entrenched in the banking community, and ready to fulfill his role as the point man in the Illuminati's plan to control our economic system, weaken Christianity, create racial tension, and to recruit members to get them elected to Congress and appointed to various government agencies.
In 1636, Miles, John, and James Morgan landed in Massachusetts, leaving their father, William, to carry on the family business of harness-making in England.
Joseph Morgan, successful in real estate and business, supported the Bank of the United States.
In 1863, he liquidated, and became a partner with Charles H Dabney, and established a firm known as Dabney, Morgan and Co.
He later teamed up with Anthony J Drexel(son of the founder of the most influential banking house in Philadelphia), in a firm known as Drexel, Morgan and Co.
In 1869, Morgan and Drexel met with the Rothschilds in London, and through the Northern Securities Corporation, began consolidating the Rothschild's power and influence in the United States.
Morgan continued the partnership that began when his father acted as a joint agent for the Rothschilds and the U S. government.
Researchers believe that the Illuminati controlled the company through these shares.
P Morgan, with the assistance and cooperation of a few of the interlocking corporations which reach all over the United States in their influence, controls every railroad in the United States.
They control practically every public utility, they control literally thousands of corporations, they control all of the large insurance companies.
They have four branch offices, and foreign offices in London, Paris, Brussels, Frankfurt, Rome, and Tokyo.
Paul Moritz Warburg, and his brother Felix, came to the United States from Frankfurt in 1902, buying into the partnership of Kuhn, Loeb and Co. with the financial backing of the Rothschilds.
Warburg and Co., a Rothschildallied bank in Frankfurt, Hamburg, and Amsterdam, which had been founded in 1798 by their great-grandfather.
Paul, married Nina Loeb, the daughter of Solomon Loeb; while Felix, in March, 1895, married Frieda Schiff, the daughter of Jacob Schiff.
Their brother Max, a major financier of the Russian Revolution(who in his capacity as Chief of Intelligence in Germany's Secret Service, helped Lenin cross Germany into Russia in a sealed train) and later Hitler, ran the Hamburg bank until 1938, when the Nazis took over.
The Nazis, who didn't want the Jews running the banks, changed its name to Brinckmann, Wirtz and Co.
Warburg and Co. in London, and by 1956, had taken over the Seligman Brothers' Bank.
The Warburgs are another good example of how the Illuminati controls both sides of a war.
Paul and Felix Warburg were men with a mission, sent here by the Rothschilds to lobby for the passing of a central banking law in Congress.
In 1903, Paul Warburg gave Schiff a memo describing the application of the European central banking system to America's monetary system.
In 1891, he studied French banking methods; and from 1892-93, traveled the world to study central banking applications.
The bottom line, was that he was the foremost authority in the world on central banking.
It is interesting to note, that the fifth plank in the 1848 Communist Manifesto had to do with central banking.
Walter Burns, Clinton Dawkins, Edward Grenfell, Willard Straight, Thomas Lament, Dwight Morrow, Nelson Perkins, Russell Leffingwell, Elihu Root, John W Davis, John Foster Dulles, S Parker Gilbert, and Paul D Cravath.
The financial panics of 1873,1884,1893,1907, and later 1920, were initiated by Morgan with the intent of pushing for a much stronger banking system.
When Morgan initiated the economic panic in 1907, by circulating rumors that the Knickerbocker Bank and Trust Co. of America was going broke, there was a run on the banks, creating a financial crisis, which began to solidify support for a central banking system.
During this panic, Warburg wrote an essay called ""A Plan for a Modified Central Bank"" which called for a Central Bank, in which 50% would be owned by the government, and 50% by the nation's banks.
In 1908, Schiff laid out the final plans to seize the American monetary system.
Colonel Edward Mandell House, the son of British financier Thomas W House, a Rothschild agent who made his fortune by supplying the south with supplies from France and England during the Civil War, was Schiff's chief representative and courier; and Bernard Baruch, whose stock market speculating made him a multi-millionaire by the early 1900's, and whose foreign and domestic policy expertise led Presidents from Wilson to Kennedy to seek his advice; were the two who were relied on heavily by Schiff to carry out his plans.
Nelson W Aid rich (father-in-law of John D Rockefeller, Jr. and grandfather of Nelson and David Rockefeller) proposed a bill, in which banks, in an emergency situation, would issue currency backed by federal, state, and local government bonds, and railroad bonds, which would be equal to 75% of the cash value of the bonds.
It was harshly criticized because it didn't provide a monetary system that would respond to the seasonal demand, and fluctuate with the volume of trade.
Aldrich was the most powerful man in Congress, and the Illuminati's head man in the Senate.
A member of Congress for 40 years, 36 of them in the Senate, he was Chairman of the powerful Senate Finance Committee.
Chapter Two Joseph Cannon, at a meeting in a hotel room at the Arlington House, his bill became known as the Vreeland Substitute.
It called for the acceptance of asset currency, but only in cases of emergency, and the currency would be based on commercial paper rather than bonds.
The Aldrich-Vreeland Bill, called the Emergency Currency Act, was passed on May 30,1908, and led to the creation of the National Monetary Commission, which was made up of members of Congress.
Now, any monetary legislation sent to Congress, would have to go through this group first.
The Bill approved by the National Monetary Commission was known as the Aldrich Bill, and formed the legislative base for the Federal Reserve Act.
It was introduced as an amendment to the Republican sponsored Payne-Aldrich Tariff Bill, in order to have Republican support.
It was based on Warburg's plan, except it would only have 15 districts; half of the directors on the district level would be chosen by the banks, a third by the stockholders, and a sixth by the other directors.
Aldrich was appointed as head of the National Monetary Commission, and from 1908 -10, at a cost of $300,000, this 16-man committee traveled around Europe to study the central banking system, In 1910, Warburg gave a speech entitled, ""A United Reserve Bank of the United States"", which called for a United Reserve Bank to be located in Washington, D.C., having the capital of $100 million.
The country would be divided into 20 districts, and the system would be controlled by a Board of Directors, which would be chosen by the banking associations, the stockholders, and the government.
Warburg said that the U S. monetary system wasn't flexible, and it was unable to compensate for the rise and fall of business demand.
As an example, he said that when wheat was harvested, and merchants didn't have the cash on hand to buy and store a large supply of grain, the farmers would sell the grain for whatever they could get.
This would cause the price of wheat to greatly fluctuate, forcing the farmer to take a loss.
Warburg called for the development of commercial paper to circulate as currency, which would be issued in standard denominations of uniform sizes.
They would be declared by law to be legal tender for the payment of debts and taxes.
On November 22,1910, Aldrich called a meeting of the banking establishment and members of the National Monetary Commission, which was proposed by Henry P Davison.
All those summoned to the secret meeting, were members of the Illuminati.
They met on a railroad platform in Hoboken, New Jersey, where they chartered a private railroad car owned by Aldrich to Georgia.
They were taken by boat, to Jekyll Island, off the coast of Brunswick, Georgia.
Simons, Tybee, Cumberland, Wassau, Wolf, Blackbeard, Sapelo, Ossabow, and Sea Islands.
Morgan, Cyrus McCormick, William Rockefeller , William K Vanderbilt, and George F Baker(who founded Harvard Business School with a gift of $5 million) for $125,000 from Eugene du Bignon, whose family owned it for a century.
Up until the time it was converted into a public resort, no uninvited foot ever stepped on its shores.
Simons Island, a short distance away, to the north, was also owned by Illuminati interests.
Those attending the meeting at the private hunting lodge, were said to be on a duckhunting expedition.
They were sworn to secrecy, even addressing each other by code names or just by their first names.
About ten days later, they emerged with the groundwork for a central banking system, in the form of, not one, but two versions, to confuse the opposition.
The banker-initiated mini-depressions, the last of which had occurred in 1907, helped get Congressional support for the Bill, and on May 11,1911, the National Citizens League for the Promotion of a Sound Banking System, an Illuminati front-organization, publicly announced their support for Aldrich's Bill.
So, the Illuminati went to Plan B, which was the second version hammered out at the Jekyll Island summit.
The National Citizens League publicly withdrew their support of the Aldrich Bill, and the move was on to disguise it, so that it could get through Congress.
Once the new version was ready, they were a little apprehensive about introducing it in Congress, because even if it would be passed by Congress, President Taft would veto it, so they had to wait until they could get their own man elected.
The Democrats, with the exception of Grover Cleveland's election, had been out of power since 1869.
During the late 1800's, they began the process of changing the Democrats from conservative to liberal, and the Republicans, from liberal to conservative.
He taught Political Science and History at Bryn Mawr and Wesleyan, and in 1902, became President of Princeton.
Because of his support of Aldrich's Bill, when it was first announced, he was supported by the Illuminati in his successful bid as Governor of New Jersey in 1910.
The deal was made through Vanderlip agents, William Rockefeller and James Stillman, at Vanderlip's West Chester estate.
In March, 1917, he will be inaugurated for the second time as President.
Wise, who made this prophetic statement in 1910, later became a close advisor to Wilson.
He had good reason to believe what he said, because the deal had already been struck.
The main problem of the Democrats, was the Republican voting edge, and the lack of money.
After the Illuminati made the decision to support Wilson, money was no problem.
The problem of the voter registration edge was a bit more difficult, but that was a project that the Illuminati was working on.
The Russian pogroms of 1881 and 1882, in which thousands of Russians were killed; and religious persecution and anti-semitism in Poland, Romania, and Bulgaria in the early 1890's, began three decades of immigration into the United States by thousands of Jews.
It was the Democrats who initiated a program to get them registered to vote.
Humanitarian committees were set up by Schiff and the Rothschilds, such as the Hebrew Immigration Aid Society, and the B'nai B'rith, so when the Jews arrived, they were made naturalized citizens, registered Democrat, then shuffled off to other large cities, such as Chicago, Philadelphia, Detroit and Los Angeles, where they were given financial help to find a place to live, food, and clothing.
This is how the Jews became a solid Democratic voting bloc, and it was these votes that would be needed to elect Wilson to the Presidency.
In 1912, with President William Howard Taft running for re-election against Wilson, the Illuminati needed some insurance.
They got it by urging another Republican, former President, Theodore Roosevelt to run on the Progressive ticket.
Taft had served as Roosevelt's Secretary of War , and was chosen by Roosevelt to succeed him as President.
A recent example of the same plan that pulled votes away from Taft, in order to get Wilson elected, occurred in the 1992 Presidential election.
In a 1994 interview, Barbara Bush told ABC-TV news correspondent Barbara Walters, that the third-party candidacy of independent H Ross Perot was the reason that Bill Clinton was able to defeat President George Bush.
Remember, the second version of the Bill prepared at Jekyll Island was to be an alternative, so public attention was turned against the Aldrich Bill.
Wilson, an aristocrat, having socialistic views, was in favor of an independent reserve system, because he didn't trust the ""common men"" which made up Congress, however, publicly, he promised to ""free the poor people of America from control by the rich"", and to have a money system that wouldn't be under the control of Wall Street's International Bankers.
Chapter Two already announced their opposition to the Aldrich Bill, now the Wall Street banking interests had come out against the Glass Bill, which was actually the Aldrich Bill in disguise.
The threat from this powerful private banking system was to be ended with the establishment of a central bank.
To avoid the mention of central banking, Wilson himself suggested that the regional banks be called ""Federal Reserve Banks"", and proposed a special session of the 63rd Congress to be convened to vote on the Federal Reserve Act.
On June 23,1913, he addressed the Congress on the subject of the Federal Reserve, threatening to keep them in session until they passed it.
The Glass Bill was introduced in the House of Representatives on June 26, 1913.
The revision mentioned nothing about central banking, which was what the people feared.
It was referred to the Banking and Currency Committee, reported back to the House on September 9th, and passed on September 18th.
Robert Latham Owen of Oklahoma, Chairman of the Senate Banking and Finance Committee, along with five of his colleagues, drafted a Bill which was more open-minded to the suggestions of the bankers.
Gilbert M Hitchcock, a Democrat from Nebraska, called for the elimination of the ""lawful money"" provision, and stipulated that note redemption must be made in gold.
It also provided for public ownership of the regional reserve banks, which would be controlled by the government.
In the Senate, the Glass Bill was referred to the Senate Banking Committee, and reported back to the Senate on November 22,1913.
Owen, who opposed the Aldrich Bill, made some additional revisions, in an attempt to keep them from completely dominating our monetary system.
Since different versions had been passed by both Houses, a Conference Committee was established, which was stacked with six Democrats and only two Republicans, to insure that certain portions of the original Bill would remain intact.
An hour after the Senate vote, Wilson signed the Federal Reserve Act into law, and the Illuminati had taken control of the American economy.
The gold and silver in the nation's vaults were now owned by the Federal Reserve.
Baron Alfred Charles Rothschild, who masterminded the entire scheme, then made plans to further weaken our country's financial structure.
Carter Glass were given the credit for getting the Federal Reserve Act through Congress, William Jennings Bryan played a major role in gaining support to pass it.
The Reserve Bank Organization Committee, controlled by Secretary of the Treasury, William Gibbs McAdoo, and Secretary of Agriculture David F Houston(who along with Glass, later became Treasury Secretaries under Wilson), was give $100,000 to find locations for the regional Reserve Banks.
On October 25,1914, the formal establishment of the Federal Reserve System was announced, and it began operating in 1915.
Administrator , which revealed the manner in which Wilson was controlled.
Incidentally, a central bank providing inflatable currency, and a graduated income tax, were two of the ten points in the Communist Manifesto for socializing a country.
House hand-picked the first Federal Reserve Board, naming Benjamin Strong as its Chairman.
In 1914, Paul M Warburg quit his $500,000 a year job at Kuhn, Loeb and Co. to be on the Board, later resigning in 1918, during World War I, because of his German connections.
The Banking Act of 1935 amended the Federal Reserve Act, changing its name to the Federal Reserve System, and reorganizing it, in respect to the number of directors and length of term.
This group decides whether or not to buy and sell government securities on the open market.
The Government buys and sells government securities, mostly through 21 Wall Street bond dealers, to create reserves to make the money needed to run the government.
The Committee also determines the supply of money available to the nation's banks and consumers.
Each of the Banks have nine men on the Board of Directors; six are elected by member Banks, and three are appointed by the Board of Governors.
All Federal Banks are members, and four out of every ten commercial banks are members.
In whole, the Federal Reserve System controls about 70% of the country's bank deposits.
Ohio Senator, Warren G Harding, who was elected to the Presidency in 1920, said in a 1921 Congressional inquiry, that the Reserve was a private banking monopoly.
His term was cut short in 1923, when he mysteriously died, leading to rumors that he was poisoned.
When there appeared to be growing support for his son Charles to run for the Presidency, his grandson was kidnapped, and apparently killed.
Every effort has been made by the Federal Reserve Board to conceal its powers, but the truth is the FED has usurped the government.
Plain and simple, the Federal Reserve is not part of the Federal Government, it is a privately held corporation owned by stockholders.
Constitution, only Congress has the right to issue money and regulate its value, so it is illegal for private interests to do so.
Yet, it happened, and because of a provision in the Act, the Class A stockholders were to be kept a secret, and not to be revealed.
Rockefeller's National City Bank had 30,000 shares; Morgan's First National Bank had 15,000 shares; Chase National, 6,000 shares; and the National Bank of Commerce, 21,000 shares.
National City Bank of Cleveland, First City National Bank of Houston, and Seattle First National Bank.
Each year, billions of dollars are ""earned"" by Class A stockholders, from U S. tax dollars which go to the FED to pay interest on bank loans.
First, lets take a brief look at the history of the two metals used for currency.
The Coinage Act of 1792 established a dollar consisting of 371.25 grains of pure silver, but was later replaced with a gold dollar consisting of 25. grains of gold.
In 1873, the Coinage Act was passed, prohibiting the use of Silver as a form of currency, because the quantity being discovered was driving the value down.
In 1875, after temporarily suspending gold convertibility during the Civil War greenback period, the U S. was put more firmly on the gold standard by the Gold Standard Act of 1900.
President Franklin D Roosevelt accepted the advice of England's leading economist, John Maynard Keynes, a member of the Illuminati, who said that deficit spending would be a shot in the arm to the economy.
Most of the New Deal spending programs to fight economic depression, were based on Keynes theories on deficit spending, and financed by borrowing against future taxes.
A Presidential Executive Order by Roosevelt on April 5,1933, required all the people to exchange their gold coins, gold bullion, and gold-backed currency, for money that was not redeemable in precious metals.
The Gold Reserve Act of 1934, known as the Thomas Amendment, which amended the Act of May 12,1933, made it illegal to possess any gold currency.
Gold coinage was withdrawn from circulation, and kept in the form of bullion.
However, while the people received $20.67 an ounce in paper money issued by the Federal Reserve, the Reserve was paid in Gold Certificates.
Chapter Two In 1934, the value of gold increased to $35 an ounce, which produced a $3 billion profit for the Government.
But when the price of gold increases, the value of the dollar decreases.
In 1974, our dollar was worth 221/2 cents, and in 1983 it was only worth 38 cents.
Since our money supply had been limited to the amount of gold in Treasury reserves, when the value of the dollar decreased, more money was printed.
The first United Nations Monetary and Financial Conference, held in Bretton Woods, New Hampshire, from July 1 to July 22,1944, which was under the direction of Harry Dexter Wnite, established the policies of the International Monetary Fund.
Its goals were to strip the United States of its gold reserves by giving it to other nations; and to merge with their industrial capabilities; and their economic, social, educational and religious policies; to facilitate a one-world government.
Of the amount remaining, $12 billion was reserved by law for backing the paper money in circulation.
Our money had been backed by a 25% gold reserve in accordance to a law that was passed in 1945, but it was rescinded in 1968.
The amount of gold slipped from 653. million troy ounces in 1957, to 311. million ounces in 1968, which according to the Treasury Department, was due to sales to foreign banking institutions, sales to domestic producers, and the buying and selling of gold on the world market to stabilize prices.
In August, 1971, gold was used only for world trade, because foreign countries wouldn't accept U S dollars.
As of November, 1981, sources had indicated that the gold reserve had dropped to 264. million troy ounces.
Code, requires an annual physical inventory of our gold supply, but a complete audit was never done, so officially, nobody knows what has occurred.
Jesse Helms seemed to think that the OPEC nations have our gold, while others believe that 70% of the world's gold supply is being held by the World Bank, which is dominated by the financial grip of the Rothschilds and the Rockefellers.
I have received information from a gentleman in Michigan which indicates that counterfeit $5,000 and $10,000 Federal Reserve Notes have been used to steal United States gold reserves.
Illegal to own, these notes are actually checks which are used to transfer ownership of large amounts of gold without actually moving the gold itself.
Using public records, he shows the serial numbers of the bills which were originally printed, and how there are now more in existence.
Some of it is American-owned, but most is owned by the central banks of other countries.
It is stored in separate cubicles, and from time to time, is moved from one cubicle to another to satisfy international transactions.
After March, 1964, Silver certificates were no longer convertible to Silver dollars; and in March, 1968, near the conclusion of the Johnson Administration, Silver backing of the dollar was removed.
This was just like the Silver Certificate, which was guaranteed by a dollar in silver that was on deposit.
The 1950 series bore the same information, but reduced it to three lines, and reduced the size of the type.
Since 1933, the Reserve has been printing too much money, compared to the declining Gross National Product.
The GNP is the accumulated values of services and goods produced in the country.
If the GNP is 4 %, then the money produced should only be about 5-6%, thus insuring enough money to keep the goods produced by the GNP in circulation.
Additional social services, which are promised during election year rhetoric to gain votes, increase the Federal Budget, so more money is printed.
Then the Government will cut the Budget, establish wage and price controls.
The extra money in circulation decreases the value of the dollar, and prices go up.
Simply put, too much money in circulation causes inflation, and that is what the Reserve is doing, purposely printing too much money in order to destroy the economy.
On the other hand, if they would stop printing money, our economy would collapse.
The Reserve is responsible for setting the interest rate that member banks can borrow from the Reserve, thus controlling the interest rates of the entire country.
So what it boils down to, the Federal Reserve determines the amount of money needed, which is created by the International Bankers out of nothing.
Besides the face value, they charge the government 30 to produce each bill.
The Federal government pays the Reserve in bonds, and then pay the bonds off at a high rate of interest.
That interest will very soon become the largest item in the Federal Budget.
Chapter Two scientifically brought down each year by 3-31/2 %, in order to allow wages to go up.
The reasoning behind this, was that the people were being made to think that they were getting more, when in fact they were really getting less.
The Congress has also contributed to this process, by approving Federal Budgets, year after year, which requires the printing of more money to finance the debt, which is now over $ 4,800,000,000,000.
When Wilson was President, the debt was about $1 billion, and in 1974, the debt was about $1 trillion.
Charles G Binderup of Nebraska, realizing the consequences of the Federal Reserve System, called for the Government to buy all the stock, and to create a new Board controlled by Congress to regulate the value of the currency and the volume of bank deposits, thus eliminating the FED's independence.
Patman, said that the Federal Open Market Committee(who, in addition to the Board of Governors, decide the country's monetary policy) is ""one of the most secret societies.
During his career, Patman has sought to force the FED to allow an independent audit, lessen the influence of the large banks, shorten the terms of the FED Governors, expose it to regular Congressional review just like any other Federal agency, and to have only officials nominated by the President and confirmed by Congress to be on the Federal Open Market Committee.
In 1967, Patman tried to have them audited, and on January 22,1971, introduced HR11, which would have altered its organization, diminishing much of its power.
He was later removed from the Chairmanship of the House Banking and Currency Committee, which he held for years.
Henry Gonzales of Texas introduced HR1470, that called for the repeal of the Federal Reserve Act.
The Federal Reserve System has never been audited, and their meetings, and minutes of those meetings, are not open to the public.
In 1967, Arthur Burns, the Chairman of the Federal Reserve, said that an audit would threaten the independence of the Reserve.
In 1979, after dismissing Secretary of Treasury, Michael Blumenthal, President Jimmy Carter offered the position to American Illuminati chief, David Rockefeller, the CEO of Chase-Manhattan Bank, as did Nixon, but he turned it down.
He also turned down the nomination for the Chairmanship of the Federal Reserve Board.
Volcker graduated from Princeton with a degree in Economics, and from Harvard, with a degree in Public Administration.
In the Nixon Administration, as the Under Secretary for Monetary Policy and International Affairs, the executive branch official who works most closely with the Federal Reserve, he and Treasury Secretary John Connally helped formulate the policy that took us off the gold standard in 1971, because of the dwindling gold reserves at Fort Knox.
Lance predicted that he would bring high interest rates and high unemployment.
He was confirmed by the Senate Banking Committee in August, 1979, replacing Arthur Burns, an Austrian-born economist who was a CFR member with close ties to the Rockefellers.
Volcker was against a gold-back dollar, and gold being used as a form of currency.
He attempted to tighten the money situation in order to curb the 10% annual growth in the money supply, and to ease the pressure of loan demand.
The result was a dramatic increase in interest rates, which climbed to 131/2 % by September, 1979, and then soared to 211/2 % by December, 1980.
Conjecture could dictate that this economic decline was purposely engineered to cause the political decline of Carter.
It's carefully isolated from any influence by the President or the Congress.
Even though inflation had skyrocketed to all-time highs, Reagan kept Volcker on.
He said that this would curtail their control over the money supply, and that led Congress, in 1980, to pass the Monetary Control Act, which gave the Federal Reserve control of all banking institutions, regardless if they are members or not.
Alan Greenspan, who became the Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board in 1987, is a member of the Council of Foreign Relations.
He met Ayn Rand, the author of Atlas Shrugged, in 1952, and they became friends.
In February, 1995, the seventh increase in the interest rate, within the period of a year, took place.
It was very interesting how the media spin doctors churned out information that totally skirted the issue concerning the FED's actual role in controlling our economy.
On March 13,1979, while meeting at Strasbourg, France, the Parliament of Europe, which governs the European Economic Community , oversaw the establishment of a new European money system.
Known as the ECU, it was backed by 20% of the participating countries' gold reserves.
What little strength our dollar had, came from the fact that all nations buying oil from OPEC, had to use U S. dollars.
Even though our economy continues to hang on, more and more financial analysts are talking about the disastrous condition of our financial system.
In 1992, independent Presidential candidate H Ross Perot garnered nearly 20% of the vote by making the state of the economy an issue during the campaign.
Bob Kerrey(Democrat, NE) promised to support President Bill Clinton's Budget Plan, if Clinton would appoint a Committee to study the condition of the American economy.
The President established a 32-member bipartisan committee and in August, 1994, they issued their report.
According to the committee's findings, by the year 2012, unless drastic changes are made, we won't even be able to pay the interest on the national debt.
Knowing this, if the federal government allows the current trend to continue, then it is obvious that the destruction of the American economy has been part of a deliberate plot to financially enslave our nation.
It is believed to be already printed, and stored at the Federal Reserve Emergency Relocation Facility in Culpepper, Virginia, which is built into the side of a mountain, and would be able to continue functioning during the aftermath of a nuclear or natural disaster; and the 200,000 sq. ft.
When our monetary system is finally destroyed, the new money will be issued.
Chapter Two threads, and colors, and may include holograms, diffraction gratings, or watermarks, will be made in coordination with six other nations: Canada, Britain, Japan, Australia, West Germany and Switzerland.
According to the government, the only reason for the currency changes is to deter counterfeiting.
According to law, the Treasury Secretary has the authority to change the currency.
Over $3 million had been spent under ""counterfeit prevention"" authority for the development of the new money, which according to the Currency Design Act hearings, would be issued by the Federal Reserve Board.
The variations shown, consisted of each denomination being a different color; Federal Reserve seals replaced with a design utilizing reflective ink; and other optical devices like holograms (a process which produces a 3-dimensional image which can change color depending on the angle it is viewed), and multilayer diffraction gratings(similar to a hologram); as well as bills containing metal security threads, and planchettes(red and blue colored discs incorporated into the paper, similar to threads) to trigger scanning equipment which would detect its presence, and to sort cash faster.
A consumer research firm from Illinois was hired by the Treasury Department to gauge the public's reactions to the various designs.
It was shown that a drastic change would not be accepted, so a process of incrementalism was adopted.
It was decided that the Bureau of Printing and Engraving would have a fine metallic strip running through the currency, leaving the basic design intact; however, they later decided to use a clear imprinted polyester strip, woven into the paper, running vertically on the left side of the Federal Reserve Seal.
The length of the translucent polyester filament reads ""USAIOO"" for $100 bills, and ""USA50"" for $50 bills, and can only be read if held up to direct light.
It was reported that a company called Checkmate Electronics, Inc., which manufactures the equipment needed to scan checks, scanned the new money, and found the strip to contain ""machine detectable"" aluminum.
Though the basic design did not change, there is microscopic type printed around the picture which reads, ""The United States of America"", but appears to only be a line.
This currency was introduced in August, 1991, with $100, $50 bills and $20 bills, and the Government discontinued printing any of the old money, and began emptying their vaults to get rid of the old bills.
The International Monetary Fund has been responsible for the decline of our dollar, and our present economic situation.
Chapter Two Control Act of 1980, which instead of a 6:1 ratio, mandated the Federal Reserve to only have one dollar on deposit for every twelve they create.
International cooperation has been intense to coordinate currency changes among its member governments.
They established the European Currency Unit Banking Association, to get world cooperation for a unified currency, and had support from bankers in Europe, Japan, and the United States.
It was an offshoot of the Banking Federation of the European Community, which has been engaged in shutting down small banks in order to develop a conglomerate of a few huge banks.
The Federal Reserve Bank, the European Central Bank, and the Central Bank of Japan.
In a June, 1989 hearing of the Senate Banking Securities Subcommittee, Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Federal Reserve, said that exchange rates could be fixed in order to solve the problem of uniformity between the currencies of various nations.
Many countries had planned to come out with new money, such as Switzerland, the United Kingdom, Japan, Canada, France, Germany, Australia, and Brazil.
Of the countries that already had, most currencies had a common 1"" square, usually on the left side of the bill.
Held over a light, a hologram appears on the spot, barely visible to the naked eye, which cannot be reproduced on a copier.
It is believed that this spot is reserved for a central World Bank overprint.
They also contain metallic strips that can be detected when they pass through scanners at airports and international borders.
On May 10,1994, USA Today carried a page-one article concerning major changes in the design of the paper currency, which is expected to take place by the end of the year.
Officials from the Department of the Treasury, the Secret Service, and the Bureau of Engraving said that the changes were necessary to combat counterfeiters.
The minor changes they had made before, for the same reason, had stopped with the twenty dollar bill, which kind of leads me to believe that the changes were just a smokescreen to prepare us for bigger changes in the appearance of the money.
The article was accompanied with a picture of the new $100 bill, with a larger portrait of Benjamin Franklin which has been pushed to the right side of the bill, and the Eagle in the center.
The line ""United States of America"" appears along the top right, and the line ""One Hundred Dollars"" appears on the lower left, with the serial number being placed over that.
Chapter Two Some financial experts have theorized that when every denomination is changed over to the new money, that the business sector may not want to accept old bills, which would then become worthless, and could create a financial emergency.
Federal officials have said that the old money would be accepted, but scrutinized.
It has been suggested that the government could really take advantage of the situation, that in order for people to exchange their old money for new, an exchange rate may be determined which would benefit the economy.
Or perhaps, the new money is just a transitional currency, the first step in testing the public's willingness to accept economic change.
The institution of a common world-wide currency may be delayed because of the possibility of moving right to a cashless system, making paper money obsolete.
If this is the case, there would be a massive campaign to promote debit cards and a move to accommodate their use in all aspects of business.
The Visa MagiCard seems to be the first step towards a national debit card.
With this card, you can make purchases at any of the 10 million merchants who accept Visa, and have the amount electronically deducted from your checking account.
Financial experts believe that in only a few years, there will be more debit cards than credit cards.
They couldn't touch the money of the people, because the Constitution did not contain any provision for the taxing of income; so they now set into motion a plan to accomplish this, in order to oppress the middle class, and increase the lower class, who would have to depend on the government for their survival.
The tax was criticized because it wasn't apportioned among the states according to population.
The Act of 1862 also provided for a sales tax, excise tax, and inheritance tax; and established the office of Commissioner of Internal Revenue, who was given the power to assess, levy, and collect taxes, and was given the authority to enforce tax laws.
Supreme Court ruled that the tax was unconstitutional, because it was not distributed among the states in accordance with the Constitution.
Newspapers controlled by the Illuminati denounced the Court's decision.
When the income tax legislation was introduced in the Senate in 1894, Sen.
Aldrich had come out against it, saying it was ""communistic and socialistic,"" but in 1909, he proposed the 16th Amendment to the Constitution, with the support of President Taft, which called for the creation of a progressive graduated income tax.
It was ratified in February, 1913, and levied a 1% tax on all incomes over $3,000, and a progressive surtax on incomes over $20,000.
Beckman, on February 25,1913, shortly before the end of his term, Secretary of State Philander C Knox ignored various irregularities, and fraudulently declared that the 16th Amendment had been ratified by three-fourths of the 48 states.
Benson traveled to all the states, and to the National Archives in Washington, DC, obtaining more than 17,000 pages of documents that proved that the 16th Amendment was not ratified.
A 16-page memo dated February 15,1913, to Knox, from his solicitor, stated that only four states had ""correctly"" ratified the amendment, that Minnesota had not forwarded their copy yet, and that the resolutions from 33 states contained punctuation, capitalization, or wording different than the Resolution that was approved by Congress.
The other thirtythree resolutions all contain errors either of punctuation, capitalization, or wording.
Minnesota, it is to be remembered, did not transmit to the Department a copy of the resolution passed by the legislature of the state.
Benson discovered that some word changes and misplaced commas were done by legislative intent.
State Legislatures voting to ratify a proposed Constitutional amendment, must use a certified, exact copy, as passed by the Congress.
This passage reveals the true intention of our forefathers, which was for the Federal Government to coordinate the efforts of all the States in order to combine their resources when it came to things like trade and defense, since the States were actually like separate countries.
Therefore, the Congress only had jurisdiction over the area of Washington, D.C., and non-state territories like Alaska, and Hawaii(before they became states); and the present countries of Puerto Rico, Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and others; and Federal property such as military bases.
Chapter Three Since America is a Republic, and not a democracy, the Government has a responsibility to protect the inalienable rights of its citizens, as granted by the Constitution, rather than to grant privileges, known as civil rights, which are decided by the will of the majority.
Therefore, the Federal Government has been able to wield its influence over the entire country, rather than the area referred to as the District.
This is possible, because, for all intents and purposes, there are two of every state.
The gold-fringed flag was reserved for use by the General of the Army, where it was present at military headquarters and displayed at courtmartials.
Its use elsewhere, as a government battle flag, was only to be done at the discretion of the President, within his role as the Commander-in-Chief of the military, to establish the jurisdiction of the military presence.
This gold-fringed flag, which is common in many public places, such as courthouses, and schools, is not the national flag which represents our constitutional republic.
It means that when Congress declares an emergency, there is no Constitution.
Contrary to what most people believe, it is not mandatory to apply for a Social Security number; however, in order for a sovereign state citizen to be eligible for Social Security benefits, they have to waive the rights given to them under our Republic.
Probably, the most incredible example of the adhesion contract, is the Income Tax system.
Therefore, since ""wages"" are received as compensation for labor, it can not be legally taxed.
The Constitution only allows the Congress to collect taxes, and that is limited to a uniform excise tax on gasoline, alcohol, tobacco, telephone bills, firearms, and tiresthings revolving in one way or another around interstate commerce.
The payment of these taxes are voluntary, because they are based on consumption.
These funds go directly to the United States Treasury to pay the expenses of the country.
Because we live in a Republic, the Internal Revenue Service Code, Title 26 USC, could not be passed into law by the Congress, and instead, was passed only as a Resolution, which is a formal expression of intent that was to pertain only to citizens of the District.
However, to the left of that is the word ""label"", which seemingly identifies the entire section as a whole.
Although the Internal Revenue Service is considered to be a Bureau of the Department of Treasury, like the Federal Reserve, they are not part of the Federal Government, and in fact were incorporated in Delaware in 1933.
It is pointed out that all official Federal Government mail is sent postage-free because of the franking privilege, however, the IRS has to pay their own postage, which indicates that they are not a government entity.
They are in fact a collection agency for the Federal Reserve, because they do not collect any taxes for the United States Treasury.
If you have ever sent a check to the IRS, you will find that it was endorsed over to the Federal Reserve.
The Federal Reserve, in turn, deposits the money with the International Monetary Fund of the United Nations, where it is filtered down to the International Development Association , which is part of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, commonly known as the World Bank.
Therefore, it is now clear, that the American people are unknowingly contributing to the financing of a World Government in-the-making.
The tax was an indication that the U S. was heading for a planned war, because they couldn't go into a war without money.
In July, 1943, workers in this country were subject to a payroll withholding tax in the form of a ""victory tax"" that was touted as a temporary tax to boost the economy because of the War, and would later be discontinued.
Under the guise of philanthropy, the Illuminati avoided taxation by transferring their wealth to tax-free foundations.
Chapter Three Before 1900, there were only 18 foundations; from 1910-19, there were 76; during the 1920's, 173; the 1930's, 288; the 1940's, 1,638; and during the 1950's, there were 2,839 foundations.
Kellogg Foundation (the Kellogg Cereals), Carnegie Corp., Alfred P Sloan Foundation , Moody Foundation , Lilly Endowment , Pew Memorial Trust , and the Danforth Foundation , which all have assets of well over $100 million.
The first Congressional Committee to investigate the tax-free foundations, was the Cox Committee in 1952, led by Rep.
Cox discovered that officers and trustees of some foundations were Communists, and that these foundations had given grants to Communists or Communist-controlled organizations.
During the investigation, Cox died, and the facts were glossed over in a cover-up.
Three of the four who were selected for the Committee, with Reece, were House members who had voted against the investigation.
He prohibited evidence discovered by two of its investigators from being used.
Reece's Special Committee to Investigate Tax Exempt Foundations discovered that many foundations were financing civil rights groups, liberal political groups, political extremist groups, and supporting revolutionary activities throughout the world.
There is here, as in the general realm of social sciences, a close interlock.
Chapter Three John Davison Rockefeller, III Nelson Rockefeller Laurance Rockefeller Winthrop Rockefeller David Rockefeller John Davison Rockefeller, grandfather of former Vice-President Nelson Aldrich Rockefeller, and David Rockefeller was the richest man of his time.
He started out in 1859 as a produce merchant, turning to oil in 1865, at the age of 26.
In 1870, when Standard Oil of Ohio was incorporated, Rockefeller controlled 21 out of 26 refineries in Cleveland.
In 1879, he controlled over 90% of all refined oil sold in the country, with 20,000 producing wells, and 100,000 employees.
The Rockefellers and Rothschilds have been partners ever since the 1880's, when Rockefeller was able to get a rebate on each barrel of oil he shipped over the Pennsylvania, Baltimore and Ohio railroads, which were owned by Kuhn, Loeb and Co.
In 1888, details concerning the Rockefeller Oil Trust began to leak out in the newspapers.
In Ohio, at the time, a company within the state could not own stock in a company in another state, which occurred when Rockefeller bought out smaller companies.
Using the secret Trust, which was established in 1879, the trustees for the companies that had been taken over, the 37 Standard Oil stockholders, and Standard Oil of Ohio, relayed all out-of-state subsidiary stock to three clerks from Standard Oil.
In 1882, the three ""dummy"" trustees, 42 Standard Oil stockholders, and Standard Oil of Ohio, transferred all its stock to nine trustees, who were controlled by Rockefeller.
In March, 1892, the Ohio Supreme Court ordered Standard Oil to withdraw from the Trust, after Ohio and other states outlawed trusts.
Rockefeller countered by moving Standard Oil to New Jersey, who allowed their corporations to hold stock in out-of-state companies, thus, Standard Oil of New Jersey became that holding Company.
He promised to support the school for ten years, which he did, donating $34,708,375.
The Board was organized by Fred Gates, the front man for the Pillsbury flour company.
In 1909, the Rockefeller Sanitation Commission was established, to which he gave $1 million.
Joseph Sibley, of Pennsylvania, was President of the Rockefeller-controlled Galena Signal Oil Co.; and in 1898, Rep.
John P Elkins, also of Pennsylvania, accepted a $5,000 bribe from Standard Oil.
Bois Penrose of Pennsylvania received a $25,000 bribe from Rockefeller, and Sen.
The ""rebates"" Rockefeller received from various railroads, were actually kickbacks.
These rebates made it possible for him to keep his prices lower so he could bankrupt his competition.
Standard Oil also made kickbacks , in the form of stock, to railroad people, such as William H Vanderbilt, who received stock without contributing any capital, as did various bankers who lent money freely to Standard Oil.
In 1905, an expose' by Ida M Tarbell, called The History of Standard Oil Co ., which came on the heels of an 1894 book by Henry Demarest Lloyd, called Wealth Against Commonwealth , began to turn public opinion against Standard Oil.
However, a few years later, through an analysis of the Directory of Directors, it was discovered that through interlocking directorates, less than a dozen men controlled the country's business interests.
Nelson Aldrich of Rhode Island, introduced a Bill of Incorporation for the Rockefeller Foundation, but it came at a time when there was an antitrust suit against Standard Oil, and the Bill was withdrawn.
Supreme Court ordered, in a 20,000 word decision, the breakup of Standard Oil of New Jersey.
The Court said that Standard Oil wanted to establish a monopoly in order ""to drive others from the field and exclude them from their right to trade,"" and that ""seven men and a corporate machine have conspired against their fellow citizens.
Rockefeller owned 25% of Standard Oil of New Jersey, which meant that he now owned 25% of all 38 Standard Oil subsidiaries.
The endowment to establish the Foundation totaled $182,851,000, and was given in securities, enabling the foundation to disperse over $1 billion, even though it is only third in total assets compared to the Ford and Johnson Foundations.
But only in regard to being involved in the day-to-day operation of the company.
He didn't officially retire until 1911, when he resigned as President of Standard Oil.
He had become America's first billionaire, yet when he died, he only left a taxable estate of $26,410,837.10, which after Federal and State taxes were levied, left about $16 million.
The remainder of his fortune had been left to surviving relatives , his sons, and his foundations.
Rockefeller, said to own 20% of American industry, between 1855 and his death in 1937, gave away nearly $550 million.
He gave $182,851,480 to the Rockefeller Foundation, $129,209,167 to the General Education Board, $73,985,313 to the Laura Spelman and Rockefeller Memorial Fund, and $60,673,409 to the Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research.
John D Rockefeller, Jr., who was married to Abby Aldrich, daughter of Sen.
Nelson Aldrich, according to a February, 1905 McClure's magazine article, was part of a corrupt political machine.
He spent over $40 million to buy up land and convert it to National Parks, donating it to the public.
The most prominent of these parks is the Jackson Hole Preserve at the Grand Teton National Park in northeastern Wyoming.
He also built 45 other buildings, including three hotels to serve the public, and planted gardens.
The Rockefeller empire is run from the 55th and 56th floors of the RCA building, at 30 Rockefeller Plaza.
The Rockefellers, undeniably the richest family in America, increased their fortune by marrying into other wealthy and influential families.
Percy Rockefeller, married Isabel Stillman, daughter of James A Stillman, President of National City Bank.
Edith Rockefeller, married Harold F McCormick, an heir to the International Harvester Co. fortune.
Their son, Fowler, grandson to John, Sr. and Cyrus McCormick, married Fifi Stillman, the divorced wife of James Stillman.
Nelson Aldrich Rockefeller, was married to Mary Todhunter Clark, the granddaughter of the President of the Pennsylvania Railroad.
Charles Percy, who had been one of the Senate's most influential members.
All together, the Rockefeller family had been joined in marriage to the Stillman, Dodge, McAlpin, McCormick, Carnegie, and Aldrich family fortunes, and its wealth has been estimated to be well over $2 billion.
Hunt, had fortunes between $2-$4 billion; and the Duponts and Mellons had fortunes between $3-$5 billion.
Ever since the TNEC hearings in 1937, which convened for the purpose of finding out who was controlling the American economy, the Rockefellers had been able to avoid any sort of accounting in regard to their vast assets and holdings.
That ended in December, 1974, when Nelson Rockefeller was nominated to be Vice-President.
This was denied by the family, and in an unprecedented event, a family spokesman, J Richardson Dilworth, appeared before the United States House of Representatives' Judiciary Committee during the 1975 ""Hearings into the Nomination of Nelson Rockefeller to be Vice-President of the United States"" to document the family's wealth, which he said only amounted to $1. billion.
Kresge, Texaco, National Cash Register, Avon, American Home Products, Delta Airlines, Braniff Airlines , Northwest Airlines, United Airlines, and Burlington Industries.
By the 1970's, Rockefeller-controlled banks accounted for about 25% of all assets of the 50 largest commercial banks in the country, and about 30% of all assets of the 50 largest life insurance companies.
The Chase Manhattan Bank, however, remains the supreme symbol of Rockefeller domination.
Founded in 1877 by John Thompson, the Chase National Bank was named after Salomon P Chase.
It was taken over by the Rockefellers in a merger with their Equitable Trust Co., whose President was Winthrop Aldrich, son of Sen.
In 1961, the Chase Manhattan Bank Plaza was built in downtown Manhattan, at a cost of $125,000,000.
It is 64 stories high, with five basement floors, the lowest of which contains the largest bank vault in the world.
They have 28 foreign branches, and over 50,000 banking offices in more than 50 countries, and have a controlling interest in many of the largest corporations in America.
Searle, Sunbeam, Beckman Instruments, Texas Instruments, Sperry Rand, Boeing, Diebold, Cummins Engine, Bausch and Lomb, CBS-TV, International Basic Economy Corp., Addressograph-Multigraph , Aetna Life, American General Insurance Co., Allegheny-Ludlum Steel, National Steel.
Men from the Chase Manhattan's Board of Directors have also sat on the Boards of many of the largest corporations, which have created a system of interlocking directorates.
Through a subsidiary, the Chase Investment Corp., they own a sheep and cattle raising operation in Australia, hotels in Puerto Rico and Liberia, a ready-mix concrete facility in Brazil, a cotton textile mill in Nigeria, a paint factory in Venezuela, a steel mill in Turkey, a petrochemical plant in Argentina, a bus line in the Virgin Islands, and bowling alleys in England.
Our tax dollars, through the Export-Import Bank, International Monetary Fund, Cooperation for Overseas Investment, and the International Stabilization Fund, are used to give aid to other countries, some who were communist.
Millions of dollars were given to Yugoslavia, including hundreds of jets, many of which ended up being given to Castro in Cuba.
Chase, and the Export-Import Bank financed 90% of the $2 billion loan to build the Kama River truck complex in Russia, which was equipped with the world's largest industrial computer system, with the capability of producing up to 200,000 ten-ton trucks a year.
Besides the production of trucks, they also have the capability of producing jeeps, military transports and rocket launchers.
The repayment period for the loan was twelve years, with a 41/2 year grace period.
Chapter Three repayment was guaranteed by the U S. taxpayers through government agencies like the Overseas Private Investment Corp., and the Foreign Credit Insurance Association.
The Export-Import Bank, and other private American banks also put up all but $40 million for a $400 million fertilizer plant in Russia.
In 1967, the International Basic Economy Corp., owned by all five Rockefeller Brothers, run by Richard Aldrich(grandson of Sen.
Nelson Aldrich) and Rodman Rockefeller; and Tower International, Inc., headed by Cyrus S Eaten, Jr., a Cleveland financier(who was the son of a man who started his career as secretary to John D Rockefeller, later making his own fortune), joined to promote trade among the Iron Curtain countries.
This partnership built a $50 million aluminum production center in Russia, and announced a multi-million plan for Russia and other Eastern European countries, which included the building of large hotels in Bucharest, Sofia, Budapest, Belgrade, Prague, and Warsaw; rubber plants, and a glass plant in Romania.
In addition, Tower International made an agreement with the Soviet patent and licensing organiaation, Licensintorg, to promote Soviet-American trade, which up to that time, was done by Amtorg Trading Corp., the o ffic ial Soviet agency in America.
This gave the Rockefellers and Eatens complete control over what technology was sent to Russia.
David Rockefeller, the head of the Chase Manhattan, and the family patriarch, controls many secondary interlocks which contribute to the family's power and influence.
Reynolds Industries, United States Steel Corp., Metropolitan Life Insurance Co., May Department Stores, Sperry Rand Corp., and Standard Oil of Indiana.
Chapter Three directors of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks, and members of the Council on Foreign Relations, Trilateral Commission, and Bilderbergers, also have similar connections to these and hundreds of other major corporations.
Now you can see how these like-minded individuals have been able to control American industry and business.
Prior to their appointments, Cyrus Vance and Dean Rusk, were both Presidents of the Rockefeller Foundation.
You have seen how powerful the Rockefeller family is, now let's look at how the Rockefeller Foundation uses its money.
Through interlocking directorates, the Foundation controls the Carnegie Endowment, and the Ford Foundation.
While the Carnegie Endowment deals with education, as it relates to international matters; the Rockefeller Foundation concentrates on education, as it relates to domestic issues.
The Foundation also funded the Kinsey Report , which heralded a new era of sexual immorality.
THE CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT Andrew Carnegie came to the United States as a poor immigrant from Scotland in 1848, and never became an American citizen.
Morgan for $500 million, who incorporated the company into the United States Steel Corporation in 1901, enabling Carnegie to retire and concentrate on his philanthropic activities.
In 1889, William Torrey Harris, the United States Commissioner of Education, told a high-ranking railroad official that the schools were being scientifically designed not to overeducate children.
He believed that the schools should alienate children from their parents and religion.
Morgan, and John D Rockefeller, and that they not only owned everything, but also controlled the government.
His worry, was that subsequent generations would realize this, and work against them.
His solution was to control the education system, and to create a direct relationship between the amount of education a person had, and how good of a job they could get.
Therefore, this created a motivation for children to attend school, where they would be taught only what the social engineers of this country wanted them to know.
Prussia became the first government to have compulsory education, setting up a three-tiered system.
The children of the elite, about one-half of one percent, went to schools called academies, and were taught to think and be independent.
About five and one-half percent went to Realschulen, where they were partially taught how to think.
The other 94% went to Volkschulen, where the idea of being a follower and a good citizen was stressed.
The success in creating an organized cumpulsory educational system in this country has allowed the elite of this country to prevent each generation from truly understanding how this country is actually run, thus keeping them from doing anything about it.
This ""dumbing-down"" has enabled the government to more easily assimilate the people of this country into a population which can be easily deceived and controlled.
In 1905, he established the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching, which, within a 20 year period, gave over $20 million to retiring teachers at universities and technical schools in the United States and Canada to support the profession and encourage higher education.
In 1904, in the U.S., and 1908 in the United Kingdom, he set up the Carnegie Hero Fund to reward heroic deeds by civilian citizens, and gave out close to $500,000,000.
He also established the world renowned Carnegie Hall, and over 2,000 public libraries.
With such a history of philanthropic contributions, the Carnegie Endowment, on its face, appeared to be innocent.
Chapter Three ruse to disguise its true purpose to promote one-world government.
Members of the Temple met at the Endowment headquarters in the United Nations Plaza.
The Carnegie Endowment and Rockefeller Foundation gave over $3,000,000 to the Institute of Pacific Relations, who used the media to convince the American people that the Communists in China were agricultural reformers.
The Endowment has also given money to the Council on Foreign Relations, the Aspen Institute for Humanistic Studies, the United Nations Association of the U.S., and the American Civil Liberties Union Foundation.
Norman Dodd, who in July, 1953, was appointed as the research director of the Special Congressional Cormnittee to investigate Tax-Exempt Foundations, said he discovered that the oldest tax exempt foundations were established before the initiation of income taxes, therefore they existed for a different purpose.
He examined minutes of the Board of Trustees, and found that for the first year, the members concentrated on whether there was any means more effective than war to alter the life of the people of a nation.
Chapter Three concluded that to get America into an upcoming war, they had to control the diplomatic machinery of the State Department.
Dodd discovered that all high-level appointments in the State Department took place only after that had been cleared through a group called the Council of Learned Societies, which was established by the Carnegie Endowment.
Syndicated columnist Joseph Kraft, writing in Harper's in July, 1958, said that records indicated that the Carnegie trustees hoped to involve the United States in a world war to set the stage for world government.
Dodd said they wanted ""to bring the idea of 'one-world( government)' to the point where it is acceptable to the people of this country.
The Guggenheim Foundation agreed to award fellowships to historians recommended by the Carnegie Endowment, and a group of 20 were assembled, and sent to London, where they were briefed and became founding members of the American History Association.
In 1928, the A.H.A. was given a grant of $400,000 by Carnegie to write a 7-volume study on the direction the nation was to take.
He also described how the Rockefeller Foundation, the Ford Foundation, the Carnegie Endowment, and the Carnegie Corporation jointly sponsor conferences to push the goals of the United Nations.
Chapter Three Over 50,000 copies of the book were distributed by the foundation to libraries and scholars.
They also gave a $340,000 grant to print a 17-volume study on American education by Dr.
THE FORD FOUNDATION In 1903, Henry Ford, Sr. founded the Ford Motor Company, and in 1907, he bought out all of his partners, so his family would control the entire company.
In 1924, he was so popular, that various polls indicated that he would be elected President if he ran.
In 1936, with his son Edsel, he established the Ford Foundation as an inheritance tax dodge, which he saw as a plot to take money away from Americans; and for his family to retain control after his death.
An enemy of the establishment, Ford wanted American hero Charles A Lindbergh(who supported the conservative 'America First' movement) to be the Director of his Foundation, but Lindbergh refused.
Ford, and his son Edsel, died before the Foundation's leadership could be placed in safe hands, and control passed to Edsel's widow, and grandson Henry Ford ll, who brought in such ""insiders"" as William Benton, Dr.
The Ford Foundation, with assets of $4 billion, is the world's largest endowment.
Ford also established the Edison Institute; and the Henry Ford Hospital, which gave two-thirds of its grants to education, and one-third to communications, public health, economic development, science, engineering, senior citizens, the humanities and the arts.
Chapter Three Relations; Adlai E Stevenson Institute of International Affairs; UNESC0; United Nations Association ; Institute for International Educational,625,000); American Assembly; World Affairs Council; Congress for Cultural Freedom ; the CED's Foreign Policy Research; National Committee on U.S.-China Relations; the communist-staffed Southern Regional Council , the leftist National Educational Television and Radio Center and the Public Broadcast Laboratory.
The Fund for the Republic, founded in 1953 under the direction of Robert G Hoffman and Robert M Hutchins, are known for their attacks on the internal security program of America, and criticism towards the FBI and Congressional committees investigating communism.
They were responsible for ending the anti-communist fervor that was sweeping the country.
They were also responsible for the establishment of the Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions, in Santa Barbara, California, who developed a Constitution for one-world government.
Robert McNamara, an executive with the Ford Motor Co., became the Foundation's President in 1960, later resigning to serve as the Secretary of Defense in the Kennedy and Johnson Administration.
McGeorge Bundy, a CFR member, the Chief Advisor for Foreign Affairs for Kennedy and Johnson, became President of the Foundation in 1966.
He ushered in an era of social unrest by announcing that the Negro movement, ""the first of the nation's problems,"" would be his top priority.
While enflaming the Negro minority against the Whites, we will instill in the Whites, a guilt complex for the exploitation of the Negroes.
We will aid the Negroes to rise to prominence in every walk of life, in the professions, and in the world of sports and entertainment.
In 1922, the Russian Comintern provided $300,000 for the spreading of communist propaganda among Negroes.
In 1925, a dozen Blacks were recruited for propaganda training in Russia.
In 1930, they changed their name to the League of Struggle for Negro Rights.
In 1947, they united with the Civil Rights Congress, a communist front group.
In a 1928 pamphlet by John Pepper called American Negro Problems , a move was being made by Stalin to ferment revolution and stir the Blacks into creating a separate Republic for the Negro.
It contained a firm pledge that a revolt would be supported by all American communists and liberals.
A Manual On Organization by J Peters, he writes: ""The other important ally of the American proletariat is their mass of 13,000,000 Negro people in their struggle against national oppression.
They have nothing to lose but their property and discrimination, and a whole world of prosperity, freedom, and equality to gain.
In light of all this, you can see why the Supreme Court, under elitist Earl Warren, issued the desegregation law in 1954, and why Eisenhower and Kennedy enforced it by using Federal troops.
Incidentally, it was the Warren Court who prohibited prayer and the singing of Christmas carols in the schools.
Jacob Schiff, the Rothschild's man in America, decided that the best way to create racial tension, was to establish leadership among the Blacks.
In 1909, he laid out plans for the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.
In the beginning, the top leaders of the NAACP were a group of Jews appointed by Schiff.
They are the largest Black organization in the country, with well over 1500 chapters, and about a half-million members.
The man who, more than anyone else, personified the heroic determination of the Black people to win their liberation now.
King, the most powerful Black leader in the country, was a pawn of the Illuminati.
Nine of his closest aides were high ranking communist activists and one of those later became an aide to Rev.
This is the major reason I severed my relationship with him during the fifties.
I know for a fact the Communists would never have promoted him, financed him, and supported him if they couldn't trust him.
Although a 1977 court order sealed the FBI's extensive surveillance records on King in the National Archives for 50 years, a 1981 book by David Garrow, called The FBI and Martin Luther King, Jr. told of King's liaisons with prostitutes and the misappropriation of funds.
In 1913, Schiff, along with Chicago author and attorney Sigmund Livingston, reorganized the group, and established the Anti-Defamation League of the B'nai B'rith to fight anti-semetism and religious prejudice.
They have been used as an instrument to convince people that an attack on the Rothschilds and the Illuminati, is a direct attack on the Jewish people.
They are the most powerful Jewish organization in the world, with chapters in 44 countries.
In the United States, they have over 2,000 agencies, about 25 regional offices, and a membership of a half-million.
Their influence on advertising with some major department stores, hotel chains, and major corporations, has been able to slant the media toward Blacks.
Nearly half of their annual budget comes through donations from non-Jews.
The American League to Limit Armaments was established on December 18,1914, a spinoff of the Emergency Peace Federation, led by communist Louis Lochner.
The League was organized by Jane Addams, John Haynes Holmes, George Foster Peabody, Stephen Wise, L Hollingsworth Wood, and Morris Hillquit, all communists and socialists.
In 1915, they changed their name to the American Union Against Militarism, establishing a Civil Liberties Bureau to oppose draft laws, The director of the Bureau, socialist Roger Baldwin, reorganized it into the National Civil Liberties Bureau, and in 1920, with the help of Jane Addams, Clarence Darrow, Norman Thomas, Felix Frankfurter, and Arthur Garfield Hays, founded the American Civil Liberties Union.
Since the 1920's, 80% of its National Committee members had Communist connections.
I seek the social ownership of property, the abolition of the propertied class and social control of those who produce wealth.
The ACLU is made up of about 200,000 members, with an army of 3,000 unpaid volunteer attorneys, and chapters in 47 states.
They are a finger organization of the Illuminati, and are most noted for their cases involving the separation of church and state.
They have defended the rights of Jehovah Witnesses to refrain from saluting the flag, and to protect the rights of the Nazis and KKK to organize and speak freely.
They have become the most powerful weapon against the Church, and Christian tradition, in the country.
WORLD WAR I World War I began in 1914, and in 1915, the United States, who were not yet involved, lent France and Great Britain $500 million through American banks.
In all, the total amount of the loans to these allied countries amounted to $3 billion, plus another $6 billion for exports, none of which were repaid.
Had Germany won, those bonds held by American bankers would have been worthless.
Morgan(who served as England's financial agent in the U.S.), Rockefeller(who made more than $200,000,000 on the war), Warburg, and Schiff, were instrumental in pushing America into the war, so they could protect their loans to Europe.
The llluminati-controlled newspapers publicized, and played-up the sinking of the British auxiliary cruiser, the Lusitania, which was torpedoed by a German U-Boat on May 7, 1915.
The Germans said they had the right to attack an allied ship, even though the United States, up to that time, had been neutral.
Three months earlier, Germany had issued a proclamation that the waters around the British Isles were part of the war zone, In addition, it was later revealed that on December 14,1914, British Intelligence broke the German war code, which meant that the First Lord of the Admiralty, Winston Churchill, knew the location of every U-Boat in the English Channel area.
The Illuminati used the incident to create a war fever, portraying the Germans as being barbaric.
Because of President Wilson's handling of the Lusitania affair, William Jennings Bryan, his Secretary of State resigned.
When the war was finally over, over 63,000 American soldiers had been killed in the fighting.
A year later, in 1919, Lenin offered four-fifths of Soviet territory, in exchange for the formal recognition of his communist government, and economic aid from the United States.
He offered to accept the creation of allied-sponsored non-communist states in the Baltic region, in the area of Archangel, Western Byelorussia, half of the Ukraine, Crimea, the Caucasus, the Ural Mountains, and all of Siberia.
Wilson rejected the offer for ""patriotic reasons"", because the Illuminati had big plans for that country.
Had he accepted the offer, Russia would have never have become a world power.
THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS Before World War I, the Illuminati, using various influential groups in the United States and Great Britain, urged the creation of an organization to promote world peace, even though George Washington warned against involvement with foreign nations.
President Wilson favored the idea, and echoed those sentiments in his famous ""Peace Without Victory"" speech before the Senate.
He proposed his idea of a League of Nations to the Senate in 1917, seeing it as a means of preventing another World War.
It would provide ""collective security"", or in other words, an attack on one, would be considered an attack on all.
The League would also help in the arbitration of international disputes, the reduction of armaments, and the development of open diplomacy.
It demanded that Germany pay war reparations to the victorious countries.
This amount was set at $32 billion, plus interest; which called for annual payments of $500 million, plus a 26% surcharge on exports.
The agreement forced Germany to forfeit some of her prime provinces, colonies, and natural resources.
They signed away their rights, had to make trade concessions, and lost what property they had in those foreign countries.
When you place conditions on a people that it cannot possibly keep, you force it to either breech the agreement or to war.
The League of Nations was signed and sealed at the Paris Peace Conference.
Bernard Baruch, who, as head of the War Industries Board made about $200,000,000 for himself, was also in the American delegation at the Paris Conference.
English Prime Minister George was accompanied by Sir Philip Sassoon, a member of the British Privy Council and a direct descendant of Amschel Rothschild.
Georges Clemenceau, the French Prime Minister, had at his side, his advisor, Georges Mandel, also known as Jeroboam Rothschild.
The citizens of the United States refused to accept the League of Nations, because they felt it would draw them into future European conflicts.
Frank B Kellogg(who in 1925 became Secretary of State under Coolidge), inspired by the American ""outlawry of war"" movement, and supported by those who were disappointed at the failure of the United States to enter the League, proposed a pact to the French Foreign Minister, Aristide Briand in the spring of 1927.
Its purpose was to create alliances directed against a possible resurgence of German aggression.
This Pact of Paris was signed on August 27, 1928, by 65 nations, who promised to settle all international disputes by peaceful means.
Chapter Three The League of Nations, headquartered in Geneva, Switzerland, throughout the 1920's, gained new members, and helped settle minor international disputes.
However, weakened by the failure of the United States to join, and the restlessness of dissatisfied nations such as Japan, Italy and Germany, the Illuminati's second attempt at establishing a one world government failed.
The League had little impact on international affairs, and ceased to exist in 1946 when the United Nations was established.
What the League of Nations did do, was allow the Illuminati to get more of a grip on world finances.
Countries which belonged to the League, sought financial aid from the United States, wherein Rockefeller said that no country could get a loan unless the International Bankers controlled the bank.
Through the Bank for International Settlement, established in 1930, the Illuminati was able to control more of the world's money.
THE STOCK MARKET CRASH AND DEPRESSION The Federal Reserve Board held a secret meeting on May 18,1920, to plan a depression.
Large banks began calling in loans, causing stocks to drop from a high of 138.12 in 1919, to a low of 66.24 in 1921.
When the value of government bonds plummeted, they were forced to call in even more loans.
When thousands of the banks' customers could not pay their notes, the banks seized their assets.
After 1922, profits rose, and with the Federal Reserve's ability to lend ten times more than their reserves, credit was easily obtained.
The Reserve expanded the money supply by 62%, and this excess money was used to bid the stock market up to fantastic heights.
The media began publicizing that there was an enormous profit to be made from the stock market.
This push was planned at a meeting of the International Bankers in 1926, who made the boom possible, and who was going to bring about financial disaster later.
In 1928, the House hearings on the Stabilization of the Purchasing Power of the Dollar, revealed that the Federal Reserve Board had met with the heads of various European central banks at a secret luncheon in 1927 to plan what they believed may be a major crash.
On February 6,1929, after Montagu Norman, head of the Bank of England, came to the United States to meet with Andrew Mellon, the Secretary of Treasury, the Reserve reversed its monetary policy by raising the discount rate, and during the next few months, after Paul Warburg had issued a tip in March, 1929, Illuminati members, who knew what the future held, got their money out of the stock market, reinvesting it in gold and silver.
Stock prices fell by 90%, and United States Securities lost $26 billion.
Thousands of smaller banks and insurance companies went bankrupt, and people who had been millionaires, were now broke.
To prolong the depression after the crash, from 1929 to 1933, the Reserve began to reducing the money flow by one-third.
The Great Depression, as it became known, was engineered by the Illuminati to take money from the people, and to make them dependent on the Government through the subsequent New Deal programs of Roosevelt.
To a limited extent, this same method was used to create minor ""depressions"" in 1937, 1948,1953,1956,1960,1966,1970, and 1979.
THE ELECTORAL COLLEGE This would be a good time to mention another contributing factor to Wilson's election to the Presidency, and how the Illuminati controls the American electorate today.
Because delegates to the Constitutional Convention, which met in Philadelphia in 1787, thought that the general public lacked the insight and the judgment necessary to elect a President, and could be easily misled by irresponsible candidates, they enacted the Electoral College to do the job.
The President and Vice-President are the only public officials in the country who are not elected through a direct vote of the people.
Each party, in every state, has a slate of electoral candidates, based on the number of representatives it has in Congress.
Technically, however, a candidate wins all of the state's electoral votes, if he wins a majority of the popular votes.
Chapter Three candidate has the largest popular vote, but doesn't obtain the necessary electoral votes, he doesn't win the Presidency.
If no candidate has a majority, then the House of Representatives chooses a President from the three highest candidates, with all the Representatives from each state combining to cast one vote for each state.
If a Vice-Presidential candidate receives no clear majority, then the Senate chooses from the top two, with each Senator casting an individual vote.
Therefore, the candidate's objective is not to win a majority of the popular vote, but a majority of the electoral votes.
That is why you see a concentration of effort in these states at election time.
With the Illuminati controlling the media in these large population centers, it is not a difficult task to alter public opinion and sway votes to the candidate they choose.
The bottom line is, that the people's right to choose a President has practically been taken away, and without the financial resources necessary to fight it, there is nothing that can be done.
SYMBOL OF THE ILLUMINATI When Weishaupt founded the Order of the Illuminati, he adopted the All-Seeing Eye symbol of Masonry, to be the symbol of the organization.
It is the Great Pyramid of Cheops, with the capstone missing, and replaced with an eye.
The All-Seeing Eye can be traced back to Chaldea as the Solar Eye, the Eye of Jupiter or Apollo, or the Eye of Providence.
Hieroglyphics in ancient Egypt identified the name of the chief Sun God Osiris with a human eye.
On July 4,1776, Thomas Jefferson, John Adams, and Ben Franklin, were appointed by a Committee of the Continental Congress to prepare the Great Seal of the United States to signify that the 13 states had united in an act of independence.
After some preliminary work by another, William Barton submitted an Eagle on the pinnacle of a Doric column, the All-Seeing Eye, and the stars.
Barton's second design pushed the All-Seeing Eye to the reverse side, and moved the eagle up to the crest, and placed a phoenix rising from the flames at the column's summit, which was to indicate the revival of the new out of the old.
Chapter Three referred to Charles Thompson, the Secretary of Congress on June 13th.
The final version, approved and adopted by an act of Congress on June 20,1782, was the result of a series of committee meetings which combined ideas from Barton, Thompson and Jefferson, who placed a triangle around the eye, added the year '1776', 'E Pluribus Unum', the olive branch on the front, stars above the eagle, and other things.
Within weeks, a brass plate of the face of the Great Seal was produced, but not the reverse side.
Although the design of the seal was not to deviate from the one approved, when the original wore out, and a second engraving in 1841 was ordered by Secretary of State Daniel Webster.
Throop, had many subtle differences, such as six, rather than thirteen arrows.
Frelinghuysen and cut by Tiffany and Co.; and the fourth engraving, under Secretary of State John Hay, engraved by Max Zeiler, and cut by Baily, Banks & Biddle; were both consistent with the design passed by law in 1782.
A committee appointed by Frelinghuysen, consisting of Theodore F Dwight(Chief of the Bureau of Rolls and Library of the State Department), Justin Winsor, Charles Eliot Norton, William H Whitmore , John Denison Chaplin, Jr. and James Horton Whitehouse decided that a die for the reverse side of the seal would not be produced and used as an official seal.
Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr. wrote in his book The Coming of the New Deal , that Vice President Henry A Wallace was ""fascinated"" by the occult, and was impressed enough with the significance of the reverse side of the Great Seal to lobby Treasury Secretary Morganthau to have it put on the back of the one dollar bill in 1935.
The reverse side displays a pyramid, with an eye in the capstone and a Latin inscription around it.
This seems to be a continuation of the masonic symbolism found on the front.
The number thirteen is displayed prominently, and was thought to have referred to the thirteen colonies.
However, the number thirteen was a mystical number to the Egyptians and Babylonians, and also the Masons.
There are thirteen leaves in the olive branch, thirteen stripes on the shield, thirteen feathers on the eagle's tail, thirteen arrows, and thirteen stars.
Which refers to the protection of Providence, ""whose eye never slumbers nor sleeps,"" which alludes to the ""Big Brother"" system of constant surveillance.
To the Illuminati, it represents the eye of Satan, who its members worship.
The pyramid represents the organizational structure of the Illuminati, and the capstone containing the eye, represents the House of Rothschild, who control the group, and have perpetuated the goal of one-world government.
Notice they said ""Deity"", and not ""God"" The news release indicated that the Latin phrase 'Annuit Coeptis' is translated as ""he favored our undertakings"", and comes from Virgil's 'audacibus annue coeptis' or ""favor my daring undertaking"", which refers to the ""golden"" age during which the ""Saturnian"" kingdom shall return.
The date 1776, found at the base of the pyramid in Roman numerals, doesn't refer to July 4th, the date of the country's independence; but May 1st, when the Illuminati was founded.
May 1st is also an international holiday for all workers, known as May Day, which was established in 1889 at the International Socialist Congress.
A forerunner of this group was the London Mercers Company, and earlier than that, the London Staplers.
The organization traced their lineage back to the ancient commercial groups involved in trading between the Mediterranean and India.
They were closely related to the Levant Company, and the Anglo-Muscovy Company, and spawned the London Company, which was chartered in 1606 to establish the Virginia Plantation on a communistic basis, and the Plymouth Colony in 1621.
It was mainly organized for trading, but soon became an agent for British imperialism.
They traded in cotton, tea, silk, and salt peter; and were accused of dealing with opium and participating in the slave trade.
They virtually monopolized all trade from South India, the Persian Gulf, Southeast Asia and East Asia.
Indian policy was influenced by the company from 1757 to 1773, when their power was broken by the 1773 Regulatory Act, and Pitt's India Act of 1784, finally ending their monopoly in 1813.
When they ceased to exist in 1873, many of its shareholders were major financiers.
The principals of this group perpetuated their elitist goals by establishing the Fabian Society.
THE FABIAN SOCIETY On October 24,1883, in London, a group of 17 wealthy Socialists gathered to discuss a 'Fellowship of the New Life', which was based on the writings of scholar Thomas Davidson, who hoped to start some sort of monastic order.
H Cole; Harold Laski; Israel Zangwil 1, a Jewish playwright and novelist, who in 1910, wrote the play The Melting Pot , which was a propaganda play showing how Americans discriminate against Blacks and Jews; and Israel Cohen, a Jewish writer.
Some of these people were also members of the Society for Physical Research, an organization dedicated to spiritualism research, which was founded in 1882.
He was a disciple of John Stuart Mill, who served as the Secretary of the British East India Company.
However, they split into two factions, and on January 4, 1884, one of the factions established a group known as the Fabian Society.
At a time when there were 30,000 Socialist voters, after a few weeks, they had only 20 members.
In May, journalist George Bernard Shaw(who would win the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1925) joined, and soon became the leading figure of the Fabians.
In March, 1885, Sidney Webb, then a clerk from the Colonial Office, joined; and in 1886, so did Graham Wallas.
The other faction, known as ""The Fellowship"", continued for 15 years under Davidson, with members such J Ramsey MacDonald, Edward Carpenter, and Havelock Ellis.
Their pamphlet Facts for Socialists in 1887, maintained that any person who knew the facts of Socialism, had no other choice but to be one.
They had 74 local chapters in Canada, Australia, New Zealand, India, South Africa, Spain, Denmark, and Germany.
In 1899, The Fabian Essays , the most noted work on socialism, was written by seven influential members of the Society, and edited by Shaw.
It became the blueprint for socialistic legislation, and was later reprinted in 1908,1920,1931, and 1952.
Fabian leaders were drawn to Herbert George Wells, and his ideas of the ""New Republic"" which he described as ""a sort of outspoken Secret Society... an informal and open freemasonry,"" made up of the educated class, whose common goals would lead to the creation of a new world state, thus saving the human race from disaster.
Known as the 'Prophet of Our Time' because of writing about many things before they came to be, in books like The Time Machine and War of the Worlds ; Wells would give the Fabians the notoriety they needed.
In his first lecture after joining, he said that the World State was a necessity.
In his 1905 book, A Modern Utopia , he wrote of the World State taking control and creating a ""sane order,"" and how they maintained a central records system in Paris, which they used to keep track of every person on Earth, and aided the state to eliminate the unfit.
Wells was unimpressed with the Fabians, and called for expansion, by raising money, getting new offices, appointing a new staff, and relaxing the guidelines for membership.
His views were not shared by the Fabian inner circle, and in September, 1908, he handed in his resignation.
Blueprints for a World Revolution , which was an elaboration of ideas from his 1926 book The World of WiiSiam Clissold , which gave a seven-point program for the development of the ""new human community"", which was inspired by the rise of communism.
Chapter Four ideas had been fleshed out in his 1897 short story A Story of the Days to Come , and his 1901 book.
It is not a project to overthrow existing governments by insurrectionary attacks, but to supersede them by disregard.
It does not want to destroy them or alter their forms but to make them negligible by replacing their functions.
The Open Conspiracy was Wells perspective of his New Republic, which represented a classless World State that controlled everything.
The revolution was to begin through the ""formation of small groups of friends, family groups, groups of students and employees or other sorts of people meeting and conversing frequently in the course of normal occupations.
Chapter Four multitude and variety of overlapping groups, but now all organized for collective political, social and educational as well as propagandist action.
It will have become a great world movement as widespread and evident as socialism and communism.
Two years later, in a published article titled ""The Banker"", Wells even included the international banking houses in Clissold's ""open conspiracy"" through a three-point program that would by-pass governments by negotiating agreements stabilizing the currency, adjusting credit availability to control the fluctuation of business, and the withdrawal of credit to governments or armament industries who instigate an arms race.
It is obvious that Wells either based his writings on the actual plans of the Fabian elitists, or used his knowledge of what they had already done in order to formulate a theory of what they were going to do in the future.
Since he did quit, were these writings meant to be an expose or warning; or was he just stating facts, daring people to try and stop them.
We don't know his intent, but what we do know, was that he was incredibly prophetic in his description of their methods.
It would indeed be a ""blueprint"" for the manner in which the Illuminati would entrench itself in our governmental affairs.
These tools would be fully utilized to begin the destruction of America.
The secret goal of the Fabian Society, was to create a godless, classless, socialistic society that was dedicated to the ultimate victory of Socialism, which really meant Communism.
In 1891, they became affiliated with the Second Socialist International , and helped establish a Democratic Socialist state in Great Britain.
Ruskin, a teacher at the Working Men's College, a professor of Fine Arts at Oxford, an artist and writer, based his views on those of Socialist Robert Owen.
In his work, The Republic , he outlined his ideal society, which was an aristocratic society ruled by the elite.
It included the elimination of marriage and the family, and introduced selective breeding by the government, who would destroy all inferior offspring.
In Plate's utopia, sexual equality dictated that women would fight alongside the men in times of war.
The name originated from the Roman Consul, General Quintus Fabius Maximus, the Cunctator , who through patient, cautious, delaying and elusive tactics, during the early phases of the Second Punic War, enabled the Roman army to regroup and defeat Hannibal's stronger Carthaginian army.
The Fabians were working towards a new world, by indoctrinating young scholars who would eventually rise to power in various policy-making positions throughout the world; by infiltrating educational institutions, government agencies, and political parties.
Their strategy was called the ""doctrine of inevitability of gradualism,"" which meant that their goals would be gradually achieved.
Ever since Bible reading and prayer has been taken out of schools, the entertainment industry has been slowly and methodically taking bolder steps in the content of their programming.
We are seeing things being televised, which would have never been considered thirty years ago.
Nudity done in ""good taste"", or done to be culturally or historically accurate, is acceptable.
Obscene language is tolerated , if it is an essential part of the plot.
Even though the level of sex and violence is increasing, the rate of complaints to the television networks is decreasing.
This was done to brainwash our children to constantly bombard them with trash that would influence them, and turn them away from God.
This is so evident with the concept of music videos, which have been able to combine sex and violence along with a hard driving musical composition that has been shown to ferment rebellion in young people.
Dewey would later serve as its Vice-President, and in 1941, its President.
Shaw called for ""wire-pulling"" the government in order to get Socialist measures passed.
In 1931, the New Fabian Research Bureau was organized, joining the Fabian Society in 1938 to form a reorganized group.
In 1940, the Colonial Bureau of the Fabian Society was established; and in 1941, the Fabian International Bureau was formed, which catered to international issues.
In December, 1942, the Fabians published the Beveridge Report , written by Sir William Beveridge, who promised the Britons the world, if they would accept his package of social reforms.
In 1945, Fabian Socialists took control of the House of Commons, on the strength of the Report, and the Parliamentary Reforms , which had been published eleven years earlier by Sir Ivor Jennings.
Within a few years, British industries and services were nationalized and put under government control, including Rothschild's Bank of England, which only meant that the Rothschilds were able to control more, because now, all banks were forced to use Bank of England notes, instead of their own.
At its peak in 1946, the Fabian Society had 8,400 members in 80 local chapters.
Today, from their headquarters at 11 Dartmouth Street, in London, they spread their ideas among teachers, civil servants, politicians, union officials, and other influential people.
They also hold meetings, lectures, conferences, and seminars; do research in political, economic, and social problems; and publish their findings and views in magazines, books and pamphlets.
THE ROUND TABLE Cecil Rhodes(1853-1902, South African financier, British statesman and industrialist, who wanted to make Africa a ""British dominion from the Cape to Cairo""), with the financial support of Nathaniel Mayer Rothschild and Alfred Belt, was able to control the diamond mines of South Africa with his DeBeers Consolidated Mines Limited by buying out the French Diamond Co. and then merging with the Barnato Diamond Mining Company, He eventually controlled the production of diamonds throughout the world.
His Consolidated Gold Fields, was also a prosperous gold mining operation.
In 1877, while still studying at Oxford(it took him 8 years because of having to run the diamond mines), he wrote the first of seven wills, in which each became a separate and legally binding document.
The Scholarships provided a two-year program for young men, and later, women, from the United States, United Kingdom and Germany, to carry on the Illuminati conspiracy.
Richard Celeste, Supreme Court Justice Byron ""Whizzer"" White, Charles Collingwood , Howard K Smith , George Jerome Goodman(writer known as ""Adam Smith""), Brig.
Pete Dawkins, Pat Haden(former quarterback of the Los Angeles Rams), Kris Kristofferson , Rep.
The Rhodes fortune, through the Rhodes Scholarship Fund, has been used to promote the concept of globalism and one world government.
Rhodes talked about starting an organization to preserve and extend the British Empire.
It was this mentality that fueled his desire to unite the world under one form of government.
Using the Jesuits and the Masons as organizational models, Rhodes, Rothschild agent Lord Alfred Milner(18541925); other Ruskin associates at Oxford such as Arnold Toynbee, Arthur Glazebrook, Sir George Parkin, Philip Lyttleton Gell, Sir Henry Birchenough; and a similar group at Cambridge, led by social reformer and journalist William T Stead, which included, Lord Reginald Baliol Brett, Sir John B Seeley, Lord Albert Grey, and Edmund Garrett; joined together to form a secret group, on February 5,1891.
There was an Inner Circle, known as the ""Circle of Initiates"", led by Rhodes, and included an Executive Committee with Stead, Brett, and Milner, the chief Rhodes Trustee; and other members like Lord Arthur Balfour(British Foreign Secretary who wrote to Rothschild promising his support for the establishment of a Jewish homeland in Palestine), Lord Lionel Walter Rothschild, Sir Harry Johnston, and Lord Albert Grey.
Their goal was to eventually establish a one-world government, which would be controlled by the international banking community, under the cloak of socialism.
Chapter Four English-speaking world, which would be controlled by them.
In 1897, British and American elitists met in order to come up with ways to accomplish Rhodes' plan to consolidate their respective governments, which would pave the way for a one-world government.
On July 24,1902, a secret organization known as the Pilgrim Society was started in London.
While he was Governor-General and High Commissioner of South Africa from 18971905, Milner began to recruit young men, mostly from Oxford and Toynbee Hall, to help run his Administration.
With his backing, they were able to get jobs in influential positions in government and finance, where they became a dominant force in England's domestic and foreign policy.
The membership consisted of men who not only had a vast amount of political clout, but some who served in the highest levels of the British government.
Most members had private fortunes, or were known financiers, however, it was the fortunes of Rhodes, Alfred Beit, Sir Abe Bailey, and the Astor Family, that formed the core of their financial support.
Morgan, the Rockefeller and Whitney families, and associates of Lazard Brothers Bank and Morgan, Grenfell and Company.
Chapter Four Lionel George Curtis, the British High Commissioner to South Africa and Secretary to Sir Alfred Milner, advocated British imperialism, and the establishment of a World State.
Today you'll find the Institut des Relations Internationales in Belgium, the Institute for International Affairs in the Netherlands, the Institute for International Affairs in Rome, the Norwegian Institute for Foreign Affairs, the French Institute of International Relations, the Australian Institute of International Affairs, and many others.
From June, 1918 to April, 1919, they held a series of dinner meetings on a variety of international matters, but soon disbanded.
In the fall of 1917, a group called 'The Inquiry' was assembled by Col.
Edward M House to negotiate solutions for the Paris Peace Conference in Versailles.
They worked out of the American Geographical Society doing historical research, and writing position papers.
The Inquiry was formed around the inner circle of the Intercollegiate Society, which was a group of American socialist-oriented intellectuals.
Chapter Four establishing ""socialism as dreamed by Karl Marx,"" and the creation of a one-world totalitarian government.
The book also discussed the graduated income tax, and tax-free foundations.
They met again on June 5,1919, and decided to have separate organiaations, each cooperating with the other.
The short-lived Council on Foreign Relations , and the Institute of International Affairs, both supporters of Wilson, strongly supported the League of Nations.
In 1921, when it became apparent that the United States wasn't going to join the League, the Council on Foreign Relations was incorporated on July 21, consisting of members from both groups, and others who had participated in the 1919 Paris Peace Talks.
The Council on Foreign Relations became the American headquarters for the Illuminati.
Morgan & Co., Rockefeller Foundation trustee, and also a Democratic candidate for the Presidency in 1924), Elihu Root, Paul D Cravath, Archibald Cary Coolidge, Isaiah Bowman, Norman H Davis(NY banker, former Undersecretary of State), John H Finley(associate editor at the NewYork Times) , David F Houston, and Otto Kahn.
This gave them the ability to slant the news in a way which would reflect their views, and thus begin the process of molding America to suit their needs.
Between 1938 and 1940, Francis P Miller organized these mini-Councils with funding from the Carnegie Corporation, to better influence thinking across the country.
Albuquerque, Atlanta, Billings, Birmingham, Boise, Boston, Casper, Charlottesville, Chicago, Cleveland, Denver, Des Moines, Detroit, Houston, Indianapolis, Little Rock, Los Angeles, Louisville, Miami, Nashville, Omaha, Philadelphia, Phoenix, Portland, Portland, Providence, Rochester, St.
Paul-Minneapolis, Salt Lake City, San Francisco, Santa Barbara, Seattle, Tampa Bay, Tucson, Tulsa, Wichita, and Worcester.
From the beginning, their goal was to infiltrate the government, and that was done.
Actually, they were so successful, that today, the CFR practically controls both domestic and foreign policy.
President Franklin D Roosevelt had Henry Wallace and Louis Douglas work with a CFR study group on national selfsufficiency, out of which came the Export-Import Bank and the Trade Agreements Act of 1934.
On September 12,1939, after the start of World War II, CFR members Hamilton Fish Armstrong and Walter H Mallory, went to the State Department and met with Assistant Secretary of State George S Messersmith, to offer the services of the Council by establishing a CFR study group concerning the war and a plan for peace which would make recommendations to the State Department.
They proposed to do research, and make informal recommendations in areas regarding national security and economics.
Secretary of State Cordell Hull, and Undersecretary of State Sumner Welles(CFR member) liked the idea, and the War and Peace Studies Project was initiated with funding from the Rockefeller Foundation, who gave grants of $300,000 over a 6 year period.
In order to formulate a closer liaison between the CFR and the Advisory Committee, the Research Secretaries from the War and Peace Studies were brought into the State Department as consultants to the corresponding subcommittee of the Advisory Committee.
The Committee had their last general meeting in May, 1942, and all work from then on occurred at the subcommittee level.
In December, 1943, the CFR began to outline their proposal for the United Nations, which was presented at the Dumbarton Oaks Conference.
For instance, Allen Dulles, former President of the CFR, was appointed director of the CIA; and John Foster Dulles, became Eisenhower's Secretary of State.
Arthur K Vandenberg, a leading Republican, and a CFR member, traveled around the country to drum up support for the creation of the United Nations.
He was also instrumental in getting the Republican-controlled Congress to go along with Truman's CFR-controlled foreign policy.
In 1925, Lionel Curtis, established the Institute of Pacific Relations in 12 countries, in order to steer America towards Communism.
Men from the IPR were placed in important teaching positions, and dominated the Asian Affairs section of the State Department.
After a four-year battle, their tax exempt status was revoked from 1955-1960.
Their publications were used by the armed forces, colleges, and close to 1,300 public school systems.
They published a magazine called Amerasia , whose offices had been raided by the FBI, who found 1,700 secret documents from various government agencies, including the Army and Navy, that were either stolen, or given to them by traitors within the State Department.
The Senate Internal Subcommittee concluded that the American policy decision which helped establish Communist control in China (by threatening to cut-off aid to Chiang Kai-shek unless he went communist), was made by IPR officials acting on behalf of the Soviet Union.
Chapter Four Laughlin Curry(an Administrative Assistant to the President, who was identified as a Soviet agent by J Edgar Hoover), Alger Hiss, Joseph Barnes, Philip Jessup, and Harry Dexter White, as Communist sympathizers.
While he was Assistant Secretary of Treasury, Harry Dexter White provided Russia with the means of printing currency.
He became Director of the International Monetary Fund in 1946, but resigned in 1947, when Whittaker Chambers accused him of being pro-communist, which he denied.
In November, 1948, after White's death, Whittaker produced five rolls of microfilmed documents, which included eight pages of United States military secrets which had been written by White.
After World War II, the CFR was able to expand its study programs with grants of $1. million from the Ford Foundation, $500,000 from the Rockefeller Foundation, and $500,000 from the Carnegie Endowment.
Pro-communist Cyrus Eaten, Sr., a recipient of the Lenin Peace Prize, established the ""Joint Conferences on Science and World Affairs"", also known as the ""Pugwash Conferences"", in 1945 to gather intellectuals from across the world, to exchange information on ways to push America towards disarmament.
The group was financed by the CFR, the Rockefeller Foundation and the Ford Foundation.
In 1959, a disarmament proposal developed by the CFR, and discussed at the Conference, became the basis for Kennedy's disarmament policy in September, 1961.
They also advocated secret negotiations with Russia concerning disarmament, and increased foreign aid to China.
THE CFR ELECTS NIXON The career of Richard M Nixon began in 1946, when, backed by Eastern Establishment money, he came out of obscurity to defeat incumbent Congressman Jerry Voorhis in California, who was anti-Federal Reserve.
Nixon was rewarded by being selected as the VicePresident, while Warren was named to the Supreme Court.
A subsequent news release indicated that Rockefeller had requested the meeting, when in fact Nixon had.
After losing to Kennedy, Nixon ran for Governor in California, but lost to Pat Brown in 1962.
He was a CFR member from 1961-65, and it was during this time that Nixon rebuilt his political career.
At the top was John F Kennedy's picture, and a list of reasons for the accusation.
It was later discovered that it had been drafted at a Pepsi-Cola ""convention"" in Dallas, by lawyers of the Rockefeller law firm of Nixon, Mudge, Rose, Guthrie, and Alexander, to be used as an attack on Kennedy during the 1963 Presidential campaign.
There is more than one Kennedy Assassination researcher who feels that Nixon had prior knowledge of Kennedy's shooting, though no hard evidence has ever come to light.
While it is widely accepted that there was a conspiracy behind Kennedy's death, as the volumes of evidence prove, there has never been a single group pinpointed as the mastermind of such a plan.
The complexities involved in such a cover-up, certainly point to the Illuminati, because they are the only group in the world, operating behind the scenes, who would be able to influence and control all the elements necessary to pull off something like this.
His murder was carried out publicly, because they wanted the political leaders in this country to know who was in control.
There has been a phenomenal amount of research done on the case of President Kennedy's murder, and it almost seems that when he died, the tide changed in this country.
The forces behind the assassination of Kennedy were able to change the course of history at will, and with the new-found confidence at their success, the power they gained, literally allowed them to exert complete control over American government.
One fact that linked the Illuminati to the Kennedy conspiracy, was the oil connection.
However, Kennedy wanted to end American involvement in the war, and in October, 1963, he recalled 1,000 so-called advisers.
After Kennedy was eliminated, the U S. government escalated the war in Vietnam.
Using a federal statute, Kennedy was going to force J Edgar Hoover, the aging Director of the FBI, to retire, because he wanted somebody who better represented his New Frontier.
Conservative in his economics, he intended to circumvent the Federal Reserve by issuing nearly $5 million in non-interest bearing United States bank notes(Executive Order #11110), much like Abraham Lincoln.
And to top matters off, after winning the showdown with Russia over Cuba, he signed a limited nuclear test ban treaty with the Soviets.
Needless to say, Kennedy's agenda was contrary to the plans for a New World Order.
Robert F Kennedy promised an honorable end to the Vietnam War, and with Martin Luther King, Jr. delivering the Black support, Kennedy would have been easily elected President.
That however, did not fit into the plans of the Illuminati, who wanted to prolong the war, and wanted Nixon to be President, because he represented the instrument that would perpetuate their goals.
Again, there is plenty of evidence that points to a conspiracy in the assassinations of Bobby Kennedy, and King.
The likelihood that the same forces were involved is evident, because again, the course of the nation was altered to fit into their plans.
The Illuminati didn't want Nixon elected in 1960, and to insure that he wasn't, Eisenhower told the country that he couldn't think of a single thing that Nixon had done to help, during the eight years of his Administration.
That comment, and his haggard appearance during the debates, were the two things that kept him from being elected.
However, now in 1968, the responsibility of moving the country closer to socialism, and towards a oneworld government, was put upon his shoulders.
Former Secretary of the Navy, William Mittendorf, Finance Chairman of Nixon's 1968 campaign, said that at 5:30 AM on the morning after Nixon's election victory, Nelson Rockefeller and William Rogers went to Nixon's room to help select his Cabinet.
He appointed Mitchell, his campaign manager, to be his Attorney General.
He appointed Henry Kissinger to be his Secretary of State, even though Kissinger's views were the complete opposite of his own.
In reality, the Kissinger appointment was urged by Nelson Rockefeller, so the Illuminati could control U S. foreign policy.
At the beginning of each of his terms, Nixon offered the post of Treasury Secretary to David Rockefeller, but he refused it.
Three days later, he announced that the country was being divided up into ten federal districts, and in February, 1972, he signed Executive Order #11647, which gave the government the power to accomplish that division.
The Ten Regional Councils, a direct extension of the Executive Branch, have, since 1972, been getting control of local, county, and state governmental functions, through federal loans.
Even though his policies had already indicated it, Nixon was basically saying that he was a Socialist.
As more and more facts come out, it is quite obvious that Watergate was a move by the Illuminati to get rid of an uncooperative President.
Watergate actually can be traced back to 1956, when Nixon's brother, Donald, received a secret loan from Howard Hughes.
It proved to be embarrassing when it surfaced during the 1960 Presidential election.
Former CIA agent, James W McCord, Jr., the security chief for the Committee to Re-elect the President, has been accused of being a double agent, used to bring Nixon down by sabotaging the break-in at the Watergate Hotel.
There is evidence to believe that the police had been tipped off on the night of the breakin.
Carl Shoffler, and three other officers, who usually went off duty at midnight, just happened to stay on for the next shift, and were parked just a minute away from the hotel complex.
McCord had entered the Watergate while it was still open, and put some tape on one of the doors so it wouldn't lock.
The tape was put on horizontally, so that it could be seen between the doors.
When the ""plumbers"" arrived hours later, instead of the doors being open, they were locked, which indicated that the piece of tape had been discovered.
They left, since there was no longer any assurance of a successful operation.
McCord told them to go back and pick the lock, since the police had not been called.
E Howard Hunt and his Cuban accomplices, did this, and left tape on the door for McCord to get in.
He was supposed to remove the tape from the door, but he didn't, however, he told the other ""plumbers"" that he did.
He also instructed them to shut-off their walkie-talkies, so the static wouldn't be heard, which means they were inside the office without being able to hear any outside communications taking place.
They were caught, when Wills discovered the door taped for a second time.
Afterward, on March 19,1973, McCord wrote a letter to Judge John J Sirica, which turned the Watergate affair into a national crisis, by saying that Attorney General John Mitchell was involved, that campaign money was used to pay the ""plumbers"", and that the White House was trying to blame the CIA, when in fact the White House had engineered the entire operation, and Nixon covered it up.
In the twenty years since Watergate occurred, one simple fact seems to have emerged, and that is, that Nixon probably had no prior knowledge of the break-in.
Chapter Four If it wouldn't have been for the discovery of the Watergate tapes, Nixon may very well have survived the scandal.
Alexander M Haig, Jr., an aide to National Security Adviser Henry Kissinger, who later became Nixon's Chief of Staff, controlled the vault where the tapes were kept, and secretly made copies of the transcripts available.
Haig became Cyrus Vance's(CFR member, Secretary of the Army, later Deputy Secretary of Defense under Robert McNamara, who was also a CFR member) assistant in 1962.
After a short tour of duty in Vietnam in 1966, where he was decorated for bravery, he was made a full colonel in 1968.
Andrew Goodpaster for two years, after which Goodpaster recommended Haig to Kissinger in 1969, and Haig was put on the National Security Council.
In less than a year, he was promoted to general, and in two more years, to major-general.
Although he had served only four months as a battalion commander, and one month as a brigade commander, in 1972, he was given four stars, and nominated for Army Vice Chief of Staff.
He resigned in 1979 because he was critical of Carter's defense and foreign policies.
He became the chief operating officer of United Technologies, only to return to government for 18 months as Reagan's Secretary of State.
John Dean claimed that ""Deep Throat"", the man who leaked information to Bob Woodward of the Washington Post, was Alexander Haig.
Woodward had claimed that he didn't meet Haig until 1973, however, it has since been revealed that prior to Woodward becoming a reporter, he was a lieutenant in the Navy, and as a special briefing officer, had contact with Haig at the National Security Office in the White House.
In addition to the previously mentioned economical changes, he infuriated Kissinger by bombing North Vietnam without consulting anyone.
However, Kissinger was the Illuminati's man in the White House, and his job was to control Nixon, so he was running the show.
Chapter Four The documents indicated that after World War II, Russia established an ODRA spy ring in Poland to infiltrate British and American intelligence.
The GZI, Polish Intelligence, discovered that one communist agent, code-named ""Bor"", had worked with another agent, Ernst Bosenhard(a clerk at the United States Intelligence Headquarters in Oberammergau, Germany), who had been sending secret documents to Moscow.
He became a consultant on security matters during the Administrations of Eisenhower, Kennedy, and Johnson.
His book, Nuclear Weapons and Foreign Policy , in 1957, established him as the leading authority on United States strategic policy.
There should be little doubt where his allegiances are in regard to his support of one-world government.
This story took on additional meaning, when in 1965, former CIA Chief of Research and Analysis, Herman E Kimsey, used fingerprint, dental and medical records, handwriting analysis, blood tests, and interviews with childhood friends and relatives to reach a conclusion that Goleniewski was actually Aleksei Romanoff, the son of Nicholas II, who survived the alleged Communist massacre of the Russian Royal family.
The Bolshevik government had claimed to have captured the seven members of the Russian Imperial family, which included the Czar, his wife, son, and four daughters, and murdered them in the basement of the Ipatiev house in Ekaterinburg, dumping their bodies in a nearby abandoned mine.
In 1970, documents released by the British Government revealed that President Wilson backed a secret mission to Russia that resulted in the rescue of the Czar and his family who were smuggled out of Russia in the back of trucks, and then taken by ship to Europe where they have lived since 1918.
The Treaty of Brest-Litovsk between Russia and Germany, which was signed on March 3,1918 to end hostilities between them, was said to also contain a codicil that guaranteed that the Romanov's would not be harmed.
The Russian people were to continue believing that they were dead, so the communists could replace the monarchy.
It had been hoped that the Bolshevik government wouldn't survive, so they could return, but it never happened.
Chapter Four Nixon also angered the Illuminati because of his choice of Vice Presidents.
After Vice President Spiro Agnew resigned because of income tax evasion charges, Establishment insiders had urged Nixon to appoint Nelson Rockefeller.
If Rockefeller would have been appointed, he would have become President after Nixon was destroyed.
Later, Lynette ""Squeaky"" Fromme would attempt to shoot Ford on September 5,1975; and on September 22,1975, Sara Jane Moore would also attempt to shoot Ford.
In a June, 1976, Playboy interview, she said that there is a ""part that I don't think I can talk about.
I just haven't figured out a way to talk about it and protect everyone.
I'm not just saying that there are other thingswhich means there are other people, though not in terms of a conspiracy.
This certainly gives some serious overtones to the attempts on Ford's life, and if they were actually meant to elevate Rockefeller to the Presidency.
With the Illuminati hoping to have world control by 1976, Nixon was hoping to follow in the steps of Woodrow Wilson and Franklin D Roosevelt who were virtual dictators, and began acting on his own to bring about change, so he could head the world government.
It is likely that the plan to get rid of Nixon was beginning to take shape at this time.
Then in October, came the rumor that Nixon may be considering a military coup to stay in office.
Watergate Special Prosecutor Leon Jaworski warned the grand jury, that if they decided to indict Nixon, he may use force to remain in office.
He felt it would be led by General Robert Cushman, the Marine Representative on the Joint Chiefs of Staff, who had been loyal to Nixon ever since he had been his military aide while he was the Vice President under Eisenhower.
Schlesinger, in July, 1974, believing the Washington contingent of Marines to be the probable force used in a coup attempt, began developing a strategy to bring in the Army's 82nd Airborne Division from Fort Bragg, North Carolina.
On August 2,1974, Secretary of State Henry Kissinger admitted that General Haig had informed him that Nixon was considering the idea of surrounding the White House with troops.
The limited scope of any coup attempt would have prevented its success, and Pentagon officials knew that.
Rather than a plot by the Illuminati to militarily take over the government, it seemed to be more of an attempt by Nixon to keep from getting pushed out of office by the powers that actually run this country.
Chapter Four THE CFR AND THEIR GOALS The CFR's ""1980's Project"", evolved from a Council Study Group on International Order, which had met from 1971-73.
They sought to duplicate the success they had achieved with the War & Peace Studies, and their concentration was to be on creating a new political and economic system that would have global emphasis.
In the fall of 1973, the 1980's Project was initiated, and to accommodate it, the CFR staff was expanded, and additional funds raised, including $1. million in grants from the Ford, Lilly, Mellon and Rockefeller Foundations.
The Coordinating Committee had 14 men, with a full-time staff; plus 12 groups, each with 20 members; in addition to other experts and advisors who acted as consultants to the project.
When Jimmy Carter was elected to the Presidency in 1976, some of the Project's strongest supporters, such as Cyrus Vance, Michael Blumenthal, Marshall Shulman, and Paul Warnke, went to the White House to serve in the new Administration.
In 1979, the Project was discontinued for being too unrealistic, which meant it was too soon for that kind of talk.
They are a semisecret organization whose 1966 Annual Report stated that members who do not adhere to its strict secrecy, can be dropped from their membership.
On the national level, the Business Advisory Council and the Pilgrim Society are groups which form the inner circle of the CFR, while on the international level, it's the Bilderbergers.
They have used the prestige that their wealth, their social position, and their education have given them to lead their country towards bankruptcy and military debacle.
Yet, the nation's right-to-know machinery, the news media, usually so aggressive in exposures to inform our people, remain conspicuously silent when it comes to the CFR, its members and their activities.
Phyllis Schlafly and Rear Admiral Chester Ward(former Judge Advocate General of the Navy from 1956-60), who was a member of the CFR for 16 years, wrote in their 1975 book Kissinger on the Couch that the CFR's ""purpose of promoting disarmament and submergence of U S. sovereignty and national independence into an all-powerful oneworld government is the only objective revealed to about 95 percent of 1,551 members.
The published accounts of CFR activities greatly understate their power and influence on national and foreign policy.
Besides their involvement in the government, they hold key positions in all branches of the media, including the control or ownership of major newspapers, magazines, publishing companies, television and radio stations.
From 1928-72, nine out of twelve Republican Presidential nominees were CFR members.
During three separate campaigns, both the Republican and Democratic nominee was, or had been a member.
Since World War II, practically every Presidential candidate, with the exception of Johnson, Goldwater, and Reagan, have been members.
The position of Supreme Allied Commander have usually been held by CFR members, like Gen.
CFR members have held almost every key position, in every Administration, from Franklin D Roosevelt to George Bush.
During that 50 year period, every Secretary of State, with the exception of Cordell Hull, James F Byrnes, and William Rogers, have been members.
Every Secretary of Defense, from 1958, up to 1992, with the exception of Melvin Laird, have been members.
Dean Acheson, Robert Lovett(Secretary of State, and later Secretary of Defense), W Averill Harriman, John McCloy(High Commissioner to Germany), George Kennan, Charles Bohlen.
When CFR member John F Kennedy took office, 63 of the 82 names on his list of prospective State Department officials, were CFR members.
Dean Rusk, C Douglas Dillon, Adlai Stevenson, John McCone(CIA Director), W Averell Harriman, John J McCloy(Disarmament Administrator), Gen.
Special White House Assistant and noted historian), Thomas K Finletter (Ambassador to NATO and the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development), George Ball (Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs), McGeorge Bundy(Special Assistant for National Security, who went on to head the Ford Foundation), Robert McNamara, Robert F Kennedy, Paul H Nitze, Charles E Bohlen, Walt Restow, Roswell Gilpatrick(Deputy Secretary of Defense , Henry Fowler (Under Secre tary of State), Jerome Wiesner, Angier Duke (Chief of Protocol.
Nixon had resigned from the CFR in 1962, when it became an issue in the California gubernatorial primary campaign, but later rejoined.
Yet he wrote in the October, 1967 edition of Foreign Affairs how he would have a new policy towards Red China.
Even after a July 15,1971 statement on Radio Peking in China that called for the ""people of the world, unite and defeat the United States aggressors and all their running dogs,"" Nixon accepted an invitation by Premier Chou En Lai to go to China, where the groundwork for trade relations was established.
Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, and the senior member of the U S. delegation for talks with Russia on SALT), Dr.
Arthur Burns(Chairman of the Federal Reserve), C Fred Bergsten , C Douglas Dillon(General Advisory Committee of the U S, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency), Richard N Cooper, Gen.
Arms Control and Disarmament Agency), Richard Gardner( member of the Commission on International Trade and Investment Policy), Sen.
Chapter Four Peterson, James Lynn, Paul McCracken, Charles Yost, Harlan Cleveland, Jacob Beam, David Kennedy.
Walter Mondale, Zbigniew Brzeznski, Cyrus R Vance, W Michael Blumenthal , Harold Brown, Stansfield Turner, Gen.
In 1970, as Ambassador to the UN, he pushed for Red China to be seated in the General Assembly.
S Information Agency and Director of the Office of Equal Opportunity and Civil Rights), Alan Greenspan.
The Council accepts only American citizens, and has a membership of about 2,900, including influential bankers, corporate officers, and leading government officials who have been significantly affecting domestic and foreign policy for the past 30 years.
It is believed that the hierarchy of this inner circle includes descendants of the original Illuminati conspirators, who have Americanized their original family names in order to conceal that fact.
It later passed to the control of Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, who was also a CFR member.
Time(founded by CFR member Henry Luce, who also publish Fortune , Life, Money , People , Entertainment Weekly, and Sports Illustrated ; and Hedley Donovan), Newsweek (owned by the Washington Post , W Averell Harriman, Roland Harriman, and Lewis W Douglas), Business Week , United States News & World Report , Saturday Review , National Review , Reader's Digest , Atlantic Monthly , McCall's , Forbes , Look , and Harper's Magazine.
G Gordon Liddy, former Nixon staffer, now talk show pundit, laughs off the idea of a New World Order, saying that there are so many different organizations working toward their own goals of a one-world government, that they cancel each other out.
You have seen that their tentacles are very far reachingas far as the government and the media.
However, as I will outline below, you will see that the CFR has a heavy cross membership with many groups; as well as a cross membership among the directorship of many corporate boards, and this is a good indication that their efforts are concerted.
Macy; Federated Department Stores; Gimbel Brothers; Sears, Roebuck & Co.
This highly influential magazine has been the leading publication of its kind, and has a circulation of over 75,000.
Reading this publication can be highly informative as to the views of its members.
For instance, the Spring, 1991 issue, called for a UN standing army, consisting of military personnel from all the member nations, directly under the control of the UN Security Council.
They also publish books and pamphlets, and have regular dinner meetings to allow speakers and members to present positions, award study fellowships to scholars, promote regional meetings and stage round-table discussion meetings.
Being that the Council on Foreign Relations was able to infiltrate our government, it is no wonder that our country has been traveling the course that it has.
The moral, educational and financial decline of this nation has been no accident.
It has been due to a carefully contrived plot on the behalf of these conspirators who will be satisfied with nothing less than a one-world government.
As each year goes by, the momentum is picking up, and it is becoming increasingly clear, what road our government is taking.
Chapter Four that, is that they feel it is too late for their plans to be stopped.
They have become so entrenched in our government, our financial structure, and our commerce, that they probably do control this country, if not the world.
In light of this, it is only a matter of time before their plans are fully implemented.
It purported to be an outline for the control of the world by the Jews, with the help of the Masons.
The document has been used to prove that the Illuminati is an exclusively Jewish plan for world domination, and has put the Jewish race in a bad light.
Even though the Illuminati's founders were Jewish, and many influential Jews were part of the inner circle, that is no reason to indict the entire Jewish race.
The Bible identifies the Jews as God's chosen people, so it is highly unlikely that they are behind such a Satanic plot.
One only has to look at the history of Israel, and see how they have been able to miraculously survive, to see that this is nothing but anti-semetic rhetoric.
It is not race, which is the common denominator here; it is money and greed.
For the most part, the conspiracy has been dominated by the Europeans, and perpetuated by the Englishspeaking countries of the world.
No one is quite sure about this notorious document, and how it fits into the puzzle of the one-world government conspiracy.
We know that its influence was taken advantage of, by the Illuminati, however, as to the actual origin and its purpose, we may never know for sure, because portions of it are highly accurate in its revelations.
If it is a forgery, it most certainly was based upon a factual document.
Whatever the case, it is included in this book because it may contain some clues about the early stages of the Illuminati conspiracy, and the people behind it.
In 1848, Hermann Goedsche, a German postal official, forged letters indicating that Benedic Waldeck was conspiring to assassinate Frederick William IV, the King of Prussia.
After it became known that they were forgeries, he was removed from his job, and he began writing under the pseudonym, Sir John Retcliffe.
One of those novels, Biarritz , written in 1868, contained a chapter titled, ""In the Jewish Cemetery in Prague"", in which the heads of the twelve tribes of Israel met with Satan to tell him of their plans to control the world.
However, the covert proceeding was witnessed by two men, who then dedicated their lives to fighting the Satanic Jewish plot.
In 1872, Russian antisemites printed the chapter in a pamphlet, as fiction based on fact.
In July, 1881, the story was published in the French paper Le Contemporain as fact, and all of the speeches by each tribal head was consolidated into a single speech, supposedly made by a chief rabbi in a secret meeting of influential Jews.
Its authenticity, again, was supported by the fictional Sir John Readclif.
Later, in the October 21,1920 issue of La Vielle France , the newspaper said there was a striking analogy between the Protocols of the Elders of Zion and the discourse of Rabbi Reichhorn, pronounced in Prague in 1869, over the tomb of the Grand Rabbi Simeon-ben-lhuda.
The document known as the Protocols of the Learned Elders of Zion, seems to be a conglomeration of many anti-Jewish publications during that period.
In 1869, Gougenot de Mousseaux wrote a book that said that the world was being taken over by a group of Satan-worshipping Jews, out of which a man would emerge whom the Jews would worship as their returned Messiah.
In World Conquest by the Jews , Osman-Bey wrote, that in 1840, a meeting of eminent Jewish leaders was held in Cracow, Poland, to discuss the expansion of Judaism over the entire world.
Victor E Marsden, the Russian correspondent for The Morning Post of London, wrote in his 1934 English translation of the Protocols, that in 1884, Joseph Schorst, a Jew who was a member of the Mizraim Lodge, stole the document and sold it for 2,500 francs to Justine Glinka, the daughter of a Russian General.
She in turn gave the French document, and a Russian translation to Gen.
Glinka was later arrested, returned to Russia, and exiled to her estate in Orel; while Schorst was killed in Egypt.
It has also been reported that Glinka had given a copy to Alexis Sukhotin, a law enforcement official in Orel, who then showed them to two friends, Stepanov, and Professor Sergei Nilus, a religious mystic.
Nilus showed them to the Czar in 1903, who believed them to be fraudulent, and ordered that all copies were to be destroyed.
After Nilus was banned from the Court, it is believed that he may have altered the text to be more intense then they originally were.
However, as far as the mysterious references to the ""representatives of Sion, of the 33rd degree"", he would not have any idea what this meant, and probably would not have altered this and any other in-kind references.
The Protocols of the Learned Elders of Zion first appeared, in a shortened form, in an August, 1903 edition of the Kishinev newspaper, in the Ukraine; then in 1905, in the appendix of the third edition of a book by Nilus called The Great in the Small , which was about the coming of the Antichrist.
A copy was received by the British Museum in London, in August, 1906, where it was translated by English journalist Victor Marsden, who published it in 1921.
Marsden said that he couldn't work on the translation for more than an hour at a time, because of the evil he felt while reading it.
However, in his 1905 edition, he said that the Protocols had been given in 1902-03.
Being illegal to criticize the Monarchy, he fictionalized it, making Napoleon the character of Machiavelli, to explain the Emperor's underlying motives.
Joly had it printed in Belgium, then attempted to have it smuggled over the French border.
It was seized by the police, who confiscated as many copies as they could, then banned the book.
The police traced the book to Joly, who was then tried on April 25,1865, and sentenced to fifteen months in prison.
At the Berne trials, a witness for the prosecution tried to prove that Joly was a Jew, and that his book was a coded version of the Jewish plan for world domination.
The only major change, is that it was changed from the past, to the future.
Who could have forged the Protocols isn't known, if in fact it is a forgery.
However, the general consensus is that it was probably done by Elie de Cyon, a Russian journalist living in Paris, who was an opponent of Sergey Witte, the Russian Minister of Finance.
When Witte took office in 1892, he began to modernize Russia by doubling steel, iron, and coal production; and constructing railroads.
He caused inflation by abandoning the gold standard in 1898 because of an economic slump.
The Protocols say that such economic depressions are caused by the Elders to gain control of the money; and that the gold standard has ruined every country that has adopted it.
Chapter Five economic and financial data could have been extracted from Joly's book, and applied to Witte, in order to present him as a tool of the Elders of Zion.
So, Cyon allegedly forged and translated the Protocols, expanding them as a satire on Witte.
His writings resembled the style used in the Protocols; and he was known to have used another French satire on a dead statesman, by changing the names.
Pyotr Ivanovich Rachkovsky, head of the Russian Secret Police in Paris, on instructions from Witte, broke into Cyon's villa at Territet, Switzerland, to look for additional written attacks on Witte.
It is believed that Rachkovsky discovered the Protocols there, and used it for a dual purpose.
He could use it against the Jews, claiming it was part of a Jewish conspiracy; and he could reveal that it was written by a Jew, which Cyon was, thus destroying Cyon.
In 1921, Count Alexandru du Chayla said that Nilus revealed to him in 1909 that the Protocols were fraudulent, and had been sent to him by Gen.
During the 1934 trial of two Swiss Nazis in Berne, brought by a group of Jews who accused them of distributing the Protocols, the historian Vladimir Burtsev and a professor, Sergey Svatikov, testified that Rachkovsky and other Czarist officials had a hand in the fabrication of the Protocols.
In 1891, Rachkovsky sent a letter to the Police, and announced his intentions to oppose the Jews.
This was followed up by a book that stated his views about the Jews, and how, as a result of the French Revolution, they controlled Europe.
It is quite possible that he added to Cyon's manuscript to produce the Protocols, and then gave it to Sergei Nilus to publish in his book.
On May 14,1935, the Court of Berne ruled that the Protocols were not of Jewish origin.
Montesquieu and Rousseau , which was published in Berlin, in 1850, also contain passages very similar to the Protocols.
Standard Oil allegedly had the Protocols distributed in Russia to create a tense situation between the Czarist Russian government, and the Jewish-owned Royal Dutch Co., who had oil distribution rights in Russia.
The document was also used in the late 1800's to instigate pogroms against the Jews so they would migrate to the United States.
Once they were in America, they were registered to vote Democratic, and greatly contributed to Wilson's election in 1912.
During the Russian Civil War from 1918-20, Bolsheviks distributed the Protocols, and in the subsequent pogroms, over 100,000 Jews were killed.
Chapter Five Eventually the Protocols were distributed all over the world, and it gave the anti-semetic people of various countries an excuse to persecute the Jews.
In 1920, U S. industrialist Henry Ford supported them in a series of articles in his newspaper The Dearborn Independent and eventually in his book The International Jew , which he published in 1921.
They are sixteen years old, and they have fitted the world situation up to this time.
Ford supported Hitler, who was seen as fighting against the international Jewish conspiracy.
In 1927, he renounced his belief in them after his car was sideswiped, forcing it over a steep embankment.
In 1938, Father Charles E Coughlin printed them in his weekly paper Social Justice , and various other semi-religious organizations followed suit.
The Illuminati had drafted a master plan that was worded in such a way, that it diverted attention away from the Illuminati, and directed it towards the Jewish Revolutionary movement in Russia.
Now their plan would appear to be a Jewish plot to achieve world control through political Zionism, when in fact, it represented the future plans of the International Bankers of the Illuminati.
One inescapable fact, is that the Protocols do reflect some of the views of Weishaupt, and the writings of various Socialists on Bolshevism; and because of that, they were not easily dismissed.
Let us, however, in our plans, direct our attention not to what is good and moral, as to what is necessary and useful.
Our power in the present tottering condition of all forms of power will be more invisible than any other, because it will remain invisible until the moment when it has gained such strength that no cunning can any longer undermine it.
Chapter Five Therefore we must not stop at bribery, deceit, and treachery, when they should serve towards the attainment of our end.
This is the reason why there is one State which would anywhere receive support if it were to raise its arm, for every one of them must bear in mind that any agreement against us would be unprofitable to itself.
Even now this is already attained by us inasmuch as all news items are received by a few agencies, in whose offices they are focused from all parts of the world.
After reading these words, you probably have the same feeling of uneasiness that I had when I read them for the first time.
Seemingly, the Protocols do elaborate on the Illuminati program for world takeover, that would not have pertained to the world at the time the Protocols were alleged to have been written.
Because of the depth of information given on the various aspects of the plan, I believe that they were written by, or based on the writings of someone who had an intimate knowledge of the future plans and inner workings of the International Bankers.
Chapter Five In the past few years, another theory has come to light in regard to the Protocols.
If the document was forged with the intent of being an indictment against all Jews, it would not just pinpoint a small group of individuals.
Eliphas Levi , who had joined a Martinist-affiliated Masonic lodge, which later merged with the Memphis and Mizraim Lodges, had assisted Charles Nodier to sift through the Vatican documents taken by Napoleon.
These strange references have been linked to a little known organization known as the Prieure' de Sion, which will be discussed later.
Chapter Five WORLD WAR II AND THE RISE OF HITLER As a youth, Adolf Hitler fled Austria, and went to Germany to escape the draft.
This was the man that the Illuminati would choose to further their goals.
As a puppet of the Illuminati, he was used to set the stage for the conflict which would eventually lead to the establishment of the United Nations, a major step towards one-world government; and to shame the world into allowing the State of Israel to be established.
The Power of the Coming Race , about a super-race of white Aryans that took control of the world.
TheLast of the Roman Tribunes , which was adapted into a major opera by German composer Richard Wagner.
History shows that Hitler ordered the death of six million Jews during the Holocaust in Europe.
Why he did, has become a mystery, since it really hasn't been established that he had an intense hatred for Jews.
Because of his financial situation, a Jewish landlady charged him only a nominal rent, and even moved out of her apartment on one occasion so that Hitler and a friend could have more room.
A Jewish used-clothing dealer gave him a long black overcoat, which he wore constantly.
When he was a lance-corporal during World War I, Hitler was awarded the Iron Cross, a rare honor for a soldier of such low rank, who hadn't really done anything to deserve such a distinction.
On one occasion, when it was suggested that he get rid of her, he became furious.
Eduard Bloch, a Jewish physician, had been the Hitler family doctor since Hitler was a child.
This idea stemmed from the fact that Hitler's father, Alois, was illegitimate, and the identity of his grandfather had never been established.
During Hitler's rise to power, his half-brother's son threatened to reveal that Hitler was of Jewish ancestry.
One investigation discovered that Hitler's grandfather had been the son of a Jewish family called Frankenburger, in Gratz, who employed Hitler's grandmother, Maria Anna Schicklgruber, as a maid.
She had become pregnant by their son, while she was working in their home.
The family sent her money for a year and a half to help support the child.
Another investigation said that Alois was conceived in Vienna, where Hitler's grandfather was employed as a servant in the home of Baron Rothschild.
In Hitler's War , written in 1977 by British author and historical revisionist, David Irving, he revealed that Hitler didn't order the Jewish massacres, and didn't find out about it until late in the war.
There is no record of Hitler ever visiting a concentration camp, although he did watch films and see photographs.
So what turned Hitler against the Jews, if indeed he was; or was there someone else making decisions for him.
He attributed the weakness of the German economy to the Jews, and considered the Treaty of Versailles, a Jewish document.
One clue was revealed in The Secret Diaries of Hitler's Doctors , written in 1983 by David Irving, which revealed that Hitler had taken 75 different medications.
He was given strychnine and belladonna, cocaine and adrenalin, amphetamines, painkillers, and sedatives, including Eukodal, a synthetic morphine derivative.
Were they being given to him for the sole purpose of making him mentally unstable, so he could be controlled by advisors, who were acting on behalf of the forces that Hitler wrongly identified as the Jewish bankers.
There may also be a more sinister reason which contributed to Hitler's state of mind.
Hitler and some of his officers had been linked to various occult groups and the use of the swastika gave evidence of that.
In its normal usage, it is a sign of the power of light; but in its reverse form, as used by the Nazis, it represents the power of darkness.
As a youth, Hitler had been influenced by George Lanz von Liebenfels, an Austrian magician who in 1907 founded ""The Order of the New Templars"", which used the swastika as its emblem.
Hitler joined a secret group in 1919, called the Thule Society, which practiced black magic and worshipped Satan.
They wanted to form a political party to rally the people against communism.
I have initiated him into the 'Secret Doctrine', opened his centres in vision and given him the means to communicate with the Powers.
Hitler grew to fear those around him who practiced the black arts, and it was discovered that along with the Jews, Masons and occult practitioners were also killed and imprisoned in the concentration camps.
Some of the reported book burnings were actually the confiscation and destruction of Masonic libraries.
Hitler was also influenced by the writings of Friedrich Nietzsche, from whose name came the word Nazi.
Because of Hitler's failed November revolt, he was jailed on April 1,1924, sentenced to five years, but was released after eight months, so he could be built up to national prominence.
The Illuminati made sure the book was well circulated, and it became the springboard for Hitler's political career.
The depressive economic situation in Germany at the time, created by the Versailles Treaty, made it possible for Hitler's leadership to take root, and he became Chancellor in January, 1933.
Since 1924, the Dawes Plan flooded Germany with a tremendous amount of American capital, which enabled Germany to build its war machine.
Farben Co.(the German company which became the largest corporation in Europe, and the largest chemical company in the world, after a $30 million loan from the Rockefeller's National City Bank after World War I, and who created a process of making high grade fuel from low quality coals) and Vereinigte Stahlwerke.
Several Germans on this Board were found guilty of war crimes at Nuremburg.
Hitler received support and financing from the aristocracy and elite of Germany, including Gustav Krupp, Carl Duisberg, Ernst Tengelmann, Dr.
The du Ponts have their allies in Germany that are aiding in the armament business.
The International Harvester Company President told me their business here rose 33% a year but they could take nothing out.
General Motors Company and Ford do enormous business here through subsidiaries and take no profits out.
Germany's two largest tank producers were Opel, a subsidiary of General Motors , and Ford A G., a subsidiary of the Ford Motor Company.
International Telephone and Telegraph held a substantial interest in Focke-Wolfe, an airplane manufacturer who produced German fighter aircraft.
Hitler indirectly received financing from the Krupps, Kennedys, and the Rothschilds.
The liaison between Hitler and Wall Street was Hjalmar Horace Greely Schact, the President of Reichsbank, who aided in the rebuilding of Germany.
The Holocaust had begun with the Jews being stripped of their German citizenship; and from 1939-45, Hitler's death camps claimed the lives of six million Jews, or about 1/3 of the entire Jewish race.
Another reason for World War II, was to make it possible for Russia, our ally at the time, to gain strength and receive recognition as a world power.
Although they were our ally, they were still a Communist nation, with growing designs on world domination.
There is an incredible amount of evidence that indicates the willingness of our government to allow the spread of Communism, because of the efforts of Communists who had been employed and were acting on behalf of the Illuminati.
In May, 1943 the Allies had pushed the Germans out of Africa, invading Sicily in June, and in September, pushed their way through Italy, on the way to Southern Germany, their weakest point.
However, the U S. withdrew troops from the invasion force so they could be used in a later invasion of France.
Dwight David Eisenhower, the German advance was spread out, which allowed the Russian forces to advance.
Was this an intentional move on the part of the United States to allow the Russians an opportunity to pursue their ulterior motives.
In the spring of 1943, a faction within the German Secret Service was prepared to assassinate Hitler, and surrender, on one condition that the Soviets would not be allowed to advance into Central Europe.
Roosevelt refused to accept, and postponed a planned European invasion, in order to give the Russians more time to advance, and occupy more land.
Eisenhower allowed the Russians to get to Berlin first, before the Americans, which eventually allowed part of the city to fall under Communist control.
Russia was able to come away from 1945 Conference in Yalta with so much, because Roosevelt believed that the Russians were ""perfectly friendly.
Russia walked away from the bargaining table with Latvia, Estonia, Lithuania, eastern Poland, east and central Europe, N Korea, the Kuril Islands, and the northern part of Sakhalin.
However, before resigning his Commission, he died after an automobile accident forced him to be hospitalized.
In 1979, Douglas Bazata, a former Secret Service agent for the Office of Strategic Services(OSS, the predecessor of the CIA) revealed that he was ordered by the Director 'Wild Bill' Donovan to kill Patton in 1944.
Although he didn't, he knows who did, and said that Patton was killed with cyanide at the hospital he was taken to after the accident.
In 1949, upon waiting to be released from a Detroit hospital, he died of a heart attack.
James Forrestal, a partner and President of Dillon, Read and Company, was appointed Secretary of the Navy in 1944, then the Secretary of Defense in 1947, till Truman asked him to resign in 1949.
After the War, he became dedicated to destroying Communism, because it seemed as though the United States was constantly yielding to them.
His personal diaries, consisting of 15 loose-leaf binders, about 3,000 pages, were removed from his office at the Pentagon, and held at the White House.
Forrestal had told a friend that he was being followed, and that his phone was tapped.
He noticed the beginnings of the Korean War, fifteen months before it actually started.
On May 22,1949, his brother, Henry Forrestal, decided to take his brother for a ride into the country.
That same day, James Forrestal, jumped from the 16th floor of the hospital.
Found on a third floor projection, the cord of his bathrobe was tied around his neck, and the hospital released a statement that he committed suicide, even though there was not enough evidence to prove that he had.
To this day, Forrestal continues to be labeled as being insane, and the cause of his death remains unknown, Towards the end of 1949, three men visited the office of Sen.
Joseph McCarthy to show him an FBI report detailing the Communist penetration of the State Department and other government spy networks.
A Special Subcommittee of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee was established to investigate where there were disloyal people employed at the State Department.
However, instead of investigating the accusations , they investigated McCarthy , and a wave of anti-McCarthy sentiment swept the country.
McCarthy was accused of smearing the reputation of innocent people, and on July 30, 1954, Sen.
The speech by Flanders was written by the National Committee for an Effective Congress, which had been created by Arthur Goldsmith, who compiled the charges against McCarthy.
He was originally charged with 46 counts, but after the hearings, only two remained, and the Senate voted only to ""censure"" him, which is a milder punishment than ""condemning"" him.
No autopsy was ever performed, leading many to believe that he was killed because he was closer to the truth the most people ever dreamed.
Of the 81 security risks that McCarthy said was in the State Department, by November, 1954, they had all been removed, either by dismissal or resignation.
Chapter Five All of this information should prove my contention, that the invisible forces at work within our government used World War II as a means of promoting the Russian goal of conquest, and allowed the spread of Communist propaganda.
THE DECEPTION OF PEARL HARBOR In the Pacific Theater, the stirrings of World War II actually began years before.
China had allowed Japan to drill for oil in several provinces, because Standard Oil's price for kerosene was too high.
Through contacts in the Chinese government, Standard Oil had been able to keep anyone from drilling, until the Japanese came and developed huge fields.
Standard Oil pushed them out, but the Japanese vowed to return, even going as far as saying that they would seize China to recover their oil investments.
When the Japanese invaded China in the 1930's, one of their first acts was to destroy Standard Oil property, because they had been responsible for their ouster.
In 1931, Henry L Stimson, the Secretary of State, met with President Herbert Hoover, on behalf of the Illuminati, to make a deal.
The International Bankers promised to end the Depression if Hoover would declare war on Japan, and send in the military to protect Standard Oil property.
Even though Hoover accommodated the Bankers in many cases, this was one deal that he refused.
So Stimson pitched the idea to Governor Franklin Delano Roosevelt(who has a dozen U S Presidents in his family tree), who was indebted to them because of his philanthropic operation at Georgia's Warm Springs.
He was appointed Assistant Secretary of the Navy by Wilson in 1913, on orders from Col.
In the 1920 Presidential election, Roosevelt was James Cox's running mate, but the Democratic team suffered from the mistakes of the Wilson Administration, and lost miserably to the Harding-Coolidge ticket.
Chapter Five The Illuminati put all their political power behind Roosevelt to get him elected, and in 1940, Roosevelt appointed Stimson to the post of Secretary of War, even though he was a Republican.
That role was filled by another Wilson advisor, Bernard Baruch, who became the liaison between Roosevelt and the Bankers.
FDR's uncle, Frederic Delano, was a member of the Federal Reserve Board, and in 1925, became the Chairman of -the League of Nations Committee.
In 1934, he was appointed as Chairman of the National Resources Planning Board, and in 1936, became Chairman of the Federal Reserve Bank in Richmond, Virginia.
Roosevelt was a 32nd degree Mason, a Knight Templar, and a member of the Shrine.
Butler chose to expose the plot, rather than lead it, supposedly because of his patriotism.
Or was it because he recognized their true aim, which was for Roosevelt to impose a dictatorship during a national emergency, so the government could take complete control.
When the planned revolt didn't materialize, other plans were developed.
Future plans called for the government to be moved towards Fascism, and government control without a revolution.
Chapter Five meeting in 1933: ""The new President again turned to the possibility of war in Japan.
Roosevelt wanted Japan to withdraw, not only from Indo-China, but also China.
To enforce his demands, he froze all Japanese assets in this country, and cancelled a 1911 commercial treaty.
He cut-off supplies of fuel and placed an embargo on 11 raw materials which were necessary for their military.
In England, Winston Churchill, and later the Dutch government, followed suit.
On November 26,19~1, Roosevelt sent an ultimatum, insisting that the Japanese withdraw all their troops.
He refused any negotiations with Prince Kenoye, the Japanese Prime Minister, even though Joseph Grew(CFR member, and Rockefeller agent), the Ambassador to Japan, said that such a meeting would prevent war with the Japanese.
On September 28,1940, Japan, Germany, and Italy signed the Tripartite Treaty, which declared that if any of the three were attacked, all three had to respond.
So if Japan attacked the U S., and the U S. would declare war against Japan, they would also be at war with Germany and Italy.
However, Roosevelt and Churchill were already working on a plan to get America to enter the war in Europe.
While Roosevelt planned for such a provocation in the Atlantic, Hitler told his naval commanders in July, 1941, to avoid confrontation with the United States while his Russian campaign was in progress.
Grew used his post as Ambassador to encourage the Japanese to enter a state of military preparedness.
The Institute of Pacific Relations, through a $2 million grant, funded communist spies who were to help induce the Japanese to strike back at the United States.
On December 7,1941, the Japanese attacked the U S. fleet at Pearl Harbor, instead of attacking Russia, as they originally intended to do.
On January 1,1942, the 25 allied nations who went to war against Germany and Japan, signed a ""Declaration by the United Nations"", which indicated that no one nation would sign a separate armistice, and Gen.
Douglas MacArthur was appointed as the ""United Nations Commander of the South Pacific"", becoming the Commander-in-Chief of all armed forces in the Pacific Theater.
Since then, it has become common knowledge that the attack was not the surprise it was claimed to be.
In August, 1941, Congressman Martin Dies, Chairman of the House Committee on Un-American Activities, collected evidence that the Japanese were planning to attack Pearl Harbor.
The Committee was in possession of a strategic map, prepared by the Japanese Imperial Military Intelligence Department, that clearly indicated their plans to attack Pearl Harbor.
An Army Intelligence officer in the Far East discovered the plan for the Pearl Harbor attack, and prior to the attack, sent three separate messages to Washington detailing the plan.
In documents declassified by the National Security Agency in 1981, America had broken the Blue and Purple secret codes of the Japanese, knew all the details of the attack, and the whereabouts of the Japanese fleet.
The State Department knew on November 20th, that a naval force, which included four of the largest Japanese aircraft carriers were heading towards Hawaii, and this information was passed on to Pearl Harbor on November 27th.
Early in December, Army Intelligence knew that the diplomats at the Japanese Embassy in Washington had been ordered to destroy all codes, and to return to Japan.
Navy had conducted tests at Pearl Harbor which indicated that it was vulnerable to an attack from sixty miles away without being able to detect it.
Admiral J O Richardson, Commander-in-Chief of the Pacific fleet, wanted the fleet withdrawn to the west coast of the United States, because they were inadequately manned for war, and because the area was too exposed.
It was later revealed that Roosevelt wanted him to create a naval blockade around Japan, to provoke them into a response, so the United States could declare war.
Rear Admiral Robert A Theobold, USN, Retired, author of The Final Secret of Pearl Harbor , and Col.
Curtis B Dali, the son-in-law of FDR, in an interview with Anthony Hilder for his book Warlords of Washington , admitted that they knew about the Pearl Harbor attack before it occurred.
Theobold, the Commander of all the destroyers at Pearl Harbor, said in his book, that Roosevelt knew about the attack 21 hours before it happened.
So the result of this positioning of the aircraft, made it difficult for them to get out of the circle, and up in the air, because they didn't have a reverse gear.
The Pacific fleet had consisted of nine battleships, three aircraft cruisers, and some smaller ships.
The aircraft carriers, and the smaller, more mobile ships, were moved prior to the attack, because Roosevelt knew they would be needed for a war at sea.
On November 28th, Admiral William F Halsey sailed to Wake Island with the carrier Enterprise, three heavy destroyers and nine small destroyers; and on December 5th, the Lexington, three heavy cruisers and five destroyers were sent to Midway, and the Saratoga went to the Pacific Coast.
The other battleships were considered dispensable, because they had been produced during and prior to World War I, and were viewed as old and obsolete.
The attack on Pearl Harbor resulted in the deaths of 2,341 American soldiers, and injury to 1,143 more.
All of this, just to create an anti-Japanese sentiment in the country, and justify American action against Japan.
With the Japanese prepared to surrender in February, 1945, the war was prolonged in order to destroy much of the industrial areas of Japan with a devastating air attack of incendiary atomic bombs.
This allowed the ground to be cleared for the Illuminati to rebuild Japan with new industries so they could use cheap labor to flood the American market with cheaply manufactured goods.
This would turn the United States into a nation that consumed more than it produced, creating unemployment and financial instability.
Chapter Five of Eastern Europe, promoted Communism, paved the way for the United Nations, and the creation of the nation of Israel.
At a cost of about $400 billion, the War raised our National Debt to $220 billion, and pushed us deeper into the clutches of the Illuminati's International Bankers.
Because of all the intricate angles involved in this conflict, it would not be an understatement to say that World War II was probably the most costly event in American history.
Goldsmith's decision would later be confirmed by Communist officials in Russia.
Socialistic ideas can be traced back to Plato's Republic , and English Statesman Sir Thomas More's Utopia in 1516.
Plato envisioned a society where marriage would be eliminated, all women would belong to all men, and all men would belong to all women.
There would be a tri-level society consisting of the ruling class, the military class, and the working class.
Private property would be eliminated, and the intellectuals would determine what was best for the lower classes.
The Mennonites who came to Pennsylvania, from Germany, in 1683, established communes.
As they moved westward, they left behind a splinter group, called the Amish, who gradually developed a society based on the private ownership of property.
Also in 1683, followers of a Frenchman, Jean de Labadie, immigrated to Maryland.
Religious persecution had forced them to America, where they practiced celibacy, equality of sexes, common ownership of property, and the public confession of sins.
Their numbers declined after the Civil War, and they finally broke up in the 1940's.
Francois Emile Babeuf, was a member of the llluminati(his pseudonym was ""Gracchus""), and as such, his social views reflected those of Weishaupt's.
He formed a masonic-like association of disciples called Babouvistes, who advocated violence as a means of achieving reform.
The location of the building, which was near the Pantheon, led to the name of the Order as Pantheonistes.
Vanish at last, revolting distinctions of rich and poor, of great and small, of masters and servants, of governors and governed.
Since all have the same needs and the same faculties, let there be only one education, one kind of food.
Under his plan, workers wouldn't be paid in money, since the owning of personal property would be abolished.
These products, stored in communal warehouses, would be equally distributed.
Another notable aspect of his plan, was that children would not be allowed to bear the name of their father, unless he was a man of great importance.
Knowing the people would never allow such a communistic system, they never fully revealed their plans.
Instead, their propaganda centered on ""equality among men"" and ""justice of the people,"" while they criticized the ""greed"" of the government.
Chapter Six In August, 1796, Babeuf and 45 leaders of his movement were arrested after the government found out they were making preparations to lead a revolt of the people against them.
They were put on trial in a proceeding that lasted from February to May, 1797.
On May 28,1797, Babeuf was hung, and many of his followers were deported.
Those who have studied the Russian Revolution have observed that there is little difference between Babouvism and Bolshevism.
The Third Internationale of Moscow in 1919, in its first Manifesto, traced its descent from Babeuf.
The earliest advocate of the movement, later to be known as Socialism, was the English millowner Robert Owen.
At his Scotland textile factory, he was known as a model employer because of the reforms he instituted, even enacting child labor laws.
A colony established along those lines in Ireland failed, so in 1824, Owen sailed to America, where he bought several thousand acres from George Rapp's pietistic Harmony Society, in Posey County, Indiana.
Other settlements like this were started in America and Scotland, and communism was born.
However, Owen was a weak leader, had few skilled workmen, and had to put additional duties on the few competent workers that he had, in an attempt to insure success.
However, Owen had failed to take into account human nature, something he had fought so hard for in earlier years, when he advocated better housing for workers, better education for children, and the elimination on unhealthy conditions.
Even though he failed in an attempt to merge all the trade unions into a ""Great Trades Union"", his reforms completely transformed the town of New Lanark, Scotland.
In 1817, a group of German separatists, led by Joseph M Bimeler, settled near the Tuscarawas River in Ohio, naming their society after one of the few Biblical plain cities that escaped the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah.
All property was held in common; factories and shops were managed by an elected Board of Trustees.
They prospered during the 1850's, establishing the town of Zoar, having over 10,000 acres, and $1 million worth of assets.
After Bimeler's death in 1853, interest declined, and the town dissolved in 1898.
Other communistic settlements, such as Harmony, PA; Nashoba, TN; the Cooperative Store at Toad Street; and the Cooperative Society of Oldham, set up by the Rochdale Pioneers, failed.
He believed that a form of communal Christianity existed during the time of the Apostles.
Noyes went to Canada in 1879 after threats of prosecution, and the colony discontinued their unusual sexual practices.
They reorganized as a joint stock company, which is still operating today.
In 1855, they moved to an 18,000 acre area in Iowa, forming the community of Amana.
It eventually expanded into seven villages, with farms, stores, sheds and factories.
The commune still exists today, with its factories producing various appliances.
Comte Henri de Saint-Simon, French nobleman, philosopher and socialist, was the grandson of the author of King Louis XIV's memoirs.
He was considered by some to be mentally unbalanced, because of an infliction inherited from his insane mother.
His philosophy, known as the ""New Christianity"", advocated the placing of all property and people under the State's control, to insure that the exploitation of the poor would end.
He declared that the existing social system was dead and should be done away with.
He called for the merging of scientific and technological knowledge towards industrialism, in order to have the elite rule.
His followers, known as ""The Family"" instituted a political program, calling for the public control of industrial production, abolition of inheritance, and equal rights for women.
In 1836, one of Simon's disciples, Philippe Joseph Benjamin Buchez, attempted to combine Socialism with Catholicism, with something called Christian Socialism.
This was a continuation of Weishaupt's efforts to identify Christianity with the Illuminati, in order to draw members.
Peaceful revolution was to be carried out through the principles of Christian love and brotherhood, with Jesus being represented as a Socialist.
The group published a labor newspaper called L'Atelier , which was written and edited by the workers themselves.
They warned against the use of violence to obtain social change, and barred the workers from belonging to secret organizations.
They started the Council for Promoting Working Men's Associations, and in 1854, started the Working Men's College in London.
As Christian Socialism developed, it was promoted by saying that Socialism was the ultimate goal of Christianity.
In America, prominent Protestant clergymen, such as Washington Gladden, Walter Rauschenbush, Lyman Abbott, Josiah Strong, and Charles M Sheldon, through sermons, books, magazine and newspaper articles, called for better working conditions for women, the elimination of child labor, a sixday work week, and a decent working wage.
These principles were later adopted by the Federal Council of Churches of Christ in America in 1908.
The aforementioned ministers, and economist Richard T Ely, in 1889, organized the Society of Christian Socialists, which advocated a cooperative society based on the teachings of Christ.
Endicott Peabody, founder of the Grotan School, spoke of such reform to the capitalist system.
Chapter Six Buchez' followers soon grew dissatisfied with the equal payment plan, and the organization split into several factions, one professing Christianity(setting up several Christian Socialist organizations), and the other, calling for revolution.
Francois Marie Charles Fourier, a French philosopher, planned out model communities, in which people would live in a pleasurable atmosphere, and work at their own pace at jobs they like.
In his communities, called 'phalanxes'(or 'phalansteries'), everyone was to live in the same building.
Jobs were assigned, and workers received a nominal wage, In 1832, he failed in an attempt to set up such a commune at Versailles.
However, his followers founded about 30 communal settlements in the United States, such as the Brook Farm.
In 1844, they instituted a constitution, making it a co-op based on the scientific division of labor advocated by Fourier.
They published a journal, The Harbinqer , which was edited by Ripley, and featured such writers as James Russell Lowell and John Greenleaf.
Ralph Waldo Emerson, Horace Greeley, and Henry David Thoreau, established another Fourier commune at Red Bank, New Jersey in 1843, where members picked their jobs and were paid according to the repulsiveness of their work.
Fourier disciples, Elizabeth Peabody, Parke Goodwin, and William Henry Channing, also began communes.
Louis Blanc, a Mason, developed a Workingman's Association, but his was to be under State control.
He called for the establishment of labor organizations in the form of national workshops, with the workers electing their management.
He despised all religion, and eliminated the idea of Christianity, criticizing Buchez for being too sentimental.
In France, during the 1840's, Louis-Auguste Blanqui espoused a form of radical socialism that was based on democratic populism.
He said that capitalism was unstable and would be replaced by cooperative institutions.
Etienne Cabet, the son of a barrelmaker, went to England in 1834, where he became a convert of Robert Owen.
When he returned to France in 1839, he laid out a plan for a communistic settlement, which he established in the Red River region of Texas in 1847.
His 69 followers were called ""Icarians"", after his 1840 novel Voyage en Icaria , which portrayed a society where all property was held in common, and products of the community were distributed according to need.
Chapter Six Locke, Montesquieu, Mably, Rousseau, and other 18th century philosophers.
He claimed that the communists were the disciples, the imitators, and continuers of the philosophy of Jesus.
This Hancock County area had been a Mormon community of about 15,000 people, who after the death of Joseph Smith in 1844, went to Salt Lake City, Utah, with Brigham Young.
By 1855, Nauvoo had farms, a running mill, a distillery, a theater, a printing press, and a school.
They eventually grew restless because of Cabet's autocratic leadership, since they didn't have a voice in their own affairs.
As time went on, only a few diehards remained, until the commune finally broke up in 1888.
Meanwhile, Cabet started a ""true Icaria"" in Cheltinham, Missouri, but soon after, died of apoplexy.
Some followers of Cabet also started communes at Corning, lowa, and Cloverdale, California.
THE RISE OF KARL MARX Heinrich Karl Marx was born of wealthy parents(his father was a lawyer), and much of his personal life has never been revealed.
He joined the Satanist Church run by Joana Southcott, who was said to be in contact with the demon Shiloh.
His early writings mentioned the name ""Oulanem"", which was a ritualistic name for Satan.
His published attacks against the German government, caused him to be ejected from the country.
He received a Doctorate in Philosophy in 1841, but was turned down for a teaching position, because of his revolutionary activities.
In 1843, he studied Economics in Paris, where he learned about French communism.
In 1844, he wrote the book A World Without Jews even though he was Jewish.
Chapter Six Engels had joined the ""Young Germany"" group(which had been established by Giuseppe Mazzini) in Switzerland in 1835.
In 1842 he was sent to England to manage the family's mill in Manchester.
It was Engel's philosophy that established the basis for the ideas which were developed by Marx.
The League, formerly known as the League of the Just, which was an off-shoot of the Parisian Outlaws League, was founded by Illuminati members who fled from Germany.
The League was made up of rich and powerful men from different countries who were behind much of the turmoil that engulfed Europe in 1848.
The Manifesto was described by Marxians as ""The Charter of Freedom of the Workers of the World,"" and it was the platform of the Communist League.
It was, basically, a program for establishing a ""perfect"" state, and it called for the workers to revolt and overthrow capitalism, and for the government to own all property.
Marx, felt, that by controlling all production, the ruling power could politically control a country, After the communist regime would take over, the dictatorship would gradually ""wither away"" and the result would be a non-government.
The final stage of communism, is when the goods are distributed on the basis of need.
The purpose of this was to divide the people of the world into opposing camps with differing ideologies.
Although the Nazis, in quoting from Nietzsche, considered themselves to be the Master Race, Nietzsche did not.
Nietzsche tried to stir things up at the top of the social order, while Marx hammered away at the bottom, concentrating on the lower class and working people.
Nietzsche wanted to keep the uneducated in a state of slavery, while Marx wanted to neutralize the elite, and pushed for the rights of the people.
One source has reported that even these articles were written by Engels.
In 1857 and 1858, Marx wrote a few articles for the New American Cyclopedia.
On September 28,1864, Marx and Engels founded the International Workingmen's Association at St.
The statutes they adopted were similar to Mazzini's, and in fact, a man named Wolff, the personal secretary of Mazzini, was a member, and pushed Mazzini's views.
Again, we find evidence that the Illuminati did in fact control the growing communist movement, but not to deal with the problems of workers and industry, but to instigate riot and revolution.
It is obvious that Marx didn't practice what he preached, and therefore didn't really believe in the movement he was giving birth to.
Nathan Rothschild had given Marx two checks for several thousand pounds to finance the cause of Socialism.
The checks were put on display in the British Museum, after Lord Lionel Walter Rothschild, a trustee, had willed his museum and library to them.
Marx felt, that as the workers achieved various reforms, there would be a possibility for the peaceful evolution towards socialism.
A little known fact, is that Marx' beliefs were gleaned from the writings of Weishaupt, Babeuf, Blanc , Cabet, Owen, Ogilvie, Hodgkin, Gray, Robert Thompson, William Carpenter, and Clinton Roosevelt; which he discovered from his hours of research in the Reading Room of the British Museum, Volume two appeared after Marx' death, edited by Engels from Marx' notes, in 1885; and volume three appeared in 1894.
Actually, Engels supported Marx with income from his father's cotton mills in England.
It grew rapidly, despite the effort of Chancellor Otto von Bismarck to break it up through the enactment of anti-socialist legislation.
In 1889, the Second International was formed, with their headquarters in Brussels, Belgium.
Their main responsibility was to create some sort of unity within its ranks.
During his teenage years, he admired Mikhail Bakunin, a follower of Weishaupt's principles, and a Satanist, who was the driving force behind the initial effort to organize Communism.
In the early 1900's, he said that socialism could only be achieved by mobilizing workers and peasants through revolution, since trade unions were not able to bring about any change.
The movement was slow to catch on, and by 1907, he only had 17 members, but he would soon have over 40,000.
He received financial support from the Fabians, including a $15,000 contribution from Joseph Fels, an American soap manufacturer and a Fabian.
Lenin was an advocate of the Populist doctrine, which had been developed by author Aleksandr Herzen during the 1860's.
He felt that the peasant communes could be the socialist society of the future, and called for Russian Socialism to be based on the ancient peasant tradition.
In 1881, they succeeded in assassinating Czar Alexander II, and continued to function as a conspiratorial organization.
Chapter Six Lenin wanted to use the Populists to overthrow the government and introduce socialism.
He added two Marxist elements to the Populist theory the notion of a class struggle, and the need for Russia to pass through a stage of capitalism.
He led the people to believe that the purpose of his movement was to help the working class.
With their slogan, ""The people against the tycoons,"" they fought for an increase in currency circulation, free silver, labor reform, a graduated income tax, government ownership of the railroads, and the direct election of United States Senators.
He wanted to ""end control of government and industry by private monopoly,"" to have public control of natural resources, public ownership of railroads, and a reduction in taxes.
Their platform included civil rights legislation, and called for negotiations with the Russians.
They also provided support for the effort which eventually gave women the right to vote.
Many of their goals were achieved during the Administration of President Franklin D Roosevelt.
THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION In 1905, while Russia was engaged in the Russo-Japanese War, the communists tried to get the farmers to revolt against the Czar, but they refused.
Czar Nicholas ll was dethroned in March after a series of riots, and a provincial government was set up by Prince George Lvov, a liberal progressive reformer who wanted to set up a democracy.
He made an effort to strengthen the Russian Army to prevent any future revolts, but ended up resigning, which allowed Kerensky, a democratic Socialist, to take over and form a coalition government.
He kept the war with Germany going, and issued an amnesty order for the communists who had been exiles after the aborted Red Revolution in 1905.
Morgan, Olaf Aschberg(of the Nye Bank of Stockholm, Sweden), the Rhine Westphalian Syndicate, a financier named Jovotovsky, William Boyce Thompson(a director of Chase National Bank, who contributed $1 million), and Albert H Wiggin, helped finance it.
The Rockefellers had given their financial support after the Czar refused to give them access to the Russian oil fields, which was already being pumped by the Royal Dutch Co., which was owned by the Rothschilds and the Nobel brothers, who was giving Standard Oil plenty of competition on the international market.
Even though John D Rockefeller possessed $15,000,000 in bonds from the Royal Dutch Co. and Shell, rather than purchase stock to get his foot in the door and indirectly profit, he helped to finance the Revolution so that he would be able to get Standard Oil firmly established in the country of Russia.
As the Congress of Vienna had shown, the Illuminati had never been able to control the affairs of Russia, so they had to get rid of the Czar, so he couldn't interfere with their plans.
He had an expensive apartment and traveled around town in a chauffeur-driven limousine.
Trotsky was given $20 million in Jacob Schiff gold to help finance the revolution, which was deposited in a Warburg bank, then transferred to the Nya Banken in Stockholm, Sweden.
Kristianiafjord, which had been chartered by Schiff and Warburg, on March 27,1917, with communist revolutionaries, At Halifax, Nova Scotia, on April 3, the first port they docked at, the Canadians, under orders from the British Admiralty, seized Trotsky, and his men, taking them to the prison at Amherst; and impounded his gold.
The Canadians were concerned that if Lenin would take over Russia, he would sign a Peace Treaty and stop the fighting between Russia and Germany, so that the Germany Army could be diverted to possibly mount an offensive against the United States and Canada.
The British government(through intelligence officer Sir William Wiseman, who later became a partner with Kuhn, Loeb and Co.) and American government urged them to let Trotsky go.
Wilson said that if they didn't comply, the U S. wouldn't enter the War.
Trotsky was released, given an American passport, a British transport visa, and a Russian entry permit.
It is obvious that Wilson knew what was going on, because accompanying Trotsky, was Charles Crane of the Westinghouse Company, who was the Chairman of the Democratic Finance Committee.
Meanwhile, Lenin had been able to infiltrate the Democratic Socialist Republic established by Kerensky.
In October, 1917, when the Revolution started, Lenin, who was in Switzerland, negotiated with the German High Command, with the help of Max Warburg(head of the Rothschild-affiliated Warburg bank in Frankfurt), to allow him, his wife, and 32 other Bolsheviks, to travel across Germany, to Sweden, where he was to pick up the money being held for him in the Swedish bank, then on to Petrograd, He promised to make peace with Germany, if he was able to overthrow the new Russian government.
He was put in a sealed railway car, with over $5 million in gold from the German government, and upon reaching Petrograd, was joined by Stalin and Trotsky.
He told the people that he could no longer work within the government to effect change, that they had to strike immediately, in force, to end the war, and end the hunger conditions of the peasants.
He led the revolution, and after seizing the reins of power from Kerensky on November 7, 1917, replaced the democratic republic with a communist Soviet state.
He kept his word and made peace with Germany in February, 1918, and was able to get out of World War I While most members of the Provisional Government were killed, Kerensky was allowed to live, possibly because of the general amnesty he extended to the communists exiled in 1905.
Chapter Six Elections were held on November 25,1917, with close to 42 million votes being cast, and the Bolshevik Communists only received 24% of the vote.
On July 18,1918, the People's Congress convened, having a majority of anti-Bolsheviks, which indicated that communism wasn't the mass movement that Lenin was claiming.
Lenin was sent into Russia...in the same way that you might send a vial containing a culture of typhoid or of cholera to be poured into the water supply of a great city, and it worked with amazing accuracy.
This conspiracy played a definitely recognizable role in the tragedy of the French Revolution.
It has been the mainspring of every subversive movement during the nineteenth century; and now at last this band of extraordinary personalities from the underworld of the great cities of Europe and America have gripped the Russian people by the hair of their heads, and have become practically the undisputed masters of that enormous empire.
There is no need to exaggerate the part played in the creation of Bolshevism and in the bringing about of the Russian revolution by these international and for the most part atheistical Jews, It is certainly a very great one; it probably outweighs all others.
Russian General Arsene DeGoulevitch wrote in Czarism and the Revolution that the ""main purveyors of funds for the revolution, however, were neither crackpot Russian millionaires nor armed bandits on Lenin.
Frank Vanderlip, President of the Rockefeller-controlled First National Bank, compared Lenin to George Washington.
A man is at the wheel and seems to lead it, but the car does not drive in the desired direction.
That same year, Lenin organized the Red Army to control the population, and a secret police to keep track of the communists.
The Third lnternational had its first Congress in 1919 in Moscow, where they established that Russia would control all of the world's communist movements.
Hopes of world revolution ran high, as they hoped to ""liberate"" the working class and enable them to break away from the reformist democracy they sprung from.
But, he added, that the revolutionary activities had to be discontinued so they could develop trade relations with capitalist countries, to strengthen their own.
The name of the country was officially changed to the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
From 1916-21, famine swept through Russia, with close to five million dying, because industry was shut down.
On September 21,1921, American relief services began in Russia, after President Herbert Hoover received a plea from famous Russian writer Maxim Gorky.
The United States appropriated $20 million for the country, with $8 million spent for medical supplies.
As it turned out, the United States was actually supporting the Communist Civil War, which ended in 1922.
American and European industrialists rushed to the aid of the Russians.
The International Barnsdale Corporation and Standard Oil got drilling rights; Stuart, James and Cook, Inc. reorganized the coal mines; General Electric sold them electrical equipment; and other major firms like Westinghouse, DuPont and RCA, also aided the Communists.
Standard Oil of New Jersey bought 50% of their huge Caucasus oil fields, and in 1927, built a large refinery in Russia.
Standard Oil, with their subsidiary, Vacuum Oil Co., made a deal to sell Soviet oil to European countries, and even arranged to get them a $75 million loan.
Chapter Six Rockefeller's Chase National Bank helped establish the American-Russian Chamber of Commerce in 1922, and its first President was Reeve Schley, a Chase Vice-President.
In 1925, Chase National and PromBank(a German bank) developed a complete program to finance the Soviets raw material exports to the United States, and imports of United States cotton and machinery.
Chase National and Equitable Trust Co. were the dominant forces in Soviet credit dealings.
Lenin had said that the capitalists would do business with anyone, and when Russia was through with them, the Communists would take over the world.
In reality, the Illuminati was completely financing the entire country of Russia, in order to transform them into a world power with principles completely opposite to that of the United States.
When he died in 1924, supposedly from syphilis, the country's leadership was taken over by Joseph Stalin(18791953, Iosif Visarionovich Dzhugashvili), after a bitter fight with Trotsky.
My nightmare is to have the feeling that I'm lost in an ocean of blood from the innumerable victims.
To save our country, Russia, we would have needed men like Francis of Assisi.
In 1924, Stalin wrote The Foundations of Leninism , hoping that Lenin would pass the torch of leadership to him.
Those who refused to cooperate with the communist government, were starved to death.
Between 1932-33, it is estimated that between three and seven million people died as a result of Stalin's tactics.
Stalin later admitted that two-thirds of Russia's industrial capability was due to the assistance of the United States.
He eventually did away with the ""withering away"" concept, and developed a fanatical, rigid, and powerful police state.
Stalin said that the goals of Communism was to create chaos throughout the world, institute a single world economic system, prod the advanced countries to consistently give aid to underdeveloped countries, and to divide the world into regional groups, which would be a transitional stage to a one-world government.
In 1933, the Illuminati urged FDR to recognize the country of Russia in order to save them from financial ruin, as a number of European countries had already done.
On November 17,1933, the United States granted diplomatic recognition to Russia.
They became a member of the League of Nations in 1934, but was thrown out in 1939 because of their aggressive actions toward Finland.
Hugh Cooper, creator of the Mussel Shoals Dam, planned and built the giant hydroelectric plant at Dniepostrol.
Because of a treaty with Poland, France and England were forced to declare war on Germany.
Hitler had said publicly, that he didn't want war with England, but now was forced into battle with them.
By the end of May, the Netherlands and Belgium had fallen, and France followed in June.
In 1940, Russia moved against Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia, Bessarabia, northern Bukovina, and half of Poland, and this sort of worried Hitler.
In England, the llluminati-controlled press attacked Prime Minister Chamberlain, because they felt their war against Germany was too mild.
Chapter Six A year later, the German High Command, unknown by Hitler, sent Rudolph Hess to England to meet with Lord Hamilton and Churchill to negotiate a Peace Treaty.
The German generals offered to eliminate Hitler, so they could join forces to attack Communist Russia.
He was later tried and convicted at the Nuremberg war crime trials, and was given a life sentence, which was served out at the Spandau prison.
Shortly after their failure, the German High Command convinced Hitler to attack Russia, which he did.
American communists urged the world to mount an immediate united effort to help Russia.
The Nazi advance was swift and savage, with the German army barreling deep into the Ukraine with one victory after another.
Foreign Policy experts predicted the defeat and collapse of the country.
In October, Kiev fell, and Hitler announced there would be a final effort to take Moscow and end the war.
On October 24, with his army 37 miles from Moscow, Hitler planned on waiting until the winter was over before he made his final attack.
But then, Japan attacked Pearl Harbor, and the United States entered the War.
For instance, they kept 84, cargo ships, some of which were used to supply North Vietnam with equipment during the Vietnam War.
Chapter Six Russians, after the War, became the foundation upon which the Soviet industrial machine was built.
Through an agreement negotiated years later by Henry Kissinger, the Russians agreed to pay back $722 million of the $11 billion, which amounted to about 74 on the dollar.
In 1975, after paying back $32 million, they announced they were not going to pay the remainder of the Lend-Lease debt.
After the War, in 1946, America turned over two-thirds of Germany's aircraft manufacturing capabilities to Russia, who dismantled the installations, and rebuilt them in their country, forming the initial stage of their jet aircraft industry.
Even though Congress had passed legislation forbidding shipments on non-war materials, various pro-Soviet officials and Communist traitors in key positions openly defied the law and made shipments.
In 1944, Harry Hopkins, Henry Morgenthau , Averell Harriman, and Harry Dexter White, supplied the material needed for Russia to print occupation currency.
The Russians then set up a printing facility in a Nazi printing plant in Leipzig and began to print currency which the United States couldn't account for.
Russia refused to redeem the currency with rubles, therefore the United States Treasury had to back the currency.
The Russians were using these newly printed Marks to sap the German economy, and take advantage of the United States, who by the end of 1946, had lost $250,000,000 because of redeeming, in United States dollars, marks which were issued in excess of the total amount of marks issued by the Finance Office, who was officially printing occupation money for the Germans.
In addition, the $18,102 charge for the plates and printing material, was never paid.
In 1943, a Congressional investigation revealed, that even before the United States had built its first atomic bomb, half of all the uranium and technical information needed to construct such a bomb, was secretly sent to Russia.
This included chemicals, metals, and minerals instrumental in creating an atomic bomb, and manufacturing a hydrogen bomb.
In 1980, James Roosevelt, the son of President Franklin Roosevelt, wrote a novel, A Family Matter , which detailed how his father made ""a bold secret decision to share the results of the Manhattan Project with the Soviet Union,"" in 1943 and 1944.
Air Force Major Racey Jordan, was a Land-Lease expediter and liaison officer for the Russians in Great Falls, which was the primary staging area for the massive Lend-Lease supply operation to the Soviet Union.
In his diaries, which were published in 1952, he said that the United States built the Soviet war machine by shipping all the materials needed to construct an atomic pile, including graphite, cadmium metal, thorium, and uranium.
Chapter Six and sealed with red wax, said to be of a diplomatic nature, were to be sent to Moscow.
One night the Russians had taken them out for dinner, and suspicious of their friendliness, Jordan decided to sneak away, and went back to the base with an armed sentry.
He discovered that two Russian couriers from Washington had arrived and had procured a plane bound for Russia, to take about 50 of these cases.
He detained the flight, and discovered that the shipment was being sent to the ""Director, Institute of Technical and Economic Information"" in Moscow.
He opened eighteen of the cases, and discovered a collection of maps that identified the names and locations of all the industrial plants in the U.S., along with classified military sites.
In short, traitors within the Administration of Roosevelt were giving the Soviets the instructions and the material to build nuclear weapons, even before the United States had fully developed the technology for use by our country.
Jordan reported all of this to Air Force Intelligence, but nothing ever happened.
The Russian's ability to establish their space program, was also provided by America.
When General Patton was moving eastward through Germany, he captured the towns of Peenemunde and Nordhausen, where German scientists had developed the V-1 and V-2 rockets.
Dwight Eisenhower ordered him to turn the two towns over the Russians, who dismantled the facilities and shipped them to Russia, along with the scientists.
Braun was prepared to launch history's first satellite, long before Russia developed one, but Eisenhower would not authorize it, because it was to be made to appear that Russian technology was superior to ours, when it wasn't.
It would add to the facade being developed that Russia was stronger than we were, and therefore should be feared.
As recently as 1978, it is believed that Russia still had not been able to construct a singlestage rocket capable of placing large payloads in orbit.
American researcher, Lloyd Malian, called the Soviet's ""Lunik"" moon landing a hoax, since no tracking station picked up its signals, and that Alexie Leonov's spacewalk on March 18,1965 was also staged.
The United States donated two food production factories, a petroleum refinery, a repair plant for precision instruments, and 17 steam and three hydroelectric plants.
More recently, Dressier Industries built a $146 million drill plant at Kuibyshov, to produce high quality drill bits for oil exploration.
Allis-Chalmers built a $35 million iron ore pelletizing plant in Russia, which is one of the world's four largest.
We have sent the Russians, computer systems, oil drilling equipment, pipes, and other supplies.
The ball-bearings used by Russia to improve the guidance systems on their rockets and missiles, such as their SS-18 intercontinental ballistic missies, were purchased in 1972 from the Bryant Grinder Co. in Springfield, Vermont.
The reasoning behind it, was to allow Russia to increase their industrial and agricultural output to match ours, because by bringing the two countries closer together, hostilities would be eased.
CHINA GOES COMMUNIST Russia, as early as 1920, was conspiring against China.
They began to infiltrate the government in 1922, and by 1924, the Chinese armed forces were reorganized along the same lines as the Soviet army.
Chapter Six Kai-shek was the Commandant, and Chou En-lai was in charge of Political Affairs.
Michael Borodin, Chiang attacked Shanghai, robbing the Rothschild-affiliated Soong Bank.
Soong negotiated with Chiang, offering him $3 million, his sister May-ling as a wife(even though Chiang had a wife and family), and the presidency of China for life, if he would change sides.
Seeing the Russians as a threat to his country, he had them ejected, and had many communist advisors arrested.
Mao Tse-tung fled, and hid out in the northern provinces, when he began training rebels for a future insurrection.
In 1937, Japan attacked Shanghai, and coupled with the growing Communist insurgency, created a two-front war.
China's plea was brushed off, and they were the last country to get military aid, which came in the form of a $250 million loan in gold to stabilize their economy.
Assistant Secretary of the Treasury, Harry Dexter White, the Soviet spy, was in charge of making sure China got the money, and over a period of 31/2 years, he only sent them $27 million.
In 1945, Congress voted a second loan of $500 million, and Dexter made sure they didn't get any of that, which resulted in the collapse of their economy.
George C Marshall(Army Chief of Staff, and CFR member, who served as Secretary of State 1947-49, and Secretary of Defense 1950-51; who had knowledge of the impending attack on Pearl Harbor, but didn't inform the commanders in the Pacific) and Patrick J Hurley were sent to China to meet with Chiang Kai-shek.
They urged him to give the Communists representation in the Chinese Government, and for the Nationalists to have a coalition government, since they felt that the Russians weren't influencing the Chinese Communists.
However, Chiang would not accept any kind of Communist influence in his government, so Marshall recommended that all American aid be stopped, and an embargo enforced.
There was no fuel for Chinese tanks and planes, or ammunition for weapons.
Russia gave the Chinese Communists military supplies they had captured from Japan, and also diverted some of the American Lend-Lease material to them.
Soon, Mao began making his final preparations to take over the government.
High level State Department officials, such as Harry Dexter White and Owen Lattimore, who were members of the Institute of Pacific Relations, besides planning the destruction of the Chinese economy, also falsified documents to indicate that the Chinese Communists were actually farmers who were pushing for agricultural reform.
While Mao Tse-tung was made to appear as an ""agrarian reformer"", Chiang was blasted for being a corrupt dictator.
In 1945, Lattimore sent President Truman a memorandum suggesting a coalition government between the Communists and the National Government.
John Carter Vincent of the IPR elaborated upon that memo, and it became the basis upon which Truman based his China policy, which was announced on December 15,1945.
It was alleged that Russia sent China a telegram, saying that if they didn't surrender, they would be destroyed.
They were requested to send ten technicians to see the bomb that would be used.
They were sent, and saw an atomic bomb with the capability of destroying a large city.
As the story goes, Chiang sent a telegram to President Truman, asking for help.
In 1948, Congress voted to send China $125 million in military aid, but again the money was held up until Chiang was defeated.
Mao Tse-tung, who announced in 1921 that he was a Marxist, after reading the Communist Manifesto , took over as China's leader, and Peking was established as the new capital.
On February 14,1950, a thirty-year treaty of friendship was signed with Russia.
In March, 1953, Mao proposed to the Soviet Union, a plan for world conquest, in which every country, except the United States, would be communist-controlled by 1973.
The first phase was to be completed by 1960, and called for Korea, Formosa, and Indochina to be under Chinese control.
Yet it was Nixon who opened the dialogue with China, and in 1971, Communist China was seated as a member country of the United Nations, while the Republic of China was thrown out.
With the visits to China by Nixon and Kissinger in 1971, on up to Reagan in 1984, relations between the two countries were almost as good as they were when they were allies in 1937.
Chapter Six the American government recognized the Communists as the official government of China.
KOREA FALLS From 1910, until 1945, Korea was part of the Japanese empire.
The victorious World War II allies agreed that Korea should be made an independent country, but until negotiations could take place, the United States took charge of the area south of the 38th parallel, while the Soviets occupied the northern half.
An officers training school, and a small arms plant was set up by the United States.
They gave the country $100,000,000 worth of military hardware to arm the 96,000 soldiers of the South Korean armed forces.
The North Koreans, heavily equipped by the Russians, considered Acheson's statement an invitation to attack, in order to unify the country under communism.
Charles A Willoughby, that North Korea was preparing for an invasion, and John Foster Dulles of the State Department went to 'investigate', and covered up the activity he viewed at the 38th parallel.
On June 24,1950, the North Koreans swarmed across the 38th parallel, and proceeded to overrun the country.
Rhee appealed to the United States, and the United Nations for help, as the communists closed in on the South Korean capital of Seoul.
Truman called for an immediate meeting of the United Nations Security Council, who convened the next day, and called the attack a ""breach of the peace,"" ordering the North Koreans to withdraw to the border.
Two days later, the Security Council called upon the UN members to furnish assistance.
Immediately the United States sent in ground troops and began air strikes.
Chapter Six troops at the disposal of the United States, under the UN command of Gen.
After MacArthur's amphibious assault on September 15, at Inchon Bay, UN forces were able to recapture Seoul, and began to push the North Koreans back across the border.
In October, they captured the North Korean capital of Pyongyang, and many communists retreated into Manchuria and Russia.
The Chinese, thinking that the security of their country was being threatened, stormed across the border on November 26,1950, and stopped the UN army at the Yalu River.
With the UN being involved in the war, all United States battle plans had to be submitted for approval, in advance, to the Under Secretary for Political and Security Council Affairs.
Due to a secret agreement made by Secretary of State Edward Stettinius in 1945, this position was to always be filled by a Communist from an eastern European country.
It was later revealed, that Russian military advisors were actually directing the North Korean war effort, and one of those advisors, Lt.
Alexandre Vasiliev, actually gave the order to attack, Vasiliev was the Chairman of the UN Military Staff Committee, who along with the Under Secretary for Political and Security Council Affairs, was responsible for all UN military action.
Vasliliev had to take a leave of absence from his position, to command the communist troops.
So, what it boiled down to, was that the Communists were controlling both sides of the war, and Russia was able to receive vital information concerning all troop movements within the UN forces in Korea, which was passed on to the North Koreans and Chinese.
The Taiwan government was planning to move against China, and Truman warned Chiang Kai-shek not to make an attempt to recapture his homeland.
Truman ordered the American Seventh Fleet into the Strait of Formosa to prevent any type of invasion.
Chiang then offered to send an advance force of 33,000 troops into North Korea, but the State Department refused.
They were a member of the UN, yet the United States would not let them fight.
The Korean War, Korean Conflict, or Police Action, as it is sometimes called, developed into a stalemate of broken cease-fire agreements, and MacArthur made plans for a massive retaliation against China.
He wanted to bomb the ammunition and fuel dumps, the supply bases, and communication lines to China, and to blockade the Chinese coast.
With MacArthur insisting that there was no substitute for victory, and that the war against Communism would be either won or lost in Korea, he was relieved of his command, on April 11,1951, by Gen.
You do not get in war to stand still and lose it and we were required to lose it.
First I was forbidden ""hot"" pursuit of enemy planes that attacked our own.
Manchuria and Siberia were sanctuaries of inviolate protection for all enemy forces and for all enemy purposes, no matter what depredations or assaults might come from there.
Then I was denied the right to bomb the hydroelectric plants along the Yalu River.
Most incomprehensible of all was the refusal to let me bomb the important supply center at Racin, which was not in Manchuria or Siberia, but many miles from the border, in forwarded supplies from Vladivostok for the North Korean Army.
Walton)Walker continually complained to me that operations were known to the enemy in advance through sources in Washington... information must have been relayed to them assuring that the Yalu River bridges would continue to enjoy sanctuary and that their bases would be left intact.
Chapter Six Over 33,000 American lives were lost in a war that they were not allowed to win.
With North Korea being supported by China, Russia and the Eastern Europe communist bloc countries, they built up their military strength, and made enormous economic gains.
During the late 1960's, they began a dialogue for the reunification of Korea, and bilateral talks were held in 1972, which further improved their relations, as the Communists attempted to take over with diplomacy.
As information about communist agents occupying high cabinet posts surfaced, the American people took out their frustrations at the polls.
Even though the 1952 Republican Platform called the Truman Plan ""ignominious bartering with our enemies,"" in reality, Eisenhower's plan made even more concessions.
Eisenhower's tough rhetoric on communism ushered in a renewed patriotism in America.
People behind the Iron Curtain were inspired, and in the fall of 1956, Hungarian freedom fighters forced the Russians to leave their homeland, ending Soviet occupation.
Hours after receiving the telegram on November 4,1956, Khrushchev sent Russian troops back into Hungary to retake the country.
Soon Eisenhower initiated foreign aid programs to the communist governments in Poland and Yugoslavia, who by 1961, received almost $3 billion in food, industrial machinery, jets, and other military equipment.
In June, 1956, John Foster Dulles said that if the United States discontinued their aid to Marshal Tito, Yugoslavia would be driven into the Soviet fold.
On September 17, Tito announced his full support of the Soviet foreign policy.
Meanwhile, United States aid continued, even after 1961, when Yugoslavia began their own foreign aid programs to spread communism among the world's underdeveloped nations.
When Eisenhower's two terms came to an end, the amount of economic and military aid to communist and 'neutralist' countries came to $7 billion.
THE VIETNAM CONQUEST As the communists moved forward with their plan for world domination, Southeast Asia was to be the next target.
They moved on to Vietnam, where the United States was pulled into a conflict, which was to become the longest in United States history.
American intervention actually began in 1954 with economic and technical assistance, after the Geneva Accords ended the Indo-Chinese War.
Kennedy increased the military budget, and escalated the War just for the purposes of impressing the Russians after being embarrassed and humiliated by the failed Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba.
Vietnam escalated into a major War by 1964, with casualties peaking in 1969, In 1964, with a possibility that ultra-conservative Barry Goldwater might win the presidency, a coalition of liberal forces, under the guidance of Illuminati advisors, worked for the election of former Vice President Lyndon B Johnson, who had taken over after Kennedy's assassination in 1963.
Johnson was urged to pursue ""peace at any price,"" but the Illuminati didn't want peace, and Johnson further escalated the War.
At the height of the War, there were about 543,000 American soldiers in Vietnam.
On July 25,1965, President Johnson told an American television audience that the military build-up was to administer ""death and desolation"" to the communists, yet he made agreements to provide the Soviet Union, and her communist satellite countries, with millions of dollars worth of food, computers, industrial plants, oil refinery equipment, jet engines, military rifles, and machine tools for an $800 million automobile production facility.
At the same time, our Supreme Court ruled that communists could teach in our schools, and work in our defense plants; and the Senate and State Department allowed them to open diplomatic offices in major American cities, even though FBI Director J Edgar Hoover warned that their embassies were part of an espionage network.
Chapter Six In 1966, after Averill Harriman had made a 22-day, 12 nation peace tour for Johnson, he was asked by a television reporter how the Russians felt about the Vietnam War, and Harriman said they were ""embarrassed by the war.
A brilliant piece of propaganda, considering the fact that the Russians were shipping guns, ammunition, missiles, and MiG fighters to the North Vietnamese.
Thieu agreed to sign after Nixon and Kissinger promised that the United States would ""respond vigorously"" to any Communist violations of the agreement.
The treaty specified that the Vietcong was to have equal recognition with the South Vietnamese capital of Saigon.
The cease-fire didn't hold, and after the American pullout, which left over $5 billion worth of military equipment, the communists were given a free hand in southeast Asia.
On April 30,1975, the government of South Vietnam fell to the communist regime, and on July 2,1976, the country of Vietnam was officially unified as a Communist state.
THE CUBAN COVER-UP Fulgencio Batista, in 1934, had overthrown the government of Cuba, which hampered the social reform that had been begun by four separate Presidents.
With financial backing from Russia, Castro bribed many military leaders.
He got a substantial amount of support from the intellectual and working class, who knew nothing of his communist intentions.
President Kennedy in a speech, compared him to South American patriot Simon Bolivar.
The American Ambassador to Cuba declared that Batista was no longer supported by the American government, and that he should leave.
The member of the Intelligence section of the Cuban army hand-carried Castro's dosser to Washington in 1957, delivering it to Allen Dulles, head of the CIA, which revealed that Castro was a Communist.
In July, 1959, Major Pedro Diaz Lanz, of the Cuban Air Force, toured the United States, and revealed that he had first-hand knowledge that Castro was a Communist.
The truth of the matter, was that the State Department was purposely covering up Castro's communist connections, the fact that his supporters were trained by Russia, and that he was carrying out a communist revolution.
Smith, who, instead of being briefed by Gardner, was briefed by Herbert Matthews.
These individuals include Robert McNamara, Theodore C Sorenson, Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr., Roy Rubottom, McGeorge Bundy, William J Fulbright, and Roger Hilsman.
After being asked to abdicate, by Eisenhower, Batista left office on December 31,1958; and Castro took control of the country in January, 1959.
Soon, Castro revealed his alliance with Russia, nationalized all business and industry.
Chapter Six an invasion force was organized, financed, and trained in Florida and Guatemala, by the State Department and the Central Intelligence Agency, who recruited from the thousands of Cubans who had fled to the United States to get away from Castro.
On April 17,1961, an anti-Castro force of 1,400 landed at the Bay of Pigs in Cuba to begin the invasion.
Within striking distance, were two United States carriers, five World War li Liberty ships, and other support vessels, whose decks were loaded with planes.
The invasion failed, because it was not able to launch the attack at the alternate site which had an airfield nearby and was more suitable for the unloading of troops and supplies, plus, there were nearby mountains to hide in.
Russia, realizing the potential of Cuba's location, tried to build missile sites on the island, but the U.S., considering them to be a threat to our national security, threatened Russia with possible military action if they weren't removed.
After a blockade was imposed, the missiles were removed, however, the Soviets were still able to bolster the Cuban military by providing advisors, troops, aircraft, submarines, and military bases.
The objects identified as ""missiles"" in government photos were no larger than pencil dots, and it was impossible to concretely label them as ballistic missiles.
It is believed that the incident was created by the Russians, and that empty crates were removed from Cuba, in exchange for an agreement by the United States to remove missiles from Russia's borders, and for a guarantee that the United States would not support an anti-Castro invasion.
Mao Tse-tung, and the Chinese Communists went out of their way to proclaim their loyalty to the dead leader.
When Enver Hoxha, the Communist ruler of Albania refused to follow Khrushchev's lead in condemning Stalin, Russia canceled all economic and technical aid, and recalled all Soviet personnel.
China then sent in their own advisors, praising Albania for their stand.
China was upset because Russia failed to support them during a recent military action, and were suspicious of Khrushchev's policy of ""peaceful coexistence"" with the United States.
Since 1961, world communists have split into either pro-Soviet or pro-China factions.
Russia boasted, that within a generation, the whole world would be communist.
Because China had their own thoughts of world domination, a major rift developed between the two communist giants.
China became angry over Russia's refusal to give them nuclear weapons, so after 14 years, Russia ceased all aid to China.
So astonished was I, for I had given strict orders not to be disturbed, that it was some moments before I had found language to inquire the cause of the visit.
I would have risen but the riveted gaze of the being before me rendered volition impossible.
I assayed once more to speak, but my tongue had become useless, as if paralyzed.
A new influence, mysterious, potent, irresistible, took possession of me.
Everything about me seemed to rarefy, the mysterious visitor also becoming more airy and yet more distinct to my sight than before.
I began to feel as one dying, or rather to experience the sensations which I have sometimes imagined accompany death.
I now beheld a heavy white vapor at some distance rising fold upon fold.
Before me lay, spread out in one vast plain, all the countries of the worldEurope, Asia, Africa, and America.
I saw rolling and tossing between Europe and America the billows of the Atlantic and between Asia and America lay the Pacific.
Dipping water out of the ocean in the hollow of each hand, he sprinkled some upon America with his right hand, while with his left he cast some over Europe.
Immediately a cloud arose from these countries, and joined in mid-ocean.
For awhile it seemed stationary, and then it moved slowly westward, until it enveloped America in its murky folds.
I cast my eyes upon America, and beheld villages and towns and cities springing up one after another until the whole land from the Atlantic to the Pacific was dotted with them.
The inhabitants presently set themselves in battle array against each other.
From each of these continents arose thick black clouds that were soon joined into one.
And throughout this mass there gleamed a dark red light by which I saw hordes of armed men.
These men, moving with the cloud, marched by land and sailed by sea to America, which country was enveloped in the volume of the cloud.
At the same moment the angel upon whose head still shown the word 'Union,' and who bore our national flag in one hand and a sword in the other, descended from the heavens attended by legions of white spirits.
As the voice ceased, the shadowy angel for the last time dipped water from the ocean and sprinkled it upon America.
This also disappeared, and I found myself once more gazing upon the mysterious visitor, who, in the same voice I had heard before, said, 'Son of the Republic, what you have seen is thus interpreted.
A red light was indeed moving towards America, and it was communism, which at its peak, controlled 14,000,000 square miles of territory, or about 1/4 of the inhabited land in the world; and close to 1,500,000,000 people, or about 1/3 of the world's population.
The communist menace swept through Russia, Mongolia , Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Bessarabia, Bukovina , Albania, TannuTuva, Ukraine, Yugoslavia, Outer Mongolia, Manchuria, Karafuto, Kurile lslands, Bulgaria , Poland, Romania, East Germany, Hungary, North Korea , Czechoslovakia, China, Sinkiang, Tibet, North Vietnam, Guinea, Cuba, Libya, South Yemen, Guyana , Benin, Burma, Laos, South Vietnam, Madagascar , Angola, Somolia, Seychelles, Mozambique, Ethiopia , Cambodia, Grenada, Congo, and Afghanistan.
Keegan, Jr. said that our government had been covering up the evidence of an imminent Soviet attack on the United States.
Keegan, a former Assistant Chief of Staff for the Air Force Intelligence Unit, said that Russia had been going through extensive preparations to mobilize their forces against the free world.
So we shall begin by launching the most spectacular peace movement on record.
The capitalist countries, stupid and decadent, will rejoice to cooperate with their own destruction.
I can prophecy that your grandchildren in America will live under socialism.
During the 1980's, statements coming out of Russia, continued to be of a threatening nature.
International security officers estimate that at least thirty thousand undercover subverters, paid by Moscow and Peking, and continually undermining the Western democracies.
In 1921, he came up with the idea of spreading communism through trade unions, youth organizations, cooperatives, and other associations.
The organizations were developed by Willi Munzenberg, a German communist.
Their aim was to further the cause of Soviet communism, and act as a cover, if communism was illegal, in order to spread propaganda.
It will operate first in the most advanced capitalist countries, and later in other countries.
These comrades will operate undercover, as do our intelligence officers and spies who are working abroad.
The objective of this fighting force is to speed up the development of revolutionary situations and spread awareness of how unrest, public disturbance, disorders and industrial dissatisfaction can bring about a breakdown of the capitalist system.
They will operate simultaneously in all the countries of the capitalist world.
In each capitalistic country one undercover subverter network will be composed of tried and trusted communists who are nationals of that country.
Their activities will be directed by Comrade Suslov who will be responsible to the Politburo.
This network of undercover subverters will comprise of men and women of ability and intelligence, especially selected for these qualities.
They will be called upon to join and operate within organizations and societies that are bourgeois and opposed to communism and the Soviet Union.
The second network of undercover subverters will consist of operators of Soviet nationality.
Chapter Six comrades will be under direct orders from our Secret Service Headquarters.
Thus, the Red ""fifth column"" was instituted in order to infiltrate the West, While appearing to be anti-communist, by going to church, getting involved in charities, and voting conservatively; they were secretly attending training centers to learn techniques of sabotage, terrorism and subversion in order to instigate strikes, provoke riots and stage demonstrations.
The recruits would then be sent to the Lenin Technical School at Verkhovnoye, which is a complex spread out of over seven square miles in a desolate area.
During the time they were here, their family, and friends, did not know their whereabouts.
The training lasted 12 months, and consisted of military-like training, such as survival techniques, various methods of hand-to-hand combat, handling firearms and heavy combat equipment, how to make and deactivate explosives, methods of electronic surveillance, and the use of poisons.
If the recruit passed, they would be sent on a vacation, during which they would be arrested by the Secret Police as a foreign agent.
This final test subjected the candidate to brainwashing, torture and interrogation, to see if they would break under the pressure.
If they passed, they would be sent to one of the Soviet Ace Spy Schools, where the training could last for up to ten years.
The northern sector was for Norway, Sweden, Denmark, and Finland; the southwestern sector was for the Netherlands; the southern area was for Austria and Switzerland; and the southeastern area was for Germany.
At the Stiepnaya Ace Spy School, near Chkalov, along the northern border of the Kazakh Soviet Republic, the northwestern section was for France; the northern area for the Spanish countries; the northeastern section for Italy; and the southern end for Portugal, Brazil, Argentina and Mexico.
Chapter Six Khabarovsk, was for Asian and Middle East countries; and the Novaya Ace Spy School, near Tashkent, was for the African countries.
In the United Kingdom section, the candidate would live in actual Britishstyle homes, hotels, and apartments, which were full-size replicas of actual English buildings, on actual streets.
There were British banks, restaurants, theaters, and a Post Office, all in a sixty square mile area.
Here the recruit ate British food, wore British clothes, rode London buses, and received a weekly salary dispensed in British currency, read English papers and magazines, and watched English television shows.
The recruits were given English names, and were ordered to speak only English, which they were given five years to master.
During the second five years, they memorized unbreakable codes, and were taught how to assemble and dismantle radio receivers and transmitters; and were taught how to use photographic equipment to reduce blueprints, records, and documents into microdots.
After this intensive training, the recruit was, in almost every way, British.
Each agent was smuggled into the country of their training, which in this case was England.
They would be given actual identification and 'cover' documents from people who were dead or missing, so that a background check couldn't reveal their true identities.
Within their new identity, they became involved in public life, working to undermine the government as a representative of the communist government of the Soviet Union.
China had similar schools, but their training period was only ten months, because spies were recruited mainly for Chiang Kai-shek's Nationalist China, and other countries within Asia, where they would fit in.
To infiltrate the West, the Chinese recruited people from all over the world, and smuggled them into China to undergo training.
Donovan didn't see anything wrong with Communists, and recruited OSS personnel from Communist ranks.
After the war, the OSS became known as the Central Intelligence Agency, and in 1952, the head of the CIA, Gen.
Three high-level Soviet KGB defectors, Anatoli Golitsin, Yuri Nosenko, and Michael Goleniewski, acknowledged their belief that there were Communist spies in the United States intelligence community.
Comrades working in armament factories or in nuclear establishments must memorize all charts, blueprints, production lists, etc. that they come upon through their employment.
If the well publicized launchings of a space rocket results in a failure, this is of tremendous propaganda value.
The class enemy must be discredited, hit often, and where it hurts the most.
The people that the Kremlin sends over here are, to a man, trained agents of Soviet policy.
Some of them are spies, seeking information; all of them are trusted carriers of Communist propaganda.
Their assignment is not to convey a true image of the Soviet Union, but a false image.
During the Johnson Administration, 66 Senators voted for the Consulate Treaty, despite the tremendous public criticism of it, which opened up the country to spies and sabateurs, who would be protected with the mantle of diplomatic immunity.
In 1905, Lenin wrote his Instructions to Revolutionaries , which indicated how important it was to concentrate on young people.
The disturbances must occur on such a large scale that they cause deep concern to the population...lightning strikes of key workers in important industrial centers must be encouraged.
Every effort must be made now to encourage students to demonstrate, and if possible, to riot on the largest possible scale.
Subtle undercover tactics must be adopted to ensure these demonstrations culminate in rioting and street fighting.
While the Soviets were calling for more ""grievance strikes, more wildcat strikes, and more trade union obstruction to smooth working of industry; more racial riots, and more sabotage to industrial plants,"" Red China's agents were instructed to ""seize every opportunity to speed drug addiction,"" and all sorts of drugs were smuggled into the West.
Chapter Six Nassar, in 1966, of his plans to turn our American soldiers into drug addicts: ""The more troops they send to Vietnam, the happier we shall be.
Organized communism began in the United States when Socialist Eugene V Debs ran for the Presidency in 1900,1904, and 1908.
They joined the Comintern, which is the world Communist organization run by the Soviet Union.
To aid the local parties, there were hundreds of 'front' organizations established to defend Soviet policies and attack its opponents.
They functioned through the media, local Communist parties, and other small organizations.
American Friends Service Committee, Arms Control Association, Center for Defense Information, Coalition for a New Foreign and Military Policy, Council on Economic Priorities, National Lawyers Guild, Citizens Committee for a Sane World, War Register League, Women for Racial and Economic Equality, and the Center for International Policy.
British-Soviet Friendship Society, Britain-China Friendship Society, Soviet-lndia Friendship Society, and the Society for Friendship with the Peoples of Africa.
On top of all of this support, Communism also had its apologists and representatives in our government, such as Sen.
He believed that once Russia caught up to the United States in technology, relations would improve between the two countries.
He advocated increased aid, and compromises to avoid direct confrontation.
He felt that the presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba did not endanger our national security.
Later, the Johnson Administration sent them 700,000 tons of American wheat, 92,000 bales of cotton, and gave them a loan for $175 million to aid their economy and industry.
I cannot understand it just baffles me why the Soviets these last few years have behaved as they have.
Many of our country's leaders have become soft on communism, because they are no longer perceived as a threat.
They will employ force, murder, lies, flattery, subversion, bribery, extortion, and treachery.
Everything they stand for and believe in is a contradiction of our understandings of the nature of men.
DISARMING AMERICA The campaign for nuclear disarmament was directly linked to the International Department of Specific Activities in the Kremlin, when after World War II, the ""Ban the Bomb"" movement was born, because the United States was the only country to have nuclear capabilities.
The Soviet Union organized and financed the World Peace Council, a well known 'freeze' group, to influence public opinion and government policy in nonCommunist countries.
Chapter Six On September 20,1961, the United States and the Soviet Union announced an agreement for general disarmament that included the disbanding of military forces, dismantling of military bases, ceasing weapon production, and eliminating all weapon stockpiles.
However, no treaty was signed, because they could never agree on all points.
For instance, Russia wanted the United States to dismantle all foreign bases and destroy nuclear weapons, but this would have given Russia an edge in conventional weapons.
The Disarmament Committee of the United Nations, composed of 18 members, also failed to come up with an adequate agreement between the two countries.
President John F Kennedy had promised to close the missile gap in order to reestablish our military strength, but his Secretary of Defense, Robert McNamara, wanted to allow our defense program to decline until Russia was equal to us.
The move towards unilateral disarmament began when McNamara announced that Russia wouldn't sign an arms limitation agreement until they caught up to the United States in strategic offensive weapons.
The Strategic Arms Limitation Talks originated from the discussions between President Lyndon B Johnson and Soviet Prime Minister Aleksei N Kosygin, in 1967.
These conferences developed into the SALT I Agreement, which was signed by President Richard M Nixon and Soviet Premier Leonid I Brezhnev, in 1972.
While the number of United States strategic missiles had been frozen at the 1967 level, the Soviets had continued to build, matching that amount in 1970.
By 1972, Russia had a 3-2 advantage in the number of intercontinental ballistic missiles.
It also froze the number of offensive missiles at the 1972 level for five years.
With Russia having 2,358 land and sea-based missiles, and the United States only 1,710, the Soviets were certainly getting the best part of that deal.
Submarine-based missiles were restricted by a complicated formula which gave the Russians a numerical advantage, but was balanced by permitting the United States more warheads for its reliable and more accurate missiles.
The second part of the agreement was a five-year pact limiting some offensive strategic weapons, and the number of launchers for ICBM's carrying nuclear warheads.
On November 24,1974, President Gerald R Ford and Brezhnev reached an agreement to limit the number of all offensive strategic weapons and delivery systems until December 31,1985.
SALT II was a treaty that resulted from a second round of talks, and was signed by President Jimmy Carter and Brezhnev on June 18,1979, and was to remain in effect until 1985.
It limited each side to 2,400 ICBM launchers and long range bombers, within six months of ratification.
It would allow each country to develop one new missile, and to modernize their existing weaponry, with certain limitations.
Each side would be expected to verify the other's compliance by its own surveillance methods.
Regardless of the many stipulations, it still did not meet the requirements of the Jackson Equality Amendment.
The Senate never ratified SALT II, because the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan, however, the United States is upholding it, but not Russia.
If their military escalation wasn't an indication of their intentions, then the capabilities of their civil defense program should have been.
They have protected water, power generators, and communications systems.
In the event of a nuclear exchange, it is believed that a large part of the Russian population would survive.
Meanwhile, the United States has literally abandoned its civil defense program, however, much planning has gone into the ""Continuity of Government"" plan developed by the Federal Emergency Management Administration.
It will house federal government officials, and contain all records on its computers, such as census, Social Security, and IRS information.
Ritchie, Maryland and Colorado Springs, Colorado, and a few others, which have been designated for military and government leaders.
There are said to be as many as 96 underground facilities throughout Maryland, West Virginia, Virginia, Pennsylvania, and North Carolina.
Civilians will be left to seek out the 235,000 buildings designated as fall-out shelters.
In addition, the Defense Department's Civil Defense Preparedness Agency indicates that there is the potential for sheltering 50 million people in mines.
Nevertheless, if a nuclear exchange were to occur today, the best estimates are that 160,000,000 Americans would die, but only 5,000,000 Russians.
Chapter Six production of the B-1 Strategic bomber, which was to be built by Rockwell International, General Electric, and the Boeing Co.
The B-1 was to replace the obsolete B-52, and would have the capability of evading Soviet radar detection because of its ability to fly at high speeds, at low altitudes; and twice the speed of sound at higher altitudes.
They would be able to carry a weapons payload twice the amount of the B-52, including 24 SRAM's inside its body, and eight on its wings.
Internally, it can carry 75,000 pounds of conventional bombs, in addition to 40,000 externally.
Its takeoff distance is half that of the B-52, giving it access to more areas.
Since 1961, about 1,000 of our B-57 strategic bombers have been phased out, and the supersonic B-58's were deactivated in 1970.
The Russians, however, produced their delta-wing supersonic ""Backfire"" bomber, which has a maximum range of over 5,000 miles, and can travel 1,500 mph.
This means that they can be launched from bases in the Siberia, can cross the United States, refuel in Cuba, or somewhere else in Latin America.
It would have taken two Russian missiles at each site to be sure of neutralizing it, which is more than they have.
This would give the United States time to retaliate with stationery missile silos.
The MX system, with its 2,000 warheads, would have the capability of devastating the Soviet Union.
Soviet fixed silos are designed to refire, ours are not; and they have at least 1,000 extra missiles for refiring.
They also have larger missiles, giving them a 6-1 advantage in firepower.
The Soviet's SS-9 Scarp Rocket can lift five times the load that the U.S.'s LGM-30 G Minuteman missile can, and hurl a 35-kiloton multiple warhead close to 6,600 miles, enabling it to destroy a group of United States ICBM silos.
It can carry a 20megaton warhead, or three smaller warheads, each independently aimed.
It can even carry 14 one-megaton warheads, all of which could directed to different locations, delivering enough explosive power to destroy a large city.
With a single warhead, the missile can travel 5,700 miles, but only 4,700 with a multiple warhead.
With their increased number of warheads, and improved accuracies, the Pentagon indicated that Russia's SS-18 and SS-19 missiles could destroy America's land-based missile force of 1,000 Minuteman and 54 Titans in a single barrage, giving them a first-strike capability.
Chapter Six warheads, while our largest can only carry three 1-megaton warheads.
Keep in mind, Russia also has many small missiles, such as the SS-20, a mobile multiple warhead missile, with a range of over 5,000 miles, that would be effective in taking out NATO ports and airfields, and with the addition of a rocket booster, could reach the United States.
The Russians also developed the SS-24, a rail-mobile missile, and the SS-25, a road-mobile missile.
In 1977, Brezhnev called for a joint renunciation of neutron weapons, and in 1978, Carter said they wouldn't be produced.
However, in 1981, President Reagan made the decision to begin production of the Neutron bomb, and Russia's edge in strategic weapons didn't seem that important after this addition to our nuclear arsenal.
The Lance missile, and eight-inch artillery shells in the United States were furnished with a radiation enhanced warhead, which contained a radioactive isotope known as tritium, that produces far more radiation, and far less explosion and heat than conventional nuclear weapons.
The result is, that they kill people, without that much damage to surrounding buildings.
America had an edge with the Navy's nuclear-powered, nuclear-armed Polaris submarines.
While at sea, they can't be detected, yet they can track Russian subs because of their ultra-sensitive electronic surveillance system.
Knowing this, Russia stepped up the development of their long-range missiles.
It carries 20 SLBM SS-N-20 intercontinental nuclear missiles, which have a range of 4,800 miles, farther than ours.
It is capable of striking any target in the United States from protected Soviet waters.
The Typhoon subs, built at Severodvinsk, the world's largest submarine production yard, are designed to operate under the Arctic Ocean ice cap.
They also began producing the Soviet submarines with torpedo-proof titanium hulls, Even though Russia had more tanks than we did, the NATO force tanks, for example, had about 193,000 anti-tank missiles, which was nine times the number that was in the arsenal of the Warsaw Pact.
They are accurate from distances up to two miles away, which is outside the range of Russia's tanks.
However, Russia developed the T-80 tank, which has an armor consisting of a honeycomb process which combines steel, ceramics, and aluminum to create a substance that is three times stronger, yet weighs little more.
For some reason, the United States government, is trying to disguise, and hide the fact, that we may no longer be the most powerful nation on Earth.
Not only are they hiding it, but continue to make it worse with further plans for disarmament.
On December 8,1987, Russian leader Mikhail Gorbachev and President Reagan signed the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty, which was to eliminate all medium and short range nuclear missiles.
They have cheated on the INF Treaty of 1989, and have not fully complied with the Conventional Forces in Europe Treaty of 1991.
Many wars or confrontations since SALT I, had been started by, or influenced by Russia in one way or another.
About the only people who do not know it are the general public in the United States and Australia.
In December, 1979, over 50,000 Soviet soldiers moved into the country of Afghanistan with tanks and helicopters; and by January, there were close to 100,000 Russian troops in positions throughout the country.
There were reports that Soviet Army officers were arming and training Baluchi tribesmen in southern Afghanistan, who had long sought their own homeland.
They live in the region covering parts of Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan, along the strategic coasts of the Arabia Sea and the Gulf of Oman.
It was believed that the intent of the Soviets, was to gain access to the Ocean, where they would be able to control the Strait of Hormuz, in the Arabian Sea, where much of the world's oil supply is shipped from.
Khan hinted, that since more than half of the students that held our hostages in Iran were pro-Soviet Communists, the Russians may have instigated the incident, hoping that it would escalate into a full-blown confrontation, so that the Soviet Union could invoke a 1921 treaty with Iran that would give them a right to send in troops if their southern border was threatened.
He participated in four Summit meetings with Reagan, and in 1987, initiated a program of reforms to bring democracy to their political process.
The reforms were denounced by some Eastern bloc countries and old-line communists.
A decline in the economy, the worst since World War II, developed an atmosphere of unrest.
We uphold the historical justness of the great ideas of Marxism-Leninism, and along with all the revolutionary and peace loving forces of mankind, stand for social progress, and peace and security for all nations.
There will be no significant internal change within the Soviet Union, other than for cosmetic purposes.
In February, 1989, after a futile eight year guerrilla war against government rebels in Afghanistan, the Soviets pulled their troops out of the country.
The Communist superpower had lost alot of the prestige that years of propaganda had built up, and the embarrassing defeat signaled the beginning of the end.
On August 19,1991, a report from Russia indicated that Gorbechev had become ill, and the Vice-President had taken over the country, imposing a state of emergency.
In reality, the military, the KGB, and communist hardliners had initiated a coup to take over the government.
It is the belief of Donald S McAlvany, who publishes the McAlvany Intelligence Advisor , that the coup was a hoax.
In all past coups and revolutions, the KGB would have killed Gorbachev, and other reform leaders; they weren't even arrested.
Only a minimal amount of troops participated in the coup, the internal or international lines of communication were not cut, the press was not controlled, and the airports were not closed.
Boris Yeltsin, the President of the Russian Republic, denounced the coup, and called for a show of force, which produced about 50,000 demonstrators at the Russian parliament.
The picture of him on top of a Soviet tank, in open defiance of the Communist hardliners, was an indelible image in the hearts of the Soviet people, and the world.
By August 21st, 1991, the coup had failed, and Gorbachev was restored as President.
Of the eight coup leaders, one was said to have committed suicide, and may have been murdered; the other seven were tried and imprisoned.
In the past, such men would have just been shot, which gives credibility to the theory that the coup was a hoax.
Shortly after the coup, the President of Soviet Georgia accused Gorbachev of masterminding the coup.
Eduard Shevardnadze, Gorbachev's former foreign minister, even said that he may have been behind it.
In light of the sagging economy, the coup was to give Gorbachev the appearance of grabbing control back from the old-guard Communists, which would boost his popularity with the Soviet people, and make the West think that there was a potential for widespread democratic reforms in Russia.
On September 2nd, Gorbachev announced that his country was ""on the brink of catastrophe"" and that all authority was to be transferred to himself, the Presidents of the ten independent republics, and an appointed legislative council, which would be the basis for a new Soviet Union.
Yeltsin became President of a Russian Federation known as the Union of Soviet Sovereign Republics.
His first actions were to eliminate state subsidies on most goods and services, which caused prices to rise; and initiated a program to privatize thousands of large and medium-sized state-owned businesses.
The Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty had been signed July 31,1991, in Moscow, by Gorbachev and President Bush, and it was to reduce the amount of strategic offensive arms by about 30%, in three phases, over the next seven years.
It was approved by the Senate on October 1,1992, and the Russian Supreme Soviet on November 4,1992, but because of the negotiations with the four former Soviet republics, which are now independent, the transfer of all nuclear weapons to the Russian Republic had not been completed.
The republics of Belarus and Kazakhstan have each ratified START, and have acceded to the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty as non-nuclear nations; but not the Ukraine, which is still negotiating with Russia to transfer their weapons.
Meanwhile, On January 3,1993, President Bush and Yeltsin signed START II, which, if ratified, will be the biggest disarmament pact in history.
It calls for both sides to reduce their long-range nuclear arsenals to about 1/3 of their current levels within ten years, and would totally eliminate all land-based multiple warhead missiles.
The Communist Strategy of Deception and Disinformation , which was published in 1984.
He outlined virtually everything that has taken place recently in Russia, such as the tearing down of the Berlin Wall and the reunification of East and West Germany; the partial relinquishing of their control of Eastern Europe; and the declaration that communism is dead.
He wrote that their plan was to deceive the West into believing that the Soviet Union was falling apart, their satellites splintering, and its economy in shambles.
The facade of weakness and instability would be part of a massive deception staged by the Kremlin to extort aid from the West, and to get the United States to withdraw troops out of Western Europe.
At various times during the history of the Soviet Union, they have appealed to the United States for help, and have gotten it, mostly through deception, and the efforts of apologists and traitors in our government.
But this is the first time that Russia has made this kind of concession.
The have made it appear that communism is dead, that democracy is sweeping the former Soviet Union and its satellite countries, and that they want to be part of the new family of nations known as the New World Order.
If you consider all the evidence that I have put forth, it just seems to be another ploy by the Soviets to undermine America.
A respected Sovietologist has stated his belief that the motive behind the Russian's actions, and their plea for financial aid, is not so much need, but an attempt to destroy the United States economy by defaulting on an international loan that could be as much as $100 billion, which could precipitate a financial collapse.
Yeltsin has already addressed a joint session of Congress to appeal for economic aid.
The Bush Administration shut down Clark Air Force Base in the Philippines, and announced in September, 1991, that it is also closing the Subic Bay Naval Base, and will completely withdraw from the island.
They have also pulled out of, and are closing 79 military bases in Western Europe; and have withdrawn United States nuclear missiles, tanks, planes , and troops, The United States has also announced the withdrawal of troops from South Korea.
Between 1990 and 1992, the total number of military personnel has decreased by over 8%, and the trend to scale down our military is continuing.
The United States is virtually shutting down our tank, submarine(only producing one a year, compared to one every six weeks for the Russians), and F-16 production lines.
Chapter Six Representatives voted to discontinue United States bomber production.
The House also voted to slash production of submarine launched ballistic missiles, to coincide with the decrease of our submarine fleet, even though the Soviets have consistently outproduced us.
Our government has set a goal of spending only 3.6% of GNP on defense by 1996.
Our government has fallen for the massive deception being put forth by the Russian Federation, and continues to make the country vulnerable by dismantling our military.
Meanwhile, the Soviets are watching, and waiting, ready to implement the next stage of their masterplan.
It was a created, nurtured, and supported by the Illuminati as an opposing political ideology in order to achieve their goals.
Rockefeller had just opened a Hong Kong branch of the Chase Manhattan, for trade with China, but since trade relations had broken off between Russia and China, because of an overbearing Khrushchev, Rockefeller got rid of the problem in order to stabilize the situation.
Karl Marx wrote about the abolition of private property, a progressive income tax, a central bank, and state control of the family, religion, and education, which are aspects of a Socialist government, the prelude to the utopian goal of Communism.
The theory is, that while the Soviets would slowly move to the political right, the United States would be pushed to the left, with the two meeting in the middle as Social Democrats.
And from there, it is only a small step to a socialist one-world government, or the New World Order.
It is apparent that the Russian Federation will continue to abolish the use of the word ""Communism"" in lieu of the word ""socialism"", in order to gain the acceptance of Western Europe.
They will be brought into future ""collectivesecurity"" agreements, as protection against Third World dictators and terrorism.
The amplification of these agreements are what the United Nations has long sought, a global reactionary force made up of American, Russian, European and Third World troops.
At the age of 21, Brookings had become a partner in Cupples and Marston, which, ten years later, under his leadership, expanded and flourished.
He was one of the original Trustees of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, and a consultant to the Commission on Economy and Efficiency during the Taft Administration.
In 1917, he was appointed to President Wilson's War Industries Board (which had the responsibility of receiving and distributing the supplies needed by the military), later becoming Chairman of its Price Fixing Committee , which gave him a key role in the Wilson Administration.
At the age of 70, he took over the leadership of the Institute for Government Research, and raised $750,000 from 92 corporations and a dozen private citizens, to get it moving.
Their first project was to push for legislation creating a federal budget, which was successful.
The first United States Budget Director, under President Harding, was Charles G Dawes, who relied heavily on the IGR's staff.
The Institute was also involved in civil service reform legislation in the 1920's.
Supreme Court Chief Justice William Howard Taft, Herbert Hoover, and Elihu Root.
Brookings decided that economics was the biggest issue, and not administrative aspects that the Institute was covering, so in June, 1922, with a $1,650,000 grant from the Carnegie Corporation, he established the Institute of Economics to represent the interests of the labor unions and the general public.
Chapter Seven work on the staffs of the IGR and the Institute of Economics.
In 1927, he merged all three organizations to form the Brookings Institution, whose purpose was to train future government officials.
He put $6 million, and 36 years of his life, into the nonpartisan, nonprofit center, which analyze government problems, and issue statistical reports.
They produce an annual report, Setting National Priorities , which analyze the President's Budget.
They have a staff of about 250, including about 45 senior fellows and 19 research associates.
After serving close to ten years in the State Department, Leo Pasvolsky returned to the Brookings Institution in 1946, along with six other members of the State Department.
With the financial backing of the Rockefeller Foundation, the Carnegie Corporation, and the Mellon Trust, Pasvolsky initiated an International Studies Group, which developed the basis for the Marshall Plan, to aid the European war recovery efforts.
In 1951, the Chicago Tribune said that the Brookings Institution had created an ""elaborate program of training and indoctrination in global thinking,"" and that most of its scholars wind up as policy makers in the State Department.
In 1941, he named Brookings Vice President Edwin Nouse as the first Chairman of the President's Council of Economic Advisors.
Carter's foreign policy became a resting place for the many of the group's recommendations.
Republican's regard the Institution as the ""Democratic government-in-exile"", yet, Nixon appointed Herbert Stein, a Brookings scholar, to be Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisors.
The Nixon Administration, who at one time had considered bombing the Brookings Institution, in order to allow the FBI to seize their documents, had considered the idea of a ""Brookings Institution for Republicans"", to offset the liberalism of Brookings.
They thought of calling it the Institute for an Informed America, or the Silent Majority Institute.
E Howard Hunt, of Watergate fame, was to be its first Director, but he wanted to turn it into a center for covert political activity.
The role of the ""conservative Brookings"" was taken by an existing research center called the American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research, which was founded in 1943 by Louis H Brown, to promote free enterprise ideas.
During the early sixties, they shortened their name to the American Enterprise Institute, and later received a lot of financial support during the Nixon and Ford Administrations, when the organization became a pool from which they drew their advisors.
At the beginning of World War II, Hoffman and Benton approached Jesse Jones, the Secretary of Commerce, with an idea for an ""American Policy Commission"" to ""analyze, criticize, and challenge the thinking and policies of business, labor, agriculture, and government,"" which Jones accepted, and began to organize, with their help.
Chapter Seven Establishment backing for what later emerged as the General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs.
After the War, while Hoover was on leave from Duke, he worked with Hoffman to develop what eventually became known as the Marshall Plan.
The group's later work laid the groundwork for regional government in the United States.
Although this mentality is becoming more pronounced, getting to that point has taken many years.
James T Shotwell organized a group known as the Commission to Study the Organization of Peace, which was made up of a number of small subcommittees.
One of these, the Subcommittee on International Organization was chaired by Sumner Wells, the Under Secretary of State, and its purpose was to plan postwar policy.
Shotwell and Isaiah Bowman, members of the subcommittee, were also members of the League of Nations Association, and had been on Col.
House's staff at the Paris Peace Conference in 1918, where plans for the League of Nations had been laid out.
This established a direct link between the League of Nations and the United Nations.
The subcommittee's work formed the basis for the Charter of the United Nations, and was the means by which the Council on Foreign Relations was able to condition the Congress, and the people of the country to accept the United Nations.
Two weeks after the attack on Pearl Harbor, Cordell Hull, the Secretary of State, sent a letter to President Roosevelt recommending the establishment of a Presidential Advisory Committee on Post War Foreign Policy, which actually became a planning group for the United Nations.
Ten of the Fourteen Committee members came from the Council on Foreign Relations.
Roosevelt's ""Four Freedoms Speech"" planted the seed for the United Nations.
A conference held in Washington, D.C between the representatives of the 26 nations that had banded together against the axis powers, gave momentum to the movement by issuing the ""Declaration of the Twenty-Six United Nations"" on January 1, 1942.
In February, 1942, the State Department's Advisory Committee on Post-War Foreign Policy secretly worked out more details.
Leading diplomats from the United States, Russia, England, and China, attended preliminary meetings in October, 1943, at a conference in Moscow.
In November, Cordell Hull ""secured the consent of Stalin to establish a general organization...for the maintenance of international peace and security,"" and in proposing it to Roosevelt, made it appear as though it was an American project.
Alger Hiss, Harry Dexter White, Virginius Frank Coe, Noel Field, Laurance Duggan, Henry Julian Wadleigh, John Carter Vincent, David Weintraub, Nathan Gregory Silvermaster, Harold Glasser, Victor Perlo, Irving Kaplan, Solomon Adler, Abraham George Silverman, William L Ullman, William H Taylor, and Dean Acheson.
All of these men, were either communists, or had pro-communist sympathies.
The idea for the United Nations was officially proposed in 1944, at the secret Dumbarton Oaks Conference, where the framework was developed, and the final plans laid out.
The conference was attended by representatives from the U.S., England, and Russia, and it was all coordinated by Alger Hiss.
Hiss was a Trustee of the Woodrow Wilson Foundation, a director of the Executive Committee of the American Association for the United Nations, a director of the American Peace Society, a Trustee of the World Peace Foundation, a director of the American Institute of Pacific Relations, and President of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.
Exposed as a Soviet spy, his communist activities extended back to 1939.
In February, 1945, at the Yalta Conference, President Roosevelt, Winston Churchill, and Joseph Stalin agreed to the plans proposing the establishment of the United Nations.
On June 26,1945, the San Francisco Conference, attended by 50 nations, established the United Nations, and adopted the Charter which had been drafted.
The United World Federalists were established on February 22,1947, by two CFR members, Norman Cousins and James P Warburg, when the Americans United for World Government, World Federalists, Massachusetts Committee for World Federation, Student Federalists, World Citizens of Georgia, and World Republic, all merged.
Their goal was to endorse ""the efforts of the United Nations to bring about a world community favorable to peace.
Ronald Reagan was associated with them before he became a conservative.
Various other left-wing organizations have also defended and are supporting this international organization.
Many of the countries are non-democratic, being ruled by dictators, royal families, military officers, or one-party governments.
The evidence given, shows the communist influence which was involved during the establishment of the organization, and all indications are that it has maintained a social slant to its affairs.
Dag Hammarskjold, the second Secretary-General, was a Swedish socialist who openly pushed communist policies, and U Thant, the third Secretary, was a Marxist.
With the United States having only one vote within the socialist-dominated organization, we are powerless to prevent the socialists from taking over the world with diplomacy.
Nonaligned nations, a majority of the delegates, voted with the communists 85% of the time in the General Assembly; and in 1987, member nations voted with the United States only 18.7% of the time.
The Constitutional right of Congress to declare war has been completely transferred to the UN Military Committee, and as such, they can order us into war at any time, without our consent, as they did in Korea.
The UN refused to come to the aid of China in 1949, ignored the Hungarian freedom fighters in 1956, shunned the Tibetans when they were attacked by Chinese Communists, and in the early 1960's, supported the communist attempt to overthrow the African country of Katanga.
They even criticized the American invasion of Grenada, which sought to stem communist activity in the Caribbean.
Remember, the Undersecretary for Political and Security Council Affairs, had always been a Russian, who along with the Chairman of the UN Military Staff Committee were responsible for all UN military action.
Alexandre Vasiliev, who took a leave of absence from the position to command the communist troops, and actually gave the orders to attack.
He continued to get valuable information about the UN's military plans from his handpicked successor, Gen.
By February, 1950, after the public expressed their outrage over the Resolution, the Liberals who sponsored it, turned their backs on it in an attempt to salvage their political reputations.
We do not intend to continue in the role of sponsors of any movement which undermine United States sovereignty.
Within two years, 18 of the 23 states which had passed the Resolution, rescinded it.
Also discussed are Senate Resolution 133, introduced July 8,1949 by Sen.
Kefauver(Democrat from Tennessee) called for an Atlantic Union of Canada, England, France, the Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg, and the United States.
Another conference, in London, in 1954, by the World Movement for World Federation, also proposed similar ideas.
Chapter Seven internationalists like United States Supreme Court Justice William 0.
Hubert Humphrey, John J McCloy(former Assistant Secretary of Defense and former High Commissioner to Germany), Paul Hoffman, Thomas K Finletter, John Foster Dulles(Secretary of State), and President Eisenhower, who said it would curtail the power of the Presidency.
The United States' Program for General and Complete Disarmament in a Peaceful World, revealed plans to give the UN control of our Armed Forces, and nuclear weapons.
President Ford called for the development of a global strategy and a policy concerning food and oil; and President Carter, in what he called an organization for the ""world structure of peace,"" tried to persuade the Chinese to take part.
The World Constitution and Parliament Association(WCPA, located at 1480 Hoyt Street, Suite 31, Lakewood, CO, 80215) was founded in 1959 by Philip Isely who had emerged during the 1940's as a leader in the one-world movement; as an organizer for the Action for World Federation from 1946-50 and the North American Council for the People's World Convention from 1954-58.
The WCPA have assumed the task of trying to establish a New World Order, and have assembled a Provisional World Parliament.
Chapter Seven ""Agreement to Call a World Constitutional Convention"" was first circulated from 1958-61, where it was signed by several thousand dignitaries.
In 1965, work began on a world constitution, and a meeting was held in the City Hall of Wolfach, West Germany, in June, 1968.
A third session was held in January, 1979, in Colombo, Sri Lanka, where a strategy was discussed on how to get the Constitution ratified by national parliaments and governments.
A timetable announced in 1984, called for a world government to be instituted by 1990, which obviously didn't happen.
They have since announced, that when the Provisional World Parliament meets for the fifth time, a world government will emerge.
The directorship of the WCPA is closely linked with the United World Federalists, the American Civil Liberties Union, Global Education Associates, Friends of the Earth, Planetary Society, Worldwatch Institute, Planetary Citizens(founded in 1974 by UN executive Robert Mueller, author Norman Cousins, and activist Donald Keyes, to push for a one-world government by the year 2000), World Future Society, Planetary Initiative, American Movement for World Government, Rainbow Coalition, World Citizens Assembly, and others.
Nearly 20% of their members are affiliated with the UN in various capacities.
In the quest for that peace, the United States has allowed itself to become weaker, and has ignored all the signs, that along with world peace, will be a new world order dominated by a socialist form of government.
The Ditchley Group, which first met in May, 1982, at Ditchley Park in London, is engineering a plan by Harold Lever(a director on the Board of the UNILEVER conglomerate) to control the fiscal and the monetary policies of the United States and called for the International Monetary Fund to control the central banks of all nations.
Dennis Weatherstone of Morgan Guaranty said that this was the only way for the United States to save itself.
The propaganda of world peace propels the United Nations further into the control of this world, and what negative publicity has emerged, has done little to slow its momentum.
The United States further showed their displeasure with the United Nations, when in December, 1983, the Reagan Administration announced it was withdrawing from UNESCO, because the UN agency had ""increasingly placed an overfed bureaucracy at the service of a coalition of Soviet bloc and Third World countries,"" which was to be effective January 1,1985, unless reforms were made.
But now we must realize that the United Nations has failed to give us even a remote hope of lasting peace.
Chapter Seven propaganda will continue to grow, and we will become more desensitized to the campaign that continues to slowly take away the freedoms that our forefathers fought and died for.
Richard Gardner, a Clinton advisor on the UN, and a professor of international law, has outlined a plan for a world army of 30,000 men.
This would create a military force that the Security Council could deploy within 48 hours to maintain the peace.
In 1993, the UN became financially stretched to the limit, because of all the peacekeeping operations throughout the world(numbering about 70,000, they pay each country $988 per soldier every month, and more for specialized troops),which forced it to cutback on travel, meetings, and the use of consultants.
It seems likely, that the strength of our economy may determine how soon our country agrees to become part of a one world government.
If it continues to decline due to government mismanagement and manipulation by the Illuminati, it may not be long till we have to be ""saved"" in order to survive, even if it is, as part of a new world order dominated by a socialistic political ideology.
EUROPEAN UNION The European Union, formerly known as the European Communities, or European Economic Community, is a movement to unite Western Europe.
For hundreds of years, there has been an ongoing effort to unify Europe.
Prior to World War II, because of intermarriage between Royal families, all crowned heads were closely related.
In 1922, Count Richard Coudenhove-Kalergi founded the Pan European Union.
He fled Austria in 1940, and came to the United States, where he continued to work towards European unity.
Churchill made the United Europe Movement a cohesive group, by merging the Union of European Federalists, the Economic League for European Cooperation, and the French Council for a United Europe, into an organization known as the International Committee of Movements for European Unity.
Late in 1947, various people and groups formed a committee to coordinate their efforts , and by May, 1948, organized the Congress of Europe, which convened at the Hague in the Netherlands.
Nearly 1000 prominent Europeans from 16 countries called for the establishment of a United Europe.
Joseph Retinger, who had helped organized the meeting at the Hague, came to the United States in July, 1948, along with Winston Churchill, Duncan Sandys, and former Belgian Prime Minister HenriPaul Spaak, to raise money for the movement.
This led to the establishment of the American Committee on a United Europe on March 29,1949.
Their first Chairman was William Donovan, the first Director of the Office of Strategic Services; the ViceChairman was Allen Dulles, who later became the Director of the CIA; and the Secretary was George S Franklin, who was a Director in the Council on Foreign Relations, and later a coordinator with the Trilateral Commission.
George C Marshall, the Secretary of State, which made proposals for European aid known as the Marshall Plan, also called for the unification of Europe.
On March 17,1948, a 50 year treaty was signed for ""collaboration in economic, social, and cultural matters and for collective self defense,"" in Brussels, by England, France, the Netherlands, Belgium, and Luxembourg.
In 1950, its functions were transferred to NATO, and in May, 1955, a military alliance, known as the Council of Western European Union was established, made up of the foreign ministers from Belgium, France, West Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Luxembourg, and England, who met every three months.
Chapter Seven The Western European Coalition began on June 8,1948, with the signing of the Benelux Agreement by Luxembourg, Belgium, and the Netherlands, to unite their economic and domestic policies.
Belgium, Denmark, France , lreland, ltaly, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, England, Greece, Turkey , lceland, West Germany, Austria, Cyprus, Switaerland , Malta, Portugal, Spain, and Liechtenstein.
The North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the father of the Common Market, was a defense alliance developed to implement the North Atlantic Treaty in 1949, and to apply counterpressure against the growing Soviet military presence in Europe.
Belgium, France, the Netherlands, Italy, West Germany, Spain, Luxembourg, United Kingdom, Canada, Denmark, Greece, Iceland, Norway, Portugal, Turkey, and the United States, all joined to oppose the growing threat of communism.
Soon afterwards, the Russians, recognizing NATO is a stumbling block to their plans, emulated the group by uniting their communist satellites in 1955 with the Warsaw Treaty Organization.
The Warsaw Pact alliance included the countries of Albania, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Hungary, Poland, Romania, and Russia.
On May 27,1952, the European Defense Community Treaty was signed in Paris, and provided for the armies of West Germany, France, Italy, Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg, to become closely aligned with England's.
On October 23,1954, it was replaced with the Western European Union, who merged their armies into a multinational armed force.
Norway eventually backed out, but on May 28,1979, in Athens, Greece became the tenth nation to join the Common Market.
When they officially became a member in January, 1981, Europe as as unified as it was in 814, when Charlemagne, founder of the Roman Empire, died.
The motion, introduced by a Socialist deputy in the Netherlands Assembly, was passed on to the Common Market Commission in Brussels where it received approval.
Great Britain, France, West Germany, and Italy had 81 seats; the Netherlands, 25 seats; Belgium, 24 seats; Denmark, 16 seats; Ireland, 15 seats; and Luxembourg, 6 seats.
Chapter Seven On March 17,1979, the Common Market initiated a new monetary system to encourage trade and investment by stabilizing their currency values in relation tOo each other.
The main feature of this link-up was a $33 billion fund made up of each other's gold and currency reserves.
Members could borrow against this fund to support their own currencies.
The value of each participating currency were set against ""European Currency Units"" established by the fund.
On January 1,1986, Spain and Portugal became the 11th and 12th members of the European Community.
On December 911,1991, at a meeting in Maastricht, in the Netherlands, a serious effort was made to establish a common currency, and discussions were held concerning a common foreign policy, and a common defense policy.
On December 31,1992, the ""Single Europe Act"" went into effect, uniting the 12 nations into a federation and lifting the restrictions on the movement of goods, services, capital, workers and tourists within the Community.
They also adopted common agricultural, fisheries, and nuclear research policies.
The industrial capability of the European Union, is nearly equal to that of the United States.
Western Europe also accounts for about 25% of the world's production, and 35% of its trade.
When the time comes, and it surely will, that the people of the European Union finally allow themselves to become a single political entity, they will be a world power, and a force to be reckoned with.
Joseph H Retinger, economist, political philosopher, communist Poland's Charge d'Affaires, and a major proponent of a united Europe; along with Prince Bernhard of the Netherlands, Colin Gubbins (former director of the British SOE, Special Operations Executive), and Gen.
We must compromise and co-exist with communism.""he later became an Undersecretary of State in the Eisenhower Administration); joined together in 1954 to organize this secret group.
Sulzberqer , Stansfield Turner(who later became CIA Director), Peter Calvocoressi, Andrew Schoenberg, Daniel Ellsburg, and Henry Kissinger.
In Alden Hatch's biography of Bernhard, he stated that the Bilderberg Group gave birth to the European Community.
The Bilderbergers hold annual meetings in locations all over the world.
The meetings were chaired by the German-born Prince Bernhard, the husband of Queen Juliana of the Netherlands, said to be the richest woman in the world(because of her partnership with Baron Victor Rothschild in the Royal Dutch Shell Oil Co., owning 5% of the stock, which in 1978 was worth $425 million; and also holds stock in Exxon), until he was forced to resign in August, 1976, because of his involvement in the Lockheed Aircraft bribery scandal, and his extramarital affairs.
For the governments of the free nations are elected by the people, and if they do something the people don't like they are thrown out.
Walter Scheel of Germany took over as Chairman, and now it is Britain's Lord Carrington, who is on the Board of the Hambros Bank.
The resort areas and hotels where they meet, are cleared of residents and visitors, and surrounded by soldiers, armed guards, the Secret Service, State and local police.
All conference and meeting rooms are scanned for bugging devices before every single meeting.
Owen Lattimore(CFR, former Director of Planning and Coordination for the State Department), Winston Lord(CFR, Clinton's Assistant Secretary of State), Allen Dulles, Sen.
William J Fulbright(from Arkansas, a Rhodes Scholar), Dean Acheson, Gabriel Hauge (Assistant to President Eisenhower, who according to the Wall Street Journal, ""helped teach Ike what to think""; and later became Chairman of Manufacturers Hanover Trust Co.), George Ball(CFR, Johnson's Under Secretary of State from 1961-66, and foreign policy consultant to Nixon), Philip Jessup , Henry Kissinger, David Rockefeller, Nelson Rockefeller, Laurance Rockefeller, Dean Rusk, Gerald Ford, Henry J Heinz ll, Sen.
Chapter Seven Steelworkers Union), Paul van Zeeland, Pierre Commin, Imbriani Longo(Director-General of the Banco Nationale del Lavoro in Italy), Vimcomte Davignon(Belgium Minister of Foreign Affairs), Walter Leisler Kiep, Ole Myrvoll(member of Norway's Parliament), Krister Wickman(former Swedish Minister of Foreign Affairs, and Governor of the Bank of Sweden), Sen.
Walter Mondale(MN, later Vice President under Carter), Henry Ford lll, Gen.
Andrew J Goodpaster (former Supreme Allied Commander in Europe, and later superintendent of the West Point Academy), Zbigniew Brzezinski, Gen.
Alexander Haig(European NATO Commander, former assistant to Kissinger, later became Secretary of State under Reagan), C Douglas Dillon(Secretary of Treasury in the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations, from Dillon, Read and Co.), Baron Edmond de Rothschild, PiercePaul Schweitzer, Paul B Finney, James Rockefeller( Chairman, First National City Bank), Giovanni Agnelli, Otto Wolff, Theo Sommer, Arthur Taylor(former Chairman of CBSTV), Neil Norlund, and Sen.
Bilderberg policy is carried out by the Bilderberg Steering Committee, made up of 24 Europeans and 15 Americans; and by the Advisory Committee, which forms a much smaller group within the organization.
The Goals 2000 program, developed during the presidency of George Bush to revamp the nation's public school system, was born at the April, 1970, Bilderberger meeting in Bad Ragaz, Switzerland.
At the 1978 meeting, they predicted that a depression would hit the world in 1979, and that the dollar would die.
Their solution was to replace the dollar with an international ""bancor"" system ( international bank note) of currency that would be universally acceptable as a medium of exchange.
The ""bancor"" system would have the international gold reserve deposited in a neutral country.
It is an offshoot of the same Keynesian system developed at Bretton Woods in 1944 from the idea by German economist Julius Wolf in 1892.
This system would protect the Illuminati when they spring their trap, and the world economy would crumble.
And George Bush, who pledged during the campaign, ""Read my lips no new taxes!"", found himself signing one of the biggest tax increases in history on November 15,1990.
At their 1991 meeting at the Black Forest resort in Baden Baden, Germany, they discussed plans for a common European currency, and European central banking; and reviewed Middle Eastern events and developments in the Soviet Union.
It would have been impossible for us to develop our plan for the world if we had been subject to the bright lights of publicity during these years.
But, the world is now more sophisticated and prepared to march towards a world government.
No wonder Clinton was able to survive all the media attacks regarding his personal life and lack of experience.
One of his top money men, was investor and international banker Jackson Stephens, who also donated $100,000 to the Bush campaign.
His wife was the Co-Chairwoman of the national ""Bush for President"" organization in 1988.
Also in attendance, were Michael Boskin, Chairman of Bush's Council of Economic Advisors, who was a speaker; Nicholas Brady, United States Treasury Secretary; and Vice President Dan Quayle, who impressed the group enough, that there was talk of supporting him for the Republican nomination in 1996.
According to one source, Rand was alleged to be a mistress to Philippe Rothschild, who instructed her to write the book in order to show that through the raising of oil prices, then destroying the oil fields and shutting down the coal mines, the Illuminati would take over the world.
It also related how they would blow up grain mills, derail trains, bankrupt and destroy their own companies, till they had destroyed the economy of the entire world; and yet, they would be so wealthy, that it would not substantially affect their vast holdings.
If we are to believe that the book represents the Illuminati's plans for the future, then the following excerpts may provide some insight to the mentality of the elitists who are preparing us for one-world government.
I shall destroy every last bit of it and every last penny of my fortune and every ounce of copper that could feed the looters.
Chapter Seven Dagney Taggart, the main character of the book, is the head of the Taggart Transcontinental Railroad.
She discovered that he was a young inventor with the Twentieth Century Motor Company, who said he would put an end to the regulations which bound a man to his job indefinitely.
We are the soul, of which railroads, copper mines, steel mines, and oil wells are the bodyand they are living entities that beat day and night, like our hearts, in the sacred function of supporting human life, but only so long as they remain our body, only so long as they remain the expression, the reward and the property of achievement.
Plane crashes, oil tank explosions, blast furnace breakouts, high tension wire electrocutions, subway cave-ins, and trestle collapsesthey'll see them all.
Galt led the men of the mind, on strike, and they retired to a self-supporting valley, where a character, Midas Mulligan, says that ""the world is falling apart so fast that it will soon be starving.
Let the world discover who they are, what they do and what happens when they refuse to function.
Ayn Rand, author of Atlas Shrugged , which was a bestseller; had previously written We the Livinq ; The Fountainhead , which became a 1949 movie starring Gary Cooper as an architect willing to blow up his own work, rather than see it perverted by public housing bureaucrats; and Anthem.
She also quoted several news stories which seemed to indicate that the world was indeed being depleted of its brains and intellectuals.
Is Atlas Shrugged a coded blueprint for the Illuminati's plans of bringing this world to a point where they can institute a one world government.
It certainly is thought provoking, and I include it only for the sake of conjecture.
Chapter Seven THE SEVEN SISTERS One oil cartel is the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, known as OPEC, which is made up of Iran, Iraq, Venezuela, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Algeria, Gabon, Indonesia, Libya, Nigeria, Qatar, and the United Arab Emirates.
The group was created on September 14,1960, for the purpose of setting oil prices by controlling oil production.
They were originally thought to be primarily Arabian, in ownership, however, it is actually an international group, which includes Americans.
The cartel was established from an agreement signed on September 17,1920, by Royal Dutch Shell, Anglo-lranian, and Standard Oil, for the purpose of fixing oil prices.
By 1949, the cartel was made up of Anglo-lranian, Socony-Vacuum, Royal Dutch Shell, Gulf, Esso, Texaco, and Calso.
In the early 1950's, revelations surfaced that the oil companies would pump the oil from the Middle East, then split the profits with the government of the country where the oil was produced.
OPEC was formed to make people believe that the Arabian oil reserves were not owned by non-Arabian oil companies.
Those non-Arabian oil companies are another cartel, which had been informally called ""The Seven Sisters"", and control what is shipped to the United States, and how much is refined into gas and heating oil.
By controlling these, and other vital arteries, they can restrict the flow of oil, limiting supplies to refineries.
When six of the nation's major commercial banks held their Executive Board meetings, the directors of the top eight oil companies, with the exception of Gulf and Chevron, met with them.
When the Bank of America had a Board meeting, the directors of Chevron and Getty Oil met with them.
Shell and Mobil directors were present at the Board meetings of First National City Bank.
Exxon was tied in with the Chase Manhattan Bank(a holding company for hundreds of smaller oil companies, including Humble Oil and Creole Petroleum), Morgan Guaranty, and Chemical Bank.
Chapter Seven The Seven Sisters also controlled 70% of the United States coal supply, which during World War II, the Germans used to make pollution-free synthetic fuel.
The oil companies are powerful, and their power was never more apparent, then it was during the manufactured crisis of 1973.
On October 6,1973, as synagogues in Israel observed Yom Kippur, the Jewish Day of Atonement, Syrian Mig-21's attacked a group of Israeli jets.
Egypt, Syria, Jordan, and eight other Arab nations had mobilized against Israel.
Egypt attacked the Sinai Peninsula with 4,000 tanks, knocking out many Israeli tanks; while Syria attacked the Golan Heights with 1,200.
New Soviet-made SAM-6 missiles plucked Israeli planes out of the sky with ease.
Israel regained control of the Heights, and took a large part of Syria.
Once Israel began smashing their way to victory, Russia sent a Naval force of 71 ships , including 16 submarines, to the Mediterranean, and put their seven airborne divisions on full alert.
On October 12th, the Chairmen of Exxon, Texaco, Mobil, and Chevron(who made up the production company of Aramco in Saudi Arabia), sent Chief of Staff Gen.
On October 17th, Omar Saqqaf, the Foreign Minister of Saudi Arabia, gave President Nixon a letter from King Faisal, which said that if the United States did not discontinue their shipment of military supplies to Israel within two days, there would be an embargo.
The United States Sixth Fleet of 49 ships, including 2 aircraft carriers, was sent to the Mediterranean, where they maintained a state of combat readiness.
OPEC met and decided to raise the price of oil to $5.12 a barrel, which was 70% higher than they had agreed to before the Arab-lsraeli War.
Chapter Seven As the Israeli counterattack continued, Egypt and Syria were in serious trouble, and Russia urged the UN to call a ceasefire.
Two days later, the Saudis requested from the Aramco directors, information concerning the amount of oil used by the United States military, which they supplied.
In December, OPEC announced a price of $11.65 a barrel, and the result was economic chaos in the United States and Western Europe.
The rush was on to reallocate other sources of oil(Venezuela and Iran had not joined the boycott), and to distribute it throughout the world.
The global emphasis of the American oil companies were revealed, when they refused to favor the United States at the expense of the other countries, causing us to lose a higher percentage of the available oil supply.
In Egypt, Sadat's terms for a ceasefire, was that Israel had to withdraw from all territories that it had won during the 1967 war; thus pressure from the United States and the Soviets, forced Israel to turn their victory into a negotiated compromise.
To add insult to injury, when the winter was at its worst during the shortage, the news that oil companies were experiencing record profits, ripped right through the heart of America.
Exxon ended up the year with a profit of $2,500 million, an all-time record for any company, in any industry.
By March, 1974, the embargo was lifted from the U.S., and the oil companies scrambled to salvage their shattered reputations.
However, the incident would never be forgotten, because it shocked the American people back to the reality of just how much control a foreign government, and multinational corporations could exert over our nation.
The price of oil never went down to their pre-embargo levels, and the threat of another shortage would always remain as the Arabs realized that they could achieve political leverage by using oil to blackmail the world.
Also in 1984, Texaco bought Getty Oil, however, because Getty had already agreed in principle to a deal with Pennzoil, Pennzoil turned around and sued Texaco for breach of contract, and won an award of $10. billion, which placed Texaco on the precipice of bankruptcy.
Chapter Seven matter, which forced Texaco to sell off many important assets, such refineries which were sold to the Saudis.
While the power of Texaco diminished, British Petroleum's increased in 1987, with the purchase of the remaining 45% of Sohio, that they didn't already own.
He claimed to have solutions for world peace and prosperity, which could be accomplished through world government.
The Club of Rome was established with a membership of 75 prominent scientists, industrialists , and economists from 25 countries, which along with the Bilderbergers, have become one of the most important foreign policy arms of the Roundtable group.
Many of the Club of Rome executives were drawn from NATO, and they have been able to formulate alot of what NATO claims are its policies.
Through Lord Carrington, they were able to split NATO into two factions, a left-wing political group, and its former military alliance.
Anderson and Harlan B Cleveland(CFR members and part of the Aspen Institute for Humanistic Studies), Sen.
On September 17,1973, they released a Report called the ""Regionalized and Adaptive Model of the Global World System"", which was prepared by Mihajlo Mesarovic and Eduard Pestel, which revealed the Club's goal of dividing the world into ten political/economic regions, called ""Kingdoms"", which would unite the entire world under a single form of government.
North America, Europe, Japan, South Africa and Australia, Asia, South America, North Africa and the Middle East, Central Africa, India and Indo-China, and China.
However, one of their reports, ""Limits to Growth"", in 1973, dealt with the problem of overpopulation.
During the Carter Administration, a task force was appointed to expand upon this report, and on July 24, 1980, a two-volume document called ""Global 2000 Report"", which had been written by former Secretary of State Cyrus R Vance, was presented to President Carter, and then Secretary of State Edward S Muskie.
It attempted to project global economic trends for the next twenty years, and indicated that the resources of the planet were not sufficient enough to support the expect dramatic increase in the world population.
They suggested an aggressive program of population control which included sterilization, contraception and abortion.
Chapter Seven This would be accomplished by using limited wars in advanced countries, and even a limited nuclear strike at a strategic location; starvation through created famines and diseases in Third World countries.
In 1961, Robert McNamara, McGeorge Bundy, and Dean Rusk, all CFR members, were concerned that there were no studies concerning long-term plans for peace, and they wanted to study the direct and indirect ramifications of war.
They wanted a study which would explore ways to control the economy during peace-time.
Since then, some have speculated that the think-tank known as the Hudson Institute, actually conducted the Study.
This secret report, known as the Report from iron Mountain on the Possibility and Desirability of Peace , appeared to be a blueprint for the future of this country, and contained recommendations that included plans for governmental control and manipulation, depopulation, gun control and disarmament, an international police force, and concentration camps.
No alternate method of control has yet been tested in a complex modern economy that has shown it is remotely comparable in scope or effectiveness.
I am referring to the disease known as AIDS, which has become a plague in our society, spreading to 91 nations.
Even though there has been alot of talk about AIDS awareness and prevention, the full danger of it has been covered-up by the Center for Disease Control, and the media, which has increasingly shown its pro-homosexual bias.
Derivatives from sheep and cattle have been commonly used to manufacture vaccines, however, certain viruses common to these animals can interact indefinitely, forming a new strain of deadly viruses called retro-viruses.
The question is whether it was created either accidentally or intentionally.
The most common theory about the origin of AIDS, was that it came from green monkeys in Africa.
Yet several virologists have said that the AIDS virus does not occur naturally in any animal.
Besides, it would have been statistically impossible to reach the point we are at now, just from a single episode.
If the AIDS virus had originated with the monkeys, then the disease would have surfaced with the Pygmies, who are closer to them, and use them as a food source, yet, it appeared first in the cities.
Further damaging evidence comes from the fact that AIDS practically occurred simultaneously in the United States, Haiti, Brazil, and Central Africa.
Strecker's research indicated that the AIDS virus was developed by the National Cancer Institute, in cooperation with the World Health Organization, in their laboratories at Fort Detrick, Maryland, in the United States Army's germ warfare unit, known as the Army Infectious Disease Unit, by combining bovine leukemia virus and visna virus, and injecting them into human tissue cultures.
The bovine leukemia virus is lethal to cows, but not to humans; and the visna virus is deadly to sheep, but not to man.
However, when combined, they produce a retro-virus that can change the genetic composition of the cells that they enter.
Chapter Seven pneumocystis carinii pneumonia in chimpanzees in 1972has not been analyzed and compared with AIDS... until 1987 when 'Characterization and Molecular Cloning of Bovine Lente Virus Related to Human Immunodeficiency Virus' was published in Nature magazine.
On May 11,1987, the London Times ran an article called ""Smallpox Vaccine 'Triggered AIDS Virus' "", written by Science Editor Pearce Wright, who linked the mass vaccination program of the World Health Organization in the 1970's to the outbreak of AIDS, because Central Africa was the focus of the program, and they have become the most affected area in the world.
In Africa, AIDS is generally a heterosexual disease, yet in the United States, it has the stigma of being a 'gay' disease.
Prior to 1978, there was no sign of the AIDS virus, yet in 1978, the killer disease struck with a vengeance within the homosexual community.
The evidence points to the introduction of an experimental hepatitis B vaccine.
He set up guidelines for a hepatitis vaccine study, and only promiscuous males between the ages of 20 and 40 were included in the study, which has led some to believe that this was how the virus was introduced into the gay population.
To allow the disease to become entrenched within the population, various facts were covered-up and glossed-over.
A great deal of emphasis has been put on the prime cause of AIDS infection, being the exchange of body fluid, through sexual activity and intravenous drug use, which has brought a campaign for the importance of using clean, unused needles, and condoms.
The use of a condom does not guarantee protection against the transmission of the AIDS virus.
The risk of casual contact has been played down, when in fact, AIDS is a highly contagious disease which demands that a quarantine be placed on those who suffer from the disease.
Chapter Seven concerned itself with giving AIDS carriers more rights and more exposure to the general population.
There is concrete medical evidence that indicates that the virus can survive up to 7 days on a dry petri dish, and in an aqueous environment, up to 15 days.
This raises the question, what would happen if an AIDS carrier would sneeze into a punch bowl or a salad bowl.
In a report published in the October, 1981, issue of Science , Boston hematologist Dr.
If the virus exists in these fluids, the better part of wisdom dictates that we assume the possibility that it can also be transmitted by these routes.
Professor William Haseltine of the Harvard Medical School, in a presentation to a university audience, said that anyone ""who tells you categorically that AIDS is not contracted by saliva is not telling you the truth.
The virus is constantly mutating, which makes it impossible to develop a general vaccine that would be effective with everyone.
Quite simply, AIDS is a twentieth century plague, and every year, the number of those affected is doubled.
Besides not being able to combat it medically, the disease will progress to being an economic drain, especially if national health care is instituted.
If its purpose was to glean out the population, it certainly will be successful.
Chapter Seven assumed that the progenitors of this disease must have a measure of protection to prevent themselves from being exposed.
The elite have already segregated themselves from the general population by virtue of their position, so from that aspect, there is little risk from being contaminated.
In the event of medical treatment, they have access to the best medical treatment money can buy, and most likely possess a private, untainted blood supply.
Somehow, I just can't help thinking, that when their goal of limits to the population have been reached, how will they end the scourge which they have placed upon the earth.
Just as the saying goes, that a lawyer in court doesn't ask the witness a question that he doesn't already have the answer for; the same reasoning would seem to apply here, that the Illuminati would not unleash a disease, that they didn't already have a cure for.
Stair, a well-known evangelist, received an anonymous letter which seemed to confirm my theory.
The writer claimed to be a molecular biologist who works in the same laboratory with Dr.
The writer claims that there is an AIDS vaccine that is now available, and that 500,000,000 doses have been produced and is now available.
The writer accidentally discovered that Gallo had actually created the AIDS virus, and found a couple letters in his office, from high government officials which mentioned the New World Order.
It is believed that Gallo and eight other scientists have been working to modify the genetic structure of the virus so that it can be more easily transmitted.
Whether AIDS is the vehicle of elimination, that the Club of Rome has referred to, is undoubtedly open to speculation, even in light of all the questions raised.
However, you can't deny how neatly this little piece of the puzzle fits into the entire picture of preparing the world for a one-world government.
The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade was signed; and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development(World Bank) and International Monetary Fund was established.
In the early 1960's, the American economy began declining, and the international situation became unbalanced again.
He initiated a 90-day wage price freeze, stimulative tax and spending cuts, and placed a temporary 10% tariff on most United States imports.
Japan and Western Europe were pressured into relaxing their trade barriers, in order to give the United States more access to them; and Japan, South Korea, Hong Kong, and Taiwan were requested to decrease the flow of goods and textiles into the United States These moves offered relief to the country's economic woes, but was an indication that he was retreating from the global policies which were formulated during the 1960's.
Speaking at Chase Manhattan International Financial Forums in London, Brussels, Montreal, and Paris, he proposed the creation of an International Commission of Peace and Prosperity in early 1972.
At the 1972 Bilderberger meeting, the idea was widely accepted, but elsewhere, it got a cool reception.
Chapter Eight Franklin, Robert Bowie(of the Foreign Policy Association and Director of the Harvard Center for International Affairs), Gerard Smith(Salt I negotiator, Rockefeller in-law , and 1st North American Chairman ), Marshall Hornblower, William Scranton(former Governor of Pennsylvania), Edwin Reischauer, and Max Kohnstamn.
Brzezinski was the author of the book Between Two Ages , which was published in 1970, in which he called for a new international monetary system, and is considered to be the ""Bible"" of the Trilateralists.
He became the first Directory 97376), drafted its Charter, and became its driving force.
Funding for the group came from David Rockefeller, the Charles F Kettering Foundation, and the Ford Foundation.
In his 1979 book Who's Running America? , Thomas Dye said that Rockefeller was the most powerful man in America.
Within a year, after their first full meeting of the Executive Committee in Tokyo, the Trilateral Commission, considered to be an off-shoot of the Bilderberger group, was officially initiated, holding biannual meetings.
Rockefeller saw the need for such a private consultation among these three democratic areas.
With the demise of the Bretton Woods system, they believed an overhaul was needed.
The theory was, that America's role should be diminished, and made equal to the Common Market and Japan, because together, the three represented 70% of the world's trade.
This may sometimes require slowing the pace at which interdependence proceeds, and checking some aspects of it.
In other words, they were promoting world government by encouraging economic interdependence among the superpowers.
This little-known organization was actually controlled by the Rockefellers, who oversee its activities and provide guidance for their policies.
The organizational structure consisted of a ten-member Executive Committee, made up of a Regional Chairman, A Deputy Chairman, and a Director for each of the three areas.
An eleven member American Executive Committee nominated candidates for its delegation, based on their profession, their involvement in international affairs; and taking in account their place of residence, so they could have a geographical balance.
They only considered people interested in promoting close international cooperation, especially among non-communist industrial nations, which actually meant they advocated a one-world government.
An analysis of one of their three-year budgets of $1.67 million, indicated that $644,000 came from foundations, $530,000 from corporations, $220,000 from individual contributors, $180,000 from the Rockefeller Brothers Fund, $150,000 from David Rockefeller's personal account, $100,000 from the Rockefeller Foundation, and $84,000 from investment income.
The Commission holds an annual-three day meeting, rotated among the three areas, to discuss the world monetary situation, and other economic and military issues.
Their Task Force Reports usually take up to a year to prepare, and they are always written by at least three experts, representing each region.
Many Cabinet level officers, and advisors, from the Kennedy Administration to the Clinton Administration have served on the Commission.
Wachovia Bank and Trust Co., Chase Manhattan, Bank of America, Lloyds of London, Bank of Tokyo, Barclays Bank, Compagnie Financiere Holding, Brown Brothers, Harriman and Co., Fuji Bank, Banque de Paris, Provincial Bank of Canada, TorontoDominion Bank, Bank of Italy, Industrial Bank of Japan, Mitsui Bank, Mitsubishi Bank, and the Continental Illinois National Bank and Trust Co.
Boeing, Coca-Cola, Japan Air Lines, Volkswagenwerk, Ford Motor Co., Deere, Caterpillar Tractor, Cargill, Cummins Engine, Sony, Toyota, Fiat, Dunlop, RollsRoyce, Thyssen, Bendix, Texas Instruments, Exxon, Hewlett-Packard, Kaisar Resources, Shell, Mitsubishi, Hitachi, Nippon Steel, Sears and Roebuck, Weyerhaeuser, and General Motors.
Abel, Leonard Woodcock(United Auto Workers), Sol Chaikin(President of the International Ladies Garment Workers Union), and Glenn Watts.
A man was arrested for breaking into the offices of the Commission, and when he was taken to the 12th Precinct, he began ranting and raving about how the Commission was attempting to set up an ""international community"" and how they eventually wanted to take over the world.
The character, William Klein was made to look like a fool, and upon leaving the squad room, Detective Sgt.
The character was made to look like a paranoid maniac, reminiscent of the McCarthy era.
This was only one of the many propaganda pieces that was used to make the Commission look just like any other organization.
This is the principle that the Illuminati has used for years to slant the news, so that the public will accept their views.
There is not one of you who dares to write your honest opinions, and if you did, you know beforehand that it would never appear in print.
I am paid weekly for keeping my honest opinions out of the paper I am connected with.
Others of you are paid similar salaries for similar things, and any of you who would be so foolish as to write honest opinions would be out on the streets looking for another job.
If I allowed my honest opinions to appear in one issue of my paper, before twenty-four hours my occupation would be gone.
The business of the journalist is to destroy truth; to lie outright; to pervert; to vilify; to fawn at the feet of mammon, and to sell his country and his race for his daily bread.
Our talents, our possibilities, and our lives are all the property of other men.
However, those who have penetrated the inner workings of the organization, say the real purpose of the Commission is to take over all key policymaking positions in the government.
Antony Sutton wrote in the Trilateral Observer that the Trilateralists have rejected the United States Constitution and the democratic political process; and their objective is to obtain the wealth of the world for their own use, under the guise of ""public service,"" and to have, ultimately, a one-world socialist government, with them in control.
The John Birch Society suspects them of being radical infiltrators of the government.
Barry Goldwater wrote that the Commission was ""intended to be the vehicle for multinational consolidation of the commercial and banking interests by seizing control of the political government of the United States.
Upon analysis, their economic plans leaned toward the controlling of energy sources, food production, and the international monetary system, so was there any reason to doubt that there were ulterior motives to their agenda.
The Death of Democracy : ""The presidency of the United States and the key cabinet departments of the federal government have been taken over by a private organization dedicated to the subordination of the domestic interests of the United States to the international interests of the multi-national banks and corporations.
It would be unfair to say that the Trilateral Commission dominates the Carter Administration.
Rockefeller had met with Carter in 1971, when they had lunch in the Chase Manhattan's Board of Director's dining room, and was impressed with the fact that Carter had opened trade offices for the state of Georgia in Tokyo.
In February, 1973, while former Secretary of State Dean Rusk was having dinner with Gerald Smith, Rusk suggested that Carter would be a good candidate for the Commission.
In April, while Robert Bowie(former professor of International Affairs at Harvard, who later became Deputy Director of the CIA), George S Franklin( Rockefeller assistant, CFR member, and Coordinator for the Commission), and Smith were discussing the recruitment of candidates, it was decided that they needed better representation from the South.
Franklin went to Atlanta to talk to Carter, then proposed his name for membership.
In the fall of 1973, after having dinner with David Rockefeller in London, Carter's political momentum began.
From that point on, he was groomed for the Presidency by Zbigniew Brzezinski, and the Trilateralists.
Chapter Eight guaranteed the Democratic nomination for Carter), and Rep.
Elliot Richardson(former United States Attorney General, Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare , Secretary of Defense, and Under Secretary of States under Nixon; former Secretary of Commerce under Ford; and former Ambassador to Great Britain) as possible candidates, and even considered Sen.
Carter campaigned by stressing those very virtues, as he asked America to elect him, an ""outsider,"" to clean up the mess in Washington.
In December, 1975, seven months before the Democratic National Convention, the Gallop Poll indicated that only 4% of the country's Democrats wanted Carter.
Within six months, the nomination was his because of the most elaborate media campaign in history.
Carter was glorified as the new hope of America as the media misrepresented his record as Governor in Georgia.
According to the Dektor Psychological Stress Evaluator, a lie detector which measures voice stress with an oscillograph, there was no stress in Carter's voice when he lied, which would seem to indicate that he is a pathological liar.
He was supported by the Trilateral Commission, the Rockefellers, and Time magazine.
Early contributions came from Dean Rusk, C Douglas Dillon, Henry Luce, and Cyrus Eaton.
Leonard Woodcock of the United Auto Workers Union, and Henry Ford II, both of whom are CFR members, endorsed Carter on the same day.
Carter's two major foreign policy speeches during the primary campaign, were made before the Chicago Council on Foreign Relations and the Foreign Policy Association.
Carter's religious convictions became a big part of his campaign, but things weren't really what they seemed.
Carter claimed that his favorite theologian was Reinhold Niebuhr, former professor at the Union Theological Seminary(which had been funded by the Rockefellers), who founded the Americans for Democratic Action.
Chapter Eight Barth(who said the Bible was ""fallible"", and filled with ""historic and scientific blunders,"" and ""theological contradictions""), Paul Tillich, and Soren Kierkegaad, all liberals who led the 'God is Dead' movement during the 1960's.
Carter told his sister, evangelist Ruth Carter Stapleton, that he wouldn't give up politics for Christ.
He admitted he wasn't ""bornagain"" until 1967, yet he joined a Southern Baptist Church when he was 10, taught Sunday School at 16, and became a deacon in the church in his twenties.
During his acceptance speech, after winning the nomination at the Democratic National Convention, Carter attacked the ""unholy, self-perpetuating alliances have been formed between money and politics...a political and economic elite who have shaped decisions and never had to account for mistakes nor to suffer from injustice.
When deprivations results from a confused welfare system, they never do without food, or clothing or a place to sleep.
When public schools are inferior or torn by strife, their children go to exclusive private schools.
In an interview with Playboy magazine, Jordan said he would quit if they were appointed.
This self-proclaimed ""outsider"" filled many of his administrative posts with establishment insiders from the Rockefeller Foundation, the Brookings Institution, and Coca Cola.
The Trilateral Commission had accomplished its goal of controlling the Presidency, and it heralded that fact by making Jimmy Carter Time magazine's Man of the Year in January, 1977.
Time 's Editor-in-Chief, Hedley Donovan, a Rhodes Scholar, was a member of the Commission.
About 40% of the American Trilateral members joined the Carter Administration.
Commission members must resign when accepting posts in the Executive branch, but they remain loyal, and usually rejoin the group when their service is complete.
Being dominated by the chief advisors of the Commission, almost every aspect of Carter's foreign policy reflected a Trilateral viewpoint.
The reasonMarxist Panamanian leader Omar Torrijos owed the International Bankers $2 billion in loan payments, so income received from the Canal could help pay them back.
The United States also guaranteed a 5-year program of loans and credits, which amounted to $295 million; and a 10 year, $50 million arms sale agreement to bolster the defense of the Canal.
When Carter broke off diplomatic relations with the government of Taiwan, Sen.
In May, 1989, George Bush would bestow favored-nation trade status to China.
Stephen(the founder and patron saint of Hungary) which the United States had in its possession since 1945.
Carter's membership in the organization was the only foreign policy experience he had, and that was limited to attending a couple of conferences in Europe and Japan.
Congressman John Anderson, himself a member, said that Carter became a member just to improve his image.
Chapter Eight indoctrination made him a willing pawn in furthering the goals of the Trilateral Commission.
The Commission, which operates in literal secrecy, made news in the fall of 1979, when David Rockefeller, Henry Kissinger, and John J McCloy(former President of the Ford Foundation, former President of the World Bank, Chairman of the Chase Manhattan Bank, former High Commissioner to Germany, and on the Advisory Board of Foreign Affairs magazine) pressured Carter into allowing the deposed Shah of lran(who had financial dealings with the Chase Manhattan) into the country for medical treatment.
The move caused the Iranian government, under the leadership of the Ayatollah Khomeini, to storm the American Embassy, and hold 52 American hostages for nearly 11/2 years.
Carter's inadequacy in dealing with this situation certainly cost him the election.
The Presidential election of 1980, saw two former Trilateralists running for President.
Republican George Bush, had resigned his post on the Council on Foreign Relations because they were ""too liberal,"" however, he didn't resign his seat on the Commission.
After a bitter Primary fight between the two, Reagan chose Bush to be his Vice Presidential running mate, over the likes of Rep.
Chapter Eight President, however, Ford wanted the power to appoint people to the National Security Council and the Cabinet.
This situation would have been almost like a co-Presidency, making Reagan more of a figurehead, which he refused to be, so his only other option was Bush.
Reagan's Campaign Manager, William J Casey(former Chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, who Reagan later appointed as Director of the CIA) was a Trilateralist.
His campaign was controlled by such Trilateralists as David Packard, George H Weyerhaeuser, Bill Brock, Anne Armstrong, Philip M Hawley, William A Hewitt, Caspar Weinberger, and others who were CFR members.
Reagan had the personal support of David Rockefeller, and belonged to the elitist Bohemian Grove Club in Northern California.
The Bohemian Grove is the site of an annual two-week summer retreat on a 2,700 acre redwood estate about 75 miles north of San Francisco, along the Russian River, which was established in the 1870's.
Every Republican President since Calvin Coolidge had been a member of this conservative clan; and among its 2,000 members are other high level government officials, and the very elite of America's corporate power, who sit on a variety of organizations such as the CFR, the Trilateral Commission, and the Committee for Economic Development.
The bottom line, is that it is ""one of the most influential meetings of the powers-that-be,"" and a setting for policy-making on specific issues; and not the all-male social club they purport to be.
Reagan's 59-member ""transition team"" who would pick, screen, and propose appointees for major administrative posts, consisted of 28 CFR members, 10 Bilderbergers, and 10 Trilateralists, including CFR members William Simon(former Secretary of Treasury under Nixon and Ford), Alexander Haig, George Shultz(former Secretary of Treasury under Nixon), Donald Rumsfeld, Alan Greenspan, and Henry Kissinger; and Trilateralists, William Casey and Anne Armstrong.
They had offered $1 million in credits to the Bolsheviks during the Russian Revolution.
Trilateral member, Caspar W Weinberger( Reagan's Finance Director when he was Governor of California, former Vice President of Bechtel Corp., and former Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare under Nixon and Ford), became Secretary of Defense.
Seemingly, Reagan was the Establishment's candidate all along, because he played ball with them.
Republican Presidential candidate John Connally, said that if he was elected, he wouldn't appoint any Trilateralists to his Administration.
Among the Trilateralists in the Bush Administration, were Brent Scowcroft(National Security Advisor), and Nicholas F Brady; and in the Bill Clinton Administration, Al Gore, Donna E Shalala, Alice M Rivlin(Deputy Budget Director), Madeleine Albright, Peter Tarnoff (Undersecretary of State for International Security of Affairs), Warren M Christopher , Ronald H Brown, Henry G Cisneros(Secretary of Housing and Urban Development), Bruce Babbitt, Walter Mondale( United States Ambassador to Japan), William J Crowe, and Lloyd N Cutler.
The Trilateral Commission represents a skillfully coordinated effort to seize control and consolidate the four centers of power, political, monetary, intellectual, and ecclesiastical.
What the Trilateralists intend is the creation of a world-wide economic power superior to the government of the nation states.
The Commission had suggested that Iran, Saudi Arabia, Brazil, and Mexico be brought into the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, an association of 24 rich industrial nations founded in 1961 to encourage world trade, economic progress , and to aid underdeveloped nations.
Their long range goals have included joint policy making in regard to economic and political relations with the Third World and the former communist bloc countries.
Chapter Eight their threats, by abandoning allies, and reducing America to a second-rate power.
The Commission has pushed for the restructuring of the International Monetary Fund, so that they would be able to create new money, and restrict its use, by issuing a form of currency called Bancor(or SDR, Special Drawing Rights), which would replace our dollar, gold, silver, and all other forms of currencyeven Travelers Checks.
The Commission, consisted of 18 members, had been established in December, 1977, and was chaired by former West German Chancellor Willy Brandt.
A Program for Survival , which called for the ""instant"" redistribution of wealth from the richer, to poorer nations, and a stepping up of world disarmament.
In 1959, Nelson Rockefeller called for an Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations, which became a federally-funded Rockefeller thinktank within Congress to prepare a working formula for the concept.
The ACIR analyzed information produced by the Public Administration Clearing House(also known as the "" 1313 "" ) and translated it into legislation to develop regional government, which would usurp the power of the local government.
Their purpose is to train and place a ""new administrative class"" in every level of government, which will replace elected officials.
On March 27,1969, as published in the Federal Register , guided by his Illuminati operatives, President Nixon announced the ""Restructuring of Government Service Systems,"" which called for the merging of states into eight federally-controlled regions.
An Executive Order, when decreed by the President, is printed in the Federal Register , and then becomes law 15 days later.
In each of the ten standard Federal Regions, there was to be a council made up of the directors of the regional offices of the Dept, of Labor; Dept, of Health, Education, and Welfare; Dept, of Housing and Urban Development; Secretarial Representative of the Dept, of Transportation; Office of Economic Opportunity; Environmental Protection Agency; and the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration.
The President was to designate one member of each Council as the Chairman.
This Executive Order was unconstitutional because Article IV of the United States Constitution prohibited the merging of the states, and guaranteed a government represented by elected officials.
However, regional government was accepted, because it brought with it, revenue-sharing funds.
Dept, of the Interior; Dept, of Agriculture; Dept, of Commerce; Dept, of Labor; Dept, of Health, Education, and Welfare; Dept, of Housing and Urban Development; Dept, of Transportation; Dept, of Energy; Environmental Protection Agency; Community Services Administration; Office of Personnel Management; General Services Administration; ACTION(Peace Corp., VISTA, senior citizen programs, and other special volunteer programs); Small Business Administration; Federal Emergency Management Agency; United States Army Corps of Engineers; and the Regional Action Planning Commission.
The Department of Education was added later, after it separated from the Dept, of Health, Education and Welfare.
It created the Federal Emergency Management Agency, an agency within the Department of Justice, which oversees all of the federal agencies that have specific duties during times of emergency, such as the Federal Disaster Assistance Agency, and the Federal Emergency Broadcast System.
It seems that only about 10% of its personnel are actually involved in disaster assistance.
Its purpose was to merge every community's police force, transferring control of them to a central government.
This was to be done through revenue-sharing funds providing special training programs to the local police, special communications equipment, and other things.
The National Guard began receiving SWAT training to be part of this national police force.
Chapter Eight MD, it has been reported that FEMA has been actively engaged in developing a computer database, for CAPS, to collect records on millions of Americans.
In addition to dividing the country into Ten Federal Regions, the government has also been making plans for the establishment of a dictatorship, which among other things, will freeze prices and wages, close the Stock Exchange, and regulate the amount of money you can withdraw from your checking and savings account.
Chapter Eight #11005 Gives Government the power to take over all railroads, inland waterways, and public storage facilities.
On January 30,1976, came the announcement of ""A Declaration of Interdependence"", a document which endorsed a one-world government.
The meeting was funded with a $100,000 grant from the Pennsylvania Bicentennial Committee.
This document went through further drafts, and in 1984, it was presented by the Committee on a Constitutional System as an alternative to the existing Constitution.
About a third of the CCS Board members belonged to the CFR, including Chairman C Douglas Dillon, Lloyd Cutler(former legal council to President Carter, now the council to President Clinton), and Sen.
Robert McNamara(former Secretary of Defense under Kennedy and Johnson), Sen.
William J Fulbright, and others who were associated with the Brookings Institute, Rockefeller Foundation, and Woodrow Wilson Center.
In October, 1970, the Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions, a tax-exempt foundation in Santa Barbara, California(financed by the Ford and Rockefeller Foundations with up to $21/2 million annually), published in their magazine Center , an article called the ""Constitution for the United Republics of America"", which was the forerunner of their new version.
In Tugwell's 1974 book, The Emerging Constitution , the 40th version of the original draft was published as ""A Constitution for the Newstates of America"", which the Ford Foundation spent $25 million to produce and promote.
Tugwell claimed that our Constitution was too cumbersome and needed to be changed.
The document contains no guarantees of freedoms that we now have under the Bill of Rights.
In an emergency, the government will have the power to curtail communication, movement, and the right to assemble.
Chapter Eight The newest threat to our Constitution is the Conference of States.
It is being peddled as a movement for the states to come together and discuss the need to balance the relationship between the states, and the federal government, in a ""co-equal partnership,"" even though the Constitution intended for the States to be sovereign, and for the federal government to only have limited powers.
Michael Leavitt, the Republican governor of Utah, and a member of the ACIR, told the Salt Lake City Tribune in 1994, that he wanted a constitutional convention.
That ""better way"" seems to be an end-run around the Constitution, because the COS literature indicates their interest in passing Constitutional amendments.
Though Article V of the Constitution indicates that two-thirds of the States must vote for a constitutional convention before Congress could call one, the COS may be planning to use the same method used by the delegates at the Annapolis convention in 1786.
Within ten years, the Constitution that was originally drafted on June 12,1776(and fully ratified by 1781), was no longer able to meet the needs of a growing nation.
The need for a stronger central government was expressed, one that didn't limit States rights.
However, upon meeting in Philadelphia in May, 1787, they locked all the doors, and posted armed guards; and they even closed all the windows, so they could deliberate in secret while they actually set up a new national government.
Neither the Congress, or the people could stop them, Their work was finished on September 17,1787(and was fully ratified on May 29,1790), and the Constitution of the United States was born, and is still in existence today.
Many people are worried about this Conference of States, because nobody is really sure what could happen.
Case law mandates that members of a constitutional convention must be directly elected by the people, so they can act as their representatives to exercise the sovereign power of the state.
Chapter Eight alternates, one from each party), and therefore would be empowered with the necessary legal status as representatives of the people, should the decision be made to turn the meeting into a constitutional convention.
They maintained, that without this Congressional approval, it would be in conflict with Article 1, Section 10 of the Constitution, which does not allow any agreements between States.
Because only 14 state legislatures had passed resolutions calling for their participation in the COS, which was short of the 26 needed, their organizational meeting scheduled for July, 1995 was canceled.
However, the same forces behind this movement planned to have a ""federalism summit"" in Cincinnati on October 22 with the support of the Council of State Governments, National Governors Association and the National Conference of State Legislators.
It is obvious that the Illuminati has taken a two-prong approach to regional government.
They have been working within the confines of the Executive Branch to get various Executive Orders passed; and they have used their various finger organizations to study our existing constitution, and recommend changes.
All of their efforts may culminate in a call for a Constitutional Convention, that will spell the end of democracy as we know it in this country.
CREATING A CRISIS Certain questions raised during the 1973 Oil Embargo, seem to point to the fact that the crisis was created by the Illuminati, as a test, to see what it would be like without gasoline for automobiles, and fuel for heating homes.
A 1973 study by Philadelphia Inquirer reporters Donald Bartlett and James B Steele, revealed, that while American oil companies were telling the United States to curtail oil consumption, through a massive advertising campaign, the five largest oil companies were selling close to two barrels overseas, for every barrel of oil sold here.
They accused the oil companies and the Federal government of creating the crisis.
Chapter Eight of the CFR) drivers were hauling excess fuel to storage facilities in the Mojave desert.
All of this evidence points to the conclusion that there was no oil shortage in 1973.
The Created Crisis : ""Our mythical energy shortage can be dismissed with a few statistics.
The United States consumes about 71 quads(a 'quad' is one quadrillion BTU's, or 10 to the 15th power British Thermal Units) of energy per year.
There is available now in the U.S., excluding solar sources and without oil and gas imports, about 151,000 quads.
Consequently, we have sufficient energy resources to keep us functioning at our present rate of consumption for about 2,000 to 3,000 yearswithout discovering new reserves.
Even at higher consumption rates there will be no problem in the next millennium"" In 1977, independent petroleum companies discovered 88% of the new oil fields, drilling on 81% of those.
They have been hampered by the large corporations, referred to earlier as the Seven Sisters, who want to avoid adding to our national supply so they can profit from the higher prices.
Carter's Department of Energy was established to perpetuate the propaganda of the existence of an energy crisis.
However, the Government won't allow it to be pumped out, and it is tunneled back into the ground.
The Gull Island find had a different chemical structure, as did the Kuparuk oil field, west of there, which meant that the three different chemical compositions indicated the existence of separate pools of oil on the North Slope in an area of 50,000 square miles.
Needless to say, this seems to be an almost unlimited supply of domestic oil.
However, a few days after the find, the Federal Government ordered the documents and technical reports locked up, the well capped, and the rig withdrawn.
Their excuse, was that an oil spill in that part of the Arctic Ocean would kill various micro-organisms.
The American Petroleum Institute said in their 1977 Annual report, that recoverable crude was set at 30. billion barrels, and with today's technology, the amount of unrecoverable crude was 303. billion barrels was 303. billion barrels, which is about an 80-year supply.
Only about 2% of the Outer Continental Shelf has been leased, even though it may contain over half of our potential natural gas reserves.
Along the Atlantic Coast, there is a potential of 67 TCF of gas, yet only about a dozen wells had been drilled in those areas.
These sources did not include the unconventional sources of coalbeds, shale formations, ""tight sand"" formations, and deep underground water areas.
That doesn't take into account the synthetic gas obtainable from growing marine bio-mass, such as the California Giant Kelp, which grows two feet per day, and could be a renewable source for the production of synthetic gas.
At the time of this report, maximum production up to 1985 would have only used 10% of this reserve, even if no new reserves were discovered.
The United States Geological Survey has estimated our coal reserves will last us well into the next century,"" One reason coal development has been held up, is that 40% of all reserves, are on land owned by the Federal Government, and environmentally-minded citizens.
The Illuminati has a firm grip on the oil supply, and after their ""test"" in 1973, its obvious that oil will be used as a weapon of control.
One can only wonder what would happen to this country if a large-scale oil crisis occurred.
Needless to say, it would be a disaster of unbelievable proportions, that most likely would cause an economic collapse.
Law and order would not exist in this scenario, as the population would fight among themselves for the limited resources that would be available, thus making the perfect situation for a World Government to step in.
RIOT AND REVOLUTION Revolution has always been the method used to facilitate change, and it would seem likely that an environment would be created that would ultimately lead to a revolt by the citizens of this country.
As our economy continues to decline, and it becomes harder for people to get by, there may be a ground swell of revolt across the country against the government, Of course, the Illuminati has already planted these seeds.
As you have read, the Illuminati controls the leadership of the labor unions, and the corporate structure of America.
For instance, a strike by the Longshoremen would prevent anything from being unloaded off the ships.
A strike by the Teamsters, would prevent anything from being shipped on a truck.
A strike by the Air Traffic Controllers, would prevent all flights, except for military planes.
Basically, with a major strike, nothing would move, and there would be no way to get food and other products of necessities to the cities.
Chapter Eight most likely be accompanied with acts of violence and sabotage.
Indeed, this situation would make it possible for a World Government to step in to maintain control.
It is a known fact, that revolution has been fermenting in this country for a long time, and riots could be instigated through the many terrorist groups that exist here.
In April and May of 1992, after four policemen were acquitted in the beating of a Black man, Rodney King, massive riots swept across south-central Los Angeles, and the military had to be sent in to restore order.
Incidents were also reported in Atlanta, Las Vegas, San Francisco, Miami, and Seattle.
Even though the Blacks in this country have achieved quite a bit in the past 30 years, the fight against oppression has hardened them, and has created a generation that thinks nothing of using the political power of violence and demonstration to make their views known.
This powder keg could be ignited in the future in order to create a nationwide crisis.
And I mean that quite literally, because until you're prepared to kill your parents, you're not ready to change the country.
Chapter Eight are playing into the hands of the Establishment they claim to hate.
On September 19, 1993, at the Sunday evening service of the Hamilton Square Baptist Church in San Francisco, California, Rev.
Lou Sheldon of the Traditional Values Coalition was to be the scheduled speaker.
Around 5:00 PM, homosexual demonstrators began arriving, and by the time of the service at 6:00 PM, so many had shown up, that they completely controlled the area outside of the church and they attempted to prevent people from entering the church, including the pastor and his wife.
Even though the police were there, they did nothing, claiming that the situation was under control.
The noise was so disturbing that the service had to be temporarily stopped.
I heard a recording of this on a radio show, and needless to say, it was very unnerving.
As the churchgoers left, they were shouted and cursed at; and the speaker had debris thrown at him.
This is just the beginning of gays exercising militant action to gain rights to carry out their perversive lifestyle.
As much as the Government would like us to believe it, Communism is not deadonly sleeping.
When it awakes, most likely under the banner of Socialism, it will be a force to be reckoned with.
Chapter Eight transportation centers, communication centers, and water reservoirs and supplies.
Despite their overtures toward democracy, they are clearly continuing to follow an agenda to undermine the United States.
Regardless of who is involved in these riots, the police and the military will be mobilized to bring order.
In 1965, the Department of Justice established the Office of Law Enforcement Assistance to help the local police fight crime.
In 1968, as part of the Crime Control Act, it became known as the Law Enforcement Assistance Agency.
I do not raise the spectre of a federal police force merely to frighten you.
We now see a substantial federal effort there and not simply because organized crime is interstate in nature.
The LEAA originally discussed the possibility of a National Police Force to be used in the event of a civil disturbance, for crowd dispersal and to neutralize revolutionary leadership.
The Deputy Attorney General of California had said during a conference on Civil Emergency Management, that ""anyone who attacks the state, even verbally, becomes a revolutionary and an enemy by definition.
On December 30,1975, the California National Guard announced that they were prepared to provide emergency assistance to any local police force in the country.
They introduced the 1,000 member Law Enforcement Assistance Force, which is a specially trained and equipped military police force to handle mass disturbances and riots.
This national police force seems to be taking shape through the Multi-Jurisdictional Task Force, a creation of the Department of Defense, and is a joint operation of FEMA and the National Guard Bureau.
With less military involvement abroad, some of our military personnel will be reassigned to this type of domestic duty.
The MJTF is the coordinating body of the BATF, FDA, CIA, DEA, IRS, Federal Marshals, National Guard, and local police organizations.
Since 1971, there have been many reports concerning unmarked black helicopters, which are equipped for low-flying ground surveillance, and appear to be part of the military's counter-terrorism program.
Chapter Eight Since 1987, the United States Army has been training the police, local National Guard units, and the Drug Enforcement Agency, in how to break in and enter private property, as part of their new urban warfare training.
The United States Army's Office of Public Affairs announced that the Defense Department Authorization Act passed by Congress in 1987, initiated this new training, which was being carried out in military bases such as Fort Hood, Fort Benning, and Fort McClellan.
There have been reports of antiterrorist training missions which have taken place throughout the country.
Marines from the 22nd Marine Expeditionary Unit at Camp Lejeune, along with air support from the unmarked black helicopters, carried out a late-night raid in July, 1993, on Tybee Island, near the mouth of the Savannah River.
In early 1994, the Army and the Alaska State Police held a joint operation on the Kenai Peninsula, near Anchorage.
In July, 1994, Marines from the 13th Marine Expeditionary Unit at Camp Pendleton, held urban warfare training in different locations around Sacramento.
In October, 1994, Army Special Forces and the Detroit Police SWAT team, engaged in anti-terrorist training missions at a vacant 6-story apartment house on West Alexandrine Street, and at a group of abandoned houses in Van Buren Township, a suburb of Detroit, near the Willow Run Airport.
It is also the location of the North American Training Center for the United Nations.
The FBI has established an anti-terrorist training compound at the abandoned Brown and Root, Inc. construction yard in Belie Chasse, Louisiana, just south of New Orleans.
The purpose of this urban warfare training, is nothing more than the perfection of ""house-to-house searches and controls on the civilian population"", which will be used to disarm the American people through force.
It has been suggested that the UN operations in Somalia and Haiti were used as practice runs for disarming the civilian population.
However, before this can happen, a massive gun law will have to be passed, so that all the guns will be confiscated.
Recent estimates place the number of registered handguns in this country at 70 million, and the number of unregistered at 50 million.
The Illuminati will not instigate any uprising if Americans will be able to defend themselves.
The extended waiting period mandated by the Brady Bill was only the beginning, there have been other Bills introduced in Congress to ban guns.
In the last twenty years, the incidence of violent crimes have more than doubled.
The Government's view is to disarm the criminal, but at the same time, they also disarm the law abiding citizens.
The move for gun control is snowballing, and that is part of their plan.
In 1994, the National Rifle Association got their hands on a secret document which represents the blueprint for the gun-control lobby in this country.
The first step is to use the media to create a clamor for gun control in this country, and this will in turn sway the opinion of a large portion of the population to support such a measure.
The second step would be the initiation of gun control legislation that would establish annual licensing fees, and surcharges on ammunition.
After two years, the third step would involve a massive increase in the licensing fees.
The reason given, would be because of the costs involved to enforce the law, when in fact, it would be to discourage ownership.
The failure to get a license would result in a $1,000 fine and/or six months in jail; and if your license lapses, your failure to turn your guns over to the government, would result in a $15,000 fine and/or eighteen months in jail.
After two more years, the fourth step will call for further legislation to increase the licensing fees even more.
In this way, the Second Amendment to the Constitution of the United States will be circumvented in order to take the guns out of the hands of the American people.
After that, the population will be defenseless against government forces.
There was a law passed that tells us what the mentality of the government is concerning this issue.
This information can be found in the United States Code, Volume 9, Title 22, Chapter 35, Sections 2551-2595.
Even though the Agency is active in negotiations regarding foreign policy, you can be sure that all such negotiations include the same concessions for America.
Chapter Eight February 14,1963 edition of the Washington Report , Congressman James B Utt said that this ""Disarmament Act sets up a super-agency with power greater than the power of Congress, which delegated it.
It was reported that a 46-question survey was handed out in May, 1994, to ""300 randomly selected"" Marines(veterans of the Panama operation and the Persian Gulf War) at the Twentynine Palms Marine Corps Base in the Mohave Desert about 70 miles east of San Bernadino, California.
A thirty day amnesty period is permitted for these firearms to be turned over to the local authorities.
At the end of this period, a number of citizen groups refuse to turn over their firearms.
A Study of Their Effect on Unit Cohesion , had been classified, until March, 1995, when it was approved for public dissemination.
So, the bottom line is, if ordered, one out of every four Marines would shoot American citizens.
What this survey reveals, is that, for the most part, our military probably could not be relied on to act as a cohesive force to fire upon the citizens of this country.
However, with increased indoctrination, that could change, but I don't think there is time for that.
The use of Fort Dix in New Jersey(a major east coast base right next to McGuire Air Force Base) was fully committed.
The military staff of the UN Secretary-General has called for a ""Rapid Response Peace Force"" of 60,000 soldiers, for instant deployment; a ""Permanent Peace-Keeping Force"" of 275,000 soldiers, for conflict control; and a ""Standing Reserve Peace Force"" of 500,000 soldiers for UN duty wherever necessary.
In 1993, Clinton issued Presidential Review Directive #13, supporting Boutros-Ghali's(UN SecretaryGeneral) proposal for a UN military force, substantially made up of Americans.
Colin Powell, Commander of the Joint Chiefs of Staff insisted on a codicil that said, if any United States commander believed his orders violated the United States Constitution, or placed our country or military forces at risk, the orders could be disregarded.
On May 3,1994, Clinton signed the Presidential Review Directive #25, which put United States military commanders under the authority of the UN during UN military operations, and instructed the Department of Defense to establish a United States military organizational structure which included the United Nations.
Troops who are attached to the Russian Interior Ministry were seen training with the United States 10th Special Forces Group, which were being reassigned to Fort Carson, Colorado.
The Russian soldiers were still wearing the red berets bearing the hammer and sickle, the symbol of Communism.
Russians have also been seen training with the SWAT team of Las Vegas, Nevada, and were reportedly involved in joint military training operations in Alaska and Alabama.
German soldiers were seen training at Luke Air Force Base near Phoenix, Arizona; as well as Fort Bliss, and Fort McClelland.
In fact, in May, 1991, the German government negotiated a deal with our government, which gives them permission to establish a German military facility in our country.
Chapter Eight Foreign soldiers are now training with American troops in order to function as a cohesive multi-national unit, that will function under the authority of the United Nations.
A multinational UN military force stationed in this country would fire upon American citizens.
Russia-made T-72 main battle tanks have been spotted on our nation's highways, being hauled on flatbed trailers.
Also seen, were Soviet surface-to-air missiles and surface-to-surface missiles.
A Soviet HindD attack helicopter, and a Soviet Helix anti-submarine naval attack helicopter were seen at the Gulf port National Guard facility in Mississippi.
Gene Taylor reported that the aircraft, as well as hundreds of other Russian-built equipment were being purchased and used for training purposes.
Hundreds of Soviet Z1L-131 military trucks were photographed in Saucier, Mississippi, which were imported from East Germany with a UN bill of lading by Airmar Resources Corporation.
They are to be painted white, marked for UN use and shipped to Africa, yet many of them have been sent to destinations in this country.
There was a report from Montana concerning three train loads of military vehicles, some painted white and marked with the UN designation.
It is widely believed that our government is stockpiling military equipment in preparation of a massive assault against the American people, if necessary.
The attack on David Koresh and the Branch Davidians in Waco, Texas may be a glimpse of what is going to happen in the future to groups who don't toe the government line.
In order to control the population, there will be large groups of people rounded up and detained.
This was done in March, 1942 to Japanese-Americans in the western United States, after the attack on Pearl Harbor, when Roosevelt signed Executive Order #9066, which directed the Army to intern up to 112,000 in concentration camps.
These detention centers were setup at Army facilities in Avon Park, Tutelake, Wickenburg, and Allenwood.
Americans were concerned about this talk, and in 1971 Congress passed legislation that repealed the Emergency Detention Act of 1950.
Chapter Eight During the Reagan Administration, a secret program identified as ""Operation Rex 84"", was initiated by our National Security Council, and authorized the establishment of 23 ""emergency detention centers"" for the purpose of detaining a large number of ""potentially subversive"" people.
An additional 20 centers were funded with the 1990-91 defense budget, and another 43 were commissioned.
Chaffee, Vandenburg Air Force Base, Eglin Air Force Base, Camp Krome, Ft.
Drum, Wickenburg, Elmendorf Air Force Base, Eilson Air Force Base, Tutelake, El Reno, Tulsa, Florence, Maxwell Air Force Base, Mill Point, Allenwood, Oakdale, Ft.
Even though the directives that brought about Rex 84 have been eliminated, it is believed that the government's plans for these detention centers are still being carried out.
It was discovered that major construction was underway, and it was reported by The Spotlight , that it was being prepared for conversion into a massive civilian detention center.
Alfonse D'Amato announced that a large part of the base was going to be turned over to the National Guard, who, it is believed, will oversee the facility.
Nearby Fort Drum, the location of the Army's 10th Mountain Division, who have been utilized as UN ""peacekeepers"", is also slated to be used as a detention facility.
Aerial surveillance of a many-thousand acre location in Indianapolis, has made this facility a prime suspect for being a detention center.
It is surrounded by a barbedwire fence, pointing inward, has a helicopter pad, a sewer treatment plant, and barracks.
They are located near a body of fresh water; near a railway system, major highway, and large airport; and have the capability of holding thousands of people.
After these revelations, wouldn't it be a good idea to prepare you and your family accordingly.
Our way of life is going to be drastically changed if this New World Order succeeds in establishing itself in America.
Chapter Eight READY TO SPRING THE TRAP Even though the Illuminati ceased to exist as an organization in the 1790's, the organization's leaders kept the conspiracy alive, and continued working towards their goal of a one world socialist government.
Since then, as you have read, various organizations have been established to perpetuate these goals, but I have still referred to the Illuminati as the name for the engineers of this Master Conspiracy, since it is more recognizable than the various secret, and little known organizations that are carrying out this Satanic plot.
It is believed, that at the pinnacle of the Illuminati, is a group of nine men, who, for the most part are the descendants of the original Illuminati conspirators.
In October, 1977, the John Birch Society printed a secret report from the office of C Douglas Dillon(CFR member, head of Dillon, Read and Company, former Chairman of the Rockefeller Foundation,and former Secretary of the Treasury under Kennedy and Johnson) that indicated that the Illuminati had hoped to establish a new World Order by 1976, but by 1970, the date appeared to be impractical, and a new agenda was drawn up, which had required about 15 years for completion.
The sweeping social reforms of the past, brought us the Social Security and Welfare system, and now the move is on for a National Health Care program.
This is all part of the Master Plan, because it is the ultimate goal of the Illuminati, for the American citizen to eventually be totally dependent upon the government for their security, food, electricity, heat, clothing, and other necessities.
Once that potential exists, One-World Government is right around the corner.
Slowly our country is being globalized, to fit into the world marketplace.
In the Trade Act of 1988, the Commerce Department was charged with the responsibility of instituting the conversion to the metric system, which is now known as the International System.
Federal law now mandates that all products must list both metric and non-metric measurements.
Chapter Eight The economy of the United States, which has been allowed to erode for years, is now experiencing what may be the final assault.
The North American Free Trade Agreement NAFTA), is a two-volume document, nearly 1,100 pages in length, which incorporates most of the provisions of the 1988 Canadian Free Trade Agreement, and makes the United States, Canada, and Mexico unequal partners in trade.
On December 31,1988, President Ronald Reagan signed Executive Order # 12662 which said, that regardless of the constitutionality of decisions made by the binational committees of the CFTA, the United States had to accept it.
When NAFTA was approved by Congress, more of our national sovereignty was given up to Mexico.
Since Mexican workers do not have minimum wage protection and do not have the right to bargain collectively, the agreement has made Mexico fertile territory for American companies to relocate, thus creating the probability of a huge loss of American jobs, and the exploitation of the Mexican workforce.
That is only part of the inequities that are contained in this agreement.
While the Clinton Administration reported that 127,000 jobs were created by NAFTA, what they didn't reveal, was that a report by the Joint Economic Committee of Congress indicated that the nation had lost 137,000 jobs.
During the first nine months of 1994, our trade surplus with Mexico shrunk by 27 percent.
Marcy Kaptur, NAFTA promoters said that 60,000 American manufactured cars would be exported to Mexico in 1994, but only 28,000 were.
The highly skilled, well-paying positions have gone to Mexico, while low-paying, low-skilled jobs have been created in the United States.
This stems from the fact that the raw materials and parts are exported to Mexico, assembled, then imported back into the country at a far greater value.
At the 1994 Summit of the Americas in Miami, Clinton spoke about bringing South America into NAFTA, and Chile became the first nation to join.
It is a descendant of the International Trade Organization , and the Organization for Trade Cooperation, which had been proposed during the 1940's and 1950's.
At that time, the country and the Congress was not ready to have their economic authority transferred to international control.
Based on its size, how many of our legislators do you think read every word of this trade agreement.
GATT is the only international agreement which sets rules for world trade, and provides for the mediation of disputes, which is argued by many to be the best way to open up foreign markets to United States exports, because protectionist countries, as well as the United States would have to lower their tariffs, to create an even playing field.
However, critics familiar with its contents say that it will succeed in seriously damaging our national sovereignty and independence.
Proponents disagree, saying that any country can withdraw from membership after giving a six month notice.
GATT will have the power to force Congress to change laws by declaring them to be ""protectionist"", and if we don't comply, we would be subject to trade sanctions.
The October 24,1994 issue of Barron's , indicated that the WTO is a de facto world government.
William Holder, deputy general counsel of the UN's International Monetary Fund, said that the WTO is a de jure world government.
In all actuality, this legislation is a Treaty, and as such, should require approval by two-thirds of the Senate; instead, it is being considered a Trade Agreement, which will require only a majority vote.
Even though, during the midterm elections of November, 1994, the country overwhelmingly voted to change the course our country has taken, GATT was still brought to a vote during the lameduck session of the 103rd Congress and passed, rather than waiting for the Republican-majority Congress that was elected.
Some opponents believe, that if the vote had been postponed, it may never have been ratified, at least, in its present form, But that was unlikely, since its passage was a bipartisan effort spearheaded by a group of key Republicans lead by Majority leader, Sen.
Newt Gingrich of Georgia(a member of the CFR); and conservative think-tanks like the Heritage Foundation and the American Enterprise Institute.
Chapter Eight the world economy is teetering, and democracy hangs in the balance, as a handful of men patiently wait for a few more pieces of the puzzle to fall into place, so they can spring their trap.
Even though we have gone back to look at the roots, and evolution of this movement, the actual motive goes back much farther than that.
Just think about, what motivation could there be to fuel that kind of desire.
The answer, is that you have to look at things with a spiritual eye, in order to comprehend the complexities that the New World Order actually represents.
And when you do that, then you can understand how it has been able to progress through all these years, and why it will continue.
And the earth was without form, and void; and darkness was upon the face of the deep.
You have to understand that there was an undetermined amount of time which passed between these two verses.
However, we do have some clues about certain events which occurred before Adam, and the refurbishing of this world for his habitation.
Just as God told Noah and his sons in Genesis 9:1 to ""replenish"" the earth after the flood, God had told Adam and Eve the same thing in Genesis 1:28.
Now you can understand the time frame, and the circumstances regarding Lucifer.
He was a ""cherub""(the highest classification of angels), and is described in the Bible as being wise and perfect.
He led a third of the angels in a revolt against Michael, the archangel, and the remaining angels, for the control of Heaven.
When God renewed the earth, and created man in his image, he gave Adam dominion over the earth, which infuriated Satan, who had the impression that he was to rule over the earth.
Again, Satan plotted against God, and caused Adam and Eve to sin by eating the fruit of the tree which was forbidden by God.
Ever since then, Satan has been carrying out his plan to corrupt and control the earth.
For six thousand years, a small group of satanically empowered men have been feverishly working to eliminate God and to enslave mankind.
The New World Order is nothing more than the culmination of these efforts.
The final step of a plan that will enable Satan to again challenge God, and the angelic forces of Heaven.
THE WORLD CHURCH Just as there have been signs that the political powers of this world are coming together in a New World Order, so it has been with the Church.
The establishment of a World Church would seem to go hand-in-hand with a World Government.
In this chapter, we will go back to the early history of man, and follow the history of the church, and what its relationship may be to the World Church.
In the Bible, according to the book of Genesis, Noah had three sons, Ham, Shem, and Japheth.
It was Nimrod who attempted to build a tower that would reach to Heaven.
God confused their language, so they couldn't understand each other, and they were scattered over the face of the Earth.
Nimrod (allegedly the founder of Masonry) established a religious system, with the help of his mother and father, to control the people through political methods.
This was the beginning of the occult, which became known as Baal worship.
Nimrod's great-uncle Shem became so enraged over Nimrod's activities, and with the help of a group of Egyptians, killed him, chopped his body up into little pieces, and sent the pieces to different cities as a warning to those who dabbled in the occult.
Nimrod's mother, Semiramis, took over the religion, and proclaimed Nimrod a god.
She gathered all of Nimrod's pieces, except for his penis, which she couldn't find.
She claimed that an Evergreen tree sprouted from a tree stump, which she said indicated the entry of new life into the deceased Nimrod.
Those joining had to take oaths of secrecy, and had to tell their priests everything they did wrong.
In this way, via the ""confessional"", they could blackmail anyone who didn't yield to their will.
Semiramis became known as the ""Queen of Heaven"" and was symbolized by the figure of the Moon.
When Babylon fell, the religion grew in Egypt and Pergamos, where Semiramis became known as Isis, and Nimrod became known as Horus, the Sun God.
In other lands, forms of Baal worship became dominant among various religious practices.
So, God established a nation of Jews, called Israel, and gave them laws to live by.
They were to be the light to a world ravaged with sin, but they too became caught up in idol worship.
Even though prophets, anointed by God, warned them, they did not heed the warning.
Thus, Julius Caesar became the Supreme Pontiff of the Babylonian Order.
Jesus Christ, whose birth was prophesied by lsaiah, was sent by God to be the saviour of the Jews.
However, he wasn't recognized as the awaited Messiah, and was despised by religious leaders who plotted against him.
These Jewish leaders became his judges, presenting phony witnesses, and breaking eighteen Jewish laws in order to have him sentenced to death.
Satan, who three years before, had tempted Jesus in the wilderness, believed that through his crucifixion, he had defeated Christ.
But, as you know, he was resurrected three days later; and forty days later was transfigured into heaven.
With the Great Commission, Jesus had instructed his disciples to go through all the world to spread the gospel, and Satan tried his best to defeat the Christian movement.
Two years after the establishment of the true Christian Church, Satan raised up a man known as Simon Magus, a Babylonian priest, to do his bidding.
Chapter Nine apostleship, without repenting his sins, in order to gain this mysterious new power.
Simon adopted some of the Christian teachings interweaving it with his own pagan religion, and called it Christianity.
Besides his attempt to dilute Christian teaching, Satan zeroed in on its leaders.
Being that Rome, who ruled the known world, was under the influence of a form of Baal worship, Christians who refused to worship the Emperor were persecuted, beginning with Nero, in the middle of the first century.
They were arrested and put to death in various ways, such as crucifixion, being tied inside animal skins and attacked by wild dogs, fed to lions, and tied to stakes to be burned as human torches to light Nero's gardens at night.
These persecutions, which lasted until early in the fourth century, caused the Christians to literally go underground, to worship secretly.
They took refuge in the subterranean catacombs of Rome, which extended for miles underneath the city.
There are said to be over two million Christian graves in these caverns.
This persecution of the Christians was Satan's attempt to get rid of the Biblical teaching.
Various religions, cults, and sects, were established to alter the Holy Scriptures in order to change them, and confuse the world.
Although the Christians were persecuted, their faith in God stood fast.
He was instrumental in preserving our Holy Bible, by informing Christians which of the manuscripts were genuine.
These manuscripts were then hidden by Christians in the cellars of the great monasteries.
In 305, the two Roman emperors, Diocletian and Maximian, stepped down, and were succeeded by their deputies, Galerius and Constantius.
Constantius was then replaced by Maximinus Daia in the east, and Severus in the west, and he sent for his son Constantine to help him reclaim the throne.
After Constantius died, Constantine was proclaimed emperor by his father's army, and he led them in a march against Rome.
On the evening of October 27, 312, he came face to face with the legions of Maxentius at the Milvian Bridge on the Tiber River.
As he prepared to pit his small army against the military might of Rome, so the legend goes, he vowed that if God would help him conquer Rome, he would institute Christian rule.
That night, Christ appeared to him with the cross, and told him to use it as a guardian.
The next morning, he had this ""sign of God"" placed on his helmet, and the shields of his men.
Eusebius was given this account by the emperor himself, years afterward, but he didn't write about it till after Constantine's death.
Most historians never acknowledged this glorified account, and not one man in his army of 40,000 ever mentioned it.
Lactantius, a Christian, a few years later, wrote that Constantine had a vision of Apollo at the temple in Gaul, who instructed him to place the ""celestial sign of God"" on their shields prior to going into battle.
Constantine felt that Christ was a manifestation of the Sun God, Sol, or Apollo, even though Christians didn't know it.
The next year, in 313, he issued the Edict of Milan(also known as the Edict of Toleration), which bestowed religious freedom, in order to show tolerance towards Christianity, and all forms of monotheism were forbidden.
He had his troops sprinkled in baptism, proclaiming them to be Christians, although spiritually they weren't.
A document discovered in the eighth century, called the 'Donation of Constantine' was said to have conferred some of his secular power upon the Pope, and it was used by the Church to gain some authority in the government, but it was later proved to be a forgery.
He considered himself to be the head of the Church, although the Bishop of Rome was the recognized head, later to be known as the Pope.
In 303, pagan emperor Diocletian had already destroyed most of the Christian writings around Rome, so of all the manuscripts of the New Testament available, not one had been produced before the fourth century, which made it easy for the Church to alter the Scriptures to fit the point of view they wanted to convey.
Although all Romans were baptized into the Christian faith, there were those who wanted to remain loyal to the Babylonian mysteries, and sought to retain some aspects of their religion in the new Christian religion.
Although Constantine claimed to have converted to Christianity, he secretly worshipped the Sun God.
He made Sunday a day of rest, not because it was supposed to be the Lord's day, but being that it was the first day of the week, it was to be a tribute to the Sun God.
Peter was said to be the first Bishop of the Church, and each Pope is said to be his successor.
This is a tradition that is historically inaccurate, because Peter never professed that distinction.
There is no evidence that the Apostle Peter had ever been in Rome, at any time.
However, secular history explains that there was a ""Simon Peter"" in Rome during the first century.
The pagan gods of the Babylonians and Greeks were identified by the name Peter.
The Romans referred to Neptune, Saturn, Mars, and Liber, as ""gods"" of the Peter-rank.
Going back as far as Nimrod, Deuteronomy 23:4 says that Balaam of Pethor was a sacred high place where there was an oracle temple.
Thus, Simon Magus, who had become the interpreter of the Babylonian Mysteries, became known as Simon Peter.
Chapter Nine Eusebius, the Bishop of Caesarea, a Church historian(who was imprisoned by the Romans as they searched for Bibles to destroy them), was Constantine's chief religious advisor.
He studied at Origen's school of Religion and Philosophy in Alexandria, where many gnostic scholars lived and studied.
Eusebius wasn't a true Christian, because he believed Jesus to be a lesser god, and was guided by that fact when he produced his version of the Scriptures.
These altered manuscripts were prepared into Bibles for the newly formed Roman Catholic Church, and it was out of Eusebius' translation, that the Latin Vulgate Bible emerged, written by Jerome, which became the official Bible for all Roman Catholics.
Emperor Theodosius made Christianity the official State religion, and church membership was mandatory.
This forced conversion brought many heathens, idol worshipers, and pagans into the Church.
Soon these pagans succeeded in getting statues of Semiramis and Nimrod into the Church, as the Babylonian system of ""mother and child"" worship eventually evolved into the Madonna and child symbol(prominent at Christmas), and referred to them as the Virgin Mary and the baby Jesus.
Confessionals were established, just as they were in Babylon, and soon the Church began to grow in power.
Several Christian sects, and semi-Christian orders criticized the Catholic Church, and taught from the original manuscripts, which they guarded with their lives, in order to insure the survival of God's word.
The Waldenses were founded in 1170 by a rich merchant from Lyons, in southern France, called Peter Waldo.
He separated from the Catholic Church, and sold all of his possessions.
The Christian movement spread to Spain, northern France, Germany, Italy, Poland, Hungary, and Switzerland.
The Anabaptists and Lollards were two groups which sprang from the Waldenses.
The Anabaptists was the name for various groups from the radical branch of the Protestant Reformation in the 16th century.
They were active in Germany, Holland, and Switzerland, and were nicknamed the ""rebaptizers"" because they rejected the idea of infant baptism, which was practiced by the Roman Catholic Church, as a means of saving souls, and demanded rebaptism.
Chapter Nine behind Menno Simons who started the group which eventually became known as the Mennonites.
He translated the Bible from Latin to English, and produced the first English Bible in 1382, paving the way for the Reformation.
He organized a group called the Order of Poor Preachers, and began distributing his new Bible.
Eventually Wycliffe's writings were banned, and the Pope ordered him to Rome to undergo trial.
Anyone who didn't profess Catholicism was sought out, and again, Satan attempted to destroy Christianity.
In 1200, the Pope instructed a Spanish priest named Dominique de Guaman to form an Order to vanquish all opposing religious groups.
In 1215, these Dominican monks(0rder of the Friar Preachers, or Black Friars), known as the ""Militia of Christ"", were dispatched to speak out against the Albigensians(a semi-Christian group prominent in France, which had Manichaean influence, as did the Cathari), who condemned the Catholic Church for worshipping images.
A missionary, Peter of Castelnau, was sent to preach against the Albigensians, who killed him, and in 1208, in response to the murder, the Pope instigated a holy war against the Albigensians, and the Cathari of Toulouse, killing many.
At the Fourth Council of the Lateran in 1227, Pope Honorius III sanctioned the Inquisition, and said that all heretics should be turned over to the government, and their property confiscated.
Catholics sympathetic to the views of these groups were excommunicated.
The Inquisition sought to eliminate anyone who wasn't Catholic and refused to submit to the Pope.
Torture was used to obtain confessions and information, which was authorized by Pope Innocent IV in 1252.
Other methods of torture included lacerating their backs with spikes, suffocation, pouring oil on them and setting them on fire.
The Roman Catholic Church had become so powerful, that through their control of the royalty in Europe, the Church and State had combined in an effort to make Catholicism the universal religion.
In Spain, within an eighteen year period, the Chief Inquisitor, Torquemada, imprisoned 97,000, and burned 10,200 to death.
From Spain, the Inquisition spread to northern Italy, southern France, Germany, the Netherlands, Mexico, Latin America, Austria, and Poland.
In all, the massive campaign, which ran into the early 1800's, claimed about 68 million victims.
They were certificates, signed by the Pope, which pardoned sins without confession and repentance.
Martin Luther, who turned away from Catholicism after reading the Syrian text of the Bible from Antioch, witnessed John Tetzel (Archbishop of Mainz and Magdeburg) selling these indulgences, and compiled a list of 95 ""points"" against indulgences, and nailed them on a church door on October 31,1517, in Wittenberg, Germany.
Those siding with Luther, were called ""Protestants"" because they protested the power of the Catholic Church.
In 1520, a Papal Bull was issued, that officially excommunicated Luther.
It called for his death because of his heresy, unless his document was retracted within 60 days.
He went on to translate the New Testament into German, and soon the Lutheran religion became the dominant religion in northern Germany.
William Tyndale translated the Greek version of the New Testament into English, but Church authorities prevented him from publishing it in England, so he published it in Germany in 1525.
By 1536 he finished translating the Old Testament, but before it could be printed and distributed, he was burned at the stake in Belgium as a religious heretic, by the order of King Henry VIII of England.
A year later, King Henry broke away from the Catholic Church, forming the Church of England, and in 1537, authorized the Tyndale Bible to be distributed as the official Bible of the Church.
Chapter Nine ""Society of Jesus"") in order to oppose the Protestant movement.
Loyola, as a soldier, had been maimed in battle, and while recuperating, claimed a conversion to Catholicism.
He wrote a guidebook called Spiritual Exercises to help people get spiritually closer to Christ.
On August 15,1534, in Paris, Loyola and six other men, joined together in taking vows of poverty and chastity, and to accept any assignment requested by the Pope.
Carried out by Dominican monks and Roman Catholic troops, most of the French Christian leaders were killed, which practically stopped the Christian movement in France.
To celebrate, the Pope ordered the Rosary said in every church to thank the Virgin Mary for victory, and had a medal struck to commemorate the occasion.
In England, Jesuit priests translated Origen's Alexandrian manuscripts into English in 1582, but the new Bible was rejected.
The Jesuit movement grew, and by 1626, there were 15,000 members; and by 1749, over 22,000.
On June 1773, Pope Clement XIV, pressured by France, Spain, and Portugal, said that the group was ""immoral and a menace to the Church and the Faith,"" and abolished the Order, in Germany, the government established a Commission to liquidate and inventory Jesuit assets.
Councilor Zuytgens was appointed to inventory all articles at their college in Ruremonde, and to forward all documents to the government.
The book contained secret instructions for the Jesuits, and its leaders, and warned against its discovery, because of people getting the wrong idea about the Order.
The Jesuits continued to operate secretly, establishing their headquarters in Russia.
Chapter Nine Avignon until he agreed to reinstate the Jesuits, and at the Congress of Vienna the demand for their services, allegedly to ""make America Catholic,"" led Pope Plus VII to reestablish the Order.
Pope Leo X proclaimed that all human beings must be subject to the Roman Pontiff for salvation.
The operation was carried out by a Commission governed by six Cardinals, called the Congregation of the Inquisition.
As Catholicism expanded, they concerned themselves only with maintaining religious order, and in 1908, Pope Plus X renamed them the Holy Office, and they were charged with maintaining the purity of the faith.
In 1965, Pope Paul Vl reorganized the group, and renamed it the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith.
Pope Plus Xl said in 1928, that the Roman Catholic Church was the only Church of Christ.
Pope Gregory XVI was so grateful that he awarded the Rothschild family with a Papal decoration.
Ever since then, the Rothschilds have been one of the financial agents of the Vatican.
Properties were sold, relics of the saints were sold, a percentage of the money received at the Shrine of Lourdes was taken, annulments were sold; and they also raised money by selling straw from the Pope's bed, candles, rosaries, and images of the Madonna.
Chapter Nine For years, the Popes ruled a 16,000 square mile area in central Italy which was referred to as the Papal States.
That was reduced to about 4,891 square miles in 1860 when the Kingdom of Italy was formed.
In September, 1870, Italian troops marched on Rome and ended the temporal power of the Pope, and limited his sovereignty to the palaces of the Vatican, the Lateran in Rome, and the villa of Castel Gandolfo.
On February 11,1929, Cardinal Gasparri and Italian Premier Benito Mussolini signed the Treaty of Conciliation, which established the independent state of Vatican City, and also made Catholicism the official religion of Italy.
The agreement compensated the Vatican for their lost land, and transferred about 5% of the government's bonds to them.
Thirteen buildings outside the boundaries possess extraterritorial rights, and house people necessary for the administration of the Church.
With a population of 800, 3,0000 employees, and an operating budget of over $100 million annually, the Vatican is the central administrative office of the Roman Catholic Church.
Here the Pope wields executive and judicial powers over a religious empire of 1,042,501,000 members in about 20,000 churches.
They have extensive real estate holdings, own major companies and utilities and have controlling interests in others, priceless works of art, religious artifacts, and massive deposits in Italian and foreign banks.
Vatican City has their own flag, their own bank, their own license plates(numbered from 1-142), their own radio station(Radio Vatican, which reaches every country on earth with broadcasts in thirty languages), their own newspaper d'Osservatore Romano) , their own post office, their own telephone system, the Institute for Religious Works(established in 1942, which provides about $10 million a year towards their budget), a pharmacy, a bar, a gas station, a train depot, and a printing plant.
There are no taxes; and they issue their own passports and citizenship papers.
They used Antioch manuscripts, and the Jewish Massoretic text, completing their work in 1611.
Today, it is the most widely accepted version of the Scriptures in the world.
To escape the persecution of King James, William Bradford led many to Holland, in 1608; and in 1619, they joined a larger group in England and sailed to America on the Mayflower, where the Separatists became known as Pilgrims.
Some of the Pilgrim leaders became worried about the group who had come from London and Southampton, and to control their actions, 41 of them drew up plans for a civil government, based on Christian principles, which became known as the Mayflower Compact.
Bradford was elected as their first Governor, and he established a system that was unlike the Jamestown colony in Virginia, which was based on the communal theories of Plato and Francis Bacon.
Although half of the settlers died during the harsh winter, the success of the Plymouth colony brought an influx of others seeking religious freedom from the dominance of the Anglican Church of England.
To protect their new found freedom, their government took on the form of a theocracy, which only allowed propertied church members to vote; and there was no tolerance towards other religions.
As the population grew, the Puritans were unable to maintain their strict control, and other colonies in New England were established as a haven from those frustrated with their rigidity.
Even though Puritan control was broken in the late 1600's, the New England colonies which welcomed Quakers and Jews, continued to ban Roman Catholic worship until 1783.
Various religious groups flourished there, such as the Dutch Reformed, Swedish Lutherans, French Protestant , Quakers, and Jews.
In 1682, responding to William Penn's ""Holy Experiment"", Quakers, Scotch-lrish Presbyterians, Mennonites, and other pietists from Germany settled in Pennsylvania.
Mott, a 45-year old American Methodist minister, chaired the World Congress in Edinburgh to foster inter-church relations and to eliminate overlapping by spreading out their manpower in the missionary field.
Out of that, came the Universal Christian Council of Life and Work, at Stockholm, Sweden in 1925; and the World Conference of Faith and Order, at Lausanne in 1927.
Six co-Presidents were appointed to run the organization, including an American, G Bromley Oxham, who was a 33rd degree Mason, and Vice-President of a communistfront organization known as the Methodist Federation for Social Action.
When the Communists were taking over China, Chao and his students welcomed their actions, and he was later given an official position in the Red Chinese government.
Communism ideology...promise that freedom will come automatically after the completion of the revolution.
Capitalism puts the emphasis on freedom and promises that justice will follow as a by-product of free enterprise.
They also called for the United Nations to accept Red China as a member.
Martin Niemoeller, President of the WCC, was awarded the Lenin Peace Prize by Russia.
The Executive Committee meets twice a year, in order to keep things going between Central Committee meetings.
Their avowed objective is to uphold the ecumenical movement, and to establish an all-inclusive church.
The WCC is made up of liberals, evangelicals, neo-Orthodox, Armenians, Calvinists, Protestants, Lutherans, Anglicans, and Russian Orthodox.
Most of the non-Roman Catholic Churches belong, and they have been extending invitations to groups such as Hindus, Buddhists, Muslims, and Jews.
Since then, they have been giving financial aid to nearly 46 revolutionary groups in 17 countries.
Some of the groups are communist, while others had been getting arms from Russia.
Between 1969-79, this Committee, known as the Program to Combat Racism, had provided an average of $2,600,00 a year.
Within a ten-year period, ending with the Vietnam War in 1975, the WCC gave millions of dollars to the Vietcong in North Vietnam.
The largest United States Church donors to the WCC, had been the Presbyterian Church , United Methodist, Disciples of Christ, Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, United Church of Christ, Episcopal, and the American Baptist Churches.
National Association of Evangelicals, and its parent organization, the World Evangelical Fellowship; and the American Council of Churches, and its parent organization, the International Council of Christian Churches.
The National Council of Churches of Christ in America, the American subsidiary of the WCC, is an interdenominational group founded on November 29,1950, after fourteen interdenominational organizations merged.
Actually, it was just a reorganization of the pro-communist Federal Council of Churches, that was founded in 1908 by Dr.
Walter Rauschenbusch(the leading spokesman of socialist Christianity, who called for ""a new order that would rest on Christian principles of equal rights and democratic distribution of economic power."") and Dr.
This was a subtle way of advocating the communistic principle of the confiscation of private property.
In 1907, Rockefeller financed Ward's establishment of the Methodist Foundation of Social Service, which was America's first Communist-front organization.
This religious institution cast serious doubts as to the virgin birth and divinity of Jesus.
In 1953, Ward was identified as a Communist by the House Committee on Un-American Activities.
In 1908, they reorganized and changed their name to the Federal Council of Churches.
Raised as a Baptist, Rockefeller began noticing all of the competition between Protestant groups, and after World War II, got involved with the Interchurch World Movement, contributing over $1 million to its initial budget of $40 million, and traveling the country on a national speaking tour.
He also donated $26 million to build the Riverside Church, which opened in 1930, which was pastored by Rev.
Later that year, Admiral William H Standley, Chief of Naval Operations, publicly accused the Federal Council of Churches of collaborating with the Communists.
Rockefeller provided the land for the 15-story triangularshaped Interchurch Center that serves as the headquarters for the National Council of Churches.
The membership of the National Council of Churches of Christ in America consists of 36 groups.
Many NCC pastors are Masons, and in the May 22,1989 edition of Time magazine, Dr.
The National Council of Churches is responsible for the Revised Standard Version of the Bible.
They have concerned themselves with civil liberties, social justice, and the theological critique of United States foreign policy, particularly in respect to China and Indochina.
The Domestic Hunger Network, which is also coordinated through the NCC, gave a hefty sum to political groups throughout the world.
At a Los Angeles tent meeting in 1949, on a night when Billy Graham was deciding whether to extend or end his revival, the place was suddenly crawling with reporters and photographers.
This may be hard to swallow, and you may ask, how Graham, one of the country's greatest Christian leaders, could be linked to the Illuminati, Well, by now, you should understand how they work, so what better person to use, then somebody who is admired and respected by millions, even though his impact for their cause is rather indirect.
Graham had said that one of his best friends is Jessie Bader, who was the Secretary of Evangelism for the National Council of Churches.
Henry Luce refused to publish it because of pressure from the Kennedy camp.
When Nixon was the recipient of quite a backlash from the American people for planning a trip to Red China, Billy Graham flew to Washington, DC, and called a meeting at the White House of leading ministers from across the country.
Both he and Henry Kissinger were able to convince them that the trip to Communist China was necessary.
The Reagan Administration tried to convince him not to go, fearing that he would become a victim of communist propaganda.
Over 2,700 gathered, including the entire Roman Catholic hierarchy, 28 non-Catholic prelates, representatives from most major Protestant denominations, and dignitaries from Eastern Orthodox Churches in the Middle East.
A few months after the initial meeting, the Council reconvened with 2,500 ecclesiastical dignitaries, and 50 observers from non-Catholic denominations.
A year later, on September 29,1963, Pope Paul Vl made an appeal for Christian unity, and said that the Ecumenical Council's ultimate goal was the universal union of all Christians.
One observation that was made about him, was that he was elected in the 6th year of the previous Pope's reign, in the sixth month, he was 66 years old, and he had completed four sets of 66 Popes.
There had been talk of a merger with the World Council of Churches, to form the Christian Catholic Church of the United Church of Christ.
It calls for Protestants and Catholics to discontinue their opposition in order to unite against enemies which are common to both of their religious philosophies.
This seems to be part of a campaign to bring the two religions closer together in ideology.
Since accepting the ""Prize for Progress in Religion"", from New Age leader John Templeton, at the 1993 Parliament of World's Religions in Chicago; and revelations of a United Nations connection to his Prison Fellowship ministry, Colson's motivations are highly suspect.
Though the two groups were able to hammer out a five-point statement to clarify the support of those Evangelical leaders that signed the agreement, it still retained the aura of religious unity.
Besides signing the agreement, Pat Robertson had Colson on his show, and brought in Neuhaus to be a keynote speaker at the Christian Coalition's(700 Club's political action group) ""1994, Road to Victory Conference"" held in Virginia Beach, Virginia.
Also in 1994, Pat Robertson presented the Christian Coalition's ""Catholic Layman of the Year"" Award to Pennsylvania Governor Robert P Casey, a Democrat who is very vocal in his stand against abortion.
Pat Robertson, in the eyes of some Christians, lost credibility, when he entered the 1992 Presidential campaign, saying God told him to run.
Though he didn't win, it gave him more political clout and visibility, and paved the way for him to receive the mantle of America's most prominent religious leader from an aging Billy Graham.
Even though he has written about the New World Order; as a guest on Larry King's national radio show, he refused to comment on a caller's question about an element of the New World Order.
In Pat Robertson's book, The New Millennium , published in 1990 by Word Publishing, at the top of every page, to the right of the page number, is the symbol of a circle with a dot in the middle.
An unusual symbol, it is used as an astronomical symbol for the sun; and for proofreaders, it is used to indicate a place where a comma should be inserted; and it is sometimes used as a mathematical sign for a circle.
According to documents discovered by the German government in 1785, it was the secret symbol which represented the Illuminati's name.
I contacted Word Publishing to ask them about the use of the symbol, since I didn't want to be accused of making an irresponsible accusation.
They told me that various symbols, called ""dingbats"", are sometimes incorporated into the header design of a page.
In this case, the symbol was randomly chosen, and nobody at Word was even aware of the symbol's connotations.
Chapter Nine had even considered that perhaps the symbol was used to sabotage the book, but Word maintains that everyone there is a committed Christian.
If it was randomly chosen, it would really be a coincidence, because there are no other symbols, that I know of, that would lend itself to having any connections with the New World Order.
Without a doubt, this book is a companion volume to Robertson's The New World Order published by Word in 1991.
It remains to be seen whether there was truly a reason for that symbol to be used, and for now, I guess we have to chalk it up as being an amazing coincidence.
His ministry has been a tremendous witness in this country, and his efforts as part of the Religious Right certainly contributed to the conservative swing this country has taken.
His connection to the entertainment industry through the Family Channel succeeded in beginning the movement towards more family-oriented programming.
However, I can not ignore the disturbing trend towards tolerance and coexistence that is succeeding to bring us closer to a united Church, which he seems to advocate.
Not too long ago, One night, I caught Jack van Impe on his show, saying that he agreed with the Pope on almost every issue.
Now here is a man who has done a tremendous amount of prophetic research, and yet he is contributing to the ecumenical movement.
SATANISM The underlying power to all occult practices, is Satanismthe worship of Satan(or Lucifer) in opposition to the worship of God.
It is the worship of Satan which has been the driving force behind the handful of men who have perpetuated the Illuminati conspiracy.
Chapter Nine The word 'witchcraft', is derived from the Anglo-Saxon word 'wicca-craft' which means 'craft of the wise', and is considered the world's oldest religion.
It is a descendent of the Druids, who existed in the British Isles, Scotland, and Ireland.
The Druids were members of a priesthood made up of the upper class of Celt society, who were exempt from taxes and manual labor.
Their name comes from the Celtic word ""daur"" which means ""oak tree"", which was sacred to them.
It was alleged that they possessed strange powers, such as being able to produce mists, storms, floods, and cast spells.
As it turned out, these men were greatly feared, because some of their rituals included both animal and human sacrifice.
The earliest mention of these ""men of the oak"" was in the 3rd century BC, and what little information that is available, comes from Roman and Greek historians, and ancient records found in Ireland.
For the most part, their legacy has been passed down orally from generation to generation.
Their biggest night of the year, was the ceremony known as the ""Vigil of Samhein"", on October 31st, in honor of Samhein, the Horned Hunter of the Night (Satan, as seen in the Pentagram), the Oak God of the Underworld, and the God of the Dead.
Many of their rites centered around such astronomical occurrences as equinoxes and solstices.
It is believed that Stonehenge, built in 2750 BC on the Salisbury Plain in southwest England, and transferred into a solar observatory by 1900 BC, was later used by the Druids as a temple for sacrifices.
The lineal successor to the religion of the Druids, was British Witchcraft, which became strong in the 120O's.
Witches are polytheists who believe in the superiority of the mother goddess who controls the fertility rites, and the process of birth and life.
They also worship a horned god which represents death and the afterlife; and a number of lesser deities.
White Sorcery is practiced out of the La Clavicule de Solomon(""The Key of Solomon""), which was said to be written by King Solomon, but was actually written in the 14th or 15th century.
Witches claim that their religion is not anti-Christian, because they worship deities in existence before the advent of the Christian era.
Chapter Nine witchcraft, and their churches are recognized as tax-deductable entities.
It has been reported, that the spread of Witchcraft and the occult, has been the job of an inner circle of the Illuminati, which is known as the Council of 13, or the Grand Druid Council.
The deities they worship are actually demons, and the ""horned hunter of the night"" is actually Satan.
Many witches have realized, that in order to get more ""power"", they have to surrender more of themselves, moving into the direction of all-out Satan worship.
Satanic charms, amulets, and talismans have now infiltrated our society, even our churches.
The charms, which attract demons, are used in demon worship and to cast spells.
It had been impossible to buy them, and were only available in witchcraft bookstores, because they were handmade and sold to occult stores.
Now they are marketed commercially to spread the influence of witchcraft.
The most notorious of these was called the Unicorn Horn, and was a symbol used by Druid priests.
It is now called the Italian Horn, and it means that you trust Satan for your finances.
It is available from most jewelry manufacturers and is frequently worn.
Remember the peace symbol, which was prominently displayed by the anti-war protesters of the 1960's and 70's.
During the Middle Ages, this symbol was known as the ""crow's foot"", the insignia of Satan.
It was first used as a ""peace"" symbol on February 21,1958, at the Aldermaston Easter Walk in England, which was led by Lord Bertrand Russell, a member of the Fabian Society.
Cooper, author of Fairy Tales-Alleqories of the Inner Life , fairy tales are linked to the occult.
Cooper said that the fairy tale practice of kissing frogs, is a pagan ritual that dates back to prehistoric days.
In the story of Hansel and Gretel, the two children encountered a witch.
Besides being able to get occult courses established at many colleges and universities, one of the greatest victories of the occult movement, was to infiltrate the music world.
The music that was performed during Druid ceremonies, had a ""rock"" beat, and they knew that when certain chords were struck, it acted as a hypnotic suggestion to stir rebellion.
Witches have their own language, and some rock songs have incorporated these coded incantations.
On the surface, what sounds like a bunch of strange words, is actually an intentionally written lyric of hidden meaning.
Acid rocker Jimi Hendrix said in an interview with Life magazine that ""music is a spiritual thing of its own.
Some of Elton John's songs have allegedly been written in witch language.
It became one of the biggest selling records in music history, and is still one of the most requested songs on rock format radio stations.
Page said it was taken from the writings of a Druid priest, hundreds of years ago, which was based on the Bible.
The song also used a process known as ""backward masking"", which is accomplished when a phrase is recorded on tape, played backwards, then recorded again on the master tape.
Revolution"", and hallucinating from drugs, was imagining that there were no windows or doors in the room, and that fire was coming at him.
On the live album of Black Oak Arkansas, called ""Raunch and Roll"", during the song, ""The Day Electricity Came to Arkansas"" the lead singer Jim Landy utters something unintelligible, then laughs.
To be fair, I have to relate information to the contrary by critics of backward masking.
In the opinion of the judge, in his statement to the court, when any segment of human speech is played backwards, it will inevitably contain sounds than can be interpreted as cohesive sentences, but they are purely coincidental and not evil messages put there by the bands for the purpose of ""brainwashing"" listeners of the song.
The face of the church's founder, Anton LaVey, can be seen in a window on the inside cover.
The Church is located on California Street, and the song refers to 1969, when the Satanic Bible was written by LaVey.
In January, 1983, Congressman Jack McCoy proposed legislation that would require albums which utilized ""back-masking"" to bear warning labels.
If such a record failed to display such a warning, then it would be confiscated.
When it got to the Senate, they amended the penalty to a Class A Misdemeanor, and when it was sent back to the House for concurrence, they tabled it.
McCoy vowed to reintroduce the Bill during the next session of Congress.
Many groups also use occult symbols on their album covers, even though the public doesn't think of it that way.
Rush and Starz, use the inverted five-pointed star(which represents Satan, the horned hunter of the night); the Blue Oyster Cult, used an inverted Satanic cross, with the bottom section replaced with an upside-down question mark.
Deep Purple has recorded in a 17th century castle that is said to be haunted by a demon who is a servant of the Babylonian god Baal.
The name of Ozzy Osbourne usually comes up, because he bit off the head of a bat in concert (because he thought it was a rubber one); and bit off the head of a dove in the office of the head of his record company; which lead to rumors of him throwing live puppies into the crowd during the 1983 ""Us"" Festival in California, and refusing to continue performing until they were returned dead.
This rumor grew out of an incident at an Alice Cooper concert where someone through a live chicken on the stage, and he through it back at the audience thinking it would fly away, but the bird was torn to pieces by the audience.
MTV, owned by Warner Communications, broadcasts rock music 24 hours a day to millions of cable subscribers across the country.
The Illuminati has been working behind the scenes to ensnare our youth, by weakening our moral fiber with pornography; encouraging the use of alcohol and drugs, and seeking the destruction of the family unit.
The 1980's and 90's have brought an explosion of interest in the supernatural, and its level of acceptance has increased because of graphic horror movies and rock music.
Chapter Nine Michael Myers, Jason, and Freddy Krueger(""Nightmare on Elm Street""), they could not be killed, and became heroes to the youth of this country who were fascinated by this kind of power.
Role-playing games, like Dungeons and Dragons, which contain occult material, have become wildly popular, even though the playing of those games have contributed to the deaths of some participants.
Many kids are being seduced into the occult because of the allure of having power, and feeling accepted.
Some come from disfunctional homes, being raised in an environment void of love.
The problem with this mentality, is that there are too many external conflicts.
Nothing has done more damage to the youth of this country, than to have prayer taken out of our schools.
Much of the decline of morality in this country can be traced to that single incident.
With the weapon of first amendment rights, our children are being bombarded with sex, violence, and drugs.
Others witnessed ""a great coronet of brilliant, shimmering blue"" appearing above his head.
Chapter Nine A biographer later wrote: ""Although he was only a little boy when she brought him from India to London, and although he hardly moved and did not speak when introduced at a party at Charing Cross, those who were present professed to feel a strange 'vibration' coming from him.
Years later this same vibration caused thousands to fall at his feet in homage, accepting him as their Messiah, when he addressed a huge International Conference of Theosophists in Holland.
A visitor to the conference afterwards testified, 'When he spoke, it was awe inspiring.
However, when he came to America in 1926, his occult powers failed him, and his spirit guides left him.
His speaking engagements were canceled, and he later denied that he was the ""Christ"", and renounced the Theosophical Society.
Because America, at that time, was still, for the most part, a Christian, Bible-believing nation, the spirit that inhabited Jiddu had to leave him.
He retired in 1929, broke all connections with organized philosophy, and became a popular mystic writer and speaker.
In 1969, he established the Krishnamurti Foundation of America to publish and distribute his teachings.
However, his library and archives are continuing to feed a new generation his brand of New Age teaching.
He is listed as a contributing editor of the Bruce Lee magazine, the official publication and voice of the Jun Fan Jeet Kune Do nucleus.
Collaborating with other occultists, she claimed to be working out mankind's spiritual destiny, from a remote Himalayan retreat, and that her writings were telepathically sent to her by the Tibetan Djuhal Khul, who said that there was going to be a new world government and a new world religion.
Years later, their president, Perry Coles, tried to downplay the sinister overtones, by saying that ""lucis"" comes from the Latin word ""lux"", which means ""of light"", and the word is used in the context of being ""bringers of light"", and doesn't have anything to do with Satanism.
Yet they are one of the biggest publishers of occult material in the country.
Robert McNamara, Donald Regan, Henry Kissinger, David Rockefeller, Paul Volcker, and George Shultz.
In her Externalization of the Hierarchy she said that the New Age will be in full bloom after the global crisis occurs and the world turns to ""Christ"" for leadership.
She felt that the term ""Christ"" could be applied to any person who reached an elevated state of consciousness, thereby achieving a divine status.
Only a few souls found enough favor with the spiritual hierarchy of the reincarnated ancient Masters to be chosen to return to earth as an avatar.
Bailey said that her ""hidden Masters"" told her that 1975 was the time to begin open propagation of their plans.
They hope to usher in the ""Age of Aquarius"" and their goal is a oneworld religion.
It is nothing more than a revival of the ancient Babylonian religion, and a dressed-up version of witchcraft, which they hope to introduce to every aspect of society.
They are working to integrate New Age teaching into religion, and in the process, they are trying to discredit Christianity.
For instance, New Agers have latched onto the ""lost years"" of Jesus, the period between his boyhood and the beginning of his ministry, which are omitted from the Bible.
Kevin Ryerson, the demon channeler for actress Shirley Maclaine, says that his spirit guides told him that ""the man Jesus studied for 18 years in India before he returned to Jerusalem.
Elizabeth Clare Prophet in her book The Lost Years of Jesus , said that she discovered, through documents she found in the Himalayas, that when Jesus was a youth, he joined a caravan to the East, and studied under ""wise men"" who taught him mysticism.
He claimed that Jesus traveled through Egypt, India and Persia, and it was in Persia that he learned from the Mystery Religion teachers.
New Age leaders claim this information was censored in the 6th century by the Church.
A book called Jesus Lived in India, by Holger Kerston, has gone as far as to say that after the ""resurrection"" of Jesus, he returned to India, and that his tomb in Kashmir can still be seen.
Chapter Nine dawning of a New Age, an evil Satan who doesn't exist, will vanish from man's memory.
New Agers refer to the writings of a 14th century gnostic group, called Luciferians, who worshiped him, believing him to be the brother of God, and taught that he was wrongly cast out of Heaven, and would someday be vindicated.
The December, 1986 issue of the Omega-Letter reported that the New Age movement is the fastest growing religion in America.
People are being drawn into the New Age movement because of its propaganda regarding social injustices, environmental concerns, and ending world hunger.
Personal and Social Transformation in the 1980's, published in 1980, which has become a handbook for action by the New Age movement, she claimed that the movement had grown to such an extent, that thousand of groups are now a part of the network, including: Human Potential Movement, New Thought, Consciousness Movement, Holistic Movement, Whole Earth, and Unity.
Association for Humanistic Psychology, the Holistic Health Organizing Committee, Association for World Organization, Political Science Committee of the Institute for the New Age, Institute for the Study of Conscious Evolution, Naropa Institute, Hunger Project, Planetary Citizens, Planetary Initiative for the World We Choose, and the Movement for a New Society.
Lola Davis, author of Toward a World Religion for the New Age , identified the New Age ""Christ"" as Lord Maitreya, who has been labeled as an avatar and a world teacher.
It promised that the ""Christ"" would appear ""within the next two months"" and that ""his message will be heard inwardly, telepathically, by all people in their own language.
This man has been identified as Rahmat Ahmad, and is the great-great grandson of Mirza Ghulam Ahmad, who was born in the 1800's in India, and claimed that he was the Messiah, sent to unite the entire world in a New World Religion.
It has been revealed that he was born in February, 1962 in Rabwah, Pakistan, then went to England in July, 1977, in preparation for his role.
Just as the birth of Jesus was prophesied by many Old Testament prophets, New Agers believed that the birth of the new ""Christ"", Lord Maitreya was prophesied by Jeanne Dixon.
Shortly before sunrise on February 5,1962, Dixon had an unusual experience.
For several months, astrologers had predicted that an earth-shaking event on that day, because of a rare conjunction of Jupiter, Saturn and Venus in the constellation of Pisces.
A similar conjunction which occurred nearly 2,000 years ago, is believed by some to explain the ""bright star in the east"" at the time of the birth of Jesus.
As she looked outside, she didn't see any trees, or the street, just a blue sky, above a barren desert.
Coming from the sun in every direction were brilliant rays which seemed to be drawing the earth toward it like a magnet.
Stepping out of the brightness of the sun's rays, hand-in-hand, was a Pharaoh and Queen Nefertiti.
The eyes of the child were ""all-knowing""(the all-seeing eye on the Illuminati seal?), full of wisdom and knowledge.
Rays of light burst forth from the baby, blending with those of the sun, obliterating the Pharaoh from her sight.
Off to the left, Dixon saw Queen Nefertiti walking away, thousands of miles into the past.
She paused beside a large brown water jug, and as she stooped to cup her hands and drink, she was stabbed in the back by a dagger.
The baby, meanwhile, had grown to manhood, and a small cross formed above him, expanding until it dripped over the earth in every direction.
At the same time, people of every race, religion, and color, all knelt and lifted their arms in worship; and were all as one.
Dixon interpreted this to mean that there was a child born somewhere in the Middle East, shortly after February 5,1962, of humble peasant origin, possibly a direct descendent of Queen Nefertiti.
Her husband, Pharaoh Amenhotep IV had changed his name to lkhnaton, and built a city, Tell-el-Amarna, protected by impregnable cliffs, to worship the sun god Aton.
Tutankhaton, who married the third daughter, became Pharaoh at the age of twelve, and changed his name to Tutankhamon, destroying all traces of Atonism, returning to the worship of earlier gods.
If the child isn't a direct descendent, the sun could be a symbol of the one world religion that is to come.
When the Illuminati was established, their secret code utilized the planetary symbol for the sun to signify the Order.
Robert Mueller, a former Assistant Secretary-General of the UN, and a member of the board of Planetary Citizens, has supported a one-world religion organized along the same lines as the UN, and suggested that the UN flag be displayed in all the churches and that a universal Bible be written.
His views were molded by his ""Master"", former Secretary-General U Thant, a Buddhist and a one worlder.
In his book The New Genesis , he calls for the New Age to be ushered in by the year 2000.
We can see New Age philosophy being advocated on television, and in the movies.
New Age meditation techniques have been secretly introduced in our public schools, and there seems to be no end as to how far they will go to spread the New Age message.
Chapter Nine had been involved with the Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, later converting to Hinduism.
The New Age movement is nothing more than a politically-correct form of witchcraft, and its purpose is to deceive.
What we want is a man of sufficient stature to hold the allegiance of the people, and to lift us out of the economic morass into which we are sinking.
Such a man will arise, and his ascent to power is discussed in various places in the Bible.
I believe that the Illuminati has been working behind the scenes to create an environment, that will enable one man to gain enough power to finally pull the countries of Europe together into one political entity.
Chapter Ten devour the whole earth, and shall trod it down, and break it in pieces.
And there was given unto him a mouth speaking great things and blasphemies; and power was given unto him to continue forty and two months.
And the beast that was, and is not, even he is the eighth, and is of the seven, and goeth into perdition.
And the ten horns which thou sawest are ten kings, which have received no kingdom yet; but receive power as kings one hour with the beast.
The Scriptures have given us an excellent indication of the origin of the man who will be known as the Antichrist.
Daniel 8:8 refers to the four powers who are Greece, Turkey, Syria, and Egypt; and Daniel 7:7-8 speaks of the seventh world empire, consisting of ten kingdoms, and the rise of another.
Let's look at the ten horns or kingdoms, which right away has led many to think that this represented the original Common Market countries of France, West Germany, Italy, Belgium, the Netherlands, Luxembourg, England, Denmark, Ireland, and Greece.
The impact of the theory was lessened upon the later addition of Spain, Portugal, and Austria, which made a total of thirteen nations in what is now called the European Union.
Belgium, Denmark, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Monaco, Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, and the United Kingdom.
According to Daniel 7:20, this leader of the eleventh country, will go against three of these nations, and defeat them.
Yet, Revelation speaks of the ten kings pledging their allegiance to the Antichrist.
Will he defeat the three nations, and replace them in the federation with his, and two others.
Or will the three defeated nations remain, under the leadership of the eleventh.
What is the purpose for the Antichrist to go against these three nations.
Is it because they were not originally part of the revived Holy Roman Empire; or if they were, what else could prompt him to attack these countries.
One clue, is that these nations may be apprehensive about uniting behind the political leadership of the Antichrist.
For example, when the European Community met in Maastricht, the Netherlands, in 1991, Great Britain and Denmark voted against the initiation of a common currency.
The Aramaeans, a seminomadic people who migrated from the Arabian desert around the third century BC, into Syria and Mesopotamia, have also been called Syrians.
The land of the Chaldeans was in southern Babylonia, in what is now southern Iraq.
These references seem to point to an Arabic background, and are given credence because they consider themselves the enemies of Israel.
In the seventh chapter of Revelation, John omitted the name of Dan when he listed the tribes of Israel.
The people that destroyed Jerusalem and the Temple in 70 AD, were the Romans.
Charlemagne, Charles V, Louis XIV, Napoleon, Kaiser Wilhelm, Benito Mussolini, and Hitler all tried to take over Europe to unify it, but failed.
The Antichrist will be a strong political leader, who will gain strength through statesmanship and promises of peace.
On December 6,1961, McGeorge Bundy, Special Assistant to President Kennedy, told the Economic Club of Europe, that if Western Europe would unite as one power to have economic, military and political unity, they would be a truly great power.
Time magazine even wrote that the real aim of the Common Market was to become a single country.
Through the policies of the Antichrist, he will revolutionize industry, agriculture, commerce, and business to bring economic prosperity.
PRIEURE' DE SION In the past ten years, an incredible revelation has been made in regard to the unity of Europe, the forces behind it, and its relationship to the man who will rise to prominence in Europe's political community.
Let me relate the information as it has been presented, and afterward I will comment on how it may fit into the scheme of things.
Before you read the section, 1 have to warn you that these are views which represent a radical departure from those traditionally held by Christians.
I do not share these views, but only include them because of how they may have a bearing on prophecy.
False Teachings Unholy Theories In 1891, in Rennes-le-Chateau, a tiny southern French mountaintop village, parish priest Berenger Sauniere, made a discovery while doing renovations to restore a church which had been dedicated to Mary Magdalene in 1059.
The altar stone had been removed, which rested on two old Visigoth columns, one of which was found to be hollow.
Chapter Ten which carried the seal of Queen Blanche de Castille, mother of King Louis IX; and the other dated from 1644 by Francois-Pierre d'Hautpoul.
Of the other two documents, the Testament of Henri d'Hautpoul, which was dated 1695, was written in French, and is believed to be a complex code detailing a state secret; and the other parchment, written in the 1780's by a priest, Antoine Bigou, was written in Latin, and contained two coded Biblical texts, one on each side of the page, which are excerpts from the New Testament.
Sauniere went to Paris to present the parchments to Church authorities.
Also during the restoration, a flagstone dating to the 7th or 8th century was removed, allegedly revealing a burial chamber which contained skeletons; and because of the amount of money he would soon begin to spend a treasure of some sort.
There has been much speculation about what this treasure could have been.
The Grail was believed to be a chalice made of gold, which was first used by Melchizedek as he offered bread and wine to Abraham on Mount Moriah.
It was guarded in a Phoenician temple in Tyre, the city of Hiram, the king who designed and built Solomon's Temple.
It fell into the hands of the Queen of Sheba, who gave it to King Solomon, and it was last used by Jesus and the disciples during the Last Supper.
Other traditions have said that it was used by Mary Magdalene or Joseph of Arimathea to catch the blood of Jesus as it dripped off of his body while he hung on the cross.
It was believed that Joseph took the cup to Glastonbury in England; while others claim that Mary took it with her to Marseilles in France.
The Cathars, who descended from the Bogomils in Bulgaria, and existed around the 10th and the 11th centuries, were perceived to be a wealthy people, and were said to possess a treasure beyond material wealth.
In January, 1244, three months before the fall of their fortress in Montsegur, two men got out with the gold, silver, and money.
As their defeat seemed eminent, the northern invaders served them with terms of surrender in March, and gave the Cathars two weeks to make a decision.
One of the terms of this ""cease-fire"", was that if anyone tried to escape, they would be killed.
A day before the surrender, when they would have been released, four men escaped with a rope, down the sheer western face of the fortress.
But if all their gold and silver had been smuggled out three months before, what did they risk their lives to protect.
Others believe that the treasure Sauniere found, may have been the Temple treasure.
Chapter Ten believed that they may have gotten all of the Temple wealth, including the Ark of the Covenant.
Or, could the treasure discovered by Sauniere been the treasure plundered from the Temple grounds by the Knights Templar.
Many of the Crusaders who went to Palestine to fight against the Moslem invaders were French Catholics, and by 1061, they had conquered Jerusalem, and established Godfroi de Bouillon, Duke of Lower Lorraine, on the throne of Jerusalem.
His aims were to possess the wealth of the world, including the Temple treasure, and to establish world government which would be controlled by a Merovingian king in Jerusalem.
Through alliances and intermarriages, this line continued through Godfroi.
This bloodline was known as a ""royal tradition...founded on the rock of Sion,"" which was considered to be equal to other European dynasties.
Their headquarters was at the Abbey of Notre Dame du Mont de Sion, in southern Jerusalem on Mount Sion, where the ruins of a Byzantine basilica from the 4th century stood, which was called the Mother of All Churches.
It was Godfroi's younger brother, Baudouin I, who became the first king of Jerusalem; it was the Prieure' de Sion that created the Knights Templar as its military arm.
In 1118, Hugues de Payen, a nobleman from Champagne, and Godfroi de St.
Omer, a French Knight, along with seven other Knights, founded the Order of the Knights Templars.
Augustine, and to use their swords, arms, and strength to defend the Christian faith.
They also took vows of chastity and poverty, and promised not to join any other organization.
They pledged to ""keep the roads and highways safe...for the protection of pilgrims"" and not to surrender any wall, or foot of land.
They offered their services to Baudouin I, the King of Jerusalem, and an entire wing of the royal palace on the Temple Mount was given to them to be used as a living quarters.
In 1139, Pope Innocent II decreed that these Knights of Christ owed their allegiance to no one but the Pope (thus becoming a military arm of the Catholic Church), and they began to wear white robes with a red cross on the front.
It is known, that for nine years, the Knights were searching for something beneath the Temple grounds, and evidence points to the fact that they might have found something.
It is believed that 24 of these locations were under the Temple Mount, which was plundered by the Templars and taken to Europe, where it became the basis for the establishment of the international banking system.
In 1153, a nobleman, Bertrand de Blanchefort, who lived only a couple of miles from Rennes-le-Chateau, became the 4th Grand Master of the Knights Templars.
He escalated their growth into the diplomatic and political circles, and established a Templar presence in the area.
Their numbers soon increased to 9,000, and the Order spread to Tripoli, Antioch, Cyprus, Portugal, Castile, Leon, Arragon, France, Flanders, the Netherlands, England, Scotland, Ireland, Germany, Italy and Sicily.
In 1187, after the fall of Jerusalem to Saladin, they were forced to move their headquarters to the island of Cyprus; and in 1188, the Prieure' de Sion withdrew their control from the Knights Templars, and divorced themselves from them.
They moved their headquarters to a Temple in Paris, and through their organization and wealth, the Knights became the bankers of Europe.
By the end of the 12th century, they had 30,000 members, and they fought in the wars of their own countries.
Between 1303-05, King Philip had Pope Boniface Vlll kidnapped and killed, and had his successor, Pope Benedict Xl, poisoned; then had his own man, Clement V, elected to the vacant papal throne.
Pope Clement worked with Philip to begin a campaign to destroy the power and the influence of the Knights, the Merovingian bloodline, and to confiscate their treasures.
In Germany, Spain, and Cyprus, they were acquitted of any charges; but not in England, Italy, and France.
On October 13,1307, all the Templars in France were arrested, amidst charges by a former member, and an investigation by Pope Clement, who said that they appeared to serve Christ, but actually worshipped Lucifer.
Chapter Ten silver bust of a woman's head, with a hinged top, which when opened, contained two head bones wrapped in a white cloth, with a red cloth around that.
They were believed to be part of the skeletal remains of Mary Magdalene.
It was revealed, that part of the initiation, required the initiate to deny, curse, and spit at the cross, as part of a gesture symbolizing St.
Peter's denial of Christ, thus introducing the candidate to the Order as a sinner, so they could teach him the ways of Christianity.
In actuality, the Knights had actually become opposed to the Pope, when they realized the Vatican's pagan relationship to sun worship; and since the Catholic Church had become so identified with St.
In 1312, Pope Clement ordered that the Knights Templars were to be suppressed.
On March 18,1314, Jacques de Molay, the 22nd Grand Master of the Knights, Geoffrey de Charney, and two of their highest officers were burned at the stake for trying to overthrow the government.
In England, where the Templars established the first modern Masonic lodge at York, it was identified as the York Rite; while in France, it became known as the Scottish Rite.
To signify the accomplishments of the Order, it was made the highest attainable degree in Masonry.
Sauniere's niece, Madame James of Montazels, inherited the parchments in 1917, and kept them until 1965 when she sold them to Capt.
Only two of the parchments have been released, the contents of the other two have not been revealed.
In the original sources concerning the Holy Grail, references are not to a cup, but to a mystery.
In the 1180's, ""Le Roman de Perceval"", a poem by Chretien de Troyes, chronicles one, Perceval, who seeks his knighthood.
Chapter Ten King"" he sees the Grail, which is golden and is studded with jewels.
Perceval discovers that he is a member of the ""Grail family"" because the custodian of the Grail is his uncle.
However, the story lived on, becoming closely aligned with King Arthur.
The most noted version is ""Parzival"", which was written between 1195 and 1216 by Wolfram von Eschenbach, a Bavarian Knight who claimed that Chretien's version was inaccurate because Wolfram received his information from a more reliable source.
But more important, is his preoccupation with the Grail family, the genealogy, or bloodline.
So therefore, the Grail actually had more to do with blood, and not a cup which held blood.
In 1964, an ancient parchment scroll was excavated on the western shore of the Dead Sea, at the ruins of the fortress of Masada.
The Roman Army spent three years with a legion of 6,000 men, and 15,000 Jewish slaves, to build an assault tower in order to destroy the last vestiges of Jewish resistance.
Either the Roman centurions were unaware of this group which were separated from the main complex, or they were allowed to remain where they had fallen, just as the three skeletons found in the palace at the northern end of the complex, which were believed to be that of Eleazar ben Ja'ir, the Jewish commander, his wife and child.
Chapter Ten The document which was discovered, had been written on the evening of April 15, 70 AD, just after the Roman battering ram had compromised the fortress gate, and was pulled back, to await the Roman attack which would come at first light.
The document was signed by Yeshua ben Ya'akob ben Gennesareth, who described himself as a ""son of eighty years"" and the last heir of the Hasmonean Kings of Israel.
This document was the 15th parchment to be discovered on Masada, and it is believed that it was smuggled out of Israel by a rogue archaeologist, and taken to Russia.
It is believed that the Last Supper was actually a meeting to plan a way for Jesus to cheat death.
During the crucifixion, what the Bible said was a sponge soaked in vinegar, was said to actually have been a drug that made Jesus appear as though he were dead.
Joseph of Arimathea then went to Pilate to ask for permission to claim the body, so that it could be interred in a tomb owned by Joseph.
To substantiate these facts, it is pointed out that the place of the crucifixion had to be near the tomb.
While the other gospels state that he was crucified at Golgotha, ""the place of the skull"", John 19:41 says that he was crucified in a garden, where a new sepulchre had been hewn by Joseph.
This garden was actually ""Golgeth"", the ""wheel press"", where olives were pressed into oil, which was the Garden of Gethsemane.
Some have even theorized, that Joseph was actually the former husband of Mary, who had left Nazareth, and established himself at Jerusalem.
Inside the tomb, an Essene physician was waiting to revive Jesus, thereby creating the illusion of a resurrection.
In one, the Second Treatise of the Great Seth, it talks about Jesus escaping his death on the cross through substitution, who was identified as Simon of Cyrene.
An ancient document, found in the 4th century, in the library of a building used by Greek monks, said that Nicodemus and Joseph conspired to retrieve the body of Jesus so that it could be revived by Essene physicians.
Chapter Ten text of an Essene scribe, and revealed that Jesus was the son of Mary and an Essene teacher who was not identified.
Because of the Essene medical knowledge, he was able to survive the Crucifixion, and by appearing to his disciples afterwards, make it seem as though he had risen from the dead.
In 1963, scrolls known as the Talmud of Jmmanuel, were discovered by Greek Catholic priest, Isa Rashid, in a cave he claimed was the burial cave of Jesus.
Written in old Aramaic, sealed in protective resin, and buried under a flat rock, it is believed to have been written by Judas Iscariot.
Pieces of the scrolls were missing, some unreadable, some deteriorating, yet, what had survived, was completely contrary to the story of Jesus as related in the Bible.
The document claims that Joseph of Arimathea realized that Jesus was still alive, and quickly went to Pilate to request the body, taking it back to his own tomb.
There was a secret second entrance, and it was through here that his friends were able to bring the herbs and salves necessary to provide medical treatment.
After a few appearances to his disciples, he went to Syria, then to India, and the area now known as west Pakistan, Afghanistan, and the Himalayas, where he continued to teach.
These scrolls were in the possession of his first born son, who returned to Jerusalem, and hid them in the burial cave of Joseph of Arimathea where Jesus had been taken.
In 367, Bishop Athanasius of Alexandria made a list of writings which were to become what we now know as the New Testament.
His selections were ratified by the Church Council of Hippo in 393, and again four years later, by the Council of Carthage.
Therefore certain ""books"" were left out, and were ""lost"" even though they may have been historically accurate.
One of the primary duties of the Church fathers between the 7th and 12th centuries, was to obtain manuscripts from collections in Eastern countries, which contained information that differed from the version accepted and taught by the Church.
The first mention of the resurrection of Jesus appears in 1 Corinthians 15:38, because this was actually written about ten years before Mark was written.
Therefore the stories concerning the resurrection of Jesus were unknown to Paul.
The word ""seen"" was translated from the Greek word ""ophthe"", which means to have one's eyes opened to realms beyond this physical world, which refers to visions.
Chapter Ten Nearly a hundred ""gospels"" appeared during the first three centuries, and to preserve continuity and protect the new Christian religion, the four gospels of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John were chosen.
All the writers of the Gospels had, concerning Jesus, was just an outline of the man.
There were no eyewitnesses to consult, so where there was a void in detail, they just referred to the Hebrew Scriptures to fill in the blanks.
It actually ends without the disciples' assertion that Jesus rose from the dead, and only says that the women were told that he had risen.
The passage was part of the story about Lazarus being raised from the dead, and hinted that he wasn't actually dead.
Along with the exclusion, there was also an addition, because the original manuscript ended with the death and burial of Christ, and the discovery of an empty tomb.
Yet, the version that exists today, includes the Resurrection, which was added in the 2nd century, making the last twelve verses of Mark fraudulent.
However, research by Ivan Panin(outlined in a booklet called The Last Twelve Verses of Mark) , utilizing analysis of numeric design, has done alot to reaffirm its authenticity.
The gospels of Luke and Matthew used Mark as a source for their writings.
While Matthew's genealogy of Jesus only goes back to Abraham, Luke's goes back to Adam.
Where Mark mentions only an empty tomb, in Luke, the women actually go in and see for themselves that it is empty.
Luke goes more into depth regarding the subsequent physical appearances of Jesus.
Matthew was put together about 85, and allegedly not by the disciple Matthew.
It also alluded to Daniel in the lion's den, and how he came out alive, when he applied the story to Jesus in regard to him surviving the tomb.
The disciples were told to baptize ""in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,"" which it is alleged that Jesus could not have said, because it actually represented a theological premise that didn't occur till much later.
John has come to be regarded as the most accurate of the Gospels, even though it is believed to have been written over a period of years by theologians, at the Greek city of Ephesus, who in 100, sought to fill the void in the contents of the other three.
John has the risen Jesus being seen by only Mary Magdalene, where in other books, other women accompanied her; and also singles her out as being a primary mourner.
This hint at a more intimate relationship has given rise to a theory as to the actual role that Mary had in the life of Jesus.
In the other three gospels, the Last Supper is portrayed as a Passover meal, after which Jesus was crucified; however in John, the crucifixion occurred before the Passover, whereby John puts more emphasis on the footwashing that occurred.
This discrepancy had been explained by saying that John was using the lunar calendar, while the others were using the solar calendar, however, it is now believed that John's purpose was to present Jesus as the Passover lamb of the Jews, who is killed as their sacrifice.
Where in Luke, only Peter goes to inspect the tomb; in John, it was Peter and John.
Critics claim that the story of Doubting Thomas(John 20:19-31) wasn't true, based on the premise that Jesus was tied to the cross, rather than nailed.
Simon Peter, the ""Rock"" upon whom Jesus said he would build his church, was believed to be the first to ""see"" Jesus after the resurrection, and it was through his efforts that the philosophy of Christianity was perpetuated.
The primary contention is that the New Testament was doctored to present Jesus as being divine.
In a 1977 book, called The Myth of God incarnate , 7 scholars and professors from prominent American seminaries seriously questioned whether Jesus was Lord, and said that the Bible should be updated by having all traces of the deity of Jesus removed.
They said that Jesus didn't claim to be divine, but was promoted to that status by early Christians who were under pagan influences.
What Did Jesus Really Say? , a report by 77 Biblical scholars, which were part of the Jesus Seminar, says that Jesus did not say about 80% of the words which are attributed to him in the four gospels.
In October, 1994, the Seminar convened and decided that the virgin birth of Jesus was fabricated.
This group is now working on a new Bible commentary that will reflect all of its findings.
The Gospel of John doesn't mention the birth of Jesus, but it covers the conclusion of his ministry.
The incident of the wedding at Cana is only mentioned in John, and is unusual in that the bride and groom are not identified, yet Jesus his disciples, and his mother were there.
When they ran out of wine, it was Jesus who performed the miracle of turning water into wine.
The question was askedwhy Jesus would use his holy powers for such an insignificant purpose; unless it was his own wedding.
Researchers have analyzed John 2:9-10, and feel that where the head of the feast is speaking to the bridegroom, it is actually Jesus that he is addressing.
It is argued that this marriage was Jesus being married to Mary Magdalene, who it is believed was the woman whom Jesus cast the demons out of, who washed and annointed the feet of Jesus, and who is identified as Mary of Bethany.
She figures heavily in the gospels, and it was to her that Jesus first revealed himself after the Resurrection.
Chapter Ten Around 70 AD, Mary, the wife of Jesus, took his children, and fled the Holy land to escape the Roman destruction of Jerusalem.
They made their way to a Jewish community in Provence, in southern France, where the lineage of Jesus, through marriage, was joined with the royal family of the Franks, thus creating the royal Merovingian dynasty.
It could be that the Holy Grail, ""Sang Raal"", or ""Royal Blood"", could actually represent the womb of Mary Magdalene, which produced the bloodline.
It is even conjectured that French cathedrals like Notre Dame, were built in honor of Mary Magdalene, and not the mother of Jesus.
During the 5th century, the Sicambrians, a Germanic tribe called the Franks, crossed the Rhine River into Gaul into what is now Belgium and northern France.
Merovee was the first king of the Merovingian bloodline, and he is surrounded in legend.
When his mother was already pregnant by King Clodio, she went swimming in the ocean, where she was raped by a sea creature ""similar to a Quinotaur"", so that when Merovee was born, the blood that coursed through his veins was a combination of both, which gave him superhuman powers.
The Spartans lived in the southern Greek peninsula of Arcadia, later migrating across the Aegean Sea to build the city of Troy.
According to the Iliad, by the Greek poet Homer, the founder of Troy was Dar-dan-us.
Over the centuries the Spartans made their way into southern France, while the Trojans moved north and west into Germany, Belgium and northern France, following the Danube River, eventually settling in the province of Lorraine.
In the apocryphal book of 1 Maccabees, it was written that the Spartans were related to the Jews and were of the stock of Abraham, and for various reasons, were believed to have been from the tribe of Dan.
In the Bible, the Danites were represented by a serpent, an eagle, a lion, and bees.
The eagle's wings on the back of the lion in the 7th chapter of Dan may symbolize Dan breaking away from the tribe of Judah.
When Moses built the Tabernacle, he chose two men to head up the project, Bezaleel, of the tribe of Judah, and Aholiab of the tribe of Dan; and after it was completed, the tribes were positioned around it, and instructed to display their standard.
Dan was in the north, and given the symbol of Scorpio, which according to the Egyptian Zodiac was a snake; and yet, Ahiezer, captain of the tribe, chose an eagle, considered a hunter of snakes.
The symbol of ancient Spartan Greece was an eagle, as was the symbol of ancient Trojan Rome.
The offspring of Merovee were noted for a birthmark, a small red cross, above their heart or between their shoulder blades, which became their symbol.
The Merovingians were known as sorcerer-kings, who could heal, had clairvoyant powers, and could telepathically communicate with animals.
They wore powerful amulets, and were called the ""long-haired Kings"" because they didn't cut their hair.
Childeric's son, Clovis 1 adopted Christianity, converting to Catholicism, and in 496, he was given the title ""Novus Constantinus"" by the Bishop of Rome, giving him the authority to preside over the rebirth of a ""Christianized"" Roman Empire, consolidating the power of the Church, and creating a tie between Church and State.
During his rule, the Frank kingdom grew to cover most of France and Germany.
Chapter Ten Clotaire I U Chilperic I U Clotaire II 11 Dagobert I 11 Sigisbert III 11 Dagobert II 11 Childeric III The Church had a hand in the assassination of Dagobert II, and Childeric III was deposed by Pepin III, the first of the Carolingian dynasty.
But the bloodline continued in the personage of Sigisbert IV, who fled southward, taking on the surname ""Plant-Ard"" , and the title of the Count of Razes.
In 1976, the excommunication of traditionalist Archbishop Marcel Lefebvre by Pope Paul VI was expected.
He represented the conservative branch of the Roman Catholic Church, who fought against the modernization of the Church.
The Order held a convent at Blois on January 17,1981, the first since the one in Paris in 1956.
A man named Pierre Plantard de Saint-Clair was elected as their Grand Master.
He is the lineal descendant of King Dagobert II and the Merovingian dynasty.
His grandfather was a personal friend of Berenger Sauniere, and he owns land in the area of Rennes-le-Chateau.
In French records, he was listed as the Secretary-General of the Prieure' de Sion.
The organization is not limited to just restoring the Merovingian bloodline, and has many Jewish members, though the full extent of the membership is unknown.
He claimed that the real treasure was ""spiritual"" and consisted of a ""secret"" that would create a major social change regarding the restoration of the monarchy.
He revealed that their Order is on a timetable, and that their plans were unstoppable.
Plantard talked about unrest within the membership of the Prieure's AngloAmerican contingent.
The signatures of Gaylord Freeman, John Drick, and A Robert Abboud were found on their official correspondence.
Drick was the President, and on the Board of Directors of other companies, including Stepan Chemical, MCA, Oak Industries, and Central Illinois Public Service.
Freeman, an Illinois lawyer, was Chairman of the Board of First National, and on the Boards of other companies, including First Chicago Corporation, Atlantic-Richfield, Bankers Life and Casualty Co., Baxter Travenol Labs, and Northwest Industries.
He also chaired a Committee on inflation for the American Bankers Association.
Chapter Ten member of the MacArthur Foundation and a trustee of the Aspen Institute of Humanistic Studies.
Robert Abboud had also been Chairman of the Board of First National, and later became President of Occidental Petroleum Corp.
It was originally believed that the signatures were forged from a 1974 Annual Report, but it was later discovered they were produced with rubber stamps.
Though Freeman denied membership in the Prieure' de Sion, or of having any knowledge of their activities, Plantard has corroborated the information and said that their association with Freeman and other financiers, had more to do with their goal of European unity, which had become their primary concern.
During the 19th century, the Prieure' de Sion, working through Freemasonry and the Hie'ron du Val d'Or, attempted to establish a revival of the Holy Roman Empire, which would be a theocratic United States of Europe, ruled simultaneously by the Hapsburgs and by a radically reformed Church.
Their goals were thwarted by World War i and the fall of Europe's reigning dynasties.
However, they continued to work for a United Europe as a protection against the Soviets, and as a neutral power to serve as a balance between Russia and the United States.
Out of the Merovingian bloodline has come most of the ruling families of Europe, and some Roman Catholic Popes.
The genealogy of Dagobert's son, Sigisbert IV, can be traced through a dozen families, including the Houses of Luxembourg, Montpezat, Montesquiou, Sinclair, Stuart, Devonshire, Plantard, and ending with the Hapsburgs.
Even though the Hapsburg empire no longer exists, when the first parliament of the European Economic Community met in 1979, one of its primary delegates was Dr.
Otto von Hapsburg, the oldest son of Charles I, the last Hapsburg emperor.
He and son Karl have been among the leading proponents of a United Europe.
His obsession for the Spear ended, when he began his European military campaign against Austria for the purpose of getting this holy relic, which he did on October 13,1938.
When the War got closer to Germany, the Spear and other treasures were secured in a protective vault.
On March 30,1945, when the American invasion was expected, the treasures were moved again, however, the holy spear was accidentally left behind, where it was found by the Americans.
It is believed that the Prieure' de Sion has ""incontrovertible proof"" concerning Jesus and his continuing bloodline, and has been working to again bring this bloodline to power.
Satanic Intentions When my research started to head in this direction, and I began to read all of the ""evidence"" regarding the theories I have just outlined, I was in shock.
These revelations were so incredible, that they bordered on the impossible.
I say that, because these theories run completely contrary to everything I have been taught to believe.
But I believe that God had his hand on me, and He enabled me to separate fact from Satanic lies and deceit.
There seemed to be something here, but for the longest time I just couldn't put my finger on it.
By approaching these theories as being untruths, which they are, and isolating certain aspects of the premise, I think that the Prieure' de Sion becomes an important piece of the puzzle which I have been trying to assemble.
My theological beliefs are based on the fact that Jesus Christ, was, and is the Messiah, the son of God; that he was crucified, and died on the cross for the sins of the world; and that after three days, he rose from the dead, and commissioned his disciples to preach the gospel to all people.
I was raised to believe that, and as I have gotten older, it continues to be an undeniable fact.
Since I consider this to be the truth, there must be a reason why people would go to such lengths to disprove the resurrection of Jesus.
For years, the story has been building that Jesus planned the crucifixion to fake his death in order to fulfill Old Testament prophecies.
This basically says that the concept of Christianity is based on a lie, and that Christ was only a man, who was transformed into the son of God by early Church leaders.
However, with knowledge gleaned from archaeological excavations, the discovery and translation of new apocryphal and biblical texts, and new interpretations of scripture, the liberals have been successful in spreading this propaganda.
Even though Jesus has been accepted as a great man, a great teacher, and credited for the establishment of the largest religious group in the world, this movement has sought to strip away his divinity by saying that the Resurrection was concocted to draw people into the Church.
Chapter Ten that not only was the Crucifixion planned, but that Jesus was married to Mary Magdalene, and had children whose descendants became part of the Merovingian Royal Family.
Although not alot is known about this group, there seems to be evidence that they may have found much of the Temple treasure, and used this wealth to establish themselves as a financial power in the world.
The Merovingians ruled in Europe, and the Prieure' de Sion has been working behind the scenes to unite Europe under a single form of government.
After all these years, why does this group continue to work towards this goal.
The implication has been made that the group represents the Merovingian bloodline, and by extension, are the living descendants of Jesus Christ.
Now, go back to the Biblical references in Daniel and Revelation referred to earlier, which talk about the rise of a future leader of the reestablished Holy Roman Empire, which is actually Europe.
This leader will have to be a man capable of gaining the political support of all the European states.
He will be a military genius who will be able to give Europe a sense of security, and a brilliant statesman whose words and deeds will make him a champion of justice.
He will understand the problems of Europe, and bring peace to the land.
As time goes on, and more propaganda is spread concerning this bloodline of Jesus, more people will begin to believe it.
And remember, only two of the four documents discovered by Sauniere have been revealed; plus, it is believed that the Prieure' de Sion is also in possession of documentation that will prove their contention.
Something else that has to be considered, because of all the controversy and secrecy surrounding the Dead Sea Scrolls, is there something there that will contribute to this massive deception.
When the time is right, this information will be revealed, and it will be the final blow which will allow all of their plan to come together.
Who better to lead a united Europe, then a living descendant of Jesus Christ, who can use New Age philosophy to claim that he is a reincarnation of the Son of God.
A man who will embody everything they have been looking for in a leader.
A man whose rise to power seems to fulfill the Biblical prophecies of a coming Messiah.
In light of this possibility, and the obvious longevity of this group, circumstantial evidence would seem to point to the fact, that the Prieure' de Sion could be the ultimate power behind the Illuminati, using them to bring the world to a point where this man would be accepted with open arms, as the answer to the world's problems.
Once this leader takes his place as the head of the revived Holy Roman Empire, it will not be long before he is revealed to be the antagonist referred to in the Bible as the Antichrist.
It is my belief, that the purpose of the movement towards a New World Order, is to establish a one-world government, and to set the stage for the rise of the Antichrist.
THE DEAD SEA SCROLLS The ruins of the settlement of Khirbet Qumran stand on a cliff, a mile away from the northwest shore of the Dead Sea, in the Jordan Valley.
It is here, just south of Jericho, and twenty miles east of Jerusalem, that one of the most important archaeological discoveries in religious history have been made.
Early in 1947, three Bedouin shepherds from the Ta'amireh tribe had their flock in the area, and while Jum'a Muhammad was looking for a stray goat, he discovered a cave in the cliffs.
He threw a rock into the hole, and heard the sound of breaking pottery.
Two days later, his cousin, Muhammed Ahmed el-Hamed, returned and crawled into the small cave, which measured 6 feet by 20 feet.
The cave contained many earthenware jars, about 2 feet high and 10 inches wide.
Inside one of the jars, he discovered three leather rolls wrapped in linen.
These rolls turned out to be ancient scrolls, which have been referred to as the Dead Sea Scrolls.
A Christian shopkeeper, Khalil Iskander Shahin, and George Ishaya Shamoun, members of the Syrian Jacobite Church in Jerusalem, heard about the discovery and went to Qumran to verify the Bedouin's claims, finding some scroll fragments.
These 4 were in turn sold to the Syrian Metropolitan Athanasius Yeshua Samuel, head of the Syrian Jacobite Church.
Samuel later sent George Isaiah back to Qumran to carry out secret extensive excavations.
It is believed that other scrolls were discovered, the contents of which have not been revealed.
In September, 1947, Samuel took the four scrolls to Hems, Syria, where he met with the Patriarch of the Church.
In January, 1948, Sukenik received one of Samuel's scrolls, which turned out to be the Isaiah scroll, which he was able to inspect.
Although he was interested in purchasing the four scrolls, he couldn't raise the money necessary to make the transaction.
Samuel then contacted the William F Albright Institute of Archaeological Research in Jerusalem, where the scrolls were inspected by John C Trever and William H Brownlee, who felt they were as old, if not older than the 2nd century Nash Papyrus fragment, which up to then, was the oldest known example of Biblical Hebrew.
Samuel, labeled a 'smuggler' was anxious to sell the scrolls, and would not allow the fourth to be published until all of them had been purchased.
In February, 1949, Gerald Lankester Harding, director of the Department of Antiquities for Transjordan and Arab Palestine; and Father Roland de Vaux, director of the Dominicancontrolled Ecole Biblique in the Jordanian sector of East Jerusalem, went to the cave at Qumran, where they found the remains of 30 identifiable texts, and a number of unidentifiable fragments.
Harding made it known that he was interested in all subsequent finds made by the Ta'amireh tribe.
They would sell the results of their excavation to Kando, who would then sell the items to Harding.
Meanwhile, de Vaux, Harding, and a group of fifteen workers continued to excavate around Qumran until 1956, where they uncovered the buildings of what they felt were an Essene community.
For nearly two weeks in mid-March, 1952, de Vaux, three members of the Ecole Biblique, William Reed, and 24, Bedouins under the supervision of three Jordanian and Palestinian archaeologists, embarked on an effort to conduct a survey of all the caves in the area.
This survey indicated the existence of 40 caves, and the umbrella term of the Dead Sea Scrolls refers to the scrolls and fragments that were found in eleven of the caves.
By 1959, all the scroll fragments were kept in a room known as the 'Scrollery' in the Rockefeller Museum, which had been built with funds provided by John D Rockefeller.
The Museum was run by an international Board of Trustees, and later fell under the control of the Jordanian government.
After the Six Day War in June, 1967, when Israel took over control of the entire city of Jerusalem, the contents of the Museum were considered spoils of war, so the Israeli government became the guardian of the fragments.
The Museum contained laboratories, photographic facilities, and the Department of Antiquities, however, the headquarters of the entire operation was actually located at the Ecole Biblique, which contained a research library totally dedicated to Qumran research, which was not open to the public.
They also published two journals, the Revue Biblique , printed since 1892, and the Revue de Qumran , started in 1958 to publish information on the scrolls.
This may be one of the keys to understanding what may be going on here behind the scenes.
Stephen, the first Christian martyr was stoned to death, a French Dominican monk established a Dominican church and monastery in Jerusalem.
At the urging of Pope Leo XIII, a Biblical school was begun there in 1890 by Father Albert Lagrange to train scholars with the knowledge necessary to protect the Church against the potential of damaging archaeological discoveries.
In 1956, de Vaux became a consultant to this Commission until his death in 1971, as did his successors Father Pierre Benoit, and JeanLuc Vesco in 1987.
The head of the Pontifical Biblical Commission is Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger, who is also the executive head of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, which prior to 1965 had been known as the Holy Office, and prior to 1542, as the Holy Inquisition.
After 1971, with many common members, the two groups were virtually combined, sharing the same offices at the Palace of the Congregation at the Holy Office Square in Rome.
Because of this connection, the implication has been made that the Vatican is exerting its influence over the Scrolls, in order to control what information is released.
From France, who, after his death, was replaced by Father Emile Puech of the Ecole Biblique.
From Germany, who was later replaced by a French priest, Father Maurice Baillet.
A self-proclaimed agnostic from Oxford, who revealed that certain material was being kept secret because of the controversial nature, and de Vaux did not want the Church to be embarrassed.
After de Vaux's death in 1971, his handpicked successor was another Dominican, Father Pierre Benoit, who became the head of the Ecole Biblique, and the overseer of the international team, until his death in 1987.
Strugnell, who converted to Catholicism, then became the leader of the team.
As you can see, this small group of Catholic scholars had complete control of all of the Dead Sea Scroll fragments that were found.
While the Israelis worked on these scrolls, across town at the Rockefeller Museum, de Vaux and his group of international scholars were working on the fragments they discovered.
In 1967, Yadin interrogated Kando, who subsequently relinquished possession of a scroll he had for six years, which had been found in Cave 11.
Five separate sources were compiled to form the Temple Scroll, and it is now considered a supplement to the Torah.
In addition to the content, another reason that it is considered a Biblical text, is that in all established Biblical books, the name of God, YHWH, is written in the square Aramaic script like the rest of the text; while in non-Biblical writings, the name is written in PalaeoHebrew, while the rest of the text is in Aramaic.
The first, in 1955, contained the fragments found in the original cave, known as Cave 1.
This find included the Hebrew versions of all the minor prophets, including Hosea, Joel, Amos , Obadiah, Jonah, Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi.
The fourth volume, in 1965, was a collection of Psalms found in Cave 11.
The fifth volume, in 1968, under the direction of Allegro, contained some material from Cave 4, however, most of the scrolls from this cave continued to be withheld from the public, even though Allegro had said in 1964 that the compilation and translation had been nearly completed by 1961.
The sixth installment of the series appeared in 1977, the seventh in 1982, and the eighth, which didn't even deal with the texts of Qumran, was released in 1990.
These eight volumes are said to represent only 25% of the information contained in the Scrolls, even though Father Benoit had said in December, 1985, that everything would be published by 1993.
Edmund Wilson, author of The Scrolls of the Dead Sea , said in 1955 that de Vaux's team wanted to isolate the sectarian non-Biblical scrolls from being connected with Christianity and Judaism, and concentrated only on the Biblical literature.
In 1989, he said publicly, that during the last 40 years, all of the research on the Dead Sea Scrolls was controlled by a handful of scholars who had revealed only a small portion.
He called for access to the Scrolls by qualified scholars, and for AMS Carbon-14 dating to be performed on the documents to verify the dating, which up to that point had been relying on the original, obsolete form of dating, which had been done shortly after their discovery.
After the Israeli government took full possession of Jerusalem in June of 1967, many were surprised that de Vaux was allowed to continue in his capacity as the leader of the team of scholars, even though it was a known fact that he was anti-Semitic, which was why he would not allow any Jewish scholars into the project.
In November, 1990, without informing Strugnell, the Israeli government assigned Emmanuel Tov to become the 'joint editor-in-chief of the project to finish the translation and publication of the Scrolls.
Tov became chief editor, along with Professor Eugene Ulrich and Emile Puech.
In September, 1991, Professor Ben-Zion Wacholder, and one of his doctoral students, Martin G Abegg, from Hebrew Union College in Cincinnati, Ohio, released their compilation of the Qumran texts, which was published by the Biblical Archaeological Society.
In 1988, Strugnell had printed 30 copies of a 52,000 word concordance of words found in the scroll, which had been created by de Vaux's team in the 1950's, so it could be used by the team.
Wacholder and Abegg used a computer to reconstruct these words, and it was purported to be 80% accurate.
Later that month, the Huntington Library in San Marine, California revealed that it had a complete set of negatives, from photographs of photographs, of the original scrolls, which had been given to them in 1987 by Elizabeth Hay Bechtel of the Bechtel Corp. who had founded the Ancient Biblical Manuscript Center in Claremont, California.
The Hebrew Union College also have a partial set; and the Oxford Centre for Postgraduate Hebrew Studies in England has a full set, which had been given to them in May, 1991, by the Israeli Oversight Committee.
The nonBiblical fragments consists of hymns and psalms, biblical commentaries, legal documents, a letter, apocryphal writings, and an inventory of the Temple treasure.
Of the non-Biblical, there are texts referred to as sectarian writings, which were produced by a unique sect of Jews who have been identified as the Essenes.
The seven intact scrolls that were found in Cave 1, were quickly published by Israeli and American scholars, but the fragments collected by de Vaux were a different story.
Of the Biblical writings, 25 copies of Deuteronomy were found, 18 copies of Isaiah, and 27 copies of the Psalter.
Among the non-Biblical, 11 copies of the Community Rule, 9 Songs of the Sabbath Sacrifice, 8 of the Thanksgiving Hymn, and 7 of the Sons of Light Against the Sons of Darkness.
Prior to the discovery of the Scrolls, the oldest known Old Testament texts, were copies which dated back to 1100 AD, yet they were nearly identical.
Archaeological dating was also done with the help of several hundred coins which were found in the Qumran complex.
They discovered evidence of an earthquake which had been recorded as occurring in 31 BC, after which they rebuilt the settlement and occupied it until 68 AD when it was destroyed by Vespasian's Roman legions.
During the Maccabean period, in the 2nd century BC, there were three main Jewish groups, the Pharisees, the Sadduccees, and the Essenes.
Early historians, such as Pliny the Elder, Josephus, and Philo, indicated that the Essenes lived in the area between Jericho and Ein Gedi, on the shores of the Dead Sea, which is where the Qumran ruins are located.
The Sadducees, whose religious principles differed from the Pharisees, separated from them after the Maccabean revolt.
A document identified as Miqsat Ma'aseh he-Torah, or ""Some Rulings Pertaining to the Torah"", which was found in Cave 4, contains about 22 religious laws, and appears to be the basis of the Qumran philosophy.
Dated between 80 75 BC, a copy was found in Cave 6, and 7 copies in Cave 4.
The fragments recovered at Qumran have proven the Cairo text to be incomplete.
The text refers to a contingent of Jews that remained faithful to the Law.
A 'Teacher of Righteousness' came to them, and led them into Damascus so they could renew their 'Covenant' with God.
This Covenant is referred to in the Community Rule, it is believed that there was an Essene community in Damascus.
When the Jews returned to Jerusalem after the Maccabean victories, they became disenchanted and went to Qumran.
It was believed that the Essenes were a pacifist, monastic Order who wanted to separate themselves from the revolutionary-minded Zealots, yet some of the evidence seems to indicate otherwise.
Originally thought to have been celibate, the graves of two women and a child were discovered; plus the Community Rule contained marriage laws.
The Essenes did not engage in animal sacrifice, yet the Temple Scroll contains instructions for such rituals, and animal bones have been found.
Thought to have been peaceful, their scrolls seem to indicate the knowledge of military strategy; and the ruins of a military defense tower and a forge have been excavated.
While de Vaux and his team were trying to distance the Scrolls from Judaism and Christianity, saying there were no connections, the texts which were already published seem to indicate otherwise.
Either the early Christians were just living at the Qumran community, or the early Christians and the Qumran community were one, and the same.
Though Essene in nature, the group in Qumran has been compared to the early Church, which was based in Jerusalem.
The Habakkuk Commentary said that Qumran's governing body, the Council of the Community, was in Jerusalem, in fact, it is believed that the scrolls were taken to Qumran from Jerusalem for protection.
The vital link for this belief comes from the Copper scroll, which lists 64 locations of hidden Temple treasure.
This seems to indicate that perhaps the Qumran settlement was a retreat for the early Christians.
This is one of the controversial developments that has emerged from the discovery of the Dead Sea Scrolls.
The Qumran texts are written in Hebrew, and sometimes Aramaic, and has been shown to contain information that is echoed in the New Testament.
Prior to the discovery of the Scrolls, the teachings of Jesus had been considered as original, though influenced by Old Testament teaching.
However, the Qumran documents now indicate the existence of a basis for his message.
The Community Rule, which was discovered in Cave 1, has proven to be one of the most important discoveries in Qumran.
One of the basic tenets of Christianity, the baptism of purification, is discussed.
This has led to the theory that John the Baptist had lived at Qumran until he was called by Cod to be the forerunner of Jesus.
This shows that common ownership was part of the early Christian philosophy.
Also in Acts, the Church leadership is shown to be made up of twelve Apostles, which according to Galatians, were led by James, John and Peter.
In the Community Rule, the Qumran group were governed by a 'Council' of twelve people, with three priests that were in leadership roles, though it is not known if they were part of the twelve.
It also talks about a 'Meal of the Congregation' which is a ritual very much like the 'Last Supper' and the subsequent communion ceremony; while other documents contain parallels with the Sermon on the Mount, and the concept of the battle between the darkness and the light.
The Qumran texts contain references to a messianic figure known as the 'Teacher of Righteousness', which some have tried to identify as being Jesus, however, there are no references as to the divinity of this person, so it couldn't be Jesus.
In addition, because of the age of the document, this person would have been living well before the time of Christ.
An unpublished Aramaic scroll fragment out of Cave 4, mention the ""Son of God"" and the ""Son of the Most High"", in a similar manner as Luke 1:32, 35.
It is the first time these references have appeared in any outside text.
Newly released fragments out of Cave 4 even prophecy the coming the coming of Jesus, as the Messiah.
Much has been made about this small group of men, who for forty years had been silent about the contents of the Dead Sea Scrolls which were in their possession.
Chapter Ten emissaries of the Catholic Church, was it because the Scrolls are contrary to the Bible in respect to the origin of Christianity, or was it, as some maintain, because of the power it gave them.
I think it may have more to do with the implications concerning Christianity.
As we discussed in the previous section, those who have tried to prove that Jesus faked his crucifixion, have also tried to link him with the Essenes.
Even though the Scrolls themselves indicate that the inhabitants of Qumran engaged in the study of astrology and mysticism, this group has been identified as the starting point for the philosophy which became Christianity.
If we are to believe the Scrolls, the teachings of Jesus were based on the philosophy of the Essenes.
This seriously damages his image as being the father of a Religion that bears his name.
Not only that, but it further diminishes his divinity, which has increasingly come under attack.
During the next few years, the last remnants of the Scrolls will be published, and in the near future, new versions of the Bible may be produced which will reflect the ""new"" information gleaned from the Scrolls.
These new versions may further contribute to the taking of Christ out of Christianity, so that the role of Jesus is reduced to that of a political visionary.
Since I believe that Jesus taught only what was given unto him through the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, what legitimacy should be given to the Dead Sea Scrolls, if any.
Beyond a shadow of a doubt, they are legitimate documents, and not the result of an incredible forgery, as far as being done shortly before their discovery.
Now that other scholars have access to them, any incorrect translations would be revised.
We have been forced to rely on the accuracy of de Vaux's team, and their ability to fit these pieces together into some sort of coherency.
It would seem that gaps in the assembled fragments of text, would make it difficult to actually grasp its full meaning, especially since missing words may have a bearing on how other words are translated.
The complex techniques utilized in this process have brought very little criticism in regard to its accuracy.
Originally only the wrapping around them were tested, because they didn't want to destroy any text in order to date them.
However, new techniques need less material to achieve the same results.
This knowledge makes it difficult to assume the accuracy of any dating.
For example, it is commonly accepted that some apocryphal books such as Tobit, and Bel and the Dragon were works of fiction, and for that reason were not included in the Bible.
When it comes to analyzing the contents of a text, how do you decide that it is a historically accurate document, if you don't know the intention of the writer, or even who the writer was.
Just as the writers of the Gospels have been accused of embellishment, do some of the Qumran texts contain the same sort of embellishments.
Because of the secrecy surrounding the Scrolls, how will we really know that all of the fragments found, will be released.
I guess, what I am thinking here, is that if they had discovered something that would have shaken the very foundation of the Christian Church, would the Scroll team have allowed it to remain, or would it have found its way into the dark recesses of the Vatican, never again to see the light of day, or perhaps only locked away for a short time, to be released when the time is right.
Or how about the existence of other scrolls that haven't made its way into official hands.
On his deathbed, Lankester Harding, the director of Jordan's Department of Antiquities, claimed to have seen two more scrolls that Strugnell had not seen.
Stories have also circulated about Bedouin discoveries which were not given to de Vaux, and have yet to surface.
It seems that the world hasn't heard the last of Qumran, because archaeologists Dr.
Aubry L Richardson, using sophisticated equipment developed by NASA(which can sense nonvisible elements of the electromagnetic spectrum and interpret the type of molecules found in its makeup), claim that there are still unexplored caves there, including one which may contain up to 40 intact jars, of the kind used to store manuscripts, and evidence of another copper scroll.
A dig was initiated, sanctioned by the Israeli government, to reach this cave, which have not, as yet, turned up anything.
My feeling is, that we haven't been able to produce enough substantiation from the Scrolls to make the kind of claims that have been made.
For example, various books in the Bible contain the same information, and are used to cross reference each other.
That wasn't possible with the Scrolls, and because of that, they may never be fully accepted.
The fact that some of their rituals are similar to the early Christian Church, may be nothing more than natural progressionor theological evolution.
Because of further archaeological excavation, we may continue to get a steady flow of information from Qumran for years to come, and how it will affect the perception of Christianity is yet to be seen.
Chapter Ten It would be nice to know how much influence the Rockefeller family has on the Rockefeller Museum, where all the fragments were housed.
Their name also figures prominently in the talk concerning the rebuilding of the Jewish Temple.
Knowing that they have had a huge role in establishing the New World Order, their involvement in the various affairs of Israel has ominous overtones.
THE WORLD CHURCH In the previous chapter, we discussed the development of the World Church, now we'll talk about what role they will have when the New World Order is established.
The Bible talks about a religious leader who will come to power, and join forces with the political leader who will rise out of western Europe.
And he exerciseth all the power of the first beast before him, and causeth the earth and them which dwell therein to worship the first beast, whose deadly wound was healed.
And he doeth great wonders, so that he maketh fire come down from heaven on the earth in the sight of men, And deceiveth them that dwell on the earth, by the means of those miracles he had power to do in the sight of the beast; saying to them that dwell on the earth, that they should make an image to the beast, which had the wound by a sword, and did live.
The identity of this individual, who has been labeledthe False Prophet, has been the subject of much speculation.
Chapter Ten Pope being the leader of this World Church, and perhaps the one who will be known as the False Prophet.
Rome is also the home of the Vatican, which is recognized as an independent government apart from the Italian government.
The Pope is literally a God to the Catholic Church, having the authority to forgive sins.
The primary color of the papacy is red, said to signify the blood of Jesus.
It was alleged that Pope Benedict IX practiced sorcery and magic; Pope Boniface Vlll was said to communicate with demons; and it was believed that Pope Sylvester 11 and Pope Sixtus V were also involved with sorcery.
All of these clues could indicate that the False Prophet could be a Pope.
Benedict requested that he convert to Catholicism, which Baruch did, changing his name to that of the Pope.
The name 'Benedict' is Latin for ""blessed"", while the name 'Baruch' is Hebrew for the same thing.
The conversion was in name only, because Baruch still financed a synagogue in the Jewish quarter of Rome.
Baruch's son, an aide to Pope Leo IX, also converted, changing his name to Lee.
His family became an established financial power in the late 11th century, and became active in the affairs of the Catholic Church.
His son, Pietro, was sent to a monastery where he worked his way up, attaining the position of cardinal.
When Pope Honorius 11 was on his deathbed, preparations were made to elect a new Pope.
The Pierleone family offered their son, the cardinal; while the Frangipani family, a traditional Catholic family, offered its own candidate.
The Pierleone family held an election the same day, with a greater number of cardinals present, and elected Pietro, who took the name Anacletus 11.
Despite efforts to remove him, Anacletus remained Pope till he died in 1138.
A year later, Innocent II returned, and after Victor IV resigned, was elected, and served till his death in 1143.
The Vatican now refers to Anacletus II as an ""anti-pope"" (""one who uncanonically claims or exercises the office of the Roman Pontiff""), and has eliminated him from papal history.
On May 13,1917, Lucia dos Santos and her cousins Jacinta and Francisco Marta, who were tending their sheep near Cova da Iria, saw their first of 6 visions of the Virgin Mary in the hilly terrain of Fatima, Portugal.
Mary gave three prophecies concerning the end of World War I, World War II, and Russia.
One prophecy said that when an unknown light was seen in the sky, it would be a sign from God that he would punish the world through war, persecution, and famine.
On the day of Mary's sixth appearance, October 13, she had promised a miracle.
In a ten-minute display, the sun came up, spun in the sky, plunged downward, then rose again.
Lucia later became a Carmelite nun in Coimbra, Portugal, and in 1927 reported that Jesus had appeared to her and made several prophecies.
It was sent to Rome, where it was kept on the mantle of the Pope's apartment in the Apostolic Palace.
Many believed it had to do with Armageddon, and in recent years, various people have become privy to the words written in Lucia's letter, which contained the third prophecy.
The prophecy indicated that the world was to be punished for disobeying the laws of God and turning away from him.
When the prophecy was unsealed by the Pope in 1960, it was to published so that the whole world would know about it; and then the country of Russia was to be consecrated to Mary by the Pope and all the bishops.
If these two things were done, the wrath of God would not fall upon the Earth.
It wasn't done, therefore the country of Russia was to become the instrument of God's punishment upon the nations.
In 1980, while speaking to a group of German Catholics, John Paul II admitted that the ""Third Secret"" did indeed refer to impending punishment from God, and that because Pope John XXIII, for diplomatic reasons, failed to honor the stipulations, the prophecy had been set into motion, and couldn't be stopped.
Off to one side, she saw a Pope, with blood running down his face, dripping over his left shoulder.
She interpreted this vision to mean, that within this century, a Pope will be bodily harmed.
She said that the new head of the Church would have a different insignia than that of the Pope.
Because of the unearthly light, she knew that the power would still be there, but not in the person of the Pope.
On April 7,1970, it was reported that Mary appeared to Veronica Lueken, and has made subsequent appearances to her at the St.
The messages received during these visitations were recorded on tape, portions of which are revealed in a newsletter known as Directives.
Malachy, Archbishop of Armagh, had made prophecies concerning future Popes.
The seventh Pope is John Paul ll, from Krakow, Poland, who began his reign in 1978.
When Pope John offered free tickets for papal audiences in Rome, the lower left portion of the ticket displayed a group of numbers followed by the number 666.
Revelation 13:18 tells us about the connection between the False Prophet and the number 666, and I will talk about that in the next chapter.
On January 24,1979, at the Vatican, the Pope met for two hours with the Soviet foreign minister, Andrei Gromyko.
Chapter Ten Vatican's establishment of diplomatic relations with Israel on December 30,1993, which came during a time when Israel was also trying to work out their own peace accord in the Middle East.
This agreement will allow the Vatican to have a seat at the negotiations on the final determination of Jerusalem.
The Vatican embassy will be in Tel Aviv, where most other embassies are located, because Jerusalem is not recognized as Israel's capital.
In March, 1994, the Vatican also established relations with the Moslem country of Jordan, on Israel's eastern border, and it may indicate the beginning of a move by the Vatican to become more involved in the Middle East situation.
Vatican hardliners have criticized the Pope's growing role as the ""protector of Jews"", but maybe this is just a fulfilment of prophecy.
In outlining the theory that the Pope is going to be the False Prophet, and that the Roman Catholic Church is going to be part of the World Church, do not misconstrue this as antiCatholic rhetoric.
As I stated earlier, the Catholic Church, as well as the Protestant churches which make up the World Council of Churches, in the coming years, will be radically different.
The liberalism that is becoming so pervasive in Religion today, will turn these churches into shadows of their former selves.
The Pope of the future, will not be the Pope as we know him today, and therefore the actions to which the Bible attributes to him, should not reflect on the respect that is due a leader of a religion, that today, theologically is Christian.
The real history of the Catholic Church is not known to a large majority of its membership, and therefore, even though they have been deceived, it is wrong to indict those who have sincerely tried to live their lives according to the basic Christian tenets as they know them.
It is my hope, that the truths contained in this book will help people find the true path to salvation through Jesus Christ.
There are many theories as to when the end will come, and this New World Order is established.
The Bible is the root of most of these theories, yet they are only interpretations, and for the most part, they have been wrong.
In 1650, using these Scriptures, Archbishop Jacob Ussher of Armagh in Ireland, attempted to calculate when the Creation took place by using chronological information from the Bible and counting backward from the date of the birth of Christ.
At that time, it was believed that Christ was born in 4 BC(some calculations have indicated that it may have been as late as 1 BC or as early as 6 BC; however, recent evidence have determined it to be 3 BC, so keep that in mind as you read this section), so Ussher theorized that the Creation took place in 4004 BC, and the passing of four ""days"" (two thousand years before the law, and two thousand years after the law) took us to Christ's birth in 4 BC, so two more ""days"" would end the six ""days"" at 1996.
The Sabbath, or the seventh ""day"", is the Millennium, or the thousand-year reign of Jesus Christ upon the Earth, which is referred to in the 20th chapter of Revelation.
Consider, my children, what that signifies, He finished them in six days.
For with him, one day is a thousand years; as Himself testifieth, saying, behold this day shall be as a thousand years.
Therefore children, in six days, that is, in six thousand years, shall all things be accomplished.
Other writers during the early Christian era also reflected this premise.
In 1583, the Gregorian calendar was adopted, which added an extra 5.25 days to that year.
When you deduct from that figure, the seven year period which is commonly referred to as the Tribulation period, that leaves us with the year of 1995 as the culmination of the efforts to establish a New World Order.
There is another theory, which has to do with the amount of time that the Jewish race would be dispersed across the Earth.
The purpose of the prophecy which is given in Ezekiel 4:1-8 was to show how long the Jews would be scattered as a people.
From 430, subtract the 70 years they were punished in Babylon, and what God was telling Moses, was that the Jewish people would be dispersed for 2,520 years.
These calculations can be somewhat correlated to the six ""day"" theory, in that it indicates a time frame for events.
Jesus was speaking to his disciples concerning the last days, and had just told them about the parable of the fig tree.
Some Bible scholars have interpreted Ezekiel 36:8 to mean that the fig tree represented the nation of Israel.
So it is believed that Jesus was referring to the generation that would be alive when Israel became a nation on May 14,1948.
Job 42:16 refers to a generation as being 35 years, while Webster's Dictionary indicates that it is forty years.
Adding 40 years to 1948 would give us the year 1988, which puts us in the general area of the above calculation.
So if you interpret this as being symbolic and add 50 years to 1948, you get the year 1998, which is more closely aligned with the other calculations.
The first came during the first year of the reign of Cyrus, who ruled for nine years, after which his son Cambyses took over, and all the work on the Temple was stopped for seven years.
The second decree was made by Darius I, in the second year of his 35-year reign.
Marler believes that the other seven ""weeks"" or 49 years apply to the second coming of Jesus.
Adding 49 years indicated a date of November 29,1996, as the end of man's rule on this Earth.
By counting back 31/2 years, he theorized that the period known as the Tribulation would begin May 29,1993.
The irony here, is a story that was reported on the news on May 19,1993.
Big Ben, the renowned tower clock famous for its accuracy, which was installed in 1859 at the eastern end of the Houses of Parliament in London, had mysteriously stopped running.
From the initiation of Christ's ministry, in the fall of 28 AD, and adding two ""days"" would give us 720,000 days, which adjusted to our calendar by dividing into that 365.25 results in 1971.25 years, which added to 28.75, takes us to the year 2000.
The period till cleansing, according to Daniel 8:14, was 2,300 days, which some scholars feel refers to 2,300 morning and evening rituals, or 1,150 days, which seemingly points to the ritual cleansing performed by Judas Maccabaeus three years later, after the success of the Hasmonean revolt.
However, according to the book of the Maccabees, the Temple was cleansed in 1,080 days.
To make matters worse, while the King James version states 2,300 days for this period, the Greek Septuagint, which was used during the time of Christ, says 2,400 days.
In his book 1754 book, Dissertations on the Prophecies , Bishop Thomas Newton wrote about the existence of a third manuscript of the book of Daniel, which was mentioned in a Commentary of Jerome, the early church leader.
Chapter Eleven Since this figure can not be applied literally to the events of that time, it is believed that the figure should be considered as years.
Let me throw one more at you, which deals with the Times of the Gentiles.
It would take a separate book just to deal with all the theories which seek to use the Bible to calculate when the last days will occur.
It is all a matter of interpretation, and numbers can be manipulated in many ways to prove a point.
However, though many theories have been proved wrong, and other theories, with varying dates, have been proposed.
They all seem to point to the same period of 1978-2000, as the time when events brought on by the establishment of the New World Order will occur.
THE INVASION OF ISRAEL In the near future, the country of Israel is going to take a prominent role in world affairs, so let's take a brief look at their historical development to see why tensions are going to continue to increase in the Middle East.
The other two tribes, Benjamin and Judah(where the word ""Jew"" came from), remained in the south.
Babylonian, Medo-Persian(536 BC-533 BC), Greek, Egyptian, Syrian, and Roman.
Through the years, most of the Jews had fled from the land, and only a small group remained in Jerusalem until 70 AD, when the Romans burned the city.
Still the area continued to be the subject of contention as it was conquered by the Byzantine, Mohammedan(6391099), Crusader, Moslem, Egyptian-Mamaluke, and Turks.
In 1895, Theodor Herzl, an Austrian Jew, wrote a book called The Jewish State ( Per Judenstadt) that began the movement towards the establishment of an independent Jewish state.
In 1897, he arranged the first World Zionist Congress in Basle, Switzerland.
Now known as ""Zionnsts"", a fund was started to raise money to buy land, and a blue and white flag was chosen, the colors of the tallith prayer shawl.
Herzl traveled around the world, especially in Europe, to lobby for his group.
In 1903, a year before he died, England offered the Jews the African country of Uganda, which they rejected, because they knew that Palestine was their country.
According to the Bible, Israel's promised land stretches from the Nile River in Egypt to the Euphrates in Syria, and includes the countries of Syria and Lebanon.
The Polish-born Jew had studied Chemistry in Germany, and taught in Switzerland and England.
During World War I, Germany was producing 250,000 shells a day, while England was only producing 2,500, due to a shortage of acetone because of the lack of wood alcohol.
Weizmann isolated an organism capable of transforming the starch of cereals, most notably that of maize, and later chestnuts, into acetone butyl alcohol.
Chapter Eleven the allied cause, Weizmann was credited with saving the British Army.
The only thanks he wanted, was for Palestine to be established as a national homeland for the Jews.
Edmund Allenby marched into Jerusalem, and when the Turks heard that he was on his way, they interpreted ""Allenby"" to mean ""Allah Nebi"", and took it as a sign that God was against them.
They were also worried about the accompanying airplanes(from the 14th Bomber Squadron of the Royal Flying Corp), which they had never seen before.
An interesting fact to add to this narrative can be found in Daniel 12:12.
Some believe that the 1335 ""days"" may refer to the actual date that Palestine was delivered from Moslem rule.
Since the land in Daniel's day was under Moslem rule, the date given would most likely be in Moslem terms, not Jewish or Gregorian.
A coin minted in Turkey showed the Gregorian date of 1917 on one side, and the Moslem date of 1335 on the other side.
After the War, the 1919 Paris Peace Conference at Versailles established the League of Nations, who approved the Balfour Declaration and granted a mandate for Great Britain to govern the Palestine area.
Within a couple of years, a Select Committee on Estimates, of the British House of Commons, reported that ""large numbers of Jews, almost amounting to a second Exodus, have been migrating from Eastern Europe to the American zones of Germany and Austria with the intention in the majority of cases of finally making their way to Palestine.
Chapter Eleven In 1937, a Royal Commission was established by England which divided the country of Palestine into three sections: Jewish, Arab and English.
Jewish terrorist groups, such as the Stern gang, and the Irgun Zvai Leumi(led by Menachim Begin), worried that a Jewish State would not materialize, began attacking Arabs.
Time magazine reported that they ""stormed the village of Deir Yasin and butchered everyone in sight.
Rather than risking the possibility of further massacres, the Arab settlers fled the country to live in neighboring countries.
On April 29,1947, the United Nations took on the responsibility of settling the Palestinian situation.
On May 14,1948, the British Union Jack in Jerusalem was lowered, and at 4m., David Ben-Gurion read the Declaration of Independence over the airwaves in a radio broadcast from the Tel Aviv Museum.
President Truman made an official statement of recognition, making the United States one of the first countries to extend diplomatic recognition to the new independent state of Israel.
In a speech to the UN General Assembly, Andrei A Gromyko, the Russian Ambassador, announced his support for an independent Jewish State in Palestine, and urged the Arabs to accommodate them.
They followed their show of support with a strong program which included financial support and military equipment.
The Soviet Union was hoping that Israel would become another communist satellite.
Another variation of one of the numerical theories given earlier, purports to indicate the foretelling of the establishment of Israel as an independent Jewish State, and the end of the dispersal of the Jewish people throughout the world.
When British troops left the area, they said it would be a matter of weeks before the Arabs would take over the new country.
An Arab alliance of Egypt, Iraq, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Yemen, Lebanon, and Jordan had attacked Israel.
Chapter Eleven 1949 Armistice gave them 21% more land that they had originally been given by the United Nations.
On July 26,1956, Gamal Abdel Nassar, President of Egypt, seized control of the Suez Canal, and announced that the profits would go towards building the Aswan Dam.
Egypt moved into a close alliance with Russia as billions of dollars worth of military equipment, along with Soviet advisors, poured into the country.
On October 29th, Israeli forces overran the Gaza Strip, and had it not been for the UN Resolution that ordered a cease fire, Egypt would have fallen to Israel.
On November 7,1957, the Jerusalem Post reported that at 6:03m., Moshe Dayan radioed to twenty of his soldiers stationed in the Sinai Desert, that three Egyptian divisions, 18,000 men, were on their way.
They men bowed down, and prayed to the ""God of their Fathers"" to have the strength to die, rather than face being captured.
When they got up, they saw the Egyptian strike force engaged in retreat.
Inside the car was one of Nassar's commanding generals, who said that they were retreating because they had been surrounded by an army dressed in white.
National Geographic reported that on November 7,1957, at 6:33m. there was an earthquake of substantial proportions on the Sinai peninsula, which lead to the speculation that the army could have been swallowed up by the earth.
Most certainly this was a sign that the Jews were indeed God's chosen people.
The Soviet Union began sending equipment to Iraq and Syria, while they continued to interfere in the internal affairs of other Arab nations through military coups and political assassinations.
Only United States and British intervention prevented Communist takeovers in the Middle East, as in July 1958, when the Marines landed in Lebanon; and British forces, supporting King Hussein, landed in Jordan.
On March 16,1965, Nassar promised the Arabs an all-out offensive effort against Israel, if they would unite under him, as he hoped to become the President of the United States of Africa.
In 1967, Russia sent exaggerated reports to Egypt and Syria that Israel was preparing for war against Syria.
In a book written by Nassar, he revealed that his chief goal was to eliminate Israel as a nation, and to push them into the sea.
Nassar ordered the UN to remove their troops, which they did; and he closed the crucial port of Eliat, on the Gulf of Aquaba, and blockaded the Tiran Straits.
The armies of Egypt, Jordan, Syria, and Lebanon surrounded Israel on all sides.
Joining them were Iraq, Algeria, Kuwait, Sudan, and other Arab nations, which represented 25 times more manpower than Israel could field.
On the evening of June 4,1967, Nassar moved his Russian-made tanks and artillery into position.
He knew, that with America caught up in the Vietnam War, there would be no help for Israel.
As daylight broke on June 5th, Israeli jets flew low from the north and began bombing the Egyptian Air Force.
Israeli ships traded fire with Egypt's naval power, and Israeli tanks rolled into the Sinai.
As the events unfolded, Russia warned the major countries of the world to back-off, so the world sat back and waited, expecting a swift Arab victory.
By the second day, Arab leaders watched their military being ground to bits.
After six days, the Arab alliance was in retreat as Israeli soldiers captured the Sinai, the Golan Heights, and reclaimed the city of Jerusalem.
Schlomo Goren, Ashkenazic(of Eastern European origin) Chief Rabbi of Israel, carried the Scrolls of the Law, and sounded the ram's horn of repentance.
Allenby entered Jerusalem, and 1967, when the Jews took complete control.
In those six short days, the Arabs lost three billion dollars of military equipment, and the Israelis captured $700 million in new Soviet military hardware.
In the years that followed, Russia continued to arm Egypt, Syria, and other Arab countries.
However, by 1972, Enwar Sadat, the President of Egypt, felt that Russia was trying to control the Middle East, and he ended his country's alliance with them.
Egypt and Saudi Arabia joined forces so they wouldn't have to rely on Russia.
In 1973, Egypt's War Minister announced that the headquarters for all Arab fronts would be established in Cairo.
Chapter Eleven Atonement, Egypt, Syria, Jordan and eight other Arab nations attacked Israel.
Sadat's terms for a ceasefire was for Israel to withdraw from all territory it took during the 1967 war.
American and Soviet pressure turned this Israeli victory into a negotiated compromise.
The Arabs punished the world for their support of Israel by initiating an oil embargo against all the nations, such us the United States, who were partial to Israel.
In 1977, Israeli Chief of Staff Mordechai Gur said publicly that Egypt was again preparing for war, basing his assumption on an unprecedented military buildup that was part of a two-year $6 billion arms modernization plan.
However, in 1988, President Carter was able to get Israel and Egypt to sign the Camp David Peace Accord.
On November 5, 1978, the 21-nation Arab League met in Baghdad and established a $3. billion war fund ""to continue the armed confrontation with the Jewish State""; and in 1980, a 37-nation Islamic Summit called for a ""Holy War"" to liberate all Arab land, including Jerusalem, to establish an independent Palestinian state, with an Arab Jerusalem as its capital.
The proposal was rejected by Egypt because of their commitment to the Peace Accord.
In June, 1982, while responding to a P.L.O. attack from a terrorist base in southern Lebanon, Israeli Intelligence discovered that Russia had enough arms and foodstuffs in huge caves under the town of Sidon to supply a million-man army, including uniforms, assault rifles, ammunition, shells, missiles, and tanks.
They found two huge digging machines that were used to dig the underground fortress.
The smaller one of the two can dig a hole 30 feet wide, 24 feet high, and 60 feet deep, in eight hours.
They were part of a six-machine shipment to Austria by a United States manufacturer.
The shocking implication of that discovery, was that the shelf life of the K-rations were only six months, which led many to believe the Israel thwarted a Russian invasion of Israel that was planned for the fall of 1982.
Today, the Israeli military force is probably the most respected in the world, despite its small size.
This commitment has nurtured that incredible fighting spirit, making them the most elite fighting force in the world literally unbeatable.
They are God's chosen people, and because of that, Israel will never fall, but that won't stop someone from trying.
In 1930, the Soviet Union released a 14 kopek postage stamp to commemorate their future invasion of Palestine.
According to Ezekiel 38:8,11, and 14, this invasion will not occur, until Israel has been placed under the protection, of what seems to be, some sort of diplomatic treaty.
Chapter Eleven Egypt, and now a treaty between Israel and the P.L.O. has been worked out.
This invasion will be World War III, and will include the Arab nations(Esau's descendants) who will go against lsrael for stealing their birthright.
In order to decipher the line-up of participants given in the 38th chapter of Ezekiel, we need to analyze it geographically.
Gomer, Magog, Madai, Javan, Tubul, Meshech, and Tiras, who repopulated the Earth after the Flood.
Magog's descendants settled in the area of Armenia, which is in southern Russia.
This race came to be known as the Scythians, and were called 'Magogites' by the Greeks.
The Arabic term for the Great Wall of China is 'the wall of Al Magog', because it was erected with the intention of keeping out the armies of Magog.
Their descendants include the Tarters, Cossacks, Kalmuks, and the Mongols.
The King James version translated 'Rosh' to mean 'chief prince', because in Hebrew it means 'head'; but in the Septuagint version, 'Rosh' is used as a proper name, as it should be.
The descendants of Meshech, settled in western Russia, where they established a city called Meshech, later known as Mosach, then Moscovi, which is the capital of Russia.
Tubal's descendants lived in the area of the Black Sea, then moved north, settling in the eastern part of Russia, establishing the city of Tobolsk.
Their descendants include the Iberians, Georgians, Cappadocians, as well as other Asiatic and European peoples.
Gomer's desecendants settled in central Asia Minor, north of the Black Sea, in southern Russia, then moved west along the Danube River, to the area now known as Germany.
Their descendants include the Galatians, Phrygians, Gauls, Celts, Germans, French, Welsh, Irish, Britons, and other Anglo-Saxon peoples.
In addition, Togarmah(known to the Assyrians as 'Tilgarimmu'), a son of Gomer, is singled out.
Togarmah's 'bands' could also refer to Armenia and Syria, whose ancestors claimed that Haik, the father of their race, was the son of Togarmah.
The descendants of another son of Gomer, Ashkenaz, settled in Germany and Austria.
These countries represent a total military force of nearly 6,000,000 men.
In light of Russia's past history, they have never been able to be trusted.
It is likely that during this period, when democracy seems to be taking root in the former Soviet Union, it is actually only an illusion.
Even though drastic changes have been made, maybe they were done only to project the image of weakness, so they can regroup and retool their military machine in preparation for their biggest assault yet.
In Russia, there is a growing anti-Jewish sentiment, which was enflamed by nationalist leader Vladimir Zhrinovsky, who seemed to be building the support needed to win the presidency of Russia.
In his book The Final March to the South , he states that it is Russia's destiny to capture all of the lands to the southincluding Israel.
History has shown that Russia has supported the Arab nations in their quest to conquer Palestine, and the aforementioned group of nations will join the Russian invasion force that will sweep across the mountains of Lebanon into Israel.
A map drawn by monks during the Crusades, still hangs in the Herford Cathedral, and identifies Jerusalem as the geographic center of the world, which is so marked on the floor of the Holy Sepulcher.
The attention of the world will become more focused on this area of the world as this nation becomes prosperous.
The Dead Sea, located between Israel and Jordan, which is 1,296 feet below sea level, is the lowest spot on the surface of the Earth.
It is fifty miles long and eleven miles wide, and has a depth of 1,200 feet at its deepest point.
Known as the 'Sea of Salt', because it is ten times saltier than ocean water, it is fed by the Jordan River, and has no outlet.
The water contains potassium chloride, or potash, which is used as a fertilizer and for making explosives.
It is believed that this ingredient will become a very valuable commodity.
Because of its sulfuric content, the water is said to have therapeutic properties.
The sun heats the shallow salt water, and the heat is trapped in the dense salt layer on the bottom, and becomes hot enough to turn a turbine, thus producing electricity.
Scientists have also discovered an algae, known as Dunaliella, which can survive in, and has adapted to, the extremely salty conditions.
It is being grown in algae farms where they double their numbers every two days.
The algae is used to produce a green paste, which, when dried, makes an excellent animal feed because of its high protein content, and it is easy to digest because the algae have no cell walls.
Chapter Eleven glycerol, which is used for eye shadow and other cosmetics, paints, resins, and toothpaste.
When the algae decomposes, it forms the raw material that nature uses to form oil.
The value of the mineral deposits in the Dead Sea has been estimated at over a trillion dollars.
However, the Dead Sea has been shrinking in size as the sea level has fallen.
The Mediterranean Dead Sea Co. initiated a $1. billion project to funnel water to the Dead Sea from the Mediterranean, which is about 70 miles away.
Geological surveys have indicated that there is plenty of steam under Israel to provide power through the harnessing of geo-thermal energy, which is a very economical source of energy.
Cutting diamonds is a major industry, as is the exporting citrus fruit to Europe and Japan.
With Russia experiencing financial hardships, there is plenty of resources in this small country that could be garnished for their benefit.
No doubt, Israel will offer tremendous resistance, causing Russia to change their plans, and circle around Israel.
Daniel mentions that ""Edom, and Moab, and the chief of the children of Ammon"" will not be overrun.
Ironically, they, along with the Israelites, Arabians, Ishmaelites, and Midianites were the descendants of Arphaxad, the son of Shem, the middle son of Noah.
Their land was on the eastern shore of the Dead Sea, in an area now occupied by the country of Jordan, who on September 14,1993 signed an agenda for peace with Israel, which culminated with Peace Treaty that was signed in October, 1994.
This seems to be an indication that even though they sided with Iraq during the Gulf War, they will stick to their treaty with Israel and not become part of the invasion.
Russia will then double-cross their allies, and strike the country of Egypt, in order to control the land bridge, giving them a three-way advantage to attacking either Europe, Africa, or Asia.
Egypt, along with Saudi Arabia, were the two main Arab countries who broke their military ties with Russia; plus, since they are not mentioned, they may also continue to honor their Treaty with Israel, and not join in the attack.
The target most likely will be Saudi Arabia, and the world's oil supply.
Chapter Eleven became known as the British colony of Aden, until achieving independence as South Yemen.
Dedan was the name of a Sabaean oasis in the northern part of Saudi Arabia, which was one of their many colonies in northern Arabia.
Cush, the son of Ham, was the father of Ethiopia, and other tribes who settled south of Egypt, in Arabia, Babylonia and India.
They were an ally of the Coalition against Iraq during the Gulf War, and will not be part of the Russian invasion force against Israel.
According to Jeremiah 10:9, Tarshish is identified as a land rich with precious metals; and in other passages, such as Isaiah 2:16, are associated with possessing a prominent shipping empire which was used to export goods to places all over the Mediterranean.
Recent archaeological evidence has shown that they possessed sailing capabilities far beyond what was originally known.
Tarshish was a great-grandson of Noah, whose descendants migrated to the areas which later became Spain and Great Britain.
Chapter Eleven make up the European Community at the time; and the ""young lions"" refer to the United States, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, their possessions and allies.
This confederation, will include the twelve princes of lshmael which scholars have identified as Egypt, Persia, Jordan, Lebanon, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Yemen, Algeria, Libya, Morocco, Sudan, and Tunisia; plus the countries of Ethiopia, Bahrain, Djibouti, Kuwait, Mauritania, Oman, Qatar, Somalia, United Arab Emirates, Turkey, Cyprus, Afghanistan, Pakistan and the Palestine Liberation Organization.
According to the 35th chapter of Ezekiel, where they are referred to as Mount Seir, they will be destroyed because of their hatred of Israel.
After their defeat of the Arab nations, Russia will receive reports concern troop movements in China, and the initiation of retaliatory strike by the coalition of Western nations; and they will regroup to attack Israel again.
They will position themselves in the ""valley of the passengers on the east of the sea,"" which is east of the Sea of Galilee and the Dead Sea.
Ezekiel's description of ""the fire of my wrath...a great shaking...great hailstones, fire, and brimstone"" directed at the Russian army appears to be the result of a one day nuclear attack by the coalition of nations from the West, that destroys 5/6 of the Russian forces.
So many men will die, that it will take seven months to bury the dead bodies.
It was reported that Russia was producing war equipment out of wood treated with lignostone, a chemical that had been developed in Holland as a fuel substitute.
It was reported that the British are using a similar substance for gears in their large vehicles.
Material treated with this chemical burns brightly with intense heat, and will make it easier for the weapons to be burned.
The incredible defeat of the Russian military machine, will make a star out of the leader of the Western European Alliance(who will take the credit for orchestrating and leading the attack), just as the Gulf War did for Gen.
He will appear to be a man who will finally be able to bring peace to the world.
He will claim that Israel has a special place in his heart, and he will make a seven-year treaty with them to guarantee the Jew's national security.
Chapter Eleven If, according to my theory, this man does come from the Prieure' de Sion, and claims to represent to bloodline of Jesus, this revelation will greatly increase his international stature.
However, it won't take long for this western European leader to be heralded as the Messiah they have been waiting for.
REBUILDING THE JEWISH TEMPLE There is a school of thought that believes that only the Messiah can rebuild the Temple, because he would be the only one who knows the actual location of its foundation.
However, there is some evidence that seems to indicate that the Temple will be rebuilt prior to the return of Jesus.
This indicates that the Temple will already be in existence by this time.
In 1948, the nation of Israel was established; in 1967, they took complete control of the city of Jerusalem; which leaves only one prophecy unfulfilled, which is the rebuilding of the Jewish Temple.
Prior to the construction of the Temple, God made his divine presence known in a miqdash, which was a temporary structure known as the Tabernacle, which was erected in various locations around Israel, such as Shiloh, Bethel, Dan, Gilgal, Mizpah, and Hebron.
This continued until the Israelites became united, both politically and spiritually, which took place when David conquered Jerusalem, thus creating a central location for their civil government and religious worship.
Chapter Eleven protected only by a tent, he knew that he had to build a house of God, which according to the Davidic Covenants Sam.:4-17), seems to indicate that the site chosen would be a permanent location.
In the 24th chapter of 2 Samuel, it is recorded how David counted his men to see if his army was going to be of sufficient military strength.
Because he didn't trust God for his victory, the Lord sent a destroying angel that brought a plague against the people of Jerusalem.
This area on Mount Moriah, was the site where God tested Abraham's faith by commanding him to sacrifice his son Isaac, and was known as the threshing floor of Araunah the Jebusite.
It took a workforce of 200,000 men, seven years to complete this magnificent edifice, with funds gathered by David in a royal treasury.
All the Temple vessels had been returned, the altar built, and the sacrifices resumed.
Another Persian king, Artaxerxes, appointed a Jew named Nehemiah as governor of Jerusalem, and he repaired the walls to protect the Temple, and began rebuilding the city.
Judea soon came under the control of the Greeks; and the Egyptian Greeks, who allowed governorship by the high priests.
A third ruler, a Syrian Greek known as Antiochus IV, who sided with the Jewish faction known as the Hellenists, appointed a high priest who initiated pagan worship in opposition to the Orthodox faction.
Antiochus desecrated the Temple by sacrificing a pig on the altar, placing a pagan idol in the Holy of Holies, and burning copies of the Torah.
The rebuilt Temple, known as the Temple of Herod, was twice as high, and much wider.
During this period of Roman rule, an imperial sacrifice had to be offered to the emperor, in addition to the traditional Jewish sacrifice.
This came to an end in 66 AD, when Eleazar, the son of a captain of the Temple, initiated an uprising of Jewish zealots, which brought the Tenth Legion from Rome.
They failed to defeat the Jewish freedom fighters and a massive revolt ensued, which resulted in Judea being returned to the control of the Jews.
Emperor Nero then sent Vespasian, Rome's best military leader, and his army, to end the rebellion.
Vespasian, who became the new emperor, gave his son Titus the task of securing Jerusalem.
A military operation was launched which ended in 70 AD, when the Temple was set on fire by the Roman Tenth Legion(consisting of 80,000 men) under Titus, who pried the Temple apart stone by stone, and threw them into the valley southeast of Jerusalem.
A portion of the Western Wall, known as the Wailing Wall, was left standing by the Romans as a symbol of how powerful they were.
When Constantine died in 361, his nephew, Flavius Claudius Julianus, the last emperor of Rome, ruled for 19 months, and attempted to reinstate paganism, and emperor worship.
Although he had grown up under the teachings of Eusebius, Bishop of Cesarea, he turned away from those teachings, and pushed for religious tolerance.
His hatred of Christianity drove him to return Jerusalem back to the Jews, to restore Jewish law, and to advocate the rebuilding of the Jewish Temple.
He freed them from taxes, and gave his support for the reestablishment of animal sacrifices, but he was told that the Jews no longer practiced the ritual because they had no Temple.
Julian appointed Alypius of Antioch to oversee its building, while the governors of Syria and Palestine were instructed to assist.
When they tried to dig into the foundation, an earthquake occurred, which ignited pockets of natural gas underground, causing fires and explosions, destroying all the stones, wood and metal which were being stored on the site.
This was taken as a divine sign that the Temple was not to be rebuilt at that time, and construction was halted after Julian died in the battle against the Persians.
After the return to power by the Christian Roman Emperors, the idea was forgotten.
Across from the Temple Mount, it was actually intended to symbolically replace the Temple, which is why its layout is reminiscent of the Temple.
As a way of offending Jews, the condition of the Temple area was allowed to deteriorate and was even used as a repository for human waste and other refuse.
In 614, the Persians broke through Byzantine defenses, and with the help of the Jews, defeated Heraclius.
Chapter Eleven Although it is believed that the sacrifices were resumed, no construction was initiated.
About fifteen years later, Heraclius returned to take over the city, building an octagonal church on the site.
After the death of Muhammed , his follower Omar(Umar Abu Ibn el-Khattab, or Umar I) became Caliph, taking over Jerusalem in 638, with the help of his Islamic army.
In 687, Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan, the 10th Caliph, began work on the Qubbat as-Sakhra or the Dome of the Rock, which was completed in 691.
The Mosque was built to rival the Church of the Holy Sepulchre, showing its religious claim on the city by symbolizing the ideology of their new faith, and to be a protection for the the rock believed to be the threshing floor purchased by David.
Even the Quran, the Islamic holy scripture, states that the Jews have a historic claim on the land.
However, the event known as the ""Night Journey of Muhammad"", when he fled from Mecca to Medina, was connected to Jerusalem, because it mentioned al-Aqsa, which is the name of the Mosque south of the Dome of the Rock.
Linguistically, ""al-aqsa"", when it is translated, means ""far corner"", and could very well refer to Mecca.
Therefore, the Temple Mount is said to be the rock where Muhammed received his instructions from God, and ascended into Heaven.
Some historians believe that the story was concocted during the rule of Umayyad prince, al-Walid I to raise the funds necessary to build the al-Aqsa Mosque into an edifice comparable to the Dome of the Rock.
From 1099-1187, the Crusaders occupied Jerusalem, and the Dome of the Rock became a Christian church, while the al-Aqsa Mosque became the headquarters of the Knights Templar.
When Jerusalem was overthrown by the Muslim leader Saladin , the Temple Mount complex, containing both the Dome of the Rock and the al-Aqsa Mosque, which is referred to as the Haram ash-Sharif, became the third holiest site in the Islamic faith, even though all prayers are directed toward Mecca.
Today, the obstacle for rebuilding the Temple, is the Islamic holy site, the Dome of the Rock.
It is maintained that the Arabs have had a claim on it for 5,000 years, and that there was never a Jewish temple on that area.
The Israeli Antiquities Authority, and most Israeli archaeologists agree that this traditional location was the site of the Temple.
In 1967, even though Israel captured East Jerusalem during the Six-Day War, a month later, as a gesture of peace and cooperation, Israeli Defense Minister Moshe Dayan returned control of the Temple Mount back to the Wakf.
It was later reported that he had an underlying fear that the ground would be razed to make way for the rebuilding of the Temple.
It is unclear whether the rock was the sacrificial altar, or the Holy of Holies where the Ark was placed, but the presence of drain holes bored into the surface, which leads to a cave below the Mosque, may indicate that it was the area of the Temple used for sacrifices.
Chapter Eleven runoff into a canal which carried the fluids out of the complex.
This would place the Holy of Holies in an area which slopes downward, and creates a conflict with archaeological evidence and historical tradition.
There is some support for the idea that the rock was the foundation stone for the Holy of Holies.
The argument for this is based on the assumption that one of the Temple gates, known as Warren's Gate(which was beneath the Gate Babel-Mat'hara and up to 1967 was the location of an Arab latrine), opened directly in front of the Holy of Holies.
In 1867, Charles Warren found an ancient gate to the Temple Mount, and since then, the entire Western Wall, and a tunnel running along it, called the Rabbinic Tunnel, was discovered and excavated by 1986, along with four other entrances, by Israel's Ministry of Religious Affairs and the Western Wall Heritage Foundation.
The Western Wall of the Temple, left standing by Rome as a symbol of their authority, was part of the retaining wall which was erected to support the immense platform which held the Temple.
In March, 1979, where excavations were being done at the Western Wall, a story was circulated, that a workman, digging with his fingers, 80 feet below the existing floor, discovered the Arch of King Solomon from the original Temple, which led to the Holy of Holies.
The archway of stone was constructed with a special mortar containing broken glass, as per God's instructions.
Tests taken of the glistening mortar indicated that it was produced during that period.
They would not break through the Wall, because according to the Law, only a Jew from the tribe of Levi, and the family of Aaron, can enter the Holy of Holies.
In July, 1981, Rabbi Meir Yehuda Getz, chief rabbi of the Western Wall, while building a new synagogue behind the Western Wall, investigated water emanating from the Wall, and discovered a great hall behind a former cistern which contained an arch, believed to be one of the entrances to the Temple.
It turned out to be the gate discovered by Warren, which led to the Temple court, and was the closest gate to the Holy of Holies.
A group of ten men, some from the Ateret Cohanim Yeshiva, began clearing the hall, working their way toward the Holy of Holies.
If the Rock was the foundation stone of the Holy of Holies, then tradition holds that beneath this stone there is a chamber created by Solomon which was later used to hide the Ark.
Getz believes that this secret chamber contains the Ark, the table, and the menorah.
After breaking down another wall, the Muslim authorities were made aware of what was going on, and the Arabs instigated a riot which led to the excavation site being shut down.
A wall was placed over the entrance to the tunnel, and was later reinforced with another wall of steel and plaster, which in 1992 was redone to give it an appearance of natural rock.
It is believed that these articles were removed, and their whereabouts are unknown.
The Israelis have been kept from rebuilding, or even doing much archaeological excavation because of their strained relationship with the Arabs, and because the Moslems fear that such excavations would weaken the structure of the Mosque.
Others would argue that it's because any significant archaeological discoveries on the site would prove Israel's ancient claim to the Mount.
Because of the lack of any substantial information, there is even alot of doubt as to where on the Temple Mount the sanctuary was actually located.
Father Bellarmino Begatti, A Franciscan researcher, published a report in 1979, that based on measurements and information in ancient documents, the Temple was located on the southern end of the Mount between the Dome of the Rock, and the al-Aqsa Mosque, and seems to be supported by the existence of underground reservoirs and tunnels.
Asher Kaufman believe that Arab construction on the northern end exposed an ancient wall near the Dome of the Rock, which is believed to be the eastern wall of the Temple's Court of Women.
It is also called the Qubbat el-Alouah, because it is believed that this was the location of the Holy of Holies in the original Temple, where the Ark of the Covenant was placed.
If this is true, that means that the Temple can be rebuilt without disturbing the Arab site, because the Mosque, which takes up an area of 34 acres, would actually be separated from most of the Temple foundation by many feet of rubble.
Proponents of this theory claim they have identified the area on the Mount of Olives which was used for the sacrifice of the Red Heifer, which further indicates that the Temple was not on the site of the Dome of the Rock.
Some Orthodox Jews believe that before the Temple can be rebuilt, both the Dome of the Rock and the al-Aqsa Mosque would have to be removed, because their presence defiles the sacred ground.
Before the Six-Day War, a quarter-page ad appeared in the Washington Post , seeking aid for the rebuilding of the Temple.
The document known as the ""Temple Scroll"", which was part of the Dead Sea Scrolls found at Qumran, give distinct instructions concerning the construction of the Temple, and a group known as the Ne'emanei Har Habayit(Faithful of the Temple Mount) commissioned a model of the Temple to be built.
Harvey A Smith, a Jewish Assemblies of God minister, wrote in his book, that they have the biggest and heaviest stones cut, and secretly placed under the Temple Mount behind Warren Gate.
From that time until the construction of the Temple by Solomon, only one generation passed.
In December, 1970, a special school called ""Yeshiva Avodas Hakodesh"" founded by Rabbi Hirsh Ha-Cohen(Cohens have been identified as the descendants of the priests in the original Jewish temple), was established to train students from the tribe of Levi in the ancient ritual of animal sacrifice.
Only students who can trace their lineage back to Aaron can be admitted.
Motti Dan , who is said to be a descendent of the priestly line, studied all the rules in regard to the Temple service, and established the ""Ateret Cohanim Yeshiva"" in the 1970's as a religious school to educate and train others, of similar descent, for the priesthood.
The first class graduated on June 1,1980, and among their graduation exercises, was to perform the ancient rite of animal sacrifice.
An episode of ""60 Minutes"" in March, 1985, in a segment called ""One Step in Heaven"", indicated that rabbinical students in Jerusalem were studying the Jewish rites of animal sacrifice under Rabbi Shlomo Goren, the former Chief Rabbi of the Israeli Defense Forces, who had said in a November, 1981 Newsweek interview that the secret of the location of the Ark would be revealed just prior to the third Temple being built.
The Institute for Talmudic Commentaries, run by Rabbi Nahman Kahane(a descendent of the priestly line), which is located in the Young Israel Synagogue, is involved in the study of the Temple rituals and ceremonies, and have been involved in research to catalog all known cohanim in Israel.
The Atara L'yoshna the crown to its original ""), a branch of Kahane's group, has established a Study and Tourist Center near the Western Wall, where they have models of the Tabernacle, the two original Temples, the new Temple, the Ark of the Covenant, a menorah, and other Temple implements.
It was a reactionary movement to protest the move by Moshe Dayan, the Israeli Defense Minister, who allowed the Muslims to maintain control of the Temple Mount area in 1967.
Asher Kaufman, and archaeologist Dan Bahat, that the Arabs were destroying valuable archaeological evidence from the first and second Temples.
The group has also made attempts to lay a special 4-ton cornerstone on the Mount.
The Temple Institute was founded in Israel, in 1988, by Rabbi Israel Ariel, who in 1967, was the first paratrooper to reach the Western Wall.
Time magazine printed a two-page article on the group in October, 1989, and ABC-TV's news show ""20/20"" televised a segment on them.
On October 18,1989, the first bi-annual Conference on Temple Research was held.
This joint venture between the Temple Institute and the Ministry of Religious Affairs brought together rabbis, scientists, archaeologists in an attempt to better coordinate their efforts in making the Temple a reality.
Based on years of research, historical tradition and the Scriptures, the Temple Institute has produced the actual items which will be used in the Temple when it is rebuilt.
In the planning stages, is the breastplate of the high priest, which will contain twelve gemstones; and the gold electroplated menorah which will contain 94. pounds of gold, giving it an estimated value of $10 million.
The priest would sacrifice an unblemished, unbroken Red Heifer, after which the remaining ashes were collected and added to the ashes of the next sacrifice.
It took place on the western slope of the Mount of Olives, within sight of the Holy of Holies.
The ashes were then sprinkled upon the waters of a large cistern under the Temple to prepare them to be used as the water of purification to cleanse sin and defilement.
The last sacrifice occurred in 70 AD, prior to the destruction of the Temple, after which the ashes were secretly buried.
This ritual cleansing would have to be performed on the Temple Mount in order to reinstate Temple worship as commanded by the Laws of God.
Chapter Eleven Scroll"" found at Qumran, were buried in a container made of clay, and dung from the Red Heifer.
If they can not be located, the Temple Institute, on the belief that the tradition of the ""ashes of continuity"" is a mistranslation, maintains that the original ashes are not necessary.
In October, 1989, the Chief Rabbi of Israel dispatched a team of scientists to Sweden to purchase the frozen embryos of a particular breed of red heifers in order to impregnate a heifer in Israel and breed an animal that would fulfill the scriptural requirements.
However, the latest report is that a herd of red Angus cattle have been discovered in Mississippi, and a group of these have been sent to Israel for later use.
Vendyl Jones, a former Baptist minister turned archaeologist in 1977, said to be the inspiration for the creation of the fictional movie character Indiana Jones(though producers Steven Spielberg and George Lucas deny it), while searching in Jericho area caves for the Ark of the Covenant, found a clay jar containing a unique incense oil which dated back to the time of the second Jewish Temple, and contained the five ingredients the Bible identified as being part of the oil used to anoint kings.
One of these ingredients was an oil called afars'mon, which was taken from the sap of the rare balsam tree that grew near Jericho at a wadi known as Ein Gedi, near the area of Qumran.
The oil was very rare, and when Rome invaded the Qumran community before 70 AD, the Essenes burned the only known grove of these balsam trees, which are now considered extinct.
This special anointing oil is listed in the Copper Scroll, and in 1988, using the clues given there, a worker, Benny Ayers, who was with a group of Christian archaeologists and volunteers , under the direction of Dr.
Professor Ze'ev Aisenshtat and Dorit Aschengrau at the laboratory of Hebrew Univeristy's Casali Institute of Applied Chemistry, used Carbon-14 dating and said that the oil was put in the container during the first century, and is believed to be the anointing oil that was used in the Temple.
The oil's chemical composition was such, that one drop placed in water, turned it a milky white, just as ancient documents indicated.
The substance was given to the Chief Rabbi of Israel, and it will be used to anoint the Messiah when he returns.
Chief Rabbi Isaac Herzog believes that the dye used to achieve the blue-colored thread on the Temple garments, comes from the Segulit snail, which because of its scarcity, is very expensive.
According to the Talmud, Israel is inundated every 70 years with these snails.
In October, 1990, they were found in large numbers on the Mediterranean beaches of Israel.
Chapter Eleven tested by the Weizmann Institute of Science, and found to be the remnants of a special mixture of incense believed to be used in the Temple service.
However, the Temple Institute believes that since the incense was not found in a container, it had been improperly prepared and disposed of, and thus is not acceptable for use.
Little by little, all the elements seem to be coming together in preparation for the day when the Temple will be rebuilt.
The closer we come to that reality, the opposition to it increases within certain religious circles.
The destruction of the second Temple in 70 AD, according to some Christian leaders, indicated that the Jews were being punished for rejecting Jesus as the Messiah, and that Judaism was being usurped by Christianity, which had become the new temple of God.
They feel that because he spiritually dwells within all who believe and follow his teachings, the rebuilding of the Temple would be a denial of Jesus' atonement for our sins on the cross, which eliminated the necessity of Temple sacrifice.
This sort of theological debate is pointless, because the Bible plainly eludes to the existence of the Temple in the last days, regardless of how right or wrong it is.
Now bear in mind, I have been told by Milt Maiman, that to fulfill the prophecy, the Temple doesn't have to be rebuilt.
Just as the Tent of the Tabernacle was originally used to house the Ark, it could again be erected on the Temple grounds, and used for Temple observances.
So, when you turn on the 6 o'clock news, and you see that Israel has put up the Tent, or that construction on the Temple has begun, know that this is one of the major events in the prophetic timetable, and that the end is near.
THE ARK OF THE COVENANT The purpose of building the Temple, was to house the Ark of the Covenant, so the discovery of the most sacred item in Jewish history may be all that is needed to initiate the rebuilding of the Temple.
However, Jeremiah 27:22 seems to indicate a connection between the Temple treasures, and the existence of the Temple.
According to Ezra, after the first Temple was destroyed, the Temple vessels had to be returned or refabricated before the Temple could be rebuilt.
Thus, only the existence of the Temple vessels may be all that is needed to rebuild the Temple, since it is believed that the Ark was not in the second Temple.
Chapter Eleven two cherubs looking down and facing each other on its lid with outstretched wings, which was known as the mercy seat.
It was constructed at Mount Sinai by Bezalel, according to the instructions Moses received from God.
Inside was placed the rod of Aaron, a pot of manna(which had been sent by God to feed the Israelites during their time of wandering in the wilderness), and the two tablets of the Law given to Moses.
It represented the divine presence of God, and was the point where the literal manifestation of God on this Earth took place.
It caused the Jordan River to part, aided in the destruction of Jericho, and brought about numerous military victories when it was present.
Inside the Temple, the Ark was placed in a dark, windowless room known as the Holy of Holies.
A vale was placed around the Ark, and only once a year, on the Day of Atonement, the high priest was allowed to enter.
Even then, he was to carry a container of burning incense, which filled the room with smoke, thus obscuring his view of the Ark.
He would sprinkle the blood of a bullock on the ground in front of the Ark, and on the mercy seat, as atonement for the sins of the priests; and then the blood of a goat, as a symbolic atonement for the sins of the people.
A rope would be tied around his waist, so if for some reason he accidently touched the Ark and was killed, he could be pulled out without risk by the other priests.
The common belief is that the Temple will not be rebuilt unless the Ark is found.
It is unlikely that Hezekiah(716-687 BC) would have allowed the Ark to be taken away.
Amon discovered that Manasseh had been involved in a form of Baal worship, and had erected an image of Astarte in the Temple(2 Kings 21:4-7, 2 Chronicles 33:7), and it is believed that he would have ordered the Levites to remove the Ark.
However, idolatry took root again, and the actions of Rehoboam, Solomon's son, caused the kingdom to be divided, with Judah in the south, and Israel to the north.
During the second invasion, 2 Kings 24:13 says that ""all the treasures of the house of the Lord, and the treasure of the king's house"" were taken, and ""all the vessels of gold which Solomon king of Israel had made in the temple of the Lord"" had been cut in pieces.
Lists of Temple items (2 Kings 25:13-17, Jeremiah 52:17-23) do not refer to any Temple treasures from the Holy of Holies, and it is this silence that could indicate that it wasn't captured, since there is a Biblical record of the time when the Philistines captured the Ark.
In addition, Ezra 1:7-11 states that all the captured items were later returned by the Persians, but the Ark was not discussed.
So, either the Ark was destroyed along with the Temple(possibly indicated by the destruction of the ""goodly vessels"" in 2 Chronicles 36:19), or the Ark was hidden before it could be found.
When Rome invaded Judea in 63 BC, and the Roman General Pompey swept through Jerusalem, entering the Temple, and the Holy of Holies, it was empty.
Jewish history records the high priest making his offering upon the foundation stone of the Holy of Holies, and not the Ark.
After Titus returned to Rome with some of the Temple treasure, the Arch of Triumph was built in 81 AD at the entrance to the Forum, in the Palatine section of Rome, to commemorate his victory.
It depicted the sevenbranched candelabra known as the menorah(with an octagonal base, rather than a threelegged stand, which it actually has; which could indicate that it was a duplicate kept in the Treasury), the golden table of the showbread, and the seven trumpets of the Jubilee.
The Ark is not pictured, thus adding to the evidence that the Ark was not in the second Temple, and has been hidden.
It is believed that King Solomon constructed a secret chamber in the recesses of the Temple Mount to hide the Ark, which is where it was placed during the reign of Manasseh.
Jewish tradition has held that the Ark, and the Altar of Incense were hidden in a secret location under a woodshed on the western side of the Temple, near the Holy of Holies.
This is not such a far-fetched idea when you realize that under the city of Jerusalem there is an underground city consisting of a number of tunnels, chambers, and cisterns; which were created to establish a water storage system, as quarters for guards, chambers to hold sacrificial animals, rooms containing ritual bathing areas, prison cells, and storage areas for Temple treasures.
Chapter Eleven Hezekiah's Tunnel, which was constructed to make sure Jerusalem would have fresh water in case the city was attacked.
It started at Gihon Spring, and ran for a third of a mile, through solid rock, spilling into the Pool of Siloam.
An escape tunnel used by King Zedekiah ran from the Tower of Antonia, to a point near the Eastern Gate, emerging outside the walls of the city, covering a distance of over 8,000 feet.
The nine original members of the Knights Templar were received by King Baldwin l in Jerusalem in 1119, and they established their headquarters in a wing of the al-Aqsa Mosque, which had been converted to a palace.
They were given complete access to the palace and various outbuildings which were on the site where Solomon's Temple originally stood, which was adjacent to the Dome of the Rock.
Although their goal was ""to keep the road from the coast to Jerusalem free from bandits"", for nine years they rarely left the palace grounds.
It was an unrealistic pledge, because it would have been difficult for the nine to patrol this fifty mile road; besides, a military order known as the Knights of Saint John were already performing that task before the Templars showed up.
It is now known that they had some knowledge about the Temple treasures, because there is evidence which indicates that they were engaged in a massive excavation project.
The Templars were aware of these hidden areas underneath the Temple grounds, and believed that the Ark would be found there.
They mounted an operation to plunder whatever treasurers they could find.
Although it is questionable that they found the Ark, it is believed that they discovered treasure, relies and ancient manuscripts dating back to the time of Moses.
Israeli archaeologists, engaged in excavations on the southern side of the Mount, found the exit point of a tunnel which had been dug by the Templars.
It lead inward about 30 yards, where it was blocked by stone and debris.
There has been many stories concerning the location of the Ark of the Covenant.
Some believe it is still buried in a secret chamber on the Temple Mount.
Jewish historian Eupolemus wrote that many of the Temple treasurers had been plundered by Babylon, ""except for the Ark and the tablets in it.
Many researcher believe that this could refer to either Mount Sinai or Mount Nebo, which is located in what is now the country of Jordan, and is the traditional burial place of Moses.
The contention was made, that since these articles were made under the leadership of Moses, they may have been deposited at the site of his burial.
Various archaeological expeditions had failed to turn up anything there.
Chapter Eleven locations in Jordan for the Ark, based on the clues in 2 Maccabees, and believed the location to be on Mount Pisgah, the highest peak on the Mount Nebo range.
Beside it was another bundle, which he thought contained the carrying poles, the cherubim which had been mounted on the top, and the legs.
The cave is located near the Church of the Franciscan Fathers of Terra Santa, and is under a building which contains the remains of an old Byzantine church.
He reported it to the media, and he claimed that God told him to send the photographs he took to London banker David Rothschild, who some people have claimed is a direct descendant of Jesus, and has been chosen to build the third Temple.
Rothschild refused to accept the pictures, and they were returned to Crotser.
Noted archaeologist Siegfried Horn visited his home in Winfield, Kansas to see the pictures.
In January, 1979, archaeologist Ronald Wyatt, while sightseeing near the Damascus Gate, felt that the location of Jeremiah's Grotto was near an ancient stone quarry on the northern extension of Mt.
He believed that during the Babylonian siege of Jerusalem from 587586 BC, when the city was surrounded, it would have been impossible to remove the Ark, so it had to be there.
With the permission of the landowner, and a permit from Israeli officials, he excavated the area.
On January 6,1982, he entered a chamber that contained the Ark, and other artifacts from the first Temple, which had been hidden there by Jeremiah.
The 22-foot long cave is actually located directly beneath the area where Christ was crucified.
According to Wyatt's research, when Jesus was crucified, his blood flowed down to the ground, through a split in the rock, and onto the Ark.
Calvary was used as burial grounds, so it is highly unlikely that the Ark would have been placed on defiled ground.
Scholars have questioned his lack of archaeological training, and his techniques; yet Wyatt's work is gaining more acceptance because of other discoveries, such as the true Mt.
Sinai, the location on the Red Sea crossing, Noah's Ark, the 12 altars erected by Moses, Sodom and Gomorrah, and Abraham's family tomb in Hebron.
Plus, his work has produced the most information on the Ark, all of which seems to be compatible with Scripture.
Chapter Eleven layout of Cave IV is similar to the Temple, and that its lower level may have been the containment room used by Jeremiah to temporarily protect the Ark.
Preliminary trenches dug in 1993 failed to turn up anything substantial.
Once Christianity became the official religion of Rome, the treasures plundered by its legions fell into the possession of the Catholic Church.
Nelson Canode, of Amarillo, Texas, a former Benedictine monk at a monastery at Subiaco, Italy, about 30 miles from Rome, said that he was taken to a cave, four levels below the monastery, where ancient artifacts were being shuttled from there to the underground vaults of the Vatican, and included the Ark and the disassembled Tabernacle.
There are many who believe that once Jerusalem becomes an international city, the Vatican will return all Temple items in their possession.
Because of the research done by Graham Hancock for his book The Sign and the Seal , some people think the Ark may be in Ethiopia.
Menelik I, the royal son of King Solomon, returned to Ethiopia, after his mother, the Queen of Sheba, died.
When he was twenty years old, he returned to Israel, and Solomon treated him with so much favor, that the elders were jealous and wanted him to return home.
Solomon agreed to send him home, on the condition that the first born sons of all the elders would go with him.
However, Azarius, the son of Zadok, the High Priest, worried about the idol worship which was flourishing, switched the Arks, and took the real one.
The Ark was taken to Egypt, on the island of Elephantine in the middle of the Nile, near Aswan, where a temple was built to protect it.
The Ark was carried along the Nile, and the Takazze tributary into Ethiopia.
During the 1530's, when the Muslims attacked, it was moved to safety, but returned a hundred years later to a rebuilt St.
It remained there until 1965, when Emperor Haile Selassie (who called himself the ""Conquering Lion of Judah"" and claimed to be a direct descendent of King Solomon) moved it to the Church of Zion near the center of Aksum, in northern Ethiopia.
Though the communists overthrew the monarchy in 1974, killed Selassie, and imprisoned much of the Royal family, the Ark remained safe because of its reputation for possessing an awesome amount of power, which has generated enough superstition to prevent people from trying to get to it.
Chapter Eleven descendents of those who accompanied him, who became known as ""Falasha"" Jews, or the ""Black Jews"" This area became part of the independent nation of Eritrea in 1993.
It was alleged, that when Israel became a nation, an appeal was made to Emperor Salassie to return the Ark.
There are some who share the suspicion, that Israel already knows where the Ark is, but also know that the political climate of their homeland is too volatile to take a chance on revealing its location until the right time.
As we have discovered, the Ark was not in the second Temple, so the existence of the Ark is not necessary for the Temple to be rebuilt.
However, if you turn on the 6 o'clock news, and you see that Israel is announcing the discovery of the Ark of the Covenant, this certainly will have a bearing on the prophetic timetable.
THE ANTICHRIST IS REVEALED During the first half of the seven-year treaty with Israel, there will be quite a few changes in the world.
The ability of the Western European leader to settle conflicts throughout the globe, will give the United Nations the impetus to establish world government.
This will probably bring with it complete disarmament in order to maintain such a peace.
Most likely, any country who does not willingly join the New World Order, will be forced to comply.
The countries of the world will make this leader from Western Europe, the head of their New World Order.
Meanwhile, the individual who has emerged as the preeminent religious leader in the world will succeed in bringing together the major religions to form a new coalition of Christianity that will be bound together with New Age philosophy.
After 42 months, or 31/2 years, the trap is finally going to be sprung.
Chapter Eleven will announce that the head of the world government is the Messiah who they have been waiting for, and he should be worshipped.
By assuming the role as the Messiah, Jerusalem will become his city, and he will erect an image of himself in the Jewish Temple.
This image will appear to speak supernaturally, and the people will be made to worship the image of the man who is called the Beast, or die.
The Antichrist will use economic terrorism to force the people of the world to follow him.
And that no man might buy and sell, save he that had the mark, or the name of the beast, or the number of his name.
Six is the number of man, because he was created on the sixth day, and given six ""days"" to live.
The word means 'Latin kingdom', and it was later believed that this referred to the religion of the Vatican, because Latin is their official language, which is used in their canons, missals, prayers, and blessings.
Chapter Eleven numerical system was based on the number six, instead of ten.
Penney, and Montgomery Ward computers were prefixing their transactions with the number 666, as mandated by its computer programming.
After alot of protest, it was omitted in 1978-79, but resumed in 1980-81.
Chapter Eleven 25) The McGregor Clothing Co. had introduced a ""666 Collection"" of menswear.
The mark may be some sort of identification number, such as your Social Security number, which will serve to identify everyone.
It could be that your Social Security number could be used for such a system, since United States law requires every citizen to have such a number by the time they enter the first grade.
The move is on for everyone in the United States to have an identification card.
A Special Presidential Commission on Immigration and Refugees had recommended a national identification card in an attempt to keep illegal aliens in check.
It reported that the Federal Government was planning an identification card that would prevent anyone without one from working or transacting any sort of business.
This computerized system would keep track of every citizen, According to a 1994 proposal by the Congressional Commission on Immigration Reform, all American citizens and legal immigrants would be given a national identification card.
In 1995, the European Economic Community was to begin issuing identification cards to all the citizens of western Europe.
In California, drivers licenses are to be issued that will contain a microchip that will contain personal information, motor vehicle records, criminal records, a photograph, and fingerprints.
And now, in a test program by the Department of Defense, the Pentagon is issuing M.A.R.C. cards to their soldiers.
It contains a bar code, a magnetic strip, a digitized photograph, and an integrated circuit computer chip.
This ""6. megabyte Laser Card"" from Drexler Technology Corporation can store nearly 2,000 pages of information, which is more than enough for identification numbers, biographical information, school records, photographs, signature, voice print, fingerprints, medical and health care records, credit and banking information, job information and activities.
This card is believed to be the prototype for the national identification card that will be issued to all United States citizens.
This system links member banks across the globe in a manner designed to accommodate any type of computer system.
The Burroughs Corp. developed the data processing and communications system equipment that will be used as a private communications system for the transmission of payment and other international banking transactions and communication.
These data concentrators are linked to terminals in all the member banks of those countries.
Brussels is the location of the Main Switching Center, which occupies three floors of the European Communities thirteen-floor headquarters.
This computer has since taken a back seat to the computer in the Monet Building in Luxembourg, which is the largest in the world.
The United States SWIFT Bank, built at a cost of $15 million, is located near the Federal Reserve Office in Culpepper, Virginia.
Everyone living in the major industrial nations are tied into this system through Social Security numbers, Driver License numbers, Birth Certificates, Passport numbers, and Credit Card numbers.
All financial transactions are on record, including taxes paid, and property acquisitions.
Also in its memory banks are changes of address, and your employment record.
All other numbers, such as driver license numbers and credit card numbers would be phased out in lieu of your Social Security number, since it is already used in bank dealings, Medicaid, Medicare, Blue Cross, and various other identification methods.
This number, most likely, will be used for the issuing of an International Card so that financial transactions can be accomplished electronically.
Relfe believes that the Personal Identification Transaction Card may include a photograph, signature, and the identification number encoded on it with a magnetic strip and a bar code.
The advent of debit cards may have heralded the coming of this type of card.
You are not to write your number down, tell it to anyone, or record it anywhere.
Giant Food, Inc. and the Safeway Stores were the first to install the Point-of-Sale computerized Electronic Fund Transfer checkout machines in their supermarkets to take bank debit cards.
They were later joined by Mobil Oil who installed the system in all of its gas stations throughout the country.
Since then, debit cards have slowly become assimilated into all aspects of the retail industry.
Now the move is to combine the credit card and the debit card into a single multi-use card.
It can be used to make deposits, pay bills, transfer money, make withdrawals, make purchases, and borrow money.
The debit card will bear the familiar red and ochre logo, in the same way that all Visa cards are blue, white and gold.
Even the magnetic stripe specification adopted for the new MasterCard now embraces an element introduced by Visa's three digit service code in the discretionary datafield of track two.
With this code, it will be possible to determine if a card from one country many be used...in another country.
The cover of the January 18,1982 issue of Business Week , depicted a single debit card for nationwide electronic banking.
A cashless society would also eliminate extortion and blackmail for money; and the purchase of illegal contraband, such as drugs and untaxed alcohol.
However, the real reason for going cashless, is that the population can be controlled and manipulated.
The 3"" X 3"" magnetic stripe on the back credit and debit cards have the potential to carry about 5,000,000 bits of information, or about 100,000 words.
Which means that it could conceivably record your credit history, work history, medical history, or in short, the story of your life.
However, technology is changing so rapidly, that the magnetic strip has been rendered obsolete by the 'Smart Card', which has a 2 line display screen, yet is only slightly larger than a credit card.
Instead of a magnetic strip, it is imbedded with an integrated circuit chip for the storage of information, and it can be updated each time the card is used.
With this card, a person could shop, bank, and receive social services; and it could be used to store their medical history, Social Security records and other personal information.
In the April, 1980 edition of Business Week , there was an advertisement for National Cash Register, for the financial terminals, which featured a card called the ""Worldwide Money Card"" which they said will replace all the world's currencies.
But people will lose their card, or have it stolen, or accidentally mutilate it.
You have probably noticed that the magnetic strip on your credit cards does not hold up well.
The constant rubbing against each other, and against your wallet, causes scratches and drop outs on the strips which can not be read by scanners.
An advertisement by the First Tennessee Bank, showed a man with his bank number tattooed on his arm, implying that this was the only way to remember your number.
Initially, a process had been developed to create a permanent non-toxic fluid that could be invisibly tattooed on human flesh, until a particular light, such as infrared or ultraviolet, shown on it.
R Keith Farrell, invented a laser gun, which he used to number fish, which accomplished the task in less than a second.
The laser beam can not be felt, the number can not be seen with the naked eye, and it is as permanent as your fingerprints.
A full-page illustration which appeared in a 1993 issue of the London Daily Mail , showed housewives in Europe making purchases by putting their hands on a computer screen at the cash register.
Note that in Revelation 13:16, it says that the ""mark"" will be placed ""in"" the right hand or forehead, not ""on"" it.
Vern Taylor, President of Identification Devices, Inc., said that the wafer is printed with a serial number and injected into the animal, When an electronic wand is passed over the area, the serial number is displayed on a digital readout.
It can also be placed on inanimate objects to electronically monitor the whereabouts of store merchandise and leased equipment.
A Washington Times article contained a report by Martin Anderson, Senior Fellow at the Hoover Institute, concerning a solution for the problem of people losing their identification cards.
It's the Syringe Implantable Transponder, a permanent method of identification using radio waves.
I am sure you have seen the horizontal scanners at the grocery stores which are used to read the UPC symbols off of the items you are buying, so that the computer will automatically print the price of that item.
No doubt these scanners already have the capability of scanning your forehead or your hand.
With a flat scanner, the cashier only had to slide the item across the scanning plate; but with -the upright scanner, the cashier has to lift the item up in front of the scanner.
I was amazed the first time I seen one, because right away I knew that its purpose wasn't to make things easier for the cashier, It was to make it easier to scan your forehead and hand.
I haven't seen alot of them, so it don't know if the retail industry as a whole is going to upgrade to this version of the scanner.
We have been talking about future developments, so let's talk about the present.
Do you realize that with the Universal Product Code, we are already buying and selling under the number 666. in 1970, the National Association of Food Chains, and five other major trade associations representing manufacturers, wholesalers, and retailers, met, and formed an ad hoc committee to set up guidelines for an encoding system that could be accepted by the entire industry.
In 1972, the Uniform Grocery Product Code Council, Inc. and Distribution Codes, lnc. was established, with thousands of companies invited to become members.
On April 3,1973, the ad hoc committee announced that they had selected a twelve-digit bar code that could be printed by conventional methods, and be scanned omnidirectionally by an automated system.
By the end of 1974, the Uniform Grocery Product Code Council had changed their name to the Uniform Product Code Council, Inc., and had 21 representatives from manufacturers, distributors, and trade associations on their Board.
Around 2,600 companies, representing a total of $70. billion in annual sales, had become members of the Code Council, and were utilizing the bar coding on their products.
Chapter Eleven 6 6 6 7797 5 02265 Left Hand Guide Bar : tells the computer that information is coming.
The regular size of the bar code is 1.469"" X 1.020"", but it can be printed from 80% of that size, to twice that size.
It must appear in a rectangular block on the bottom, side or back panel of a product, or anywhere it can be scanned.
The bar code is a series of black and white parallel bars, 30 black and 31 white , with white margins on each side.
Modules are all the same width, being that they are the foundation of the system, and create the bars which are visible to the naked eye.
If you look at the above diagram of the UPC symbol, you will notice that the symbol is split into two sides, a left-hand side, using an odd number of modules; and a right-hand side, using an even number of modules, making them opposite of each other.
Sometimes the actual number may appear on the right-hand side of the symbol, just as the Number System Character appears on the left-hand side.
The purpose of the Check Character is to check for errors, such as the unauthorized addition of lines that could result in the computer reading the wrong number.
You add the two lines together as indicated, which gives you a figure of 50.
Subtract 50 from the next highest number which is a multiple of 10, which is 60.
Design Variations The Zero Suppression Method of the UPC Symbol permits zeros to be eliminated from the ten digit code number, narrowing it to six numbers, which reduces the width of the symbol so it can fit on a product with a smaller package.
Known as truncation, this method also reduces the height by shortening the length of the vertical lines; and reduces the computer's effectiveness in reading the symbol omnidirectionally.
The intention of this alternate design was to insure that the general public would not crack the UPC code.
The design incorporates bar codes from the first and second sets, and from a third set created from the second set.
These bar codes from Set Two are used to represent the numbers 0, 4, 5 and 9 in Set Three.
Chapter Eleven Since the design is half of the regular design, it uses half of its center bar pattern to represent the number 6 in the third set of numbers.
While the main portion of the design will only use bar codes from the first and second sets; the extended area on the right side of the symbol will use bar codes from all three sets.
Incredibly, as you have seen, through the use of the UPC system of encoding products, we are actually buying and selling with the number 666.
In other words, the only visible modules of the number 6, is the designation of 101, which is used in the left and right-hand guides, and the center bar pattern.
In Design #2, which is half of Design #1, it incorporates a third bar code for the number six, which is represented by half of the center bar pattern, or a module pattern of 010.
In Design #1, there are six numbers on the left side, and six numbers on the right side.
Six is the perfect computer number, a fact, which, according to the Wall Street Journal (November 11, 1981), led Apple Computer, Inc. to introduce their Apple I units at a price of $666.66.
However, the evidence is overwhelming to the contrary, Bible prophecy has been fulfilledwe are buying and selling with the number 666.
As the items are carried down the conveyer belt, the cashier pulls the item, symbol downward, across the scanner, then bags the item.
The white bars or spaces will reflect more light than the black bars, which is measured by a light detector.
A time measurement of how long the beam takes to move across the bar and space, is also used for decoding.
The scanner reads the symbol, no matter what direction it is passed over the scanner, from several inches, to a foot away, decoding the number and sending the number to a computer.
The computer transmits to the electronic cash register, the price of the product, which is indicated on a display, and printed on the receipt tape.
When the register totals the purchase, the printed receipt tape usually indicates the store name, number, and location, item name, item price, whether it is taxable, and the total.
It allows for payment in cash, food stamps, check, debit card, or credit card; and deducts the coupons which are presented.
It tells how much change is received, the date, time, and lane number, Besides the quickness and efficiency, another feature of the system is the ability to automatically keep track of inventory.
Those stores who already have electronic fund transfer capabilities, and are accepting debit cards, are pulling funds directly from a customer's checking account, and transferring it to the store's account at the bank.
Needless to say, the system is also able to accept an international debit card.
In the October, 1980 edition of Advertising Age magazine, TeleResearch Item Movement, Inc. had a full page advertisement for their supermarket computer scanner, which featured the picture of a man with a UPC symbol printed on his forehead.
Relfe believes that the UPC method of encoding will be used to invisibly place identification numbers on the forehead and hand with a laser.
When the international debit card is phased out, the scanners now being used in stores will also be able to scan your forehead and hand.
Frank Church said in August, 1975, that ""the government has the technological capacity to impose 'total tyranny' if ever a dictator came to power.
The purpose of the Mark, is to serve as a surveillance tool, to make a person totally dependent on the government.
Without the Mark, you won't be able to buy food for you and your family, receive medical treatment, buy clothing, or gas for your car.
Those who do not take the Mark, will be constantly harassed by the government; especially true Christians, who will become fugitives when their freedom of religion is taken away.
And he opened his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name, and his tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven.
And when the dragon saw that he was cast unto the earth, he persecuteth the woman which brought forth the man child.
When the Antichrist reveals himself by defiling the Jewish Temple with a statue of his image, and his demand that he be worshipped as the Messiah; the eyes of the Jewish people will be opened.
Revelation 13:2 indicates that ""the dragon gave him his power, and his seat, and great authority,"" and once his Satanic agenda is realized, the Jews will flee Israel to escape his wrath.
This area is believed to be the land of Edom, Moab, and Ammon, which were not overrun by Russian forces.
Located in a valley, and surrounded by impassable sandstone cliffs, the only entrance is a narrow path known as El Ciq, which is about 6,000 feet long, and varies in width from 12 to 30 feet.
Chapter Eleven Known as Mount Seir in the Bible, this was the home of Esau, the father of the Edomites.
During the Babylonian captivity of the Jews, the Edomites moved into Israel, and Petra was inhabited by an Arabic tribe known as the Nabataeans during the 6th century BC, and became an important trade center.
They were defeated by the Romans around 55 BC, and in 32 BC, Marc Antony gave Petra to Cleopatra of Egypt as a gift.
Because he was married to Octavia, the sister of Roman Emperor, the Senate stripped him of his rank and ordered him back to Rome.
With the decrease of Roman influence in the 5th century, and after the Islamic invasion during the 7th century, the area became part of the province of Arabia, and remained a ghost town until it was rediscovered in 1812 by Swiss explorer John L Burckhardt.
The last segment of the 1989 Paramount movie ""Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade"" was filmed at Petra.
Believed to have originally been built inside an extinct volcano, this rock city contains many elaborate facades among its many structures, which includes various tombs, monuments, and dwellings, which were carved into the rock of the mountainside.
Some date back to the Edomite era, most are Nabataean, and some are Roman and early Christian.
Even though it is located in a desert area, there are water cisterns there, and dozens of springs and wells, including the Ain Musaf'Spring of Moses""), two miles from the entrance, which is traditionally identified as one of the two sites where Moses produced water by striking a rock.
More recently, a construction firm out of Minneapolis, Minnesota, has been hired to restore the water system; and other international teams were schedules to carry out other restoration work.
This event marks the beginning of the end, for when the Antichrist is able to do this, he will have been able to take control of Jerusalem.
By this time, he will have absolute power over 25% of the world, with the main concentration being in the Middle East.
He will seek out and destroy the true Christians who will not worship him or take his Mark.
Chapter Eleven It is at this time when ""two witnesses"" will emerge to ""prophesy"", according to Revelation 11:3.
It says, ""I will give power unto my two witnesses,"" which could indicate that God intends to anoint a couple of ordinary men, who will become ""super evangelists"", possessing extraordinary powers like the prophets of old.
However, just as angels have been sent to Earth in various capacities, the consensus seems to be that these two will be prophets sent by God.
There have been two possibilities mentioned as to the identities of the two.
Matthew 17:3 and Mark 9:4, refer to Jesus being transfigured with Elijah and Moses.
Moses, unlike Elijah, had died, so it was his spiritual body which had appeared.
So the identity of the second witness perhaps points to Enoch, because he was the only other person in the Bible who never died.
These two witnesses, who will preach for 1,260 days, or 31/2 years, will most likely have a ministry similar to John the Baptist.
They will be latter-day prophets, opposing the dictatorship and government of the Antichrist, and spreading the word that the Son of man, Jesus, the true Messiah, is returning the reclaim the Earth.
After their ministry is complete, the Antichrist will succeed in having them killed, and as a warning to others, the Antichrist will demand that the bodies remain unburied, so that all can see the extent of his power.
However, God will show his power, and bring them back to life, and they will be taken back to Heaven.
At this point, the Antichrist will put his military might on full alert, because he knows that the Scriptures are about to be fulfilled.
There is a risk in trying to interpret Bible prophecy, and piece together last day events.
In the quest for understanding, literal and rational explanations are attached to events which may seem beyond reason.
Realizing that Biblical writers were describing events in terms familiar to them, it becomes necessary to adapt those descriptions into modernday correlations.
For example, Revelation 9:16-19 describes the action of the 6th of 7 angels, whose trumpet-blast set in motion an invasion force of monstrous creatures.
Clearly the mention of angelic activities is describing things which are occurring in the spiritual realm, however the results of those actions are literal events.
The Associated Press reported that one out of every five in China have had military training.
To comprehend a number this large, bear in mind that the population of the United States is close to 260,000,000.
With the destruction of the Russian military, China is the last bastion of Communist domination.
They will join the forces of the Antichrist as he mobilizes for his last stand.
Starting in Tibet, it weaves its way through the province of Singkiang; the mountains peaks of Manchuria, Mongolia, Nepal, the Himalayas, West Pakistan; and into Afghanistan, to where the Euphrates River rises in Turkey, and runs across Syria.
It follows the ancient trans-Asian invasion route used by Alexander the Great, Genghis Khan, and the Mogul invaders.
It is written that the Euphrates River will be dried up at the time of this troop movement.
It could be done through supernatural means, as has happened with the Red Sea and the Jordan River; or it could be the result of manipulation.
There are two dams in the Turkish section of the Euphrates, Ataturk and Karakaya.
In 1974, Soviet engineers built the Keban dam, and in 1975, built another at Tabka, in Syria.
In January, 1990, Turkey began the operation of a dam that caused the river to fall 75% in one day.
So, it is quite possible that the river could be made to dry up at just the right time.
Revelation 16:13-16 identifies the unholy trinity of Satan, the Antichrist, and the False Prophet working to bring together the armies of the world in preparation for the coming battle.
Chapter Eleven the capital of the area of Canaan when it was attacked by Joshua.
The port city of Haifa is located at the Valley's western entrance, and no doubt will be utilized as the drop-off point for troops who are transported by naval vessels.
While this area is identified as the area where the armies of the world gather, Joel 3:2,12,14, pinpoints the battle area as the valley of Jehoshaphat, which was known as the ""valley of decision"" and according to tradition is believed to be located near Jerusalem, in the Kidron valley.
The rider is none other than Jesus, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.
It seems obvious that the military might of the Antichrist will use any means at their disposal to do battle against an invincible adversary.
The extent of our present weapons technology is our nuclear capability, and the Bible gives an excellent description of just that kind of warfare in Revelation 9:18.
Chapter Eleven ""But in those days, after that tribulation, the sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, And the stars of heaven shall fall, and the powers that are in heaven shall be shaken.
Four other sites have been identified on the east side of the Dead Sea as part of the ruins of the five plain cities involved in the turn of events, including Numeira(discovered in 1973), Safi, Feifa, and Hanazir.
Because of evidence which proves that the area was fertile and densely populated, all of these sites, along with Sodom and Gomorrah, are believed to be the five cities of the plain.
Excavations made since 1974 at the Tell Mardikh, site of the ancient Ebla, in northern Syria, have turned up tablets from their archives which refer to all five cities of the plain, and on one, even names them in the same sequence as in Genesis 14:2.
Nelson Glueck, while Director of the American School of Oriental Research in Jerusalem, made a survey of the southern Transjordan area, east and south of the Dead Sea, and discovered that the area had been settled before 2000 BC, but suddenly had been abandoned.
These cities were located at the Vale of Siddim, at the southern end of the Dead Sea in the Great Rift Valley, which extends from Mount Hermon and the Sea of Galilee in the north, as far south as the Gulf of Aquaba, and includes the Jordan Valley and the Dead Sea region.
Chapter Eleven The Dead Sea, between Israel and Jordan, is the lowest spot on the Earth's surface, and is fed by the Jordan River.
Without an outlet, the water has evaporated for hundreds of years, leaving behind a variety of minerals, including sodium chloride, potassium chloride, magnesium bromine, magnesium chloride and hydrogen sulfide.
Along the southern end of the Dead Sea is a ten mile mass of salt called Jebel Usdim.
The ""slimepits"" mentioned in Genesis 14:10, refer to the bitumen, asphalt or pitcha lustrous black petroleum product which melts and burns.
There are vast beds of it on both sides of the Sea, with heavier concentrations at the southern end.
The Nabataeans collected the bitumen which floated to the surface for trade.
The southern half of the Dead Sea seems relatively new, and much shallower than the northern half, which is 1,296 feet deep.
It had been written that the ruins were still visible until the first century; and there were even later reports that when the sun was shining in the right direction, the outline of trees were visible under the surface of the water, preserved by the high salt content of the water.
These stories were not confirmed by divers, who found no sign of human settlements.
However, regardless of any hard evidence, enough circumstantial evidence exists which indicated that the southern end of the Dead Sea was the location of the destruction.
It has been theorized that an earthquake ignited the natural gas deposits, which created a violent explosion, and propelled a mixture of salt, sulphur and bitumen into the air, literally raining fire and brimstone, as the oil basin beneath the cities burned.
Some have even gone as far as saying that God leveled the area with an atomic blast.
According to Revelation 11:13, within the hour after the two witnesses leave the earth, a massive earthquake will occur.
This same earthquake is referred to in Zechariah 14:4, as Jesus returns to this world at the same point he left it, on the Mount of Olives, a small range of four summits which overlook Jerusalem from the east.
His eyes were as a flame of fire, and on his head were many crowns; and he had a name written, that no man knew, but he himself.
And the armies which were in heaven followed him upon white horses, clothed in fine linen, white and clean.
It seems that the use of nuclear weapons in an all-out assault will begin a chain reaction in the Earth, that will affect one-third of the world, or the areas surrounding ground zero.
On August 6,1945, the first atomic bomb was dropped on Hiroshima, Japan.
The heat from this blast was 127,200,000 degrees Fahrenheit, or three times hotter than the center of the sun.
Although the 20 kiloton explosion affected only a four square mile area, its intensity killed 50,000 people, and wounded another 55,000, On August 9,1945, the second bomb, was dropped on Nagasaki, and people ten miles away were paralyzed, and even those with only slight wounds, eventually died.
In 1953, a movie was produced which recorded the results of ""Operation Ivy"", a military test of a hydrogen bomb detonation in the Pacific which took place in November, 1952.
The blast caused an entire island to disappear, turning it into deadly vapor and radioactive ash.
The concentration of nuclear weapons in such a small area could succeed in throwing the Earth off of its axis, producing disastrous results.
These theories seem to be corroborated by events described in the book of Genesis.
The vegetation was watered by the morning dew, which was why the people scoffed when Noah warned of an impending flood, because they didn't know what rain was.
According to scientists, the reason for this, is that the Earth has been moved away from the sun by a million miles, resulting in 2% less heat; and the tilt of the axis is now 231/2 degrees, which accounts for the harshness of the seasons.
The upset of these delicate balances of nature have been blamed for the reduction of the human life span.
While the intense heat of the nuclear assault wreaks havoc on the land; the movement of the Earth off of its axis, would certainly instigate earthquakes, and initiate volcanic activity; which would explain changes in the topography of the Earth, and the poisoning of the waters.
Volcanic activity, because its ash, smoke and dust tend to stay in the air for long periods of time, will screen out the light of the sun, as well as the moon and stars.
Radioactive particles, and the igniting of sulfur deposits will poison the air.
During the United States hydrogen bomb tests on the Marshall Islands, an analysis of the results indicated, that besides the fireball, and the beta/gamma rays, there were also hailstones.
The blast caused a tremendous air turbulence to develop, which in turn caused the formation of hailstones large enough to dent the armor plating on surface ships.
Revelation 8:8 talks about a ""great mountain burning with fire"" which falls into the sea; and in 8:10, ""a great star from heaven, burning as it were a lamp"" falls into the rivers.
A meteor that fell in Winslow, Arizona, left a crater a mile in diameter.
Indentations on the ocean floor off the coats of South Carolina and Georgia indicate a meteor shower which accompanied an asteroid that hit the western area of the Atlantic Ocean.
In 1908, in Siberia, what is believed to have been a meteor, fell with such an impact, that trees for 25 miles around were knocked over, and the resulting smoke was visible for hundreds of miles.
In 1937, an asteroid, called Hermes, which was over a mile in diameter, approached the Earth.
Scientists plotting its course thought it might hit the planet, but it only came within a million miles, then veered away.
They estimated that if it would have hit an ocean, at its speed of 1,800 mph, it would have generated a tidal wave big enough to destroy all nearby coastal cities. lcarus, the closest asteroid to the sun, comes dangerously close to the Earth during its orbit around the sun.
Another asteroid, Toro, over three miles in diameter, also comes close to this planet during its orbit between Venus and the Earth.
The futile attempt of the armies of Armageddon will be in vain, and the combatants will be destroyed within a day.
Chapter Eleven Jesus will then establish his kingdom on this Earth, and restoration of this area will begin.
The earthquake which caused the Mount of Olives to split, will produce a waterway to issue forth from under the Temple, which will split into two separate rivers south of Jerusalem; one going to the Mediterranean, and the other to the Dead Sea.
This will cleanse the waters of the Dead Sea, and enable it to support life; and will change the desert on the eastern slope of Israel's mountains into fertile land.
Israel will then take possession of the land promised to them in Genesis 15:18.
The country of Israel will extend from the Nile to the Euphrates River, and include parts of Lebanon, Syria, Iraq, and Jordan; and from the Red Sea, to almost the Black Sea.
Afterword FINAL WARNING: A HISTORY OF THE NEW WORLD AFTERWORD Since this book has been published, and scrutinized; I have been questioned in regard to my views.
There's alot of talk about 'taking America back', and Christians are heavily involved in the political process.
They are supporting conservative, pro-life, pro-gun, mostly Republican candidates in order to facilitate change.
We should continue to fight for traditional family values, Christian principles, and the achievement of a higher moral standard.
However, what is happening out there in the world, is going to continue, and nothing you or I can do will change that.
Anyone who thinks that political action and a Republican majority is going to do anything, better think again.
It was House Speaker Newt Gingrich and Senate Majority Leader Bob Dole who supported NAFTA and the World Trade Organization.
Richard Leach, who voted for HR666, which would allow for our homes to be entered and searched without a warrant.
One of the principle tenets of the Bible, is that we are to put our faith in Godnot man.
There is a segment of Christians who believe that with enough political action, they can bring this nation back to God, so it will be ready when Jesus returns.
To believe that you can ""take America back"" is like saying that you don't believe what the Bible says.
Well, how about prayer, you may ask; can't we put it off, can't we delay it.
When the Illuminati made their first attempt toward world domination at the Congress of Vienna, Russia, then a Christian nation, prevented it.
When the Illuminati made their second attempt with the League of Nations, the people of the United States, then a Christian nation, wouldn't accept it.
I believe, that when Israel became a nation, it was the beginning of the end.
And indeed, since then, there has been an accelerated effort towards one-world government.
When Jesus prayed in the Garden of Gethsemane, he said, ""...if it is possible, let this cup pass from me,"" but in the end, he knew what God's plan was, and that it would be carried out.
Afterword from them, by doing everything they can to turn this nation back to God.
That's how I got involved in all of this, because I wasn't going to accept what someone else said.
This book contains an extraordinary amount of information, in order to bolster my contentions, and if you don't agree with it, or have some doubts; then you need to get on your knees, and get into the word of God, and seek answers and confirmation that will satisfy you.
We can continue doing what we were ordained to do with the Great Commission.
We must not lose sight of this mission, because it is a key that will unlock the kingdom.
With the advent of modern technology, the Bible has been printed in every major language; and his Word is beamed via satellite to the four corners of the Earth.
Where this technology is not available, missionaries have carried the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ to these remote areas.
By his very word, the end will not come until this Great Commission has been fulfilled according to the expectations of God.
Instead of winning votes for some politician, you should be winning souls for Jesus.
Bible prophecy is being fulfilled everyday, and there is no doubt that we are living in the last days.
As is usually the case, people don't think about God until there is some sort of crisis.
When the time of the Tribulation comes closer, and things become more apparent, I think that revival is going to sweep this land.
It may be the last chance that people will have to come to the Lord; and as Christians, that is where our duty lies.
You may not be a Christian, and have a personal relationship with Jesus Christ.
The same can be said about salvation, but the difference here, is that Jesus is everything.
Now, I am not a preacher, and I don't make any claims regarding the authority of my words.
I believe that the Bible is the Word of God, and my theology is based on the truth contained therein.
You see, the Bible is a very unique book, because it is the complete story of mankind, from the beginning, till the end.
There are no ifs, ands, or buts; there's no two ways about it, if you don't heed the warning, you will be sentenced to eternal damnation in the fiery pit of Hell.
Jesus is coming back to rule and reign forever, and unless you are a Christian, unless your faith is in him, and unless you love the Lord, he will have no part of you.
If you are not born again, if you don't know Jesus as your personal saviour, you can not afford to turn your back.
What an incredible amount of love for mankind, and all he asks from you in return, is for you to follow him, and to serve him; and not to be a follower of the world.
You may be having problems in your personal life, God hears and answers prayers.
Just get down on your knees, and even if you think you don't know how to pray, the Lord knows your heart.
You can talk to him, just like you would talk to your friend, because he is your friend, and friend that will never leave you, nor forsake you.
I believe that Jesus Christ, your Son, died on the cross for my sins, then rose from the dead so that I may have everlasting life.
I pray for your guidance on my life, and for you to reveal yourself to me through the Bible, your living Word.
If you prayed this prayer with all your heart and soul, you have just been taken out of the grasp of Satan and this world, because you are now a child of God.
As a new Christian, you need to cultivate your relationship with Jesus, and to further develop your walk with the Lord; and nobody expects you to do it on your own.
You need to get a Bible and start reading it, and you need the spiritual guidance that can only be achieved through the regular attendance of a Spirit-filled, Bible-believing Church.
Sources Consulted Ankerberg, John & Weldon, John; The Facts on Rock Music , Harvest House Publishers: Eugene, OR, 1972.
Blair, Mike; ""Armed Patriots Confront UN Unit"", The Spotlight , September 12,1994, pg., 3.
Blair, Mike; ""FEMA Connection Exposed"", The Spotlight , September 26,1994, pg.,12, 13.
Blair, Mike; ""Feds Training to SWAT Enemies Secret Federal Training Facility"", The Spotlight , November 21,1994, pg., 5, 6.
Blair, Mike; ""Foreign Tanks, Missiles"", The Spotlight , August 15,1994, pg.,14.
Blair, Mike; ""Hidden Aircraft I.D.'s Seen as Bow to the UN"", The Spotlight , August 15, 1994, pg.,6.
Blair, Mike; ""Marines Quizzed On Loyalty"", The Spotlight , August 22,1994, pg., 3.
Blair, Mike; ""Russian Choppers Confirmed"", The Spotlight , September 5,1994, pg., 3.
Blair, Mike; ""Russian Special Forces Unit Coming"", The Spotlight , October 10,1994, pg.
Blair, Mike; ""'Shoot Americans' Survey Results"", The Spotlight , April 24,1995, pg., 3.
Blair, Mike; ""Urban Warfare Training Center Now Taking Shape in Louisiana"", The Spotlight , August 29,1994, pg., 5.
Brownstein, Ronald; ""Will It Slow Your Mail"" Parade , July 19,1981, pg.-18.
Cook, Terry; ""The Mark of the New World Order"", Today's Front Page , October, 1994, pg.
Vol., A History of the War Between English and French Freemasonry , Jon Kregal, Inc.: Tyler, TX, 1994.
Vol., English Freemasonry, Mother of Modern Cults, Vis-A-Vis Mystery Babylon, Mother of Harlots , JKI Publishing: Tyler, TX, 1994.
Davis Jr., Nord; ""Dallas Conspiracy"", PARDON ME, but... , #2 , Northpoint Teams(Topton, NC), April, 1992, pg., 32.
Davis Jr., Nord; ""Sui Juris"", PARDON ME, but... , #5, Northpoint Teams, August, 1994.
Evans, Mike; ""Countdown to Armageddon"" Christ for the Nations , August, 1982, pg.-5, 13.
A Second Look at the United Nations , Western Islands: Belmont, MA, 1964, pg., 70, 73, 87,110, 113,176-177.
Hough, Warren; ""Key United States Units Internationalized"", The Spotlight , December 5,1994, pg.
Hough, Warren; ""UN Gets United States Troops; Moves Into 'Phase 2'"", The Spotlight , August 22, 1994, pg.,6.
Hudson, David; "" United States Currency Change Aimed at 'Cash Only' Group"" The Spotlight , May 21,1984, pg.-21.
In History and Prophecy , Hearthstone Publishing: Oklahoma City, OK, 1991.
Katson, Trisha; ""Defeat of Balanced Budget Amendment Hikes COS Threat"" The Spotlight , March 27,1995, pg.-13.
Katson, Trisha; ""Global Connection Exposed"" The Spotlight , April 3,1995. pg.
Katson, Trisha; ""Last Minute Hold On GATT Vote"", The Spotlight , October 17,1994, pg.
Katson, Trisha; ""Opposition in Grassroots to Constitution Changes Grow"" The Spotlight , April 3, 1995, pg.
Katson, Trisha; ""Powers of COS in the Process"" The Spotlight , April 3,1995, pg.
Katson, Trisha; ""Supreme Court Would Ignore Con-Con Political Questions"" The Spotlight, April 3, 1995, pg.
Is There An Illuminati Plot to Pollute the Word of God? , Intelligence Examiner Special Edition, 1994, 60 min. cassette tape.
Marrs, Texe; ""Foreign Occupation Troops in America?"", Flashpoint , December, 1994, pg.
Marrs, Texe; ""Priest Richard Neuhaus ExposedHe's a Marxist Heretic!"", Flashpoint , November, 1994, pg., 3.
Maxwell, Joe; ""Evangelicals Clarify Accord with Catholics"", Christianity Today , March 6, 1995, pg.-53.
McCarty, Burke; The Suppressed Truth About the Assassination of Abraham Lincoln , Taiwan, pg.-16.
The Soviets Bold Mideast Strategy"" Saturday Review , April 12,1980, pg.-22.
Peltz, James; ""'Smart Card' Has Its Own Information Storehouse"" Sunday Patriot News , October 9,1983, pg.
Pilote, Alain; ""Country With Honest Money Would Defeat Bankers"", Spotlight , December 12,1994, pg.-18.
Rockefeller, David; ""The Trilateral Commission"" Saturday Evening Post , October, 1980, pg.-38, 84.
Smythe, Horace; ""New Money Plans Remain Unclear"" The Spotlight , August 6,1984, pg.
Stang, Alan; ""Crimes of the World Council of Churches"" American Opinion , January, 1982.
The Ancient Plan of Secret Societies , Huntington House Publishers: Lafayette, LA, 1990.
Ward, Wes; ""Jekyll Island"" Saturday Evening Post , January/February, 1981, pg.8-111, 128.
The Plot Against Civilization , Small, Maynard and Co.: Boston, MA, 1921.
Welch, Robert; The John Birch Society Bulletin , Belmont, MA, February, 1975, pg.-15.
Welch, Robert; The John Birch Society Bulletin , Belmont, MA, July, 1976, pg.65.
While most movies are made to entertain, and are fairly straight forward in their approach, ""The Matrix"" challenged its viewers.
Incredibly unique was the fact that different people who saw it, had different interpretations of its meaning.
For people to devote their time into discussing the ""meaning"" of a Hollywood movie illustrates the shear impact it has had.
This new on-line book considers the interpretations, the observations, the symbolism, and the spiritual significance of ""The Matrix,"" and puts it into perspective.
DECLARATION There is nothing that can happen to me today, that my God can not handle.
And because I walk by faith, and not by sight, I know, that with God, all things are possible.
I go where others fear, fight where others fall, and triumph where others fail.
No weapon that is formed against me shall prosper, and when the enemy comes in like a flood, the Spirit of the Lord will lift up a standard against him.
I have no fear in what man can do to me, because through Christ, I am more than a conqueror.
I am an overcomer, and I can do all things through Christ who strengthens me.
I am a winner and I will walk in victory, because I have put my trust in God.
Featuring a lightning fast search function, it is great for quick and easy searches of the entire Bible, and also gives you the ability to annotate verses with notes, along with an essay editor to extract text to use in sermon preparation and other writings.
If your looking for the ultimate personal Study Bible, you need the Dake's Annotated Reference Bible.
With 35,000 commentary notes, 500,000 cross/chain references and 9,000 outline headings, the Dake Bible gives you more resources for personal study than you'll find in any other Bible.
Tired of going to the movies or renting a video only to be disgusted because of the inappropriate content.
ENTERTAINMENT REVIEWS FOR PARENTS ^S&Sloiker Internet filtering software We-WebCorp is offering a FREE internet blocking system that allows parents to set-up a password protected personalized account for each member of the family, with each given a certain set of restrictions based on seven different categories.
