They enable us to understand how users navigate our site and measure which pages are the most and least popular.
They are capable of tracking your browser across other sites and building a profile of your interests.
It is used to make the site work as expected, support your experience, and enable us to analyze performance and improve our services.
The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience.
This month marks the 50th anniversary of the Cuban missile crisis – those 13 days in October 1962 that were probably the closest the world has come to a major nuclear war.
The lessons of that brief but perilous episode remain valid today, as the world confronts anew the threat of nuclear proliferation.
CAMBRIDGE – This month marks the 50th anniversary of the Cuban missile crisis – those 13 days in October 1962 that were probably the closest the world has come to a major nuclear war.
But Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev decided to cross Kennedy’s red line surreptitiously and confront the Americans with a fait accompli.
When an American surveillance plane discovered the missiles, the crisis erupted.
M Manivannan argues that the escalating economic crisis demands radical action to restore financial credibility.
Kennedy mobilized troops, but also bought time by announcing a naval blockade of Cuba.
The crisis subsided when Soviet ships carrying additional missiles turned back, and Khrushchev agreed to remove the existing missiles from the island.
The Soviets were simply outgunned.And yet the United States did not preemptively attack Soviet missile sites, which were relatively vulnerable, because the risk that even one or two of the Soviet missiles would be fired at an American city was enough to deter a first strike.
In addition, both Kennedy and Khrushchev feared that rational strategies and careful calculation might spin out of control.
Robert McNamara, Kennedy’s secretary of defense, said he became more cautious as the crisis unfolded.
Douglas Dillon, Kennedy’s treasury secretary, said he thought that the risk of nuclear war had been about zero.
He did not see how the situation could possibly have escalated to nuclear war, and thus had been willing to push the Soviets harder and to take more risks than McNamara was.
General Maxwell Taylor, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, also believed that the risk of nuclear war was low, and he complained that the United States let the Soviet Union off too easily.
PS 2022 Reader Survey PS 2022 Reader Survey There are exciting changes coming to PS, and we want to make sure they reflect your needs and preferences.
Share your feedback today to help us to deliver the best possible experience to readers like you.
Take Survey But the risks of losing control of the situation weighed heavily on Kennedy, too, which is why he took a more prudent position than some of his advisers would have liked.
The moral of the story is that a little nuclear deterrence goes a long way.Nonetheless, there are still ambiguities about the missile crisis that make it difficult to attribute the outcome entirely to the nuclear component.
But how much the United States won, and why it won, is hard to determine.There are at least two possible explanations of the outcome, in addition to Soviet acquiescence to America’s superior nuclear firepower.
The naval blockade and the possibility of a United States invasion strengthened the credibility of American deterrence, placing the psychological burden on the Soviets.The other explanation questions the very premise that the Cuban missile crisis was an outright United States victory.
For a long time, the participants said little about the buyout aspects of the solution.
On October 27, 1962, just after Soviet forces in Cuba shot down a United States surveillance plane , a similar plane taking routine air samples near Alaska inadvertently violated Soviet air space in Siberia.
But, even more serious, unbeknownst to the Americans, Soviet forces in Cuba had been instructed to repel a United States invasion, and had been authorized to use their tactical nuclear weapons to do so.It is hard to imagine that such a nuclear attack would have remained merely tactical.
In a rational, predictable world, such an outcome might produce stability.
In the real world, the Cuban missile crisis suggests that it might not.
Read more from ""The JFK Legacy"" PS 2022 Reader Survey Exciting changes are coming to PS, and we want to make sure they reflect your needs and preferences.
Share your feedback today to help us deliver the best possible experience to you and your fellow PS readers.
Take Survey Featured The Fed Does Not Deserve All the Inflation Blame The Fed Does Not Deserve All the Inflation Blame May 4, 2022 Kenneth Rogoff Asia’s Post-COVID Education Catch-Up Asia’s Post-COVID Education Catch-Up May 5, 2022 Albert Park Soft Power After Ukraine Soft Power After Ukraine May 3, 2022 Joseph S Nye, Jr.
What the War in Ukraine Means for Europe What the War in Ukraine Means for Europe May 4, 2022 Joschka Fischer The End of Nordic Neutrality The End of Nordic Neutrality May 4, 2022 Paulina Neuding Joseph S Nye, Jr.
Previous Cancel Next Close new comment has been posted. new comments have been posted.
Close 0 Comments on this paragraph, 0 in all 0 Comments on this article Before posting a comment, please confirm your account.
Pin comment to this paragraph After posting your comment, you’ll have a ten-minute window to make any edits.
Please note that we moderate comments to ensure the conversation remains topically relevant.
We appreciate well-informed comments and welcome your criticism and insight.
Select Newsletters The Promise of South African Democracy Politics Marco Longari/AFP via Getty Images The Promise of South African Democracy Evan Lieberman thinks highly publicized governance failures and scandals need to be seen in their proper context.
Pascal Boniface thinks the French president's second term will offer fewer opportunities to chalk up foreign policy successes.
Through renewable energy, taxes, carbon credits, or new protocols, they could become greener than the greenback. presents the options for decarbonizing a notoriously energy-intensive technology and global industry.
Please enter your email address and click on the reset-password button.
If your email exists in our system, we'll send you an email with a link to reset your password.
Please note that the link will expire twenty-four hours after the email is sent.
Cancel Yes, cancel Cancel Yes, cancel Edit Newsletter Preferences Cancel Save Set up Notification To receive email updates regarding this {entity_type}, please enter your email below.
If you are not already registered, this will create a PS account for you.
