In the days of tense political climate in Burma, he held moderate views positioning himself between fervent nationalists and British loyalists.
He was a close friend of Burma's first Prime Minister U Nu and served in various positions in Nu's cabinet from 1948 to 1961.
Thant had a calm and unassuming demeanor that won his colleagues' respect.He was appointed as Secretary-General in 1961, six weeks after his predecessor Dag Hammarskjöld died in an air crash.
Later, in December that year, Thant ordered Operation Grandslam, which ended a secessionist insurgency in Congo.
He was reappointed as Secretary-General on December 2, 1966 by a unanimous vote of the Security Council.
During his second term Thant was well known for publicly criticizing United States conduct in the Vietnam War.
A devout Buddhist and the foremost Burmese diplomat on the international stage, he was widely admired and held in great respect by the Burmese populace.
When the military government refused him any honours, riots erupted in Rangoon; these were violently crushed by the government, leaving scores of casualties.
Contents 1 Early life 2 Civil servant 3 United Nations Secretary-General 3.
Retirement 4 Death and legacy 5 Personal life 6 Awards, honors, and memorials 7 See also 8 Notes 9 Citations 9.
His father Po Hnit, who had been educated in Calcutta, was the only person in the town who could communicate well in English.
He was a founding member of the Burma Research Society and had helped establish The Sun newspaper in Rangoon.
His other sons, Khant, Thaung, and Tin Maung went on to become politicians and scholars.Po Hnit had collected a personal library of various American and British books and cultivated a reading habit among his children.
Apart from reading, he enjoyed various sports including hiking, swimming and playing chinlone.
He dreamed of becoming a journalist and surprised the family by writing an article for the Union of Burma Boy Scouts magazine.
As the eldest son he had to fulfill his filial duties and responsibilities to the family.
Nu was told by a distant mutual relative to take care of Thant and the two soon became close friends.
Promising a good post, Furnivall urged Thant to complete a four-year university course and join the Civil Service, but Thant refused.
After earning the certificate, he returned to Pantanaw to teach at the National High School as a senior teacher in 1928.
Urged by Thant, his friend Nu took the local superintendent of schools position.
Thant regularly contributed to several newspapers and magazines under the pen name ""Thilawa"" and translated a number of books, including one on the League of Nations.
His major influences were Sir Stafford Cripps, Sun Yat-sen and Mahatma Gandhi.
In the days of tense political climate in Burma, Thant stood moderate grounds between fervent nationalists and British loyalists.
Civil servant Thant with U Nu in 1955 on an early morning walk During the World War II, the Japanese occupied Burma from 1942 to 1945.
They brought Thant to Rangoon to lead the Educational Reorganizing Committee.
When teaching the Japanese language was made compulsory in Pantanaw high schools, Thant defied the orders and cooperated with the growing anti-Japanese resistance.In 1948, Burma gained independence from the United Kingdom.
Nu became the prime minister of the newly independent Burma and appointed Thant as director of broadcasting in 1948.
The Karen insurgency began and Thant risked his life to go to Karen camps to negotiate for peace.
The negotiations broke down, and in 1949 the advancing insurgents burned his hometown, including his house.
The insurgents pushed the front to within four miles of the capital Rangoon before they were beaten back.
In the following year, Thant was appointed secretary to the government of Burma in the Ministry of Information.
From 1951 to 1957, Thant was secretary to the prime minister, writing speeches for U Nu, arranging his foreign travel, and meeting foreign visitors.
During this entire period, he was U Nu's closest confidant and advisor.He also took part in a number of international conferences and was the secretary of the 1955 Bandung Conference in Indonesia, which gave birth to the Non-Aligned Movement.
From 1957 to 1961, he was Burma's permanent representative to the United Nations and became actively involved in negotiations over Algerian independence.
The Burmese government awarded him the title Maha Thray Sithu as a commander in the order of Pyidaungsu Sithu.
Within two weeks, the United States and the Soviet Union had agreed to appoint Thant as the Acting Secretary-General for the remainder of Hammarskjöld's term.
However, the two superpowers spent another four weeks arguing over the details of his appointment.
On November 3, 1961, the Security Council recommended Thant in Resolution 168, and the General Assembly voted unanimously to appoint Thant to a term of office ending on April 10, 1963.
This was the indispensable first step in the peaceful resolution of the Cuban crisis. —Adlai Stevenson, Senate Foreign Relations Committee 88th Congress, March 13, 1963 Thant shakes hands with John F Kennedy during his visit to the UN Headquarters.
On October 20, 1962, two days before public announcements were made, U.S President John F Kennedy showed Thant U-2 aerial reconnaissance photographs of Soviet missile installations in Cuba.
The president then ordered a naval ""quarantine"" to remove all offensive weapons from Soviet ships bound for Cuba.
To avoid a naval confrontation, Thant proposed that the U.S should make non-invasion guarantees in exchange for missile withdrawal from the Soviet Union.
Soviet Premier Khrushchev welcomed the proposal, which formed the basis of further negotiations.
Khrushchev further agreed to suspend missile shipments while the negotiations were ongoing.
However, on October 27, 1962, a U-2 plane was shot down over Cuba, deepening the crisis.
The U.S agreed to dismantle missiles in Turkey and guaranteed never to invade Cuba in exchange for removal of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Thant flew to Cuba and discussed with Fidel Castro allowing UN missile inspectors and the return of the body of the downed U-2 pilot.
Castro, furious that the Soviets had agreed to remove missiles without his knowledge, categorically rejected any UN inspectors, although he did return the pilot's body.
The inspection was done at sea by United States reconnaissance aircraft and warships.
War in the Congo Thant's reappointment was assured when Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev made several favorable references to Thant in letters to United States President John F Kennedy.
In November 1962, the General Assembly voted unanimously to promote Thant from Acting Secretary-General to Secretary-General for a term ending on November 3, 1966.
For personal reasons, Thant wanted his term to end five years from his initial appointment, and he would henceforth consider his first five years in office to be a single term.Although a manifest pacifist and a devout Buddhist, Thant did not hesitate to use force when required.
The operation proved to be decisive and ended the secessionist insurgency once and for all.
By January 1963, the secessionist capital Elizabethville was under full UN control.
For his role in defusing the Cuban crisis and other peacekeeping efforts, the Norwegian Permanent Representative of the United Nations informed Thant that he would be awarded the 1965 Nobel Peace Prize.
The disagreement lasted three years, and in 1966 and 1967 no prize was given, with Gunnar Jahn effectively vetoing an award to Thant.
In April 1964, Thant accepted the Holy See's designation of itself as a UN permanent observer.
There appeared to be no involvement of the General Assembly or the UN Security Council in the decision.
On December 2, 1966, the General Assembly re-appointed Thant to a term ending on December 31, 1971, on the unanimous recommendation of the Security Council.
During his second term, he oversaw the entry into the UN of dozens of new Asian and African states, and was a firm opponent of apartheid in South Africa.
The Six-Day War between Arab countries and Israel, the Prague Spring and subsequent Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia, and the Indo–Pakistani War of 1971 leading to the birth of Bangladesh all took place during his tenure as secretary-general.
Thant meets with U.S President Lyndon B Johnson in the Cabinet Room of the White House on February 21, 1968.
He was criticized in the United States and Israel for agreeing to pull UNEF troops out of the Sinai in 1967 in response to a request from Egyptian president Nasser.
The Permanent Representative of Egypt had informed Thant that the Egyptian government had decided to terminate UNEF's presence in the Sinai and the Gaza Strip, and requested steps that would withdraw the force as soon as possible, which Thant was obligated to accept.
The UN afterwards stated, ""Because Israel refused to accept UNEF on its territory, the Force had to be deployed only on the Egyptian side of the border, and thus its functioning was entirely contingent upon the consent of Egypt as the host country.
Thant's once good relationship with the United States government deteriorated rapidly when he publicly criticized American conduct of the Vietnam War.
His secret attempts at direct peace talks between Washington and Hanoi were eventually rejected by the Johnson Administration.In 1971, the participation of the People's Republic of China in the United Nations, which was a long-standing problem, was realized.
Thant sent a message to the Chinese government asking China to send a delegation.
Retirement On January 23, 1971, Thant categorically announced that he would ""under no circumstances"" be available for a third term as secretary-general.
The 1971 United Nations Secretary-General selection was delayed by the anticipated arrival of the People's Republic of China, and the Security Council did not begin voting until two weeks before the end of Thant's term.
After every candidate was vetoed in the second round, Kurt Waldheim accidentally won in the third round when the US, UK, and China failed to coordinate their vetoes and all abstained.Unlike his two predecessors, Thant retired after ten years on speaking terms with all the big powers.
In 1961, when he was first appointed, the Soviet Union tried to insist on a troika formula of three secretaries-general, one representing each Cold War bloc, to maintain equality in the United Nations between the superpowers.
After his retirement, Thant was appointed a senior fellow of the Adlai Stevenson Institute of International Affairs.
He spent the last years of his life writing and advocating the development of a true global community and other general themes he had tried to promote while he was secretary-general.
While serving as secretary-general, Thant lived in Riverdale, Bronx, on a 4.75-acre estate near 232nd Street, between Palisade and Douglas Avenues.
By that time, Burma was ruled by a military junta which refused him any honours.
The then-Burmese president Ne Win was envious of Thant's international stature and the respect that was accorded him by the Burmese populace.
Ne Win also resented Thant's close links with the democratic government of U Nu which Ne Win had overthrown in a coup d'état on March 2, 1962.
Histories of Burma that intense animosity between Thant and Ne Win went back only to 1969, when Ne Win believed Thant was conniving with Nu after Nu denounced Ne Win at a press corps meeting at the UN headquarters.
Ne Win told his men to consider Thant as an enemy of the state, despite Thant denouncing Nu's action as inappropriate.Regardless of the reasons, Ne Win ordered that Thant be buried without any official involvement or ceremony.
On the day of Thant's funeral on December 5, 1974, tens of thousands of people lined the streets of Rangoon to pay their last respects.
Thant's coffin was displayed at Rangoon's Kyaikasan race course for a few hours before the scheduled burial.
The coffin of Thant was then snatched by a group of students just before it was scheduled to leave for burial in an ordinary Rangoon cemetery.
During the period of December 5–11, the student demonstrators also built a temporary mausoleum for Thant on the grounds of the RUSU and gave anti-government speeches.
In early morning on December 12, 1974, government troops stormed the campus, killed some of the students guarding the makeshift mausoleum, removed Thant's coffin, and reburied it in Kandawmin Garden Mausolea near the Shwedagon Pagoda, where it has continued to lie.
Martial law was declared in Rangoon and the surrounding metropolitan areas.
What has come to be known as the U Thant crisis—the student-led protests over the shabby treatment of Thant by the Ne Win government—was crushed by the Burmese government.Thant's memoirs, View from the UN, were posthumously published, initially by Doubleday in 1978.
In April 2012, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon paid his respects at U Thant's mausoleum during a visit to Yangon.U Thant is held in esteem in Malaysia, as he helped to endorse the formation of the country in 1963.
Among others, a road in Kuala Lumpur and the residential estate of Taman U-Thant are named after him.
They had two sons, but lost both; Maung Bo died in infancy, and Tin Maung Thant fell from a bus during a visit to Yangon.
Tin Maung Thant's funeral procession, which was attended by dignitaries, was grander than that of the state funeral of Commodore Than Pe, a member of the 17-man Revolutionary Council and minister of health and education.
His only grandson, Thant Myint-U, is a historian and a former senior official in the UN's Department of Political Affairs and the author of The River of Lost Footsteps, in part a biography of Thant.
Awards, honors, and memorials Thant was generally reluctant to receive prizes and honors due to his own humility as well as publicity associated with them.
He declined Burma's second highest honor awarded to him by U Nu's government in 1961.
However, he did accept the Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International Understanding in 1965 and the United Nations Prize in the Field of Human Rights in 1973.
The meditation team also named a tiny island in the East River opposite the headquarters of the United Nations U Thant Island.
The road Jalan U-Thant and the township Taman U-Thant in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia are also named in his honor.In December 2013, in an effort spearheaded by his daughter Aye Aye Thant and his grandson Thant Myint-U, Thant's house in Yangon was being converted into a museum which would feature his photos, works and personal belongings.
In October 2013, the building of an U Thant library near his Pantanaw house was underway.
In Burmese, he was known as Pantanaw U Thant, in reference to his hometown, Pantanaw.
In 1965 and 1966 a majority of the committee clearly favored giving the prize to the third Secretary General, U Thant, and even to the first, Norway's Trygve Lie, but chairman Jahn more or less vetoed this.
In March 1964 pope Paul VI wrote to UN secretary general U Thant saying he was minded to appoint a permanent observer.
In April, U Thant wrote back saying, in effect, fair enough, come ahead.
Withdrawal of the United Nations Emergency Force leading to the Six-Day War of June 1967.
