He also wrote about the Cuban missile crisis and its lessons for today's leaders in the Post Outlook Section.
Dobbs awards Pinocchios to exaggerating and prevaricating politicians and pundits in his Washington Post column, The Fact Checker.
The Nazi Raid on America and Down with Big Brother: The Fall of the Soviet Empire.
Thanks for joining me on this on-line discussion, and your interest in my book, or the Fact Checker column.
The long-range ones capable of hitting the United States were removed within one week.
The tactical missiles, which would have been used to attack a United States invading force, stayed longer, for a few more weeks.
But in the end, Khrushchev decided he had to remove them too, as he did not want to leave nuclear weapons on the island, under Castro's potential control.
I'm curious to know whether history illuminates any misconceptions, mis-steps, or, perhaps, irony in Mr Kennedy's memoir.
The RFK book was published posthumously, after his assassination in 1968, edited by Ted Sorensen.
Of course, it tells the story from the Kennedy point of view, and there is a fair amount of political spin in it.
It leaves out the secret war against Castro, which Bobby was responsible for directing, which was one of the factors that led to Khrushchev putting missiles in Cuba in the first place.
I mentioned the eyeball to eyeball naval confrontation on October 24, which did not happen as advertised.
I believe the strength of a great leader is measured in how they safeguard our country without going to war.
Back-door negotiations have a place with getting things done without having to fire a weapon.
President Kennedy had Bobby Kennedy work with the Russian leader with secret talks.
The cowboy that we have in the White House today showed that you go to war first and work out the details later is truly the weak leader.
This question goes to the heart of an issue that has come up in the present election campaign: should you talk to America's enemies, or freeze them out.
Barack Obama is correct in saying that Kennedy felt that it was necessary to negotiate, have contacts.
He kept talking to Khrushchev through the most dangerous episode of the Cold War, and it was important that he did.
On the other hand, the McCain people have a point when they cite the failed Vienna summit of 1961.
JFK went into the summit unprepared, and was pushed around by Khrushchev.
Afterwards, he came to see the summit as a mistake, and felt that it would take a great deal of effort to restore his credibility with Khrushchev.
Both campaigns can use the Kennedy experience to justify their positions, to some extent.
At one point Kennedy himself calculated the chances of nuclear war as between one in three and even.
My book shows that the risk was not necessarily greater, but it was different from the way we have traditionally looked at it.
In my view, the risk came not so much from the direct confrontation between K and K, but from the chance, unpredictable events that happen once you put the machinery of war into motion.
By Black Saturday, October 27, both leaders were losing control over events, which is why they moved, in their different ways, to find a solution.
Pressure was building on JFK to bomb the missile sites, and invade Cuba, which we now know could have pushed the Soviets into using their tactical nukes, against a United States invading force.
Kennedy and his aides believed that the principal Soviet motivation was a desire to achieve strategic parity.
By stationing intermediate range weapons in Cuba, Khrushchev suddenly had more nukes that could hit the United States That was no doubt one of his motivations, but I believe that he also wanted to defend Castro, and defend the Socialist revolution in Cuba.
It was a matter of prestige for him, but also an emotional connection with Castro.
He feared that the Kennedys were out to get Castro after the failure of the Bay of Pigs, and sending nukes was a way to protect him.
Bobby was a complicated person, with two sides to him, much more emotional than his brother.
He was effectively in charge of Operation Mongoose, the secret war against Castro.
When he first heard that the Soviets had deployed missiles to Cuba, he reacted very emotionally, cursing Khrushchev.
He talked about arranging some kind of ""Sink the Maine"" incident as a pretext for an invasion of Cuba, as if he needed one.
Later he adopted a rather moralistic position, saying that a Pearl Harbor type attack was against the American tradition.
In fact, the Soviets were responding to the United States putting missiles into Turkey, immediately adjoining the Soviet Union.
The crisis was resolved when we agreed to move our missiles from Turkey in exchange for them removing their missiles from Cuba.
I agree with you that there is a lot of pre-history to the Soviet decision to send missiles to Cuba.
Khrushchev was also indignant about the United States missiles in Turkey, across the Black Sea from his summer residence.
He would look out in the direction of Turkey from his dacha, seethe with resentment, and think about ways of ""putting a hedgehog down Uncle Sam's pants,"" as he put it.
Naftali's book has Khrushchev telling his government it was time to end the confrontatation -before the message arrived with Bobby Kennedy's secret offer.
I have looked at the same sources that he and Fursenko have, and think they have misread the admittedly somewhat ambiguous Presidium record.
It is true that Khrushchev had probably taken a decision in principle to withdraw the missiles, but the message with the RFK offer arrived during the course of the meeting, prior to the final decision.
Khrushchev loved Fidel ""like a son,"" but he also had doubts about his emotional stability, and was not going to entrust nuke weapons to him.
As for Castro, his strategy has always been based on total defiance and showing no weakness to his enemies.
He was ready to die for the cause, and take a large number of his fellow countrymen with him.
I believe he was willing to authorize a nuclear war on Cuban soil to defeat the yanqui invader.
It recreates the atmosphere well, but includes a number of inaccuracies, including the famous Eyeball to Eyeball naval confrontation, which did not happen in this way.
While the low-level reconnaissance planes were fired on, they were never hit.
I think JFK was willing to go a long way to avoid a preemptive strike against Cuba, and had a few other tricks up his sleeve.
One of them was a more public deal on the removal of the Jupiters from Turkey in exchange for the Soviet missiles on Cuba.
However, the military were urging him to attack, and the shootdown of another U-2 spy plane, or some unforeseeable incident, could have have forced his hand.
The deployment of nukes to within 15 miles of Guantanamo was closely coordinated with the Cubans, particularly with Raul Castro, Fidel's successor.
I think that Fidel, and his immediate circle, were fully prepared to authorize the use of nuclear weapons against United States troops on Cuban soil.
Che Guevara later talked about being willing to accept the deaths of hundreds of thousands, even millions, of people, to ensure the ultimate defeat of the imperialists.
In your posting on the Web site leading up this chat, you mentioned that intelligence failed the Kennedy administration.
What the President Didn't Know Michael Dobbs: The intelligence record is mixed.
On the one hand, the CIA did discover the long-range missiles at the last moment, on October 14, when they sent a U-2 plane over the missile sites.
That was about a month after they arrived in Cuba, but it gave the president time to prepare a response before the missiles were armed with nuclear warheads.
On the other hand, the intelligence agencies missed most of the tactical warheads, never learned about the FKR cruise missiles and grossly underestimated the numbers of Soviets on Cuba.
McNamara told JFK on Oct. that there were 6-8,000 Soviet ""technicians"" on the island, when there were 43,000 heavily armed combat troops.
Some have speculated that RFK's emotional demeanor in his critical meeting with Ambassador Dobrynin was more ploy than genuine.
I think that RFK was quite rattled by this stage in the game, and it was not simply a ploy.
Of course, it may have helped convince the Soviets that time was running out.
Former U.N Ambassador Richard Holbrooke recently said that Kennedy had requested removal of the Jupiter missiles from Turkey before the Crisis.
I've read that the president only requested that the Defense Dept. conduct a study on how to remove them.
Bundy, the national security adviser, noted that there is a distinction between a presidential wish and a presidential order.
I do not think that JFK ever gave a formal order for the removal of the Jupiters, although he several times encouraged his aides to get them out of there.
As I researched the book, I was repeatedly struck by parallels between then and now.
But ""irrational actors"" -the guys with long beards, the guys in caves -sometimes push themselves onto the stage, as we were reminded on 9/11.
They were also preparing to evacuate the White House on Black Saturday.
A friend is trying to find a quote used in your book ""One Minute to Midnight"" but we are unable to locate it.
They were pretty much obsolete by that stage, which is why JFK did not feel that there was much sense hanging on to them, let alone going to war over them.
The same job could be done much better by Polaris submarines, which were hidden beneath the oceans.
The Jupiters were pretty much obsolete by the time they were fully operational in March 1962.
But they were a matter of prestige for the Turks, in particular, who decorated them with the Turkish flag.
My twin sister worked as a Supervisory Archivist in NARA's records declassification division.
In your Op Ed, ""Our History, Off Limits,"" you noted that some archivists regard Richard Nixon as a champion of glasnost.
If you are going to throw out such observations, some caveats are in order.
As a federal agency, NARA is subject to message discipline so even as dogged a journalist as you never can survey and take the pulse of -allthe internal stakeholders.
Also, you need to distinguish carefully between two separate and discrete actions by Nixon.
My sis was involved in the former, I in efforts to deal with the latter.
This enabled NARA over time to start systematic declassification and release of some historical records that dated back 30 years or more.
Nixon's lawyers sought to delay or limit disclosures from his own records after he left office in 1974.
Although archivists screened 3,700 hours of Nixon's taped conversations for public access during the 1980s, NARA only released 63 hours while he still was alive.
Our History, Off-Limits Michael Dobbs: I was not talking about Nixon's attitude to his own records, but his attitude toward historical records.
He did not have any problems about embarassing his Democratic predecessors.
But the fact remains that more historical records were being declassified under Nixon than under the current administration.
More effort now is being put into reclassification than declassification.
It could well have begun at the tactical level in Cuba, with an attack on Guantanamo or an American beachhead, but it would likely have escalated to a full nuclear exchange.
Of course, the United States would have ""won"" the war, because it had huge nuclear superiority at that time.
But even if only one or two Soviet nukes got through, the consequences for Americans would have been catastrophic.
You label a photo as showing a Cuban anti-aircraft gun in a city square.
Also, this weapon couldn't be elevated high enough to take on aircraft.
I think it's important to remember that when the decision-makers were in the middle of this crisis, all they had to go on was what they knew at the time.
I remember thinking, though, that we were all going to die or at the least never see the United States again.
I am sure there are some errors in the book, which I will correct for future editions.
They presented themselves to the Cubans as the real revolutionaries, as opposed to the gutless Soviets.
Khrushchev was worried that Castro might end up siding with the Chinese.
This was two years or so after the Sino-Soviet split, but the intelligence people routinely referred to the Soviets on Cuba as Russ/Sino, because that was the category they thought in at that time.
The Cubans gave me no help in my research, but I got valuable insights into Fidel's activities, point of view, from the conferences organized by the National Security Archive in Havana and elsewhere.
This comes from Khrushchev's memoirs, I believe, which talks about Kennedy's fear of a military coup.
In the end, Generals like LeMay obeyed civilian authority, but they were not shy about expressing their disapproval.
I was an eight year old living in Cuba and remember Dad listening to the radio -not the Cuban stations -in secret and the overall feeling of impending catastrophe.
VOA probably reflected the general tone of the American media during the 13 days, which was one of considerable alarm.
There was a lot that reporters did not know at the time, of course, and the Kennedy administration was quite effective in spinning the media.
The essay of yours I read in the Post earlier this week did not seem to allow for the possibility that the whole ""crisis"" was unnecessary, that both the Soviet and Cuba were entirely within their rights under international law in installing the missiles and that the United States was the one acting illegally, a blockade being an act of war.
The problem was that the Soviets installed missiles in Cuba in total secrecy, having assured the United States that they would never do any thing.
Castro wanted a public defense treaty, which would have put the United States in a much more difficult position.
After all, we had already deployed missiles to Turkey, so it would have been difficult to object if the Soviets did the same thing in Cuba.
As I relate in the book, some nukes were under the effective physical control of 25-year old Air Force lieutenants, flying solo.
I believe, however, that an accidental release of a nuke or an accident involving a nuke was a bigger risk than United States military leaders defying the president.
I did write a book on the end of the Cold War, or at least the collapse of the Soviet Union, which I witnessed as a reporter in Moscow between 1988 and 1993.
Hi Michael, When I was a history student in the '70s, I got a B for proposing that JFK averted a nuclear war.
My prof said that JFK was ""macho,"" and provoked the crisis to satisfy his macho instincts.
You've made it clear that he was in fact thoughtful and calm in the face of pressure to go to war.
During the 13 days, however, both men helped avert the danger of nuclear war.
Although they did not appreciate it at the time, they ended up being on the same side, struggling to control the chaotic forces of history they themselves had unleashed.
I have read that the United States learned of the existence of the missiles because a top Soviet walked into our embassy in Moscow and told us.
You are probably thinking of Oleg Penkovsky, but it is more complicated than that.
Penkovsky had provided the technical manual for the R-12 missile that was deployed on Cuba, but he did not tip off the United States to the deployment itself.
His info helped the CIA to identify the missiles accurately, and predict when they would become operational.
This is the first time that I've read that Kennedy horsetraded the dismantling of United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey for the Soviet missiles from Cuba.
Yes, we had identified the precise location of the missile sites, but not the warheads.
However, there were also reserve missiles, which were difficult to identify.
The Air Force told Kennedy that they were ""95 percent"" sure of getting all the missile sites in a strike, but that was not good enough for him, and was one of the factors that dissuaded him from authorizing a strike.
At one point, on the first day of the crisis, JFK is fuming about the deployment of Soviet missiles on Cuba, and tells Bundy, his national security adviser, ""why, that would be like us deploying missiles to Turkey, that would be really dangerous,"" or words to that effect.
JFK had evidently forgotten that little detail in the midst of his indignation at being double-crossed by Khrushchev.
I am sure your book covers this, yet the Cuban missile crisis and how President Kennedy handled it contains a very valuable lesson in diplomacy.
When the Russians sent mixed responses , there was a realization in language to respond only to the messages that were encouraging and presented openings for further the dialogue rather than addressing the more threatening messages.
Otherwise, this could easily have turned into an exercise of bravado with two sides that probably didn't want to fight feeling obligated to fight because they had dared each other into a fight.
Instead, keeping the dialogue towards diplomatic solutions led to a diplomatic solution.
Obviously, it was important to keep the lines of communication open during the crisis.
We would not have got anywhere with Khrushchev by ignoring him, or freezing him out.
On the other hand, the Vienna summit was ill-prepared, and might have encouraged him to test JFK's mettle.
