He was also the youngest president at the end of his tenure, and his lifespan was the shortest of any president.
A Democrat, he represented Massachusetts in both houses of the United States Congress prior to his presidency.
During World War II, he commanded a series of PT boats in the Pacific theater.
Kennedy's survival of the sinking of PT-109 and rescue of his fellow sailors made him a war hero for which he earned the Navy and Marine Corps Medal, but left him with serious injuries.
After a brief stint in journalism, Kennedy represented a working-class Boston district in the United States House of Representatives from 1947 to 1953.
He was subsequently elected to the United States Senate and served as the junior senator for Massachusetts from 1953 to 1960.
While in the Senate, Kennedy published his book, Profiles in Courage, which won a Pulitzer Prize.
In the 1960 presidential election, he narrowly defeated Republican opponent Richard Nixon, who was the incumbent vice president.
Kennedy's humor, charm, and youth in addition to his father's money and contacts were great assets in his campaign.
Kennedy's campaign gained momentum after the first televised presidential debates in American history.
Kennedy's administration included high tensions with communist states in the Cold War.
As a result, he increased the number of American military advisers in South Vietnam.
In April 1961, he authorized an attempt to overthrow the Cuban government of Fidel Castro in the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion.
However, his administration continued to plan for an invasion of Cuba in the summer of 1962.
Kennedy presided over the establishment of the Peace Corps, Alliance for Progress with Latin America, and the continuation of the Apollo program with the goal of landing a man on the Moon before 1970.
He also supported the civil rights movement, but was only somewhat successful in passing his New Frontier domestic policies.
Vice President Lyndon B Johnson assumed the presidency upon Kennedy's death.
Marxist and former United States Marine Lee Harvey Oswald was arrested for the assassination, but he was shot and killed by Jack Ruby two days later.
The FBI and the Warren Commission both concluded Oswald had acted alone.
After Kennedy's death, Congress enacted many of his proposals, including the Civil Rights Act and the Revenue Act of 1964.
Despite his truncated presidency, Kennedy ranks highly in polls of United States presidents with historians and the general public.
His personal life has also been the focus of considerable sustained interest following public revelations in the 1970s of his chronic health ailments and extramarital affairs.
Kennedy is the most recent United States president to die in office. .mw-parser-output .toclimit-2 .toclevel-1 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-3 .toclevel-2 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-4 .toclevel-3 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-5 .toclevel-4 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-6 .toclevel-5 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-7 .toclevel-6 ul{display:none}Contents 1 Early life and education 2 United States Naval Reserve 2.
Navy and Marine Corps Medal citation 3 Journalism and personal diary 4 Congressional career 4.
Other Early life and education Kennedy's birthplace in Brookline, Massachusetts John Fitzgerald Kennedy was born outside Boston in Brookline, Massachusetts on May 29, 1917, at 83 Beals Street, to Joseph P Kennedy Sr., a businessman and politician, and Rose Kennedy , a philanthropist and socialite.
Kennedy's maternal grandfather and namesake, John F ""Honey Fitz"" Fitzgerald, served as a United States Congressman and was elected to two terms as Mayor of Boston.
Kennedy in a football uniform at Dexter School , 1926 Kennedy lived in Brookline for the first ten years of his life.
He was educated through the 4th grade at the Edward Devotion School, the Noble and Greenough Lower School, and the Dexter School; all located in the Boston area.
JFK's earliest memories involved accompanying his grandfather Fitzgerald on walking tours of historic sites in Boston and discussions at the family dinner table about politics, sparking his interest in history and public service.
His father's business had kept him away from the family for long stretches of time, and his ventures were concentrated on Wall Street and Hollywood.
In 1927, the Dexter School announced it would not reopen before October after an outbreak of polio in Massachusetts.
The family spent summers and early autumns at their home in Hyannis Port, Massachusetts, a village on Cape Cod, where they enjoyed swimming, sailing, and touch football.
Christmas and Easter holidays were spent at their winter retreat in Palm Beach, Florida.
In September 1930, Kennedy, then 13 years old, was shipped off to the Canterbury School in New Milford, Connecticut, for 8th grade.
In April 1931, he had an appendectomy, after which he withdrew from Canterbury and recuperated at home.In September 1931, Kennedy started attending Choate, a prestigious boarding school in Wallingford, Connecticut, for 9th through 12th grade.
His older brother Joe Jr. had already been at Choate for two years and was a football player and leading student.
He spent his first years at Choate in his older brother's shadow and compensated with rebellious behavior that attracted a coterie.
Their most notorious stunt was exploding a toilet seat with a powerful firecracker.
Defiantly Kennedy took a cue and named his group ""The Muckers Club"", which included roommate and lifelong friend Kirk LeMoyne ""Lem"" Billings.
The Kennedy family in Hyannis Port, Massachusetts, with JFK at top left in the white shirt, 1931 During his years at Choate, Kennedy was beset by health problems that culminated with his emergency hospitalization in 1934 at Yale New Haven Hospital, where doctors suspected leukemia.
In June 1934, he was admitted to the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota; the ultimate diagnosis there was colitis.
In September 1935, Kennedy made his first trip abroad when he traveled to London with his parents and his sister Kathleen.
He intended to study under Harold Laski at the London School of Economics , as his older brother had done.
He was then hospitalized for observation at Peter Bent Brigham Hospital in Boston.
He convalesced further at the family winter home in Palm Beach, then spent the spring of 1936 working as a ranch hand on the 40,000-acre Jay Six cattle ranch outside Benson, Arizona.
I feel that Harvard can give me a better background and a better liberal education than any other university.
I have always wanted to go there, as I have felt that it is not just another college, but is a university with something definite to offer.
He tried out for the football, golf, and swimming teams and earned a spot on the varsity swimming team.
Kennedy also sailed in the Star class and won the 1936 Nantucket Sound Star Championship.
In July 1937, Kennedy sailed to France—taking his convertible—and spent ten weeks driving through Europe with Billings.
In June 1938, Kennedy sailed overseas with his father and older brother to work at the American embassy in London, where his father was President Franklin D Roosevelt's United States Ambassador to the Court of St.
James's.In 1939, Kennedy toured Europe, the Soviet Union, the Balkans, and the Middle East in preparation for his Harvard senior honors thesis.
Two days later, the family was in the House of Commons for speeches endorsing the United Kingdom's declaration of war on Germany.
Kennedy was sent as his father's representative to help with arrangements for American survivors of SS Athenia before flying back to the United States from Foynes, Ireland, on his first transatlantic flight.
While Kennedy was an upperclassman at Harvard, he began to take his studies more seriously and developed an interest in political philosophy.
In 1940 Kennedy completed his thesis, ""Appeasement in Munich"", about British negotiations during the Munich Agreement.
The thesis eventually became a bestseller under the title Why England Slept.
In addition to addressing Britain's unwillingness to strengthen its military in the lead-up to World War II, the book also called for an Anglo-American alliance against the rising totalitarian powers.
Kennedy became increasingly supportive of United States intervention in World War II, and his father's isolationist beliefs resulted in the latter's dismissal as ambassador to the United Kingdom.
This created a split between the Kennedy and Roosevelt families.In 1940, Kennedy graduated cum laude from Harvard with a Bachelor of Arts in government, concentrating on international affairs.
That fall, he enrolled at the Stanford Graduate School of Business and audited classes there.
In early 1941, Kennedy left and helped his father write a memoir of his time as an American ambassador.
He then traveled throughout South America; his itinerary included Colombia, Ecuador and Peru.
United States Naval Reserve Kennedy planned to attend Yale Law School after auditing courses on business law at Stanford, but canceled when American entry into World War II seemed imminent.
In 1940, Kennedy attempted to enter the army's Officer Candidate School.
Despite months of training, he was medically disqualified due to his chronic lower back problems.
On September 24, 1941, Kennedy, with the help of then director of the Office of Naval Intelligence and the former naval attaché to Joseph Kennedy, Alan Kirk, joined the United States Naval Reserve.
Lieutenant Kennedy with his PT-109 crew, 1943 In January 1942, Kennedy was assigned to the ONI field office at Headquarters, Sixth Naval District, in Charleston, South Carolina.
In early November, Kennedy was still mourning the death of his close, childhood friend, Marine Corps Second Lieutenant George Houk Mead Jr., who had been killed in action at Guadalcanal that August and awarded the Navy Cross for his bravery.
Accompanied by a female acquaintance from a wealthy Newport family, the couple had stopped in Middletown, Rhode Island at the cemetery where the decorated, naval spy, Commander Hugo W Koehler, USN, had been buried the previous year.
Columba's chapel, Kennedy paused over Koehler's white granite cross grave marker and pondered his own mortality, hoping out loud that when his time came, he would not have to die without religion.
Two decades later, Kennedy and Koehler's stepson, United States Senator Claiborne Pell had become good friends and political allies, although they had been acquaintances since the mid-1930s during their ""salad days"" on the same Newport debutante party ""circuit"" and when Pell had dated Kathleen Kennedy.
It was a patrol torpedo boat used for training while Kennedy was an instructor at Melville.
During the trip south, he was hospitalized briefly in Jacksonville after diving into the cold water to unfoul a propeller.
Thereafter, Kennedy was assigned duty in Panama and later in the Pacific theater, where he eventually commanded two more PT boats.
Commanding PT-109 Kennedy on his navy patrol boat, the PT-109, 1943 In April 1943, Kennedy was assigned to Motor Torpedo Squadron TWO, and on April 24 he took command of PT-109, which was based at the time on Tulagi Island in the Solomons.
Of the 24 torpedoes fired that night by eight of the American PTs, not one hit the Japanese convoy.
Shunning surrender, around 2:00 p.m. on August 2, the men swam towards Plum Pudding Island 3. miles southwest of the remains of PT-109.
Despite re-injuring his back in the collision, Kennedy towed a badly burned crewman through the water to the island with a life jacket strap clenched between his teeth.
Kennedy made an additional two-mile swim the night of August 2, 1943, to Ferguson Passage to attempt to hail a passing American PT boat to expedite his crew's rescue and attempted to make the trip on a subsequent night, in a damaged canoe found on Naru Island where he had swum with Ensign George Ross to look for food.On August 4, 1943, he and his executive officer, Ensign Lenny Thom, assisted his injured and hungry crew on a demanding swim 3.75 miles southeast to Olasana Island, which was visible to the crew from their desolate home on Plum Pudding Island.
Commanding PT-59 It only took Kennedy a month to recover and return to duty, commanding the PT-59.
He and his crew removed the original torpedo tubes and depth charges and refitted the vessel into a heavily armed gunboat, mounting two automatic 40mm guns and ten .50 caliber Browning machine guns.
The new plan involved attaching a gunboat to each PT boat section adding gun range and defensive power against barges and shore batteries which the 59 went on to encounter on several occasions from mid-October to mid-November.
The 59 acted as a shield from shore fire and protected them as they escaped on two rescue landing craft at the base of the Warrior River at Choiseul Island, taking ten marines aboard and delivering them to safety.
Under doctor's orders, Kennedy was relieved of his command of PT-59 on November 18, and sent to the hospital on Tulagi.
After receiving treatment for his back injury, he was released from active duty in late 1944.
Kennedy was hospitalized at the Chelsea Naval Hospital in Chelsea, Massachusetts from May to December 1944.
On June 12, he was presented the Navy and Marine Corps Medal for his heroic actions on August 1–2, 1943, and the Purple Heart Medal for his back injury while on PT-109.
Beginning in January 1945, Kennedy spent three more months recovering from his back injury at Castle Hot Springs, a resort and temporary military hospital in Arizona.
After the war, Kennedy felt that the medal he had received for heroism was not a combat award and asked that he be reconsidered for the Silver Star Medal for which he had been recommended initially.
Kennedy's father also requested that his son receive the Silver Star, which is awarded for gallantry in action.
On August 12, 1944, Kennedy's older brother, Joe Jr., a navy pilot, was killed while on a special and hazardous air mission for which he had volunteered; his explosive-laden plane blew up when its bombs detonated prematurely over the English Channel.On March 1, 1945, Kennedy retired from the Navy Reserve on physical disability and was honorably discharged with the full rank of lieutenant.
In 1950, the Department of the Navy offered Kennedy a Bronze Star Medal in recognition of his meritorious service, which he declined.
Kennedy's two original medals are currently on display at the John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum.
Military awards In addition to the various campaign medals received for his war service, Kennedy was awarded the Navy and Marine Corps Medal for his conduct during and after the loss of PT-109, as well as the Purple Heart for being wounded.
He worked as a correspondent that May and went to Berlin for a second time, covering the Potsdam Conference and other events.
During this time, he kept a diary—his only known—in which he wrote that Adolf Hitler ""had a mystery about him in the way he lived and in the manner of his death that will live and grow after him"", and speculated that the dictator could still be alive.
Kennedy gave the diary to a research assistant, who auctioned it in 2017.
Congressional career JFK's elder brother Joe had been the family's political standard-bearer and had been tapped by their father to seek the presidency.
Joe's death during the war in 1944 changed that course and the assignment fell to JFK as the second eldest of the Kennedy siblings.
House of Representatives At the urging of Kennedy's father, United States Representative James Michael Curley vacated his seat in the strongly Democratic 11th congressional district of Massachusetts to become mayor of Boston in 1946.
With his father financing and running his campaign under the slogan ""The New Generation Offers a Leader"", Kennedy won the Democratic primary with 42 percent of the vote, defeating ten other candidates.
Campaigning around Boston, Kennedy called for better housing for veterans, better health care for all, and support for organized labor's campaign for reasonable work hours, a healthy workplace, and the right to organize, bargain, and strike.
In addition, he campaigned for peace through the United Nations and strong opposition to the Soviet Union.
Though Republicans took control of the House in the 1946 elections, Kennedy defeated his Republican opponent in the general election, taking 73 percent of the vote.
Along with Richard Nixon and Joseph McCarthy, Kennedy was one of several World War II veterans elected to Congress that year.He served in the House for six years, joining the influential Education and Labor Committee and the Veterans' Affairs Committee.
He concentrated his attention on international affairs, supporting the Truman Doctrine as the appropriate response to the emerging Cold War.
He also supported public housing and opposed the Labor Management Relations Act of 1947, which restricted the power of labor unions.
JFK set a goal of speaking in every city and town in Massachusetts prior to 1952.
Joseph Kennedy again financed his son's candidacy, while John Kennedy's younger brother Robert F Kennedy emerged as an important member of the campaign as manager.
The campaign hosted a series of ""teas"" at hotels and parlors across Massachusetts to reach out to women voters.
In the presidential election, Republican Dwight D Eisenhower carried Massachusetts by a margin of 208,000 votes, but Kennedy defeated Lodge by 70,000 votes for the Senate seat.
The following year, he married Jacqueline Bouvier.Kennedy underwent several spinal operations over the next two years.
Often absent from the Senate, he was at times critically ill and received Catholic last rites.
During his convalescence in 1956, he published Profiles in Courage, a book about United States senators who risked their careers for their personal beliefs, for which he won the Pulitzer Prize for Biography in 1957.
Rumors that this work was co-written by his close adviser and speechwriter, Ted Sorensen, were confirmed in Sorensen's 2008 autobiography.
Kennedy endorsing Adlai Stevenson II for the presidential nomination at the 1956 Democratic National Convention in Chicago At the start of his first term, Kennedy focused on Massachusetts-specific issues by sponsoring bills to help the fishing, textile manufacturing, and watchmaking industries.
In 1954, Senator Kennedy voted in favor of the Saint Lawrence Seaway which would connect the Great Lakes to the Atlantic Ocean, despite opposition from Massachusetts politicians who argued that the project would cripple New England's shipping industry, including the Port of Boston.
Three years later, Kennedy chaired a special committee to select the five greatest United States senators in history so their portraits could decorate the Senate Reception Room.
That same year, Kennedy joined the Senate Labor Rackets Committee with his brother Robert to investigate crime infiltration of labor unions.
In 1958, Kennedy introduced a bill which became the first major labor relations bill to pass either house since the Taft–Hartley Act of 1947.
The bill dealt largely with the control of union abuses exposed by the McClellan committee but did not incorporate tough Taft–Hartley amendments requested by President Eisenhower.
Kennedy finished second in the balloting, losing to Senator Estes Kefauver of Tennessee but receiving national exposure as a result.
Kennedy's margin of victory of 874,608 votes was the largest in Massachusetts political history.
A matter demanding Kennedy's attention in the Senate was President Eisenhower's bill for the Civil Rights Act of 1957.
Kennedy cast a procedural vote against it and this was considered by some to be an appeasement of Southern Democratic opponents of the bill.
Kennedy did vote for Title III of the act, which would have given the Attorney General powers to enjoin, but Majority Leader Lyndon B Johnson agreed to let the provision die as a compromise measure.
He proposed on July 2, 1957, that the United States support Algeria's effort to gain independence from France.
The following year, Kennedy authored A Nation of Immigrants , which analyzed the importance of immigration in the country's history as well as proposals to re-evaluate immigration law.In 1958, Kennedy was re-elected to a second term in the Senate, defeating Republican opponent, Boston lawyer Vincent J Celeste, by a margin of 874,608 votes, the largest margin in the history of Massachusetts politics.
It was during his re-election campaign that Kennedy's press secretary at the time, Robert E Thompson, put together a film entitled The United States Senator John F Kennedy Story, which exhibited a day in the life of the Senator and showcased his family life as well as the inner workings of his office to solve Massachusetts-related issues.
It was the most comprehensive film produced about Kennedy up to that time.
In the aftermath of his re-election, Kennedy began preparing to run for president by traveling throughout the United States with the aim of building his candidacy for 1960.
When it came to conservation, Kennedy, a Massachusetts Audubon Society supporter, wanted to make sure that the shorelines of Cape Cod remained unsullied by future industrialization.
On September 3, 1959, Kennedy cosponsored the Cape Cod National Seashore bill with his Republican colleague Senator Leverett Saltonstall.Kennedy's father was a strong supporter and friend of Senator Joseph McCarthy.
Additionally, Bobby Kennedy worked for McCarthy's subcommittee, and McCarthy dated Kennedy's sister Patricia.
In 1954, the Senate voted to censure McCarthy, and Kennedy drafted a speech supporting the censure.
However, it was not delivered because Kennedy was hospitalized at the time.
The speech put Kennedy in the apparent position of participating by ""pairing"" his vote against that of another senator and opposing the censure.
On January 2, 1960, Kennedy announced his candidacy for the Democratic presidential nomination.
Though some questioned Kennedy's age and experience, his charisma and eloquence earned him numerous supporters.
Many Americans held anti-Catholic attitudes, but Kennedy's vocal support of the separation of church and state helped defuse the situation.
His religion also helped him win a devoted following among many Catholic voters.
Kennedy faced several potential challengers for the Democratic nomination, including Senate Majority Leader Lyndon B Johnson, Adlai Stevenson II, and Senator Hubert Humphrey.Kennedy's presidential campaign was a family affair, funded by his father and with his younger brother Robert, acting as his campaign manager.
John preferred Ivy League policy advisors, but unlike his father, he enjoyed the give and take of Massachusetts politics and built a largely Irish team of campaigners, headed by Larry O'Brien and Kenneth O'Donnell.
Kennedy traveled extensively to build his support among Democratic elites and voters.
At the time, party officials controlled most of the delegates, but several states also held primaries, and Kennedy sought to win several primaries to boost his chances of winning the nomination.
In his first major test, Kennedy won the Wisconsin primary, effectively ending Humphrey's hopes of winning the presidency.
Nonetheless, Kennedy and Humphrey faced each other in a competitive West Virginia primary in which Kennedy could not benefit from a Catholic bloc, as he had in Wisconsin.
Kennedy won the West Virginia primary, impressing many in the party, but at the start of the 1960 Democratic National Convention, it was unclear as to whether he would win the nomination.When Kennedy entered the convention, he had the most delegates, but not enough to ensure that he would win the nomination.
Stevenson—the 1952 and 1956 presidential nominee—remained very popular in the party, while Johnson also hoped to win the nomination with the support from party leaders.
Kennedy's candidacy also faced opposition from former president Harry S Truman, who was concerned about Kennedy's lack of experience.
Kennedy knew that a second ballot could give the nomination to Johnson or someone else, and his well-organized campaign was able to earn the support of just enough delegates to win the presidential nomination on the first ballot.Kennedy ignored the opposition of his brother, who wanted him to choose labor leader Walter Reuther, and other liberal supporters when he chose Johnson as his vice presidential nominee.
He believed that the Texas Senator could help him win support from the South.
At the start of the fall general election campaign, the Republican nominee and incumbent vice president Richard Nixon held a six-point lead in the polls.
Despite Kennedy's efforts to quell anti-Catholic concerns and similar statements by high-profile Protestant figures, religious bigotry would dog the Democratic candidate through the end of the campaign.
His score among white Protestants would ultimately be lower than Adlai Stevenson's in 1956, though Stevenson lost his election.
Some Catholic leaders also expressed reservations about Kennedy, but the vast majority of laypeople rallied to him.
Kennedy and Richard Nixon participate in the nation's second televised presidential debate, Washington, D.C., 1960 Between September and October, Kennedy squared off against Nixon in the first televised presidential debates in United States history.
During these programs, Nixon had an injured leg, ""five o'clock shadow"", and was perspiring, making him look tense and uncomfortable.
Conversely, Kennedy wore makeup and appeared relaxed, which helped the large television audience to view him as the winner.
On average radio listeners thought that Nixon had won or that the debates were a draw.
The debates are now considered a milestone in American political history—the point at which the medium of television began to play a dominant role in politics.Kennedy's campaign gained momentum after the first debate, and he pulled slightly ahead of Nixon in most polls.
On Election Day, Kennedy defeated Nixon in one of the closest presidential elections of the 20th century.
Fourteen electors from Mississippi and Alabama refused to support Kennedy because of his support for the civil rights movement; they voted for Senator Harry F Byrd of Virginia, as did an elector from Oklahoma.
Kennedy became the youngest person ever elected to the presidency, though Theodore Roosevelt was a year younger at 42 when he automatically assumed the office after the assassination of William McKinley in 1901.
Presidency of John F Kennedy For a chronological guide to this subject, see Timeline of the John F Kennedy presidency.
John F Kennedy's Inaugural Address Chief Justice Earl Warren administers the presidential oath of office to John F Kennedy at the Capitol, January 20, 1961.
John F Kennedy was sworn in as the 35th president at noon on January 20, 1961.
In his inaugural address, he spoke of the need for all Americans to be active citizens, famously saying, ""Ask not what your country can do for you.
The address reflected Kennedy's confidence that his administration would chart a historically significant course in both domestic policy and foreign affairs.
The contrast between this optimistic vision and the pressures of managing daily political realities at home and abroad would be one of the main tensions running through the early years of his administration.
Kennedy with retired president Dwight D Eisenhower at Camp David Kennedy brought to the White House a contrast in organization compared to the decision-making structure of former General Eisenhower, and he wasted no time in scrapping Eisenhower's methods.
He was ready and willing to make the increased number of quick decisions required in such an environment.
He selected a mixture of experienced and inexperienced people to serve in his cabinet.
This was needed in exchange for votes to expand the membership of the House Rules Committee in order to give the Democrats a majority in setting the legislative agenda.
Kennedy focused on immediate and specific issues facing the administration and quickly voiced his impatience with pondering of deeper meanings.
At the request of Senator Henry Jackson, Senator John McClellan held 46 days of mostly closed-door hearings before the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations investigating the TFX contract from February to November 1963.
During the summer of 1962, Kennedy had a secret taping system set up in the White House, most likely to aid his future memoir.
Foreign policy of the John F Kennedy administration Foreign trips of John F Kennedy during his presidency Kennedy's foreign policy was dominated by American confrontations with the Soviet Union, manifested by proxy contests in the early stage of the Cold War.
In 1961 he anxiously anticipated a summit with Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev.
He started off on the wrong foot by reacting aggressively to a routine Khrushchev speech on Cold War confrontation in early 1961.
The speech was intended for domestic audiences in the Soviet Union, but Kennedy interpreted it as a personal challenge.
His mistake helped raise tensions going into the Vienna summit of June 1961.
On the way to the summit, Kennedy stopped in Paris to meet French President Charles de Gaulle, who advised him to ignore Khrushchev's abrasive style.
The French president feared the United States' presumed influence in Europe.
Nevertheless, de Gaulle was quite impressed with the young president and his family.
Clip of Kennedy meeting with Nikita Khrushchev in Vienna, 1961 On June 4, 1961, Kennedy met with Khrushchev in Vienna and left the meetings angry and disappointed that he had allowed the premier to bully him, despite the warnings he had received.
He made it clear that any treaty interfering with United States access rights in West Berlin would be regarded as an act of war.
Shortly after Kennedy returned home, the U.S.S.R. announced its plan to sign a treaty with East Berlin, abrogating any third-party occupation rights in either sector of the city.
Kennedy began intensive meetings on the Berlin issue, where Dean Acheson took the lead in recommending a military buildup alongside NATO allies.
In a July 1961 speech, Kennedy announced his decision to add $3.25 billion to the defense budget, along with over 200,000 additional troops, stating that an attack on West Berlin would be taken as an attack on the United States The speech received an 85% approval rating.A month later, both the Soviet Union and East Berlin began blocking any further passage of East Germans into West Berlin and erected barbed wire fences, which were quickly upgraded to the Berlin Wall, around the city.
Kennedy's initial reaction was to ignore this, as long as free access from the West to West Berlin continued.
This course was altered when West Berliners had lost confidence in the defense of their position by the United States.
Kennedy sent Vice President Johnson and Lucius D Clay, along with a host of military personnel, in convoy through East Germany, including Soviet-armed checkpoints, to demonstrate the continued commitment of the United States to West Berlin.Kennedy gave a speech at Saint Anselm College on May 5, 1960, regarding America's conduct in the emerging Cold War.
Bay of Pigs Invasion Kennedy and Vice President Johnson walking on the White House grounds The Eisenhower administration had created a plan to overthrow Fidel Castro's regime in Cuba.
Led by the Central Intelligence Agency , with help from the United States military, the plan was for an invasion of Cuba by a counter-revolutionary insurgency composed of U.S.-trained, anti-Castro Cuban exiles led by CIA paramilitary officers.
The intention was to invade Cuba and instigate an uprising among the Cuban people, hoping to remove Castro from power.
Fifteen hundred U.S.-trained Cubans, dubbed Brigade 2506, landed on the island.
CIA director Allen Dulles later stated that they thought Kennedy would authorize any action that was needed for success once the troops were on the ground.By April 19, 1961, the Cuban government had captured or killed the invading exiles, and Kennedy was forced to negotiate for the release of the 1,189 survivors.
Twenty months later, Cuba released the captured exiles in exchange for $53 million worth of food and medicine.
The incident made Castro feel wary of the United States and led him to believe that another invasion would take place.Biographer Richard Reeves said that Kennedy focused primarily on the political repercussions of the plan rather than military considerations.
When it proved unsuccessful, he was convinced that the plan was a setup to make him look bad.
He took responsibility for the failure, saying, ""We got a big kick in the leg and we deserved it.
He appointed Robert Kennedy to help lead a committee to examine the causes of the failure.In late-1961, the White House formed the Special Group , headed by Robert Kennedy and including Edward Lansdale, Secretary Robert McNamara, and others.
In March 1962, Kennedy rejected Operation Northwoods, proposals for false flag attacks against American military and civilian targets, and blaming them on the Cuban government in order to gain approval for a war against Cuba.
However, the administration continued to plan for an invasion of Cuba in the summer of 1962.
The United States would also appear to the world as less committed to the defense of the hemisphere.
There was also some concern from the international community , that the assault plan was an overreaction in light of the fact that Eisenhower had placed PGM-19 Jupiter missiles in Italy and Turkey in 1958.
In concurrence with a majority-vote of the NSC, Kennedy decided on a naval quarantine.
On October 22, he dispatched a message to Khrushchev and announced the decision on TV.The United States Navy would stop and inspect all Soviet ships arriving off Cuba, beginning October 24.
The Organization of American States gave unanimous support to the removal of the missiles.
United Nations Secretary General U Thant requested both parties to reverse their decisions and enter a cooling-off period.
Khrushchev agreed, but Kennedy did not.One Soviet-flagged ship was stopped and boarded.
On October 28, Khrushchev agreed to dismantle the missile sites, subject to UN inspections.
The United States publicly promised never to invade Cuba and privately agreed to remove its Jupiter missiles from Italy and Turkey, which were by then obsolete and had been supplanted by submarines equipped with UGM-27 Polaris missiles.This crisis brought the world closer to nuclear war than at any point before or after.
It is considered that ""the humanity"" of both Khrushchev and Kennedy prevailed.
Kennedy's approval rating increased from 66% to 77% immediately thereafter.
Foreign policy of the John F Kennedy administration § Latin America Kennedy signs the Proclamation for Interdiction of the Delivery of Offensive Weapons to Cuba in the Oval Office, October 23, 1962 Believing that ""those who make peaceful revolution impossible, will make violent revolution inevitable,"" Kennedy sought to contain the perceived threat of communism in Latin America by establishing the Alliance for Progress, which sent aid to some countries and sought greater human rights standards in the region.
He worked closely with Puerto Rican Governor Luis Muñoz Marín for the development of the Alliance of Progress and began working to further Puerto Rico's autonomy.
The Eisenhower administration, through the CIA, had begun formulating plans to assassinate Castro in Cuba and Rafael Trujillo in the Dominican Republic.
When Kennedy took office, he privately instructed the CIA that any plan must include plausible deniability by the United States His public position was in opposition.
In June 1961, the Dominican Republic's leader was assassinated; in the days following, Undersecretary of State Chester Bowles led a cautious reaction by the nation.
Robert Kennedy, who saw an opportunity for the U.S., called Bowles ""a gutless bastard"" to his face.
See media help.In one of his first presidential acts, Kennedy asked Congress to create the Peace Corps.
Through this program, Americans volunteered to help developing nations in fields like education, farming, health care, and construction.
The organization grew to 5,000 members by March 1963 and 10,000 the year after.
As a United States senator in 1956, Kennedy publicly advocated for greater United States involvement in Vietnam.
When briefing Kennedy, Eisenhower emphasized that the communist threat in Southeast Asia required priority; Eisenhower considered Laos to be ""the cork in the bottle"" regarding the regional threat.
In May, he dispatched Lyndon Johnson to meet with South Vietnamese President Ngo Dinh Diem.
Johnson assured Diem more aid to mold a fighting force that could resist the communists.
Kennedy announced a change of policy from support to partnership with Diem to defeat of communism in South Vietnam.During his presidency, Kennedy continued policies that provided political, economic, and military support to the governments of South Korea and South Vietnam.
There's no other country in history that's carried this kind of a burden.
Other countries have had forces serving outside their own country, but for conquest.
We have two divisions in South-Korea, not to control South-Korea, but to defend it.
Well, no other country in the world has ever done that since the beginning of the world; Greece, Rome, Napoleon, and all the rest, always had conquest.
News conference, March 23, 1961 The Viet Cong began assuming a predominant presence in late 1961, initially seizing the provincial capital of Phuoc Vinh.
After a mission to Vietnam in October, presidential adviser General Maxwell D Taylor and Deputy National Security Adviser Walt Rostow recommended the deployment of 6,000 to 8,000 United States combat troops to Vietnam.
Kennedy increased the number of military advisers and special forces in the area, from 11,000 in 1962 to 16,000 by late 1963, but he was reluctant to order a full-scale deployment of troops.
In late 1961, Kennedy sent Roger Hilsman, then director of the State Department's Bureau of Intelligence and Research, to assess the situation in Vietnam.
There, Hilsman met Sir Robert Grainger Ker Thompson, head of the British Advisory Mission to South Vietnam, and the Strategic Hamlet Program was formed.
Kennedy and Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, 1962 In April 1963, Kennedy assessed the situation in Vietnam, saying, ""We don't have a prayer of staying in Vietnam.
Lodge was instructed to try getting Diem and Nhu to step down and leave the country.
Lodge concluded that the only option was to get the South Vietnamese generals to overthrow Diem and Nhu.
Kennedy was unaware that both men were so much at odds that they did not speak to each other on the return flight.In October 1963, Kennedy appointed Defense Secretary McNamara and General Maxwell D Taylor to a Vietnamese mission in another effort to synchronize the information and formulation of policy.
Kennedy instructed Lodge to offer covert assistance to the coup, excluding assassination.
Kennedy was shocked by the deaths.News of the coup led to renewed confidence initially—both in America and in South Vietnam—that the war might be won.McGeorge Bundy drafted a National Security Action Memo to present to Kennedy upon his return from Dallas.
Fueling the debate were statements made by Secretary of Defense McNamara in the film ""The Fog of War"" that Kennedy was strongly considering pulling the United States out of Vietnam after the 1964 election.
The film also contains a tape recording of Lyndon Johnson stating that Kennedy was planning to withdraw, a position in which Johnson disagreed.
At the time of Kennedy's death, no final policy decision was made to Vietnam.
It reversed Kennedy's decision to withdraw 1,000 troops, and reaffirmed the policy of assistance to the South Vietnamese.
JFK's Ich bin ein Berliner speechIn 1963, Germany was enduring a time of particular vulnerability due to Soviet aggression to the east as well as the impending retirement of West German Chancellor Adenauer.
At the same time, French President Charles de Gaulle was trying to build a Franco-West German counterweight to the American and Soviet spheres of influence.
To Kennedy's eyes, this Franco-German cooperation seemed directed against NATO's influence in Europe.To reinforce the United States alliance with West Germany, Kennedy travelled to West Germany and West Berlin in June 1963.
On June 26, Kennedy toured West Berlin, culminating in a public speech at West Berlin's city hall in front of hundreds of thousands of enthusiastic Berliners.
He reiterated the American commitment to Germany and criticized communism, and was met with an ecstatic response from a massive audience.
The speech is known for its famous phrase ""Ich bin ein Berliner"" , which Kennedy himself had begun to try out in preparation for the trip.
As president, Kennedy initiated the creation of security ties with Israel, and he is credited as the founder of the US-Israeli military alliance, which would be continued under subsequent presidents.
Kennedy ended the arms embargo that the Eisenhower and Truman administrations had enforced on Israel.
In 1963 the Kennedy administration was engaged in a now-declassified diplomatic standoff with the leaders of Israel.
In a May 1963 letter to Ben-Gurion, Kennedy wrote that he was skeptical and stated that American support to Israel could be in jeopardy if reliable information on the Israeli nuclear program was not forthcoming, Ben-Gurion repeated previous reassurances that Dimona was being developed for peaceful purposes.
The Israeli government resisted American pressure to open its nuclear facilities to International Atomic Energy Agency inspections.
In 1962 the United States and Israeli governments had agreed to an annual inspection regime.
A science attaché at the embassy in Tel Aviv concluded that parts of the Dimona facility had been shut down temporarily to mislead American scientists when they visited.According to Seymour Hersh, the Israelis set up false control rooms to show the Americans.
The documents reveal the deep concern the Kennedy Administration had over Dimona, and while Kennedy understood the United States and the international community may not be capable of preventing Israel or any nation, he certainly was not satisfied to learn Israel was using Dimona for the production of plutonium.
Rodger Davies, the director of the State Department's Office of Near Eastern Affairs, concluded in March 1965 that Israel was developing nuclear weapons.
He reported that Israel's target date for achieving nuclear capability was 1968–1969.
On May 1, 1968, Undersecretary of State Nicholas Katzenbach told President Johnson that Dimona was producing enough plutonium to produce two bombs a year.
The State Department argued that if Israel wanted arms, it should accept international supervision of its nuclear program.
Israeli national interests to an extent were also at odds with Kennedy's endorsement of the United Nation's Johnson Plan, which devised a plan to return a small percentage of displaced Palestinians from the war of 1948 into what was by then, Israel.
This continuation of the late UN Secretary General Dag Hammarskjold's plan for Palestinian repatriation particularity disturbed persons who had a hard line view of even Arab resettlement in Israel, or the more heavily feared, full repatriation.
The later plan was spearheaded by the Palestine Conciliation Commission's Dr.
Joseph E Johnson, while the United Nations attempted to oversee progression from writing into action.
Foreign policy of the John F Kennedy administration § Iraq Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi of Iran, Kennedy, and United States Defense Secretary Robert McNamara in the White House Cabinet Room on April 13, 1962 Relations between the United States and Iraq became strained following the overthrow of the Iraqi monarchy on July 14, 1958, which resulted in the declaration of a republican government led by Brigadier Abd al-Karim Qasim.
The United Kingdom—which had just granted Kuwait independence on June 19, and whose economy was dependent on Kuwaiti oil—responded on July 1 by dispatching 5,000 troops to the country to deter an Iraqi invasion.
At the same time, Kennedy dispatched a United States Navy task force to Bahrain, and the UK, at the urging of the Kennedy administration, brought the dispute to United Nations Security Council, where the proposed resolution was vetoed by the Soviet Union.
The situation was resolved in October, when the British troops were withdrawn and replaced by a 4,000-strong Arab League force, which acted as a barrier against the Iraqi threat.In December 1961, Qasim's government passed Public Law 80, which restricted the partially American-controlled Iraq Petroleum Company 's concessionary holding to those areas in which oil was actually being produced, effectively expropriating 99.5% of the IPC concession.
United States officials were alarmed by the expropriation as well as the recent Soviet veto of an Egyptian-sponsored UN resolution requesting the admittance of Kuwait as UN member state, which they believed were connected.
In April 1962, the State Department issued new guidelines on Iraq that were intended to increase American influence there.
While there have been persistent rumors that the CIA orchestrated the coup, declassified documents and the testimony of former CIA officers indicate that there was no direct American involvement, although the CIA was actively seeking a suitable replacement for Qasim within the Iraqi military and had been informed of an earlier Ba'athist coup plot.
The Kennedy administration was pleased with the outcome and ultimately approved a $55-million arms deal for Iraq.
He visited the cottage at Dunganstown, near New Ross, County Wexford, where his ancestors had lived before emigrating to America.Kennedy also was the first foreign leader to address the Houses of the Oireachtas, the Irish parliament.
Kennedy later told aides that the trip was the best four days of his life.
In their Vienna summit meeting in June 1961, Khrushchev and Kennedy both reached an informal understanding against nuclear testing, but the Soviet Union began testing nuclear weapons that September.
Shortly afterwards, new United States satellites began delivering images that made it clear that the Soviets were substantially behind the United States in the arms race.
Nevertheless, the greater nuclear strength of the United States was of little value as long as the U.S.S.R. perceived itself to be at parity.In July 1963, Kennedy sent W Averell Harriman to Moscow to negotiate a treaty with the Soviets.
It quickly became clear that a comprehensive test ban would not be implemented, due largely to the reluctance of the Soviets to allow inspections that would verify compliance.Ultimately, the United States, the United Kingdom, and the Soviet Union were the initial signatories to a limited treaty, which prohibited atomic testing on the ground, in the atmosphere, or underwater, but not underground.
The United States Senate ratified this and Kennedy signed it into law in October 1963.
Kennedy added that the top rate should be set at 70% if certain deductions were not eliminated for high-income earners.
Congress passed few of Kennedy's major programs during his lifetime, but did vote them through in 1964 and 1965 under his successor Johnson.
Recession of 1960–1961 and Kennedy Slide of 1962 Kennedy signing the Manpower Development and Training Act, March 1962 Kennedy ended a period of tight fiscal policies, loosening monetary policy to keep interest rates down and to encourage growth of the economy.
He presided over the first government budget to top the $100 billion mark, in 1962, and his first budget in 1961 resulted in the nation's first non-war, non-recession deficit.
The economy, which had been through two recessions in three years and was in one when Kennedy took office, accelerated notably throughout his administration.
Despite low inflation and interest rates, the GDP had grown by an average of only 2.2% per annum during the Eisenhower administration , and it had declined by 1% during Eisenhower's last twelve months in office.The economy turned around and prospered during Kennedy's years as president.
The GDP expanded by an average of 5.5% from early-1961 to late-1963, while inflation remained steady at around 1% and unemployment eased.
This rate of growth in GDP and industry continued until 1969, and has yet to be repeated for such a sustained period of time.Attorney General Robert Kennedy took the position that steel executives had illegally colluded to fix prices.
Yale law professor Charles Reich opined in The New Republic that the administration had violated civil liberties by calling a grand jury to indict United States Steel for collusion so quickly.
Nevertheless, the administration's Bureau of Budget reported the price increase would have caused a net gain for the GDP as well as a net budget surplus.
The stock market, which had steadily declined since Kennedy's election in 1960, dropped 10% shortly after the administration's action on the steel industry took place.
Federal and military death penalty During his administration, Kennedy oversaw the last federal execution prior to Furman Georgia, a 1972 case that led to a moratorium on federal executions.Victor Feguer was sentenced to death by an Iowa federal court and was executed on March 15, 1963.
Kennedy commuted a death sentence imposed by a military court on seaman Jimmie Henderson on February 12, 1962, changing the penalty to life in prison.On March 22, 1962, Kennedy signed into law HR5143 , which abolished the mandatory death penalty for first degree murder suspects in the District of Columbia, the only remaining jurisdiction in the United States with such a penalty.
The death penalty has not been applied in the District of Columbia since 1957 and has now been abolished.
Civil Rights Movement The turbulent end of state-sanctioned racial discrimination was one of the most pressing domestic issues of the 1960s.
Many schools, especially those in southern states, did not obey the Supreme Court's decision.
The Court also prohibited segregation at other public facilities but it continued nonetheless.
Thurgood Marshall, appointed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit by Kennedy in May 1961 Kennedy verbally supported racial integration and civil rights; during his 1960 presidential campaign, he telephoned Coretta Scott King, wife of the Reverend Martin Luther King Jr., who had been jailed while trying to integrate a department store lunch counter.
Robert Kennedy called Georgia governor Ernest Vandiver and obtained King's release from prison, which drew additional black support to his brother's candidacy.
Upon taking office in 1961, Kennedy postponed promised civil rights legislation he made while campaigning in 1960, recognizing that conservative Southern Democrats controlled congressional legislation.
Kennedy believed the grassroots movement for civil rights would anger many Southern whites and make it more difficult to pass civil rights laws in Congress, including anti-poverty legislation, and he distanced himself from it.Kennedy was concerned with other issues in the early part of his administration, such as the Cold War, Bay of Pigs fiasco, and the situation in Southeast Asia.
Civil rights movement participants, mainly those on the front line in the South, viewed Kennedy as lukewarm, especially concerning the Freedom Riders, who organized an integrated public transportation effort in the south, and who were repeatedly met with white mob violence, including by law enforcement officers, both federal and state.
Kennedy assigned federal marshals to protect the Freedom Riders rather than using federal troops or uncooperative FBI agents.
It established the President's Committee on Equal Employment Opportunity.
Displeased with Kennedy's pace addressing the issue of segregation, Martin Luther King Jr. and his associates produced a document in 1962 calling on Kennedy to follow in the footsteps of Abraham Lincoln and use an Executive Order to deliver a blow for Civil Rights as a kind of Second Emancipation Proclamation.
On November 20, 1962, Kennedy issued Executive Order 11063 requiring all federal agencies to prevent racial discrimination in federally-funded subsidized housing in the United States.
Meredith did finally enroll for a class, and Kennedy regretted not sending in troops earlier.
Kennedy began doubting as to whether the ""evils of Reconstruction"" of the 1860s and 1870s he had been taught or believed in were true.
The instigating subculture during the Ole Miss riot, and many other racially ignited events, was the Ku Klux Klan.
Despite this, in Boston, the Boston Housing Authority Board would continue to actively segregate the public housing developments in the city during the John F Collins administration , with BHA departments engaging in bureaucratic resistance against integration through at least 1966 and the Board retaining control over tenant assignment until 1968.
Both Kennedy and Robert Kennedy were concerned about King's ties to suspected Communists Jack O'Dell and Stanley Levison.
His brother Robert and Ted Sorensen pressed Kennedy to take more initiative on the legislative front.
Wallace moved aside only after being confronted by Deputy Attorney General Nicholas Katzenbach and the Alabama United States National Guard, which had just been federalized by order of the president.
That evening Kennedy gave his famous Report to the American People on Civil Rights on national television and radio, launching his initiative for civil rights legislation—to provide equal access to public schools and other facilities, and greater protection of voting rights.His proposals became part of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
The day ended with the murder of an NAACP leader, Medgar Evers, in front of his home in Mississippi.
As Kennedy had predicted, the day after his TV speech, and in reaction to it, House Majority leader Carl Albert called to advise him that his two-year signature effort in Congress to combat poverty in Appalachia had been defeated, primarily by the votes of Southern Democrats and Republicans.
Earlier, Kennedy had signed the executive order creating the Presidential Commission on the Status of Women on December 14, 1961.
The Commission statistics revealed that women were also experiencing discrimination; its final report, documenting legal and cultural barriers, was issued in October 1963.
Further, on June 10, 1963, Kennedy signed the Equal Pay Act of 1963, which amended the Fair Labor Standards Act and abolished wage disparity based on sex.
Kennedy meetings with leaders of the March on Washington in the Oval Office, August 28, 1963 Over a hundred thousand, predominantly African Americans gathered in Washington for the civil rights March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom on August 28, 1963.
To ensure a peaceful demonstration, the organizers and Kennedy personally edited speeches that were inflammatory and agreed the March would be held on a Wednesday and would be over at 4:00 pm.
Kennedy felt that the March was a victory for him as well and bolstered the chances for his civil rights bill.Nevertheless, the struggle was far from over.
Three weeks later on Sunday, September 15, a bomb exploded at the 16th Street Baptist Church in Birmingham; by the end of the day, four African American children had died in the explosion, and two other children were shot to death in the aftermath.
Due to this resurgent violence, the civil rights legislation underwent some drastic amendments that critically endangered any prospects for passage of the bill, to the outrage of the president.
Gaining Republican support, Senator Everett Dirksen promised the legislation would be brought to a vote preventing a Senate filibuster.
The legislation was enacted by Kennedy's successor President Lyndon B Johnson, prompted by Kennedy's memory, after his assassination in November, enforcing voting rights, public accommodations, employment, education, and the administration of justice.
Civil liberties In February 1962, FBI Director J Edgar Hoover, who was suspicious of civil-rights leader Martin Luther King Jr. and viewed him as an upstart troublemaker, presented the Kennedy Administration with allegations that some of King's close confidants and advisers were communists.
Concerned by these allegations, the FBI deployed agents to monitor King in the following months.
Robert Kennedy and President Kennedy also both warned King to discontinue the suspect associations.
After the associations continued, Robert Kennedy issued a written directive authorizing the FBI to wiretap King and other leaders of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, King's civil rights organization, in October 1963.
Immigration During the 1960 campaign, Kennedy proposed an overhaul of American immigration and naturalization laws to ban discrimination based on national origin.
He saw this proposal as an extension of his planned civil rights agenda as president.
These reforms later became law through the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965, which dramatically shifted the source of immigration from Northern and Western European countries towards immigration from Latin America and Asia.
The policy change also shifted the emphasis on the selection of immigrants in favor of family reunification.
The late president's brother, Senator Edward Kennedy of Massachusetts helped steer the legislation through the Senate.
Kennedy was asked by the American Civil Liberties Union to intervene and to halt the project, but he declined, citing a critical need for flood control.
He expressed concern about the plight of the Seneca and directed government agencies to assist in obtaining more land, damages, and assistance to help mitigate their displacement.
Space Race and Space policy of the United States Accompanied by astronaut John Glenn, Kennedy inspects the Project Mercury capsule Friendship 7, February 23, 1962 Wernher von Braun and Kennedy The Apollo program was conceived early in 1960, during the Eisenhower administration, as a follow-up to Project Mercury, to be used as a shuttle to an Earth-orbital space station, flights around the Moon, or landing on it.
As senator, Kennedy had been opposed to the space program and wanted to terminate it.In constructing his presidential administration, Kennedy elected to retain Eisenhower's last science advisor Jerome Wiesner as head of the President's Science Advisory Committee.
Wiesner was strongly opposed to manned space exploration, having issued a report highly critical of Project Mercury.
Kennedy was turned down by seventeen candidates for NASA administrator before the post was accepted by James E Webb, an experienced Washington insider who served President Truman as budget director and undersecretary of state.
Webb proved to be adept at obtaining the support of Congress, the President, and the American people.
Kennedy also persuaded Congress to amend the National Aeronautics and Space Act to allow him to delegate his chairmanship of the National Aeronautics and Space Council to the Vice President, both because of the knowledge of the space program Johnson gained in the Senate working for the creation of NASA, and to help keep the politically savvy Johnson occupied.
Kennedy proposing a program to Congress that will land men on the Moon, May 1961.
In Kennedy's January 1961 State of the Union address, he had suggested international cooperation in space.
Khrushchev declined, as the Soviets did not wish to reveal the status of their rocketry and space capabilities.
Early in his presidency, Kennedy was poised to dismantle the manned space program but postponed any decision out of deference to Johnson, who had been a strong supporter of the space program in the Senate.
Kennedy's advisors speculated that a Moon flight would be prohibitively expensive, and he was considering plans to dismantle the Apollo program due to its cost.However, this quickly changed on April 12, 1961, when Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first person to fly in space, reinforcing American fears about being left behind in a technological competition with the Soviet Union.
Kennedy now became eager for the United States to take the lead in the Space Race, for reasons of national security and prestige.
On April 20, he sent a memo to Johnson, asking him to look into the status of America's space program, and into programs that could offer NASA the opportunity to catch up.
His memo concluded that a manned Moon landing was far enough in the future that it was likely the United States would achieve it first.
I believe that this nation should commit itself to achieving the goal, before this decade is out, of landing a man on the Moon and returning him safely to the Earth.
We choose to go to the Moon in this decade and do the other things, not because they are easy, but because they are hard.Full text On November 21, 1962, in a cabinet meeting with NASA administrator Webb and other officials, Kennedy explained that the Moon shot was important for reasons of international prestige, and that the expense was justified.
Johnson assured him that lessons learned from the space program had military value as well.
Khrushchev again declined, and the Soviets did not commit to a manned Moon mission until 1964.
On July 20, 1969, almost six years after Kennedy's death, Apollo 11 landed the first manned spacecraft on the Moon.
Assassination of John F Kennedy For a chronological guide to this subject, see Timeline of the John F Kennedy assassination.
The Kennedys and the Connallys in the presidential limousine moments before the assassination in Dallas President Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas at 12:30 p.m.
He denied shooting anyone, claiming he was a patsy, and was shot dead by Jack Ruby on November 24, before he could be prosecuted.
Ruby successfully appealed his conviction and death sentence but became ill and died of cancer on January 3, 1967, while the date for his new trial was being set.
President Johnson quickly issued an executive order to create the Warren Commission—chaired by Chief Justice Earl Warren—to investigate the assassination.
The commission concluded that Oswald acted alone in killing Kennedy and that Oswald was not part of any conspiracy.
The assassination proved to be a pivotal moment in United States history because of its impact on the nation, and the ensuing political repercussions.
A 2004 Fox News poll found that 66% of Americans thought there had been a conspiracy to kill President Kennedy, while 74% thought that there had been a cover-up.
A Gallup Poll in November 2013 showed 61% believed in a conspiracy, and only 30% thought that Oswald did it alone.
In 1979, the United States House Select Committee on Assassinations concluded, with one third of the committee dissenting, that it believed ""that Kennedy was probably assassinated as a result of a conspiracy.
The Justice Department concluded ""that no persuasive evidence can be identified to support the theory of a conspiracy"" in the Kennedy assassination.
State funeral of John F Kennedy President Kennedy's family leaving his funeral at the United States Capitol Building A Requiem Mass was celebrated for Kennedy at the Cathedral of St.
Afterwards, Kennedy was interred in a small plot, 20 by 30 ft., in Arlington National Cemetery.
Over a period of three years , an estimated 16 million people visited his grave.
On March 14, 1967, Kennedy's remains were disinterred and moved only a few feet away to a permanent burial plot and memorial.
It was from this memorial that the graves of both Robert and Ted Kennedy were modeled.
The honor guard at Kennedy's graveside was the 37th Cadet Class of the Irish Army.
Kennedy was greatly impressed by the Irish Cadets on his last official visit to Ireland, so much so that Jacqueline Kennedy requested the Irish Army to be the honor guard at her husband's funeral.Jacqueline and their two deceased minor children were later interred in the same plot.
Kennedy family The Kennedy brothers: Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, Senator Ted Kennedy, and President John F Kennedy in 1963 The Kennedy family is one of the most established political families in the United States, having produced a president, three senators, three ambassadors, and multiple other representatives and politicians, both at the federal and state level.
While a Congressman, Kennedy embarked on a seven-week trip to India, Japan, Vietnam, and Israel in 1951, at which point he became close with his then 25-year-old brother Bobby, as well as his 27-year-old sister Pat.
Because they were several years apart in age, the brothers had previously seen little of each other.
This 25,000-mile trip was the first extended time they had spent together and resulted in their becoming best friends.
Bobby would eventually play a major role in his brother's career, serving as his brother's attorney general and presidential advisor.
Bobby would later run for president in 1968 before his assassination, while another Kennedy brother, Ted, ran for president in 1980.
Kennedy came in third in Gallup's List of Widely Admired People of the 20th century.
Wife and children The First Family in Hyannis Port, Massachusetts, 1962 Kennedy met his future wife, Jacqueline Lee ""Jackie"" Bouvier , when he was a congressman.
After suffering a miscarriage in 1955 and a stillbirth in 1956 , their daughter Caroline was born in 1957 and is the only surviving member of JFK's immediate family.
Popular image Yellow Oval Room portrait Kennedy and his wife were younger in comparison to the presidents and first ladies who preceded them, and both were popular in the media culture in ways more common to pop singers and movie stars than politicians, influencing fashion trends and becoming the subjects of numerous photo spreads in popular magazines.
In 1961 the Radio-Television News Directors Association presented Kennedy with its highest honor, the Paul White Award, in recognition of his open relationship with the media.Mrs.
Kennedy brought new art and furniture to the White House and directed its restoration.
On the White House lawn, the Kennedys established a swimming pool and tree house, while Caroline attended a preschool along with 10 other children inside the home.
Vaughn Meader's First Family comedy album, which parodied the president, the first lady, their family, and the administration, sold about four million copies.
Health Kennedy and Jackie leaving the hospital following his spinal surgery, December 1954 Despite a privileged youth, Kennedy was plagued by a series of childhood diseases, including whooping cough, chicken pox, measles, and ear infections.
These ailments compelled JFK to spend a considerable amount of time in bed convalescing.
Three months prior to his third birthday, in 1920, Kennedy came down with scarlet fever, a highly contagious and life-threatening disease, and was admitted to Boston City Hospital.Years after Kennedy's death, it was revealed that in September 1947, while Kennedy was 30 and in his first term in Congress, he was diagnosed by Sir Daniel Davis at The London Clinic with Addison's disease, a rare endocrine disorder.
Davis estimated that Kennedy would not live for another year, while Kennedy himself hoped he could live for an additional ten.
Kennedy also suffered from chronic and severe back pain, for which he had surgery.
Kennedy's condition may have had diplomatic repercussions, as he appears to have been taking a combination of drugs to treat severe back pain during the 1961 Vienna Summit with Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev.
The combination included hormones, animal organ cells, steroids, vitamins, enzymes, and amphetamines, and possible potential side effects included hyperactivity, hypertension, impaired judgment, nervousness, and mood swings.
Kennedy at one time was regularly seen by no fewer than three doctors, one of whom, Max Jacobson, was unknown to the other two, as his mode of treatment was controversial and used for the most severe bouts of back pain.Into late 1961, disagreements existed among Kennedy's doctors concerning his proper balance of medication and exercise.
Kennedy preferred the former because he was short on time and desired immediate relief.
During that time, the president's physician, George Burkley, did set up some gym equipment in the White House basement, where Kennedy did stretching exercises for his back three times a week.
Details of these and other medical problems were not publicly disclosed during Kennedy's lifetime.
The President's primary White House physician, George Burkley, realized that treatments by Jacobson and Travell, including the excessive use of steroids and amphetamines, were medically inappropriate, and took action to remove Kennedy from their care.In 2002, Robert Dallek wrote an extensive history of Kennedy's health.
Dallek was able to consult a collection of Kennedy-associated papers from the years 1955–1963, including X-rays and prescription records from the files of Dr.
According to Travell's records, during his presidential years Kennedy suffered from high fevers; stomach, colon, and prostate issues; abscesses; high cholesterol; and adrenal problems.
His sister Rose Marie ""Rosemary"" Kennedy was born in 1918 with intellectual disabilities and underwent a prefrontal lobotomy at age 23, leaving her incapacitated for the rest of her life until her death in 2005.
Another sister Kathleen Agnes ""Kick"" Kennedy died in a plane crash en route to France in 1948.
A son, Patrick Bouvier Kennedy, died two days after birth in August 1963.
Affairs and friendships Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, Marilyn Monroe, and John Kennedy talk during the president's May 19, 1962, early birthday party, where Monroe publicly serenaded Kennedy with ""Happy Birthday, Mr President"" Kennedy was single in the 1940s while having relationships with Danish journalist Inga Arvad and actress Gene Tierney.
During his time as a Senator, he had an affair with Gunilla von Post, who later wrote that the future President tried to end his marriage to be with her before having any children with his wife.
Kennedy was also reported to have had affairs with women such as Marilyn Monroe,Judith Campbell,Mary Pinchot Meyer,Marlene Dietrich,Mimi Alford, and his wife's press secretary, Pamela Turnure.The full extent of Kennedy's relationship with Monroe is not known, although it has been reported that they spent a weekend together in March 1962 while he was staying at Bing Crosby's house.
Furthermore, people at the White House switchboard noted that Monroe had called Kennedy during 1962.
J Edgar Hoover, the FBI director, received reports about Kennedy's indiscretions.
According to historian Michael Beschloss, in July 1963, Hoover reportedly informed Bobby Kennedy about the affair.
Bobby Kennedy reportedly took the matter sufficiently seriously to raise it with leading Democratic and Republican figures in Congress.
Former Secret Service agent Larry Newman also remembered ""morale problems"" that the president's indiscretions engendered within the Secret Service.Kennedy inspired affection and loyalty from the members of his team and his supporters.
Kennedy believed that his friendly relationship with members of the press would help protect him from public revelations about his sex life.Lem Billings was Kennedy's ""oldest and best friend"" from the time they attended Choate together until Kennedy's death.
Historical evaluations and legacy Effect of assassination The Kennedy half dollar was first issued in 1964 John F Kennedy statue outside the Massachusetts State House in Boston The John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum, in Boston Television was the primary source that kept people informed of the events that surrounded Kennedy's assassination.
On September 2, 1963, Kennedy helped inaugurate network television's first half-hour nightly evening newscast according to an interview with CBS Evening News anchor Walter Cronkite.Newspapers were kept as souvenirs rather than sources of updated information.
In this sense his assassination was the first major TV news event of its kind.
TV coverage united the nation, interpreting what went on, and creating memories of this space in time.
Many vividly remember where they were when they first learned the news that Kennedy was assassinated, as with the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, before it and the September 11 attacks after it.
Many people have also spoken of the shocking news, compounded by the pall of uncertainty about the identity of the assassin, the possible instigators, and the causes of the killing, as an end to innocence, and in retrospect, it has coalesced with other changes of the tumultuous decade of the 1960s, especially the Vietnam War.
Don't let it be forgot, that once there was a spot, for one brief, shining moment that was known as Camelot.
There'll be great presidents again ... but there will never be another Camelot.— Jacqueline Kennedy On television, this era was represented by Mary Tyler Moore's Dick Van Dyke Show character Laura Petrie, who would often dress like Kennedy's wife Jackie as well.
Presidency Official White House portrait of John F Kennedy, by Aaron Shikler The United States Special Forces had a special bond with Kennedy.
At the commemoration of the 25th anniversary of Kennedy's death, General Michael D Healy, the last commander of Special Forces in Vietnam, spoke at Arlington National Cemetery.
Kennedy was the first of six presidents to have served in the United States Navy, and one of the enduring legacies of his administration was the creation in 1961 of another special forces command, the Navy SEALs, which Kennedy enthusiastically supported.Kennedy's civil rights proposals led to the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
President Lyndon B Johnson, Kennedy's successor, took up the mantle and pushed the landmark Civil Rights Act through a bitterly divided Congress by invoking the slain president's memory.
This civil rights law ended what was known as the ""Solid South"" and certain provisions were modeled after the Civil Rights Act of 1875, signed into law by President Ulysses S Grant.Kennedy's continuation of Presidents Harry S Truman and Dwight D Eisenhower's policies of giving economic and military aid to South Vietnam left the door open for President Johnson's escalation of the conflict.
At the time of Kennedy's death, no final policy decision had been made as to Vietnam, leading historians, cabinet members, and writers to continue to disagree on whether the Vietnam conflict would have escalated to the point it did had he survived.
The Vietnam War contributed greatly to a decade of national difficulties, amid violent disappointment on the political landscape.
Many of Kennedy's speeches are considered iconic; and despite his relatively short term in office, and the lack of major legislative changes coming to fruition during his term, he is considered by many Americans to be in the upper echelon of presidents.
In 2018 The Times published an audio recreation of the ""watchmen on the walls of world freedom"" speech he was scheduled to deliver at the Dallas Trade Mart on November 22, 1963.
Kennedy also posthumously received the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 1963.
John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum on Columbia Point in Boston; opened in 1979 Statue of John F Kennedy by Isabel McIlvain on the grounds of the Massachusetts State House in Boston; dedicated on May 29, 1990.
Oral History Interview – JFK #1, 2/6/1967 | JFK Library"". www.jfklibrary.org.
Archived from the original on December 4, 2008. ^ a b O'Brien 2005, 645.
Online by Gerhard Peters and John T Woolley, The American Presidency Project.
John F Kennedy's Address Before the 18th General Assembly of the United Nations ^ Dallek 2003, 654.
Kennedy and Khrushchev ^ Taylor Branch, ""Kennedys and Hoover: How Their Battles Affected King"" Los Angeles Times ^ Larry Sabato, ""John F Kennedy's Final Days Reveal A Man Who Craved Excitement"" Forbes ^ Barnes 2007, 116.
American Politics and the African American Quest for Universal Freedom.
Coming of Age in the American Century, 1917-1956 Lynch, Grayston L Decision for Disaster: Betrayal at the Bay of Pigs Manchester, William.
A Life of John F Kennedy ; hostile biography Sabato, Larry J The Kennedy Half-Century: The Lasting Legacy of John F Kennedy Schlesinger, Arthur Jr.
A Portrait of Power Primary sources Goldzwig, Steven R and Dionisopoulos, George N., eds.
Life Portraits, November 5, 1999 Radio coverage of the assassination of President Kennedy as broadcast on WCCO-AM Radio and CBS RadioOther United States Congress.
Patrick Bouvier Kennedy Jack Schlossberg Rose Schlossberg Tatiana Schlossberg John Vernou Bouvier III Janet Lee Bouvier Lee Radziwill Hugh D Auchincloss Janet Auchincloss Rutherfurd Edith Ewing Bouvier Edith Bouvier Beale James T Lee John Vernou Bouvier Jr.
Bates Harrington Mavroules Torkildsen Tierney Moulton7th district Leonard Ward Sr.
Averell Harriman Roger Hilsman Thich Thien Hoa John F Kennedy Thich Tinh Khiet Victor H Krulak Henry Cabot Lodge Jr.
Jamal Khashoggi / Maria Ressa / Wa Lone / Kyaw Soe Oo / Staff of The Capital Greta Thunberg Joe Biden / Kamala Harris Elon Musk vtePulitzer Prize for Biography or Autobiography Margaret Louise Coit Merlo J Pusey David J Mays Charles A Lindbergh William S White Talbot Faulkner Hamlin John F Kennedy Douglas Southall Freeman, John Alexander Carroll and Mary Wells Ashworth Arthur Walworth Samuel Eliot Morison David Donald Leon Edel Walter Jackson Bate Ernest Samuels Arthur M Schlesinger Jr.
E Hoover Johnson Humphrey Unknown Soldier for the Vietnam War 2 Pepper Reagan Ford Inouye McCain Bush Cummings 3 Lewis Ginsburg 3,4 Dole Reid Young 3Lain in honorUS Capitol rotunda Chestnut and Gibson Parks Graham Sicknick Evans Lain in reposeGreat Hall of theUS Supreme Court Warren Marshall Burger Brennan Blackmun Rehnquist Scalia Stevens Ginsburg 4Bold Presidents and chief justices • ‡ Assassinated1 Died in 1825, exhumed and honored before reinterment • 2 Later identified as 1st.
