Fidel's Cuba in facts and figures"",""description"":""The beard, the cigars, the fatigues, the interminable speeches not to mention the plucky defiance in the face of the big bad bully from just across the water.
There's so much about Fidel Castro that we're going to miss when he's gone, and that moment, it seems, is not far off.
Scientist contaminated Fidel's favourite brand with botulinum toxin, but the cigars were never delivered.
Exploiting Castro's love of scuba diving, the CIA planned to pack a mollusc with explosives and paint it in bright colours to attract Castro's attention.
Plans to send Castro scuba-diving equipment contaminated with deadly fungi were never followed through.
Agents planned to spray Castro's TV studio with the drug in an attempt to induce a humiliating psychedelic episode live on air.
She aborted the mission when they dissolved, but Castro, who was aware of the plot, handed her his gun.
It is illegal to buy a computer without government approval, which is rarely granted to ordinary Cubans.
It remains in place 44 years later.Critics call it an illegal attempt to destabilise Cuba.
Washington says it will lift the embargo only if Havana embraces democratic reforms.FAMILY MEMBERS, NOTABLE* Angel Castro, father.
Only emerged from his older brother's shadow when Fidel fell ill last year.
Criticised Miami's exile community after thousands celebrated the announcement of her brother's failing health.
An Exile's Memoir of Cuba, which provoked a lawsuit from Castro's loyal sister, Juanita.
EXCEPTIONS:* According to reports in the 1990s, Rotterdam designer Merel Van't Wout persuaded Castro out of his fatigues and fitted him for several suits in dark blue, grey and dark green.
His father is a waiter but in 2003 was elected to Cuba's National Assembly.
A room in the town's museum is dedicated to Elian, and Castro was filmed at his seventh birthday party.
It is now on permanent display next to the Museum of the Revolution in Havana.GUANTANAMO BAYThe 45 sq miles of Cuban territory was ceded in perpetuity to the United States under a treaty signed by President Theodore Roosevelt in 1903.
SELECTED ENTRIES FROM ""TEN FACTS ABOUT GUANTANAMO"", A United States DEFENSE DEPARTMENT PRESS RELEASE PUBLISHED LAST SEPTEMBER:* More money is spent on meals for detainees than on the United States troops stationed there.
The library has 3,500 volumes available in 13 languages the most requested books are the Harry Potter series.GUEVARA, CHE* The iconic Argentinian revolutionary was introduced to Fidel by his brother Raul, in Mexico in 1955.
He joined Castro's movement to topple Cuban President Batista and became a key figure in the revolution.
Castro flatly denies reports in a United States newspaper that he has been treated for a potentially fatal brain disease.
Two hours into a speech being broadcast live from Havana, Castro faints at the podium.
Denying rumours of Castro's failing health, his doctor, Eugenio Selman Housein, says the Cuban leader could live at least to the age of 140.
At the end of a televised public speech, Castro trips and falls as he walks from the podium, shattering a kneecap and fracturing his right arm.
A leaked CIA report concludes that Castro is suffering from Parkinson's disease.
Castro rejects the diagnosis, which apparently is based on analysis of his television appearances.
A spokesman for Castro announces the provisional transfer of power to Castro's brother, Raul.
United States officials say they believe Castro has cancer of the colon, stomach or pancreas and is unlikely to survive through 2007.
Diplomatic sources close to Castro say he is refusing treatment for stomach cancer and could be dead by Christmas.
SELECTED EVIDENCE ON WHICH PRISONERS HAVE BEEN PROSECUTED AND IMPRISONED:* Publishing articles or giving interviews said to be critical of economic, social or human rights matters in Cuba.
He declares a naval blockade around Cuba as both sides prepare for war.
Khrushchev agrees to withdraw the missiles in return for a United States guarantee not to invade Cuba and the removal of Jupiter missiles from Turkey.
Kennedy agrees publicly to the first demand, and privately to the second.
PRESS FREEDOMThe bottom of the Reporters Without Borders 2006 Press Freedom Index:162.
North Korea* In 2003, 27 independent journalists were tried summarily and imprisoned in a wide-ranging crackdown on political dissent.
Cuba is one of the few countries in the world to deny the International Committee of the Red Cross access to its prisons.Castro himself served two years of a 15-year sentence handed down after his failed attempt to topple President Batista.
October 1953, while on trial for the failed rebel attack that launched the Cuban Revolution.
In 1962 Pope John XXIII excommunicated the Cuban leader.In 1998 Pope John Paul II became the first pontiff to visit Cuba.
In 2005 Castro visited Havana's cathedral to mourn the Pope's death.RAUL CASTROFidel's younger brother and acting President.
Less charismatic than his brother, Raul, 75, has a reputation as Fidel's enforcer.
He was a committed socialist before Fidel and played a key role in the revolution.
Before beginning his speech at the UN Millennium Summit, he draped a white handkerchief over the yellow light that would, after five minutes, signal the end of his allotted time.
He went on to speak for precisely five minutes, before removing the handkerchief and leaving the stage.
SUCCESSIONRaul Castro, Fidel's 75-year-old brother and acting President, is Fidel's designated successor, but his rule is expected to be transitional.THE POST-CASTRO CONTENDERS:* Felipe Perez Roque, Foreign minister.
Formerly Castro's representative at the UN and Fidel's chief advisor on United States relations.
Less well known outside Cuba but a key player in the country's economic affairs.
Instrumental in post-Soviet economic reforms and recently secured a subsidised supply of oil from Venezuela.
Ran Cuba's nuclear energy programme until his dismissal in the early 1990s.
Recently appointed as an adviser to his father, to whom he bears a striking resemblance.SUPPORTERS, HIGH PROFILE* George Galloway.
During a 1998 trip to Havana, the supermodel compared Castro with Nelson Mandela.
The retired Argentinian footballer has a tattoo of Castro on his left leg.
In 2005 he secured a rare interview with the Cuban leader on his talk show La Noche del 10.
The former Canadian Prime Minister forged a friendship with Castro in the 1970s.
In 2000 Castro had a rare encounter with a United States President when he and Jimmy Carter attended Trudeau's funeral in Montreal.
The acclaimed director praised Castro while promoting his film Comandante in 2003.
Cuba is a popular destination for American tourists but direct flights are only available with the permission of the United States government, which restricts travel to journalists, students and a few other groups.Cuba has a reputation as a destination for sex tourists.
In 2004 United States President Bush accused Castro of ""welcoming"" the trade.
In May last year George Galloway appeared on Cuban TV to defend Castro.
Some claim the true figure is in fact much higher, pointing to ""the Comandante's reserves"", billions of dollars in real estate, yachts and other assets in Europe, Latin America and Asia.YANK TANKSCuba has been described as the largest American car museum in the world.An estimated one-sixth of Cuba's 500,000 cars were imported from the United States in the 1950s.
Fidel's Cuba in facts and figures The Castropedia: Fidel's Cuba in facts and figuresThe beard, the cigars, the fatigues, the interminable speeches not to mention the plucky defiance in the face of the big bad bully from just across the water.
