After listening to his speech, I decided it was time for me to return the favor and make a few overdue comments of my own.Fidel Castro, the despot who came very close to starting a nuclear war in 1962 between the United States and the Soviet Union, made several public appearances this week to predict imminent nuclear war.
Those Yankees are certainly powerful, Castro explained, but also a bit naïve and submissive.
We ended up getting exactly what we'd wanted all along,"" Nikita Khrushchev later wrote in his memoirs, ""security for Fidel Castro’s regime and American missiles removed from Turkey.
Kennedy pulled defeat out of the jaws of victory,” Nixon wrote about the Bay of Pigs and Missile Crisis.
For us, war was unthinkable.The Crisis “resolution” gave Castro a new status, protection assured by the two most powerful countries on earth.The Missile crisis “solution” also pulled the rug out from under Cuba's freedom fighters.
The Coast Guard in Florida got 12 new boats and seven new planes to make sure Castro and his Soviet patrons remained virtually unmolested as they consolidated Stalinism 90 miles from United States shores.
It is a shame he overlooked our neighbor just a little south of Key West.
As for Castro’s prediction of nuclear war, he also predicted Cuba would be shining example of progress and prosperity under his brand of socialism.
GaryIt wasn't until I saw the Robert McNamara documentary ""Fog of War"" that I really grasped how close the world came to nuclear war during the missile crisis.
For me, it also made understand how important it was that no other country in Latin America be allowed go communist.
For me, the real blame for Cuba lies with whoever is responsible for allowing Castro to come to power and for those who failed to remove him in the early days of the regime.
For stability sakes non intervention in Cuba was probably wise even if it was hard to stumoch.
Incidentally, isn't it amazing how Castro manages to blame the worlds problems on Israel.
In my early days I worked closely some some people who had been involved in the Cuban operation and there was a lot of deep anger, directed at everyone involved.
So much that it could easily be why I have not spent much time on it these days.You are right.
You are also right that unless things change the best course is to watch and let the whole thing play itself out as it will inevitably do.
