This kept the European powers out of South America, while the commercial interests of the United States increased, as did incidents of American interventions to install pliant governments.
It was responsible for the invasion of Honduras in 1911, and in a classic case of nexus between the American government and its corporate sector, engineered the invasion of Guatemala and the overthrow of its reformist President Arbenz in 1954.
This was done in collaboration with the State Department, headed by John Foster Dulles, and the CIA, headed by Allen Foster Dulles.
Both the brothers had served as legal advisors to the United Fruit Company.
Ernesto “Che” Guevara was in Guatemala at the time, and was forced to flee with other Arbenz supporters to Mexico.
The Guatemalan experience was a turning point in Che’s life, for he wrote to his mother that independence for South America could only be achieved through revolution and not reform, and joined Castro’s band of revolutionaries in Mexico.
This measure affected American interests directly, as concerns like the United Fruit Company owned large holdings.
But even before this measure, the United States National Security Council had met to discuss measures for regime change in Cuba.
Castro accepted an invitation from the American Association of Newspaper Editors.
He had come to meet the people rather than the government, and won them over.
His meeting with Vice President Nixon was not a great success, but he lunched at the National Press Club and gave an interview on television in the, “Meet the Press”, re-iterating each time that the Platt Amendment , inserted into the constitution of Cuba in 1902, was not acceptable.
Cuban-Soviet rapprochement had begun in early 1960, and the United States feared that Castro was joining the communist bloc.
On March 4, 1960, two explosions blew up the French cargo ship La Coubre, carrying munitions bought by Cuba from Belgium against American opposition.
The same month President Eisenhower ordered the CIA to launch a series of anti-Castro operations.
Castro feared a repeat in Cuba of the 1954 invasion of mercenaries into Guatemala.
By June 1960 the trade war between Cuba and the United States had escalated, and in October the United States imposed an embargo on Cuba.
From September 1960 onwards there were a number of assassination attempts on the life of Castro.
Even the mafia was contracted for that purpose, for they had lost millions of dollars of business in casinos, hotels, prostitution and drugs as a result of the revolution.
Fidel Castro with Nikita Khrushchev The USA finally broke diplomatic relations with Cuba on January 3, 1961, and on April 15 eight B-26 bombers took off from Nicaragua to bomb Cuban airports and destroy its miniscule air force.
Two days later the invasion began with the landing of 1400 trained Cuban emigres at the Bay of Pigs, using some ships supplied by the United Fruit Company.
When the Cuban air force sank two cargo ships, which had transported these men, the rest of the ships retreated.
The Soviets warned Castro in 1962 that the United States was planning another invasion, and suggested that he deploy defensive strategic weapons in Cuba.
While Khrushchev, the Soviet President, denied to Kennedy that they had any plans to deploy strategic weapons in Cuba, a U2 plane photographed a missile base being built.
Kennedy announced on October 22, that he was going to put a naval blockade around Cuba.
The world waited for the outbreak of a nuclear war with bated breath as the Soviet ships, escorted by submarines, came in contact with the United States warships on October 24.
At the last minute wisdom prevailed, and Khrushchev ordered the withdrawal of Soviet navy.
Two days later he proposed to Kennedy the withdrawal of missiles in exchange for a commitment that the United States would not invade Cuba, and would dismantle its missiles in Turkey.
CIENFUEGOS AND TRINIDADCUBA VI: REVOLUTIONARY SANTIAGO AND IDYLLIC VINALES .push; .push; As the new year begins, let us also start anew.
I’m delighted to extend, on behalf of the Embassy of the People’s Republic of China in the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and in my own name, new year’s greeting and sincere wishes to YOULIN magazine’s staff and readers.
Only with courage can we live to the fullest.20 was an extraordinary year.
Confronted by the COVID-19 pandemic, China and Pakistan supported each other and took on the challenge in solidarity.
The China Pakistan Economic Corridor projects advanced steadily in difficult times, become a standard-bearer project of the Belt and Road Initiative in balancing pandemic prevention and project achievement.
The handling capacity of the Gwadar Port has continued to rise and Afghanistan transit trade through the port has officially been launched.
The Karakoram Highway Phase II upgrade project is fully open to traffic.
A batch of green and clean energy projects, such as the Kohala and Azad Pattan hydropower plants have been substantially promoted.
The China-Pakistan Community of Shared Future has become closer and closer.
Reviewing the past and looking to the future, we are confident to write a brilliant new chapter.
Mohammad Ali Jinnah, the founding father of Pakistan said, “We are going through fire.
Yes, Pakistan’s best days are ahead, China will stand with Pakistan firmly all the way.
YOULIN magazine is dedicated to promoting cultural exchanges between China and Pakistan and is a window for Pakistani friends to learn about China, especially the Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region.
It is hoped that with the joint efforts of China and Pakistan, YOULIN can listen more to the voices of readers in China and Pakistan, better play its role as a bridge to promote more effectively people-to-people bond.
Last but not least, I would like to wish all the staff and readers of YOULIN a warm and prosper year in 2021.
