The historian Marc Trachtenberg has argued that the treaty was the capstone of the “constructed peace” he believes had been in the making since the onset of the Cold War and subsequently ensured peace for the remainder of the Cold War and even beyond.
Other authors have regarded the treaty as a Berlin settlement in disguise and therefore a decisive step toward the solution of the German question.
John Van Oudenaren depicts the LTBT as having “dramatically” improved the prospects for the later signing of the Nonproliferation Treaty—the only other arms control treaty of the Cold War era that has retained importance afterward.
The treaty may have helped “détente” to become a household word by the end of 1963, but the East-West conºict kept dragging on for another quarter of a century.
The nuclear standoff that was a hallmark of the Cold War befuddled the relationship between military power and politics.
Common sense suggests that an arms race is a symptom rather than the cause of political rivalry, but the nuclear arms race had its own momentum that deªed common sense.
Arms control seemed to be conducive to détente, but in retrospect it appears 1.
The story of the LTBT is a case study of interaction between arms control and détente.
The negotiations that led to the LTBT are among the most extensively documented episodes of the Cold War.
Yet the very abundance of sources, overwhelmingly of Western origin, has tended to hide the forest behind the trees, making it difªcult to relate details to the larger picture.
This article attempts to clarify that picture by supplementing United States and British sources with new evidence from the Soviet side.
The article shows that the more important political obstacles were on the Soviet rather than the American side.
The article illustrates how the weakness of Nikita Khrushchev in the aftermath of the Cuban missile crisis served as an impediment rather than incentive to negotiating.
The article highlights the reasons for his indecision in assigning the treaty the priority it deserved as well as the reasons for his eventual embrace of the concept of a limited treaty in 2.
Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars, Washington, DC, 22 October 2002.
New sources from Eastern Europe reveal the Soviet Union’s inability as well as unwillingness to use the treaty as the starting point toward a deeper détente.
Not only had tests fouled the atmosphere, but they had also been unexpectedly disruptive.
In late 1961 the Soviet Union had exploded a hydrogen bomb so powerful that it could not be of any conceivable military use and instead merely created unanticipated environmental havoc.
U.S.-Soviet-British negotiations on the cessation of nuclear testing had been held on and off since 1958 but were an exercise in exasperating futility.
The respective governments were reluctant to make the necessary concessions to reach an agreement.
They believed they had higher priorities, particularly the German question, which was aggravated by the unresolved Berlin crisis.
Moreover, the weapons designers and armament bureaucracies on both sides had a vested interest in keeping their programs going and growing, although signiªcant minorities of scientists in both the United States and the Soviet Union had come to believe that the programs had already gone too far.
The weaker of the two superpowers, the Soviet Union, insisted that it would accept only a comprehensive ban that would impede further development of nuclear weapons, thereby reducing the value of America’s superior nuclear arsenal while preserving the value of the larger Soviet conventional forces—traditionally the bedrock of the USSR’s military security.
The United States, for its part, saw the need for continued testing to keep its nuclear arsenal up to date as an indispensable deterrent of what it perceived as a perennial threat of Soviet aggression.
The test ban negotiations were closely connected with the similarly sluggish nonproliferation talks aimed at preventing the spread of nuclear weapons to additional countries, particularly West Germany and China.
By contrast, China—as France before—was pursuing the acquisition of its own nuclear weapons as an independent safeguard of its security as well as a putative attribute of great-power status.
Chinese leaders opposed anything that would hamper the attainment of this goal.
The Soviet Union’s numerous disarmament initiatives suffered from a lack of credibility.
Moscow’s September 1962 proposal for general and complete disarmament impressed some Western experts as the “most feasible” to date.
Yet it could have hardly been meant seriously at a time when Khrushchev was surreptitiously introducing nuclear missiles into Cuba to confront the United States with an unprecedented threat to its security.
Nor was the subsequent exposure of this secret deployment—a disclosure that provoked the Cuban missile crisis—reassuring about Soviet intentions.
Conversely, the peaceful resolution of the crisis after both sides had turned away from the brink has retrospectively been judged as having created the best conditions for détente since the onset of the Cold War.
But this was not self-evident at the time, when the consequences of the crisis seemed to point in the opposite direction.
Regardless of the United States posture, Khrushchev for his own internal reasons could not easily afford to be accommodating to the West.
The European allies were willing to credit President John F Kennedy for having managed the crisis wisely, but they were less willing to excuse him for having allowed it to develop in the ªrst place and for having threatened to embroil them in a war not of their making.
French President Charles de Gaulle felt conªrmed in his view that the United States “nuclear umbrella” was full of holes and needed to be replaced by France’s own impermeable shield.
As Kennedy’s “grand design” for Europe was faltering, a confrontation between Washington and London was looming because of the approaching climax of the “Skybolt” controversy, which also involved a deterrent to Soviet attack.
Regardless of how improbable such an attack may have become, the two countries kept quarreling about the Kennedy administration’s failure to provide Skybolt missiles, originally intended to prolong the life span of Britain’s aging nuclear bombers, and its offer to transfer more advanced, submarine-based Polaris missiles that would make the bombers obsolete.
Novotný, speech to the Czechoslovak party central committee, 2 November 1962, Ceský Národní Archiv, Archiv Ústredního výboru Komunistické strany Ceskoslovenska, 01/98/85.
The European allies, while favoring détente in principle, were nervous about a superpower deal over their heads.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff were dead set against a nuclear test ban, arguing that it would compromise the United States strategic deterrent.
Among Washington’s major allies, only the British favored the ban, urging United States concessions to make it possible.
The issue had accidentally gained urgency at the peak of the Cuban missile crisis.
On 28 October, a United States reconnaissance plane strayed into Soviet air space while on a mission monitoring nuclear tests in the Far East.
Khrushchev immediately conveyed his alarm to Kennedy, who promptly apologized—all in one day.
He wanted to resist anything that might pierce the secrecy that Soviet rulers deemed indispensable to protect their closed society along with their arbitrary power.
Khrushchev also declared that he would not agree to a partial ban that would allow the United States to continue testing underground.
He claimed that “we do not carry on underground tests, we did it but once and we are not going to do it anymore,” and he challenged Washington to accept a comprehensive ban.
Unlike his American adversaries, Khrushchev approached the ban as a political rather than technical issue.
Dean hinted to Soviet First Deputy Foreign Minister Vasilii V Kuznetsov that 15.
For Khrushchev, the Cuban missile crisis did not end with his accession to the United States demand for the removal of Soviet medium-range missiles from the island.
He still had to cope with the furious Cuban leader, Fidel Castro, who chafed at the humiliation and sought to assert control of the additional Soviet tactical missiles that had escaped the Americans’ attention.
If these deadly weapons, whose only purpose was use in combat, had come to light at the time, the United States government would have interpreted their deployment as evidence of Soviet treachery, nipping in the bud any chance of détente.
Moscow’s further diplomatic initiatives had to await the elimination of this potentially embarrassing nuclear secret in Cuba.
The Deadlock On 22 November 1962, Khrushchev’s troubleshooter in Havana, Anastas Mikoyan, reestablished Moscow’s control over its remaining missiles and arranged for their shipment home by the end of the year.
Only at this point did Khrushchev begin to specify the conditions under which the Soviet Union would be willing to sign a test ban agreement.
In fact, the Berlin question had largely been resolved even before the test ban treaty became topical.
Khrushchev explained to Ulbricht—although he chose not to say as much publicly—that the intended goal of a separate treaty had already been accomplished through the building of the Berlin Wall.
The Wall provided a de facto solution to the Berlin question, though not to the larger German question, prior to the test ban treaty and independent of it.
Before heading back to Moscow from Havana, Mikoyan stopped in Washington, DC and met with Kennedy at the White House, but made no mention of either Berlin or the test ban.
Instead, Mikoyan raised the subject of a non-aggression treaty between NATO and the Warsaw Pact— Khrushchev’s pet project since 1955.22 Non-aggression treaties ªgured prominently in the Soviet diplomatic repertory.
It may seem puzzling that the hardnosed Kremlin leaders—as other Communist dictators at other times— craved a paper promise from their presumably untrustworthy capitalist foes.
What they were really craving was to offset their deªcit of legitimacy by being recognized as equals.
By duplicating the commitments that all major countries had already assumed by subscribing to the United Nations Charter, the pact might cast doubt on the strength of those commitments.
More to the point, Western governments suspected a Soviet ploy to convince NATO member-states that the alliance was no longer needed.
The Soviet maneuvering made NATO’s experts conclude that Moscow was not ready for détente.
The Soviet leader then informed Kennedy that he would go along with an annual quota of two to four inspections, previously hinted at by Dean and Wiesner during similar such conversations.
But the president, under pressure from opponents of the ban, replied that eight to ten inspections would be needed, thus raising technical impediments to an agreement.
It was certainly unwise of Kennedy to up the ante before negotiations had even started and thereby give Khrushchev a pretext to charge that the United States had been acting in bad faith.
Moreover, because other means of veriªcation were becoming available, the difference in the number of inspections was negligible.
In any case, no number of inspections could guarantee compliance unless the Soviet Union regarded the cessation of testing as being in its interest—something that remained an undecided question for the country’s leaders, as did that of whether seeking accommodation with the capitalist adversaries would be better than trying to exploit disputes among them.
The resumption of the test ban negotiations coincided with dramatic developments within NATO that affected the “correlation of forces”—the traditional guiding formula of Soviet foreign policy.
Moscow chose to revive its non-aggression proposal at a time when Kennedy was facing difªcult discussions with Macmillan at Nassau about the Skybolt issue.
By the end of December, however, the successful outcome of the Nassau meeting, after the United States offered the Polaris missiles not only to the British but also to the French, defused the NATO crisis and created opportunities to resolve differences with both of these key allies.
Moscow’s relations with the United States took a turn for the better as the two governments announced publicly that their dispute over Cuba was resolved.
On a visit to the White House, Kuznetsov expatiated on the Soviet Union’s 24.
As the Soviet media rejoiced with Schadenfreude, Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko displayed to United States Ambassador Foy Kohler his usual sour face, brooding thoroughly pessimistic about the prospects of the talks.
Gromyko had reason to be pessimistic, knowing that his own government the next day was to make public, without consultation with Washington, the secret correspondence between Khrushchev and Kennedy regarding the test ban.
Kuznetsov delivered a “long, propagandistic, and inºexible speech” putting forth an even less acceptable draft of a NATO–Warsaw Pact non-aggression pact intended to complement the test ban.
Because this would amount to the GDR’s international recognition, which both Bonn and Washington were known to rule out in principle, the test ban was doubly deadlocked by being linked to the intractable German question as well as the inspection issue.
Commenting on the implications for détente, Rusk observed that a pact between the two military groupings should be a crowning achievement of détente rather than the ªrst step toward it.
Neither superpower regarded the test ban treaty as a high enough priority to separate it from other military and political issues.
For the United States, the military balance was central and was the reason for insisting so strenuously on inspections, which Moscow could not afford for political reasons.
For the Soviet Union, the political balance was more crucial, spurring attempts by Soviet ofªcials to extract concessions from the West on the test ban issue that would be politically beneªcial to the East.
Yet Sergei describes his father as acting in February 1963 with his customary vigor in clashing with military commanders during a Defense Council meeting at the army base of Fili.
Marshal Matvei Zakharov, the chief of the Soviet General Staff, apparently fared no better.
Khrushchev must have sent chills down the generals’ spines by suggesting, as he had before to the CPSU Presidium, that a small professional army, supported by territorial militia, was all that the country might need.
Khrushchev, for all his dangerous antics and other shortcomings, was ahead of his time in deprecating the military utility of nuclear weapons.
Whatever illusions he may have previously entertained on this matter had been dispelled by the embarrassment such weapons had caused him in Cuba.
Unlike Kennedy, who was in thrall to the fanciful theories of United States “defense intellectuals” about the increasingly complex nuclear postures required to deter the Soviet Union from attacking, Khrushchev was more open to the simple but sound view that the mere possession of nuclear weapons sufªced as a deterrent.
Remarks by Khrushchev for meeting of the CPSU Presidium, 8 December 1959, Rossiiskii Gosudarstvennyi Arkhiv Noveishei Istorii, Fond 2, Opis’ 1, Delo 416, Listy 3–11.
Kremlinologists identiªed intra-party opposition animated by the CPSU Presidium member Frol Kozlov.
Accordingly, the situation called for negotiations without a rigid agenda to ªnd common ground rather than searching in vain for a breakthrough on matters on which agreement was most difªcult, such as disarmament or the Berlin question.
Whatever the doubtful similarity of the situation in 1963 to that of a decade earlier after Stalin’s death, contradictory signs indicated that disagreements existed at the highest levels in Moscow and that Khrushchev was ªnding it difªcult to make up his mind.
On the one hand, the secret Soviet decree of 30 March, which provided for mass production of intercontinental ballistic missiles, contradicted Khrushchev’s reasoning at the recent Defense Council meeting, thus signaling the strength of the opposition he was facing.
On the other hand, the insulting message he sent to Kennedy through Ambassador Anatolii Dobrynin a few days later was vintage Khrushchev.
Echoing the rumblings around him, the Soviet leader ruminated about America’s disrespect for his country’s status as a great power.
At the same time, Kennedy and Macmillan chose to respond with restraint to Khrushchev’s outburst.
In accordance with the United States State Department analysis, the two Western leaders focused on the test ban treaty while ignoring the Berlin question.
They assumed that Moscow had already acquiesced in the status quo of Berlin—an assumption now vindicated by evidence from the archives.
After receiving the Kennedy-Macmillan message from the United States and British ambassadors on 24 April, Khrushchev nevertheless told the envoys that Germany was the key to everything and that the test ban treaty no longer mattered.
The next day he secretly proposed to the CPSU Presidium that the two sides move ahead with the treaty but limit it to tests in the atmosphere, outer space, and under water—not the comprehensive ban he had been insisting on thus far.
To justify this reversal, he referred to the view of unnamed “military comrades” that atmospheric testing was no longer necessary for defense purposes.
He saw continued utility of underground explosions for peaceful purposes.
Khrushchev’s argumentation on this point, however, bore close resemblance not to anything advocated by the military but to the position laid out in a memorandum several months earlier by a leading Soviet nuclear scientist, Viktor Adamskii.
Although there is no evidence that Khrushchev actually read the memorandum, the idea of a limited ban had been circulating for some time, initially in the West.
Now Khrushchev decided to endorse the idea as not only mutually beneªcial but also good for public relations.
He continued, however, to keep this important decision secret, subject to tactical considerations and proper timing.
The evidence of Khrushchev’s reversal in April 1963 changes the prevailing view of how the treaty became possible.
In reality, Khrushchev had already found the basis for the ban and separated it from political issues.
His effort to link it again with the elusive German settlement, described as the key to détente, was a delaying maneuver at a time when he was increasingly preoccupied with cracks in the unity of the Communist camp—cracks that were much more serious than outsiders realized.
In April 1963, a senior CPSU ofªcial, Yurii Andropov, traveled to Bucharest on an urgent mission to placate Romanian leaders, who were upset about Khrushchev’s plan for an international “division of labor” within the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance , the Soviet bloc’s agency for economic cooperation.
Andropov’s proposal for a summit to settle the disagreements elicited no more than a noncommittal Romanian response.
Meanwhile another difªcult ally, Fidel Castro, came to the Soviet Union at the end of April for a month-long stay.
The visit started inauspiciously as Castro demanded massive economic aid and security guarantees for Cuba, including admission into the Warsaw Pact.
As the verbal sniping between Beijing and Moscow went from bad to worse, Khrushchev placed his remaining hopes on inviting China’s top leaders for a brainstorming session in the Soviet capital.
He proposed 15 May as the starting date, but the Chinese were in no hurry to accept the invitation.
Khrushchev egged them on by moving closer to the test ban treaty that, much like the proposed nuclear nonproliferation treaty, was intended in part to counter China’s ambition to become an independent nuclear power.
On 8 June, a day after the upbeat meeting of the CPSU Presidium, Khrushchev notiªed Kennedy of the Soviet Union’s readiness to resume the test ban talks without indicating his own willingness to accept a limited treaty, as proposed by the West.
Instead, Khrushchev kept fulminating against inspections and lecturing the president about the need to treat the Soviet Union as an equal.
The president speciªed his preference for a limited rather than comprehensive treaty and went out of his way to proclaim respect for the Soviet Union as an equal partner.
Kennedy’s speech, by all accounts, was well received in Moscow, but no change in Soviet policy ensued for another three weeks.
During the interval, the Sino-Soviet split reached the point of no return.
Four days after Kennedy spoke, Beijing’s blistering 25-point denunciation of Khrushchev’s “revisionist” sins reached the Soviet capital, and copies were sent to the “fraternal” parties.
Not only the pro-Chinese Albanians but also the ostensibly uncommitted Romanians promptly published a summary of the inºammatory document.
The Chinese had taken Romania’s side in the intra-CMEA dispute, posing as a champion of national sovereignty against Soviet encroachments.
On 24 June, Khrushchev rushed to Bucharest to discard his ill-conceived plan for 40.
Although Khrushchev no longer linked the test ban with the German settlement, he revived his demand for a non-aggression pact as the supposedly necessary complement to the treaty.
He harped on this specious linkage in a conversation with the visiting former secretary general of NATO, Paul-Henri Spaak.
What ªnally cleared the way for the LTBT was the collapse of the SinoSoviet talks held in Moscow from 5 to 20 July.
Mao’s emissary, Deng Xiaoping, lambasted Soviet leaders for assorted “revisionist” treachery and singled out for special condemnation their readiness to pursue disarmament agreements with the American enemy.
In anticipation of the collapse, Pravda had disclosed on 15 July the full text of the 25-point Chinese statement along with a Soviet rebuttal, and Khrushchev had summoned the Warsaw Pact allies for an urgent meeting.
A day later, the test ban negotiations resumed in Moscow and swiftly moved toward conclusion.
The treaty was signed on 25 July, just as the leaders of the Warsaw Pact were convening in the Soviet capital.
The East-bloc gathering, its agenda hidden from contemporaries, was not about the treaty, which all the participants welcomed, but about China.
The conferees included Yumjaagiyn Tsedenbal, the party chief of neighboring Mongolia, an observer state within the Warsaw Pact.
Attesting to the recent worrisome turn in Sino-Soviet relations, Tsedenbal had applied for his country’s admission as a full-ºedged ally, and Khrushchev, in contrast to his 42.
The danger of a confrontation with Beijing over the LTBT made the difference.
The Romanians did not want to say yes or no but highlighted the likely adverse consequences of Mongolian membership.
In a spirited memorandum, Polish Foreign Minister Adam Rapacki argued that Mongolia’s admission to the alliance would bring no advantages but only risks while giving Beijing an excuse to charge that the USSR was militarizing the thus far mainly ideological conºict.
Because any alteration of the Warsaw Pact’s terms would require unanimous consent from the existing members—something that Rapacki broadly hinted could not be taken for granted—he concluded that the unity of the alliance was at risk.
It is unclear whether the East European allies had communicated their objections to Moscow before the Soviet Union itself, after rethinking the matter, decided to withdraw its support of Mongolia’s application, ending further consideration of it.
Soviet ofªcials justiªed the reversal to the conference by suggesting that, in view of the reassuring impact of the test ban treaty, the expansion of the alliance would send the wrong signal—to the West rather than to China.
The promise of an uncertain détente with Washington took precedence over the certain deterioration of relations with Beijing.
Although the ªnal version was much less bold, it at least expressed hope that 45.
In the meantime, Moscow could assess the repercussions of the treaty, particularly the reactions of the two recalcitrant outsiders, China and France.
The signatories could also decide whether they should proceed from the limited treaty to a comprehensive ban.
He did not mean a comprehensive treaty, nor did he want to entertain Harriman’s worthwhile proposal to cut the production of ªssionable materials and start dismantling nuclear weapons.
Instead, the Soviet leader returned to his vintage calls for a non-aggression pact and a German settlement.
Back in Washington, he spoke in favor of signing the pact as well as recognizing the GDR and the Oder-Neisse Line as Germany’s eastern border, as Moscow desired.
Such farreaching concessions presupposed that the Soviet Union was ªrmly committed to détente.
The majority opinion in Washington was skeptical about the ªrmness of that commitment.
It is extremely important that we so comport ourselves with our Allies to avoid any semblance of impression that we have incurred any indirect obligation with the Soviets in regard to non-aggression arrangements.
We should also avoid any appearance of indecent or anxious haste in an attempt to move forward in the entire ªeld of relations with the Soviet Union.
Soviet policy is too realistic and based upon long-range considerations for that.
His contention that the test ban was no unilateral Soviet concession conformed to Khrushchev’s own reasoning at the CPSU Presidium meeting in April.
What was missing from the analysis, however, was any suggestion that making the limited ban comprehensive would be worth trying on its own merits.
Once the political obstacles to the partial treaty had been removed, the remaining technical impediments to its completion were rendered more manageable as the divisive issue of inspections was losing its relevance.
Rather than moving in that direction, both sides preferred scrutinizing each other’s “good faith” in détente.
He found Khrushchev ill-prepared, repeating standard Soviet positions, and obviously unwilling to address the “difªcult issues” he had been saying should be addressed, particularly Germany.
United States ofªcials took the sensible view that consolidation of the recent gains was more important than moving ahead fast.
Rusk believed that, instead of a “comprehensive discussion . . . looking toward some negotiated détente across the board,” they should explore speciªc issues.
He meant, for example, issues “in the surprise attack ªeld,” which had become particularly topical now that the National Security Council had reached the sobering conclusion that a preemptive strike was no longer an option for the United States.
Neither was such a strike feasible for the Soviet Union, thus making the reduction of the increasingly superºuous nuclear weaponry all the more imperative, regardless of the unresolved political problems that underlay the lack of trust between the superpowers.
The UN General Assembly, too, favored steps toward making the limited test ban comprehensive, but found the superpowers unresponsive.
Once the LTBT came into effect, the superpowers’ interest shifted to the related but more complex problem of nonproliferation.
Because this issue involved not only the nuclear haves but also the have-nots, it was more politically charged than the test ban and hence more intractable.
The negotiation and signing of the Nonproliferation Treaty took another ªve years.
The hurdles to the NPT included not only China’s pursuit of the bomb but also the MLF, and with it the German question.
The Soviet Union evaded Washington’s overtures about possible joint action to check Beijing’s nuclear ambitions and remained publicly hostile toward the MLF as well.
Unbeknownst to Rusk, Khrushchev at that very time began to feel out Moscow’s East European allies about the possibility of a qualiªed acceptance of the MLF—perhaps in return for a qualiªed acceptance of East Germany.
On 2 October the Soviet Foreign Ministry informed the Polish leader Wladyslaw Gomulka that the Soviet Union would not insist on including a prohibition of joint nuclear forces in a nonproliferation agreement that was to be negotiated with the United States.
Gomulka was appalled, and he wrote to Khrushchev that tolerating Bonn’s access to nuclear weapons in any form would not only violate the spirit of the test ban treaty but also threaten Poland’s security and undermine the Warsaw Pact, not to mention Soviet prestige.
The decline of Moscow’s standing among the previously docile Eastern European Communists became evident when Gomulka added the unsolicited advice that if the MLF were to come into effect, the Soviet Union should create a joint nuclear force with China.
Khrushchev appeared genuinely shaken by this sudden reminder of the fragility of power, including his own.
Kennedy’s successor, Lyndon B Johnson, tried to maintain the link by promptly agreeing to create a conªdential channel to Khrushchev through Dobrynin.
An upbeat Rusk sensed that the United States now had a “hunting license for means to develop a détente.
By the end of 1963, détente was in the air far more so than it had been in the wake of the test ban treaty or ever before.
Soviet ofªcials were prepared to consider the none-too-forthcoming December 1963 communiqué of the North Atlantic Council as an invitation to promote détente.
As 1964 began, the Soviet Union announced a 4. percent cut of its defense budget, to which Washington responded with a 2 percent cut of its own budget and a 25 percent reduction in the procurement of enriched uranium needed for manufacturing nuclear weapons.
Khrushchev reciprocated by stopping the construction of two new plutonium plants that served the same purpose.
The Atlantic Powers and the Reorganization of Western Europe, 1955–1963 , 123; 23 Mastny If the budding détente did not bloom, this was for reasons independent of the lost momentum of the test ban treaty.
His overthrow in October 1964 by leaders committed to reversing his innovations put the brakes on détente for the remainder of the decade.
The resurgence of détente in the 1970s, independent of arms control, did not build on the foundations of 1963 but on what came to be considered common values and political interests.
The Missed Opportunity The 1963 détente went further than any of its predecessors but not far enough.
United States ofªcials’ inclination to think of the Cold War in terms of a potential military confrontation rather than the actual political competition was an obstacle, though not one that varied.
In that sense, the more important obstacles were on the Soviet side, including those posed by such extraneous issues as relations with Cuba and China and political inªghting in the Kremlin.
In Khrushchev’s scheme of things—which suffered from improvisation and inconsistency—the test ban treaty was not a goal in itself but a way toward achieving more important political objectives.
The nuclear standoff over Cuba did not make him more willing to conclude the treaty, but the humiliation he had suffered increased his need for a success.
Hence he tried to link the LTBT to progress toward a settlement in Germany and accommodation between the alliances.
Once the treaty was signed, however, its value as a tool for achieving political goals, which had never been high for the United States, diminished for the Soviet Union, as well.
At issue in the treaty’s follow-up was not making détente permanent, much less ending the Cold War.
The Berlin question had already been effectively solved by Soviet acquiescence in the continued division of the city, though without a solution to the larger German question.
Nothing happened to satisfy either the West’s demand for guaranteed access to Berlin or Moscow’s demand for the recognition of the GDR—the two points that facilitated the emergence of détente in the early 1970s.
In 1963 the systemic crisis that eventually resulted in the demise of the Soviet bloc and, with it, the end of the Cold War was still nowhere in sight.
It is intriguing, if pointless, to speculate whether the end would have come earlier if the 1968 SovietCzechoslovak crisis had occurred while Khrushchev was still in power.
The reason he was no longer in power is that the system was still strong enough to block him.
No opportunity for détente, much less for the Cold War’s termination, was therefore missed.
What was missed was a unique opportunity for making the limited ban complete.
For a brief period, the eclipse of the inspection issue, which had previously been the main stumbling block, would have made it easier for both superpowers to proceed toward a total ban.
Had this goal received the priority it deserved in the immediate aftermath of the LTBT, a comprehensive treaty could have been signed before further testing allowed for technological advances that would fuel the arms race and make its reversal more difªcult.
This missed opportunity not only prolonged the Cold War but also multiplied the stockpile of useless nuclear weaponry that remains its most deplorable legacy.
