He promised to get America moving again Kennedy had a well-organized campaign and was handsome and charismatic.
The incident captured the attention of the African-American community, whose votes JFK would carry in key states.
Nixon dominated the west, while Kennedy won the south and the east coast.
Of all of his elite advisors who filled Kennedy\u2019s inner circle, he relied most on his 35-year-old brother Robert, whom he appointed attorney general.
In March 1960, Eisenhower gave the CIA permission to secretly train Cuban exiles for an invasion of Cuba.
It turned out to be a disaster when in April, 1961, 1,200 Cuban exiles met 25,000 Cuban troops backed by Soviet tanks and were soundly defeated.
Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev promised to defend Cuba with Soviet weapons.
Finally, Khrushchev agreed to remove the nuclear weapons from Cuba in exchange for a United States promise NOT to invade Cuba.
Just after midnight on August 13, 1961 the Soviets began construction of a 90-mile wall separating East and West Berlin.
An excited nation watched as United States astronaut Neil Armstrong took the first steps on the moon.
Space and defense-related industries sprang up in Southern and Western states.
The nation mourned the death of the young president while Jackie Kennedy remained calm and poised.
Like 9-11, Americans can recall where they were when they heard the news of the President\u2019s death.
He was charged and as a national television audience watched his transfer from one jail to another, nightclub owner Jack Ruby broke through the crowd and shot Oswald to death.
Johnson admired Franklin Roosevelt who took the young congressman under his wing.
Johnson became a senator in 1948 and by 1955 he was Senate majority leader.
The Act prohibited discrimination based on race, color, religion or national origin, and granted the federal government new powers to enforce the law.
The act prohibited literacy tests or other discriminatory practices for voting.
The Community Action Program which encouraged the poor to participate in public works program.
Reform and change were not limited to the Executive and Legislative branches.
In Escobedo Illinois the court ruled that the accused has the right to have an attorney present when questioned by police.
JFK AND THE COLD WAR KENNEDY’S LEGACY Kennedy’s Background Wealthy Family that expected public service. years old Roman Catholic Charismatic and highly appealing to American.
THE NEW FRONTIER AND THE GREAT SOCIETY Lyndon B Johnson  A fourth-generation Texan, Lyndon B Johnson entered politics in 1937 as a congressman  Johnson admired Franklin Roosevelt who.
Have you ever experienced a historic event so moving or influential that it made you remember.
Next Week  Kennedy, The New Frontier; LBJ, The Great Society  Civil Rights Movement.
While Kennedy had trouble getting his ideas for a New Frontier passed, several goals were achieved.
What are some federal programs that provide assistance to the poor and some Americans call entitlement.
