Women's Opportunity Center Executive Director, Ryan Harriott to visit virtually Friday OCTOBER 16 11:00 am Program Committee the Center's name to Syracuse Rotary Foundation Ryan Harriott is the Executive Directhe Women's OpOctober meeting via ZOOM tor at the Women’s Opportunity Center portunity Center. 12:10 pm , a not-for-profit organization WOC partners RCS Club Regular Meeting primarily supporting economically disadwith the Tompkins via ZOOM vantaged women with programs designed County Workforce Program to enhance social and economic selfsufand are a United Ryan Harriott, Exec.
Way member agenWomen's Opportunity Center WOC provides training for employcy.
Donations are tax Ryan Harriott E/D at WOC ment skills with individualized coachdeductible.
Current OCTOBER 23 programs offered by the WOC include ing in financial literacy, computer litera12:10 pm cy, health and wellness, and professional job search and preparation workshops RCS Club Regular Meeting dressing.
Throughout its existence, the that emphasize job retention and the devia ZOOM velopment of essential computer skills, WOC has helped over 15,000 women Program and men overcome obstacles and achieve career development, and the success of Gary Prophet, President Empire success through employment and training families in reaching their goals.
In Syracuse, the Displaced HomeAmtrak passenger trains maker Program was established in 1985 The Women's Opportunity Center originated from a group formed in a local at the RLS Career Center.
In November OCTOBER 30 woman's kitchen in 1979 that helped disof 2005, RLS closed and the Syracuse 12:10 pm program partnered with the Women's RCS Club Regular Meeting placed homemakers enter the workforce after divorce, separation, or widowhood.
In 2002, lic Administration and Non-Profit Man1946 Ten Nazi leaders are hanged as war agement. the family of Mary Durham donated criminals after Nuremberg war trials, including Last year, the Rotary Club of Syracuse a second facility to the WOC to serve Wilhelm Keitel, Joachim von Ribbentrop and funded the organization's “Moving Forwomen in transition.
Club of Syracuse SYRACUSE ROTARY PRESS FRIDAY, OCTOBER 16, 2020 Club of Syracuse Syracuse Rotary's Pandemic Response Committee Paul Szemkow | Co-Chair PRC the community.
Protocols and policies suggest methods on how to alleviate the Members of Syracuse Rotary recently that prioritize the well-being of everyone long-term effects of isolation. formed an ad hoc committee to contend will assist in slowing the spread of the viThe local Club is part of a larger orgawith the ongoing pandemic experience rus.
The District Administration can ership model of Rotary. provide their guidance and advice on how within our Club.
Since pandemic protocols dictate to deal with the COVID-19 pandemThe Pandemic Response Commitwe not meet in person, meetings of the ic.
Rotary International and other Clubs tee consists of co-chairs Jim Rotary Club of Syracuse take place on may have further insights.
Gladziszewski and first vice president the ZOOM platform every Friday at The committee will identify charitable Paul Szemkow, and president Jim Yonai. 12:10pm.
The Club is a collection of organizations that deal with or are imOf course, any Club member wishing to friends and colleagues who network topacted by the pandemic.
This will benefit join the committee is welcome and engether for the good of all. us to pursue innovative ideas on how to couraged to contact the co-chairs with As the pandemic evolves and proceeds, assist individuals and organizations.
The ideas and concerns. the committee will monitor and advise welfare of the community, during this criThe PRC has been tasked with several when in-person meetings may be restartsis, depends on the timely philanthropic jobs to assist the membership with their ed.
Of course, the committee will support generosity of organizations such as ours. pandemic experience.
Our Club members should be tion of the personal health and safety of will pass.
When the cricines, health issues, medical procedures, the public at large is a priority.
FurtherRotary is a community-aware organigate procedures and encourage members more, members may join this committee zation that wants to not only protect its to keep in touch with colleagues, friends, who wish to assist in any function of the members, but also protect people within and families.
On the morning of October 16, 1962, the photo at left was one of a set shown to US President John F Kennedy, confirming that the Soviet Union had placed nuclear missiles in communist Cuba, 90 miles off the coast of Florida.
This kicked off thirteen extraordinary days of tension and brinkmanship between the two rivals.
For days the Kennedy cabinet debated in private what to do about the situation, and on October 22, Kennedy went public with the crisis by announcing a 'quarantine' of Cuba a carefully used word, since a blockade would technically be an act of war.
Soviet ships attemptReconnaissance photo of Soviet missiles in Cuba shown to John F Kennedy on October 16, 1962 ed to penetrate the blockade but turned back.
Eventually, after a long period of talks, Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev agreed that the Soviets would withdraw the missiles in The Man Who Saved The World exchange for a public assurance the United States would not inOctober 27, 1962 There had been little communivade Cuba, as well as a secret deal that America would cation with Moscow.
The Americans continued to before October 27, 1962 probWhat most people don't know is just how close the ably owes their life to Vasili Aldrop depth charges left and right situation came to nuclear war.
Inside, the sub was US Navy dropped practice depth charges on a Soviet the Russian naval officer who, rocking, shaking with each new submarine.
Inside the sub, the commanders were unon this day, refused to fire a nuexplosion. aware if a war had begun.
Its target was the USS the Soviet submarine B-59 near 1962-10-22 United States President John F Kennedy addresses TV about Cuba.
They dropped explosives to Randolf, the giant aircraft carrier Russian missile bases in Cuba and imposes a naval blockade on Cuba, force the submarine to come to leading the task force. beginning the missile crisis. the surface for identification not An attack could not be knowing that it was armed with launched, however, unless all 1962-10-24 Soviet ships approach but stop short of the United States three senior officers aboard the blockade of Cuba. a nuclear-tipped torpedo with roughly the power of the bomb sub agreed.
Dropwith the crew's failure to follow the strict FRIDAY, OCTOBER 16, 2020 ping depth charges left then right, noisy but orders of secrecy after finding out they had always off target — those are signals, Arkhbeen discovered by the Americans.
They say, We know you’re there. ficer even noted Grechko's reaction, stating comprised of two entities; the Club Identify yourselves.
Come up and talk. that he ""upon learning that it was the diesel which was chartered on June 1, Arkhipov vehemently argued that since submarines that went to Cuba, removed his 1912 as Club Number 42, and the Syracuse Rotary Foundation, Inc., no orders had come in a long time, such a glasses and hit them against the table in fury, the not-for-profit philanthropic drastic action as firing the nuclear torpedo breaking them into small pieces and abruptarm of the Club founded in 1957. was ill-advised and the sub should surface to ly leaving the room after that."" contact Moscow.
In 2002, retired Commander Vadim PavTogether, the Club and the Foundation have served the It did so and was met by a United States destroylovich Orlov, a participant in the events, Greater Syracuse community er.
There were held a press conference revealing the subs with uncommon distinction no inspections.
Instead, the Russians turned were armed with nuclear torpedoes and that and vigor, leaving a long trail of away from Cuba and headed north, back to Arkhipov was the reason those devices had accomplishment in the best of Russia. not been fired.
Orlov presented the events Rotary’s traditions, all of which has As they did so, less dramatically, saying that Captain Savcontributed to giving The Rotary Khrushchev, afitsky lost his temper, but eventually calmed Club of Syracuse an honored ter a thirteen-day down. position in our community. stand-off, offered After the Cuban Missle Crisis, Arkhipov to dismantle the continued serving in the Soviet Navy.
Cuban bases if was promoted to rear admiral in 1975 and James Morrow, Editor Kennedy lifted retired in the mid-1980s.
In recognition of his actions onboard B-59, Vasili Alexandrovich Arkhipov Immediately Arkhipov received the first ""Future of Life upon return to Russia, many crew members Award,"" which was presented posthumously were faced with disgrace from their superito his family in 2017.
