President John F Kennedy complained to the Soviet Union about these developments and warned them that the United States would not accept offensive weapons in Cuba.As the Cubans now had SAM installations they were in a position to shoot down U-2 spy-planes.
The public opinion polls showed that his own ratings had fallen to their lowest point since he became president.Photograph of San Cristobal taken on 15th October, 1962In his first two years of office a combination of Republicans and conservative southern Democrats in Congress had blocked much of Kennedy's proposed legislation.
Understandably, the Republicans attempted to make Cuba the main issue in the campaign.This was probably in Kennedy's mind when he decided to restrict the flights of the U-2 planes over Cuba.
Kennedy hoped this would ensure that a U-2 plane would not be shot down, and would prevent Cuba becoming a major issue during the election campaign.On 27th September, a CIA agent in Cuba overheard Castro's personal pilot tell another man in a bar that Cuba now had nuclear weapons.
However, it was not until 15th October that photographs were taken that revealed that the Soviet Union was placing long range missiles in Cuba.President Kennedy's first reaction to the information about the missiles in Cuba was to call a meeting to discuss what should be done.
Use nuclear weapons against Cuba and/or the Soviet Union.When discussing these strategies.
President Kennedy and his advisers had to take into consideration how the Soviet Union and Cuba would react to decisions made by the United States.At the first meeting of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council, the CIA and other military advisers explained the situation.
The committee was now so divided that a firm decision could not be made.if{__ez_fad_position};The Executive Committee of the National Security Council argued amongst themselves for the next two days.
However, the majority of the committee gradually began to favour a naval blockade of Cuba.Kennedy accepted their decision and instructed Theodore Sorensen, a member of the committee, to write a speech in which Kennedy would explain to the world why it was necessary to impose a naval blockade of Cuba.As well as imposing a naval blockade, Kennedy also told the air-force to prepare for attacks on Cuba and the Soviet Union.
Kennedy also promised his military advisers that if one of the U-2 spy planes were fired upon he would give orders for an attack on the Cuban SAM missile sites.The world waited anxiously.
However, in the United States, polls suggested that the vast majority supported Kennedy's action.if{__ez_fad_position};On October 24, President John F Kennedy was informed that Soviet ships had stopped just before they reached the United States ships blockading Cuba.
The next day a second letter from Khrushchev arrived demanding that the United States remove their nuclear bases in Turkey.While the president and his advisers were analyzing Khrushchev's two letters, news came through that a U-2 plane had been shot down over Cuba.
Kennedy refused and instead sent a letter to Khrushchev accepting the terms of his first letter.Khrushchev agreed and gave orders for the missiles to be dismantled.
The two sides established a direct communications link that became known as the Hot Line.
The split between the Soviet Union and China became wider.if{__ez_fad_position}; The United States became convinced that the Soviet Union would not go to war over another communist country.
In 1984 Fidel Castro was interviewed by the American journalist, Tad Szulc.
The journalist asked Castro why he was willing to allow Soviet missiles to be placed in Cuba.It was necessary to make it clear to the United States that an invasion of Cuba would imply a war with the Soviet Union.
Terence Cannon, Revolutionary Cuba Convinced that Cuba faced an imminent attack by an overwhelmingly superior force, the revolutionary government sent Che Guevara to Moscow to request nuclear missiles with which to defend their country The Soviet Union agreed.
Theodore Sorensen was a close friend and a political adviser to President John F Kennedy.
In his biography of Kennedy, Sorensen explains what the president and his advisers believed to be the reasons for the missiles being placed in Cuba.Convinced that Cuba faced an imminent attack by an overwhelmingly superior force, the revolutionary government sent Che Guevara to Moscow to request nuclear missiles with which to defend their country The Soviet Union agreed.
One wonders, given Russian reluctance to move nuclear weapons from Soviet soil, if in fact they merely sent rockets and non-nuclear warheads.
If the Kremlin's purpose was essentially political , all they needed to do was to give the appearance of nuclear capability.
Moreover, sending atomic warheads to Cuba offered certain disadvantages.
Something might go wrong such as a ship sinking or a misfire, or even the Cuban government grabbing them.
The presence of Russian missiles in Cuba had drastically altered the balance of world power.
On October 22,1962 President John F Kennedy made a speech to the nation on radio and television about the Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Below is an edited version of the speech.Good evening, my fellow citizens.
Each of these missiles, in short, is capable of striking Washington, D.C., the Panama Canal, Cape Canaveral, Mexico City, or any other city in the south-eastern part of the United States, in Central America, or in the Caribbean area.To halt this offensive buildup, a strict quarantine on all offensive military equipment under shipment to Cuba is being initiated.
For the first time in twenty years Americans can carry their head high because the president of the United States had stood up to the premier of Russia and made him back down.
Mario Lazo, a Cuban lawyer was a supporter of the Batista regime that was overthrown by Castro.
American Failures in Cuba.The accounts of the crisis did not make clear that it was a power confrontation, that the power of the USA was incomparably superior to that of the USSR, and that the leaders of both nations knew this to be a fact.
Stone, a journalist, wrote an article on Kennedy after he was assassinated in 1963.
Since this is the kind of bluff that can easily be played once too often, and that his successors may feel urged to imitate, it would be well to think it over carefully before canonizing Kennedy as an apostle of peace.
Ambassador Dobrynin's Cable to the Soviet Foreign Ministry Late tonight R Kennedy invited me to come see him.
On the whole Turkey issue,"" R Kennedy added, ""if Premier NS Khrushchev agrees with what I've said, we can continue to exchange opinions between him and the president, using him, R Kennedy and the Soviet ambassador.
