Day 6 Preparing hundreds of thousands troops for war is a complicated thing.
Clear and precise directives are an essential part of such adventures, especially when the troops are armed with nukes.
Politics on the other hand is fraught with ambiguity and lack of clarity, especially when it involves a potential nuclear war.
Yesterday, October 20th, the crisis had heated up significantly when the United States administration decided to impose a naval blockade on Cuba beginning tomorrow the 22nd.
The Soviets were deeply mistaken in thinking that they had deterred the United States from decisive action on Cuba.
The preparations for the blockade and for a possible war are underway today, Sunday October 21st, 1962.
It’s virtually impossible to mobilize the armed forces of the United States without someone noticing.
All you need are a few people in the right places, observing the movement of people and material to connect the dots.
That’s exactly what happens today when the Soviets are alerted to the fact that their assessment yesterday is inaccurate.
The central question is how to react in case of an American invasion of Cuba.
It was already debated in the summer by Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev and Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko, the architects of the whole Soviet-missiles-on-Cuba plan, along with Marshal Matvei Zakharov, the Chief of the Soviet General Staff, who argued for allowing the use of tactical nukes in a case of an American invasion.
They met opposition from Deputy Chairman Mikoyan and Defense Minister Marshal Rodion Malinowsky, a veteran of both world wars and the Russian Civil War.
Malinowsky is an outstanding military leader who is in the process of turning the Red Army into one of the most fearsome fighting forces ever seen.
But he is also an outspoken pacifist and a believer in a conventional defense policy.
To him, nuclear arms should only be used strategically as a deterrent to keep the peace, never on the field.
In the end they can’t find common ground, but Khrushchev prevails, or at least he thinks he does.
An order is drafted, but when it lands on Malinowsky's desk for signature, he stalls and just leaves it there unsigned, so when the battle orders are formally issued it’s not part of Malinowsky and Zacharov’s signed memorandum.
Unfortunately, the unsigned instructions have already been given orally to most of the commanders on the ground.
The Luna missiles can carry a nuclear warhead with an explosive yield as low as 3 kilotons and has high as 200.
The lowest yield would kill about 65,000 and injure almost 250,000 if blown up over Pariswhich we’ve used as our model in great detail before.
The Russians have at least seven missiles ready to fire from land and 12 from ships at sea An estimated additional 70 warheads are also in storage together with the strategic warheads.
So, today the Soviet forces have both been ordered to use and to not use these tactical nukes at their own discretion.
For now, the Soviet Forces on Cuba remain on alert with tactical nuclear readiness, in a political vacuum.
Meanwhile, the United States armed forces find themselves in a remarkably similar situation.
As we’ve already seen, President Kennedy has walked a thin line between decisive military actions and diplomatic restraint regarding Cuba for some time.
Kennedy is trying his best to satisfy everyone and still stay his own preferred course by not getting involved in another embarrassing adventure on Cuba like the Bay of Pigs Invasion, but the situation he has tried so hard to avoid is now facing him.
After all that’s been said, after all the actions that have been taken, and with all the pressure that Kennedy faces both at home and abroad, he believes that the blockade, or quarantine as they call it, is the compromise that will allow him to avoid a war.
He hopes that the Soviets will back down; he also hopes that he can reign in his own hawks who are pressing hard for an invasion or at least air strikes as a show of force.
In fact, he has set a machine into motion that is almost pre-programmed to end with war.
Remember that yesterday it was decided to not go for airstrikes and to not invade Cuba, yet the President also told the Joint Chiefs to continue preparations for the exactly these things should the USSR not back down.
A total blockade on Cuba to stop any ships leaving or entering Cuban territorial waters.
They can call it a quarantine as much as they want, but by international law this IS an act of war.
The line will initially be held by 12 destroyers, with the aircraft carrier Essex leading an anti-submarine warfare carrier group, and aerial anti-submarine warfare squadrons based in Bermuda and Puerto Rico.
The naval force will be gradually increased to include the aircraft carrier group, two cruisers, 22 destroyers, two frigates carrying tactical nuclear cruise missile, and an undisclosed number of submarines with nuclear arms.
The quarantine announcement will be accompanied by a demand to the USSR to withdraw the missiles from Cuba.
If they do not withdraw the missiles, the destruction of the missile sites will follow.
Several hundred jet fighters and bombers will fly more than 1,500 sorties on the first day alone.
After seven to eight days of continuous air strikes, the plan is to invade Cuba with an initial force of 200,000 troops.
These troops already have permission to use tactical nuclear arms to respond to any tactical nuclear strikes by the Russians.
Finally, should these actions fail to eliminate the missiles, there is a contingency plan to drop kiloton range thermonuclear charges on the missile sites.
Even by the most conservative calculation, that last action will wipe Cuba out of existence.
Now, you might think that this is just a theoretical contingency plan, but it’s not this is exactly what the United States military is preparing for and what some of the generals are even hoping for.
I just don’t see any other solution except direct military intervention right now.
Okay, politically that has been rejected… sort of… but in practice it’s still the direction that the military is taking.
Boats full of bombs, missiles, aircraft, and troops are already at seas sailing heading for Cuba.
Hundreds of fighter jets and bombers are being armed and made ready at the East Coast military airfields.
Paratroops and infantrymen all over the US are confined to quarters and 150,000 reserves have already been called in.
The nuclear forces of the United States are preparing to go on high alert.
So far, very few of them know why, and the world in general has no idea that they are about to be shocked with Cold War steel suddenly glowing hot with the threat of radiation.
See you tomorrow on day 6, when the Cuba Crisis grows ever hotter and the Kennedy cabinet carefully weigh their words before they announce their actions to the world.
We’re at the mid point of this series of daily episodes, but we’re already planning out next big project, which will be covering Pearl Harbor minute by minute in ten episodes December 7th in real time.
To get that off the ground, we need your support, so join us and the TG Army at TG.tv and patreon.com.
