Lifestyle America had freedom and a two-party democracy; Russia had secret police and a one-party state.
Truman did not tell Stalin that he had the atomic bomb. 2 of 13 Soviet power in Eastern Europe Twenty million Russians died during the Second World War, so Stalin said he wanted a buffer zone of friendly states around Russia to make sure that Russia could never be invaded again.
During the war, Communists from the occupied countries of Eastern Europe escaped to Moscow and set up Communist governments in exile there.
In the countries that the Red Army ""liberated"", communist-dominated governments took power.
The Communists made sure that they controlled the army, set up a secret police force, and began to arrest their opponents.
Non-Communists were gradually beaten, murdered, executed and terrified out of power.
By 1949, all the governments of Eastern Europe, except Yugoslavia, were hard line Stalinist regimes.
In 1946, in a speech at Fulton in the USA, Churchill declared that an Iron Curtainhad come down across Europe, and that Soviet power was growing and had to be stopped.
In this Revision Bite, you will learn about these policies. 4 of 13 The Berlin Blockade and airlift In 1945, the Allies decided to split Germany into four zones of occupation.
On 12 May 1949, Stalin abandoned the blockade. 5 of 13 The Korean War In 1945, Korea was split along the 38th parallel between a communist north led by Kim IL Sung, and a non-communist south led by Syngman Rhee.
Then, in 1950, a report by the American National Security Council recommended that the United States stop containment and start to roll back communism.
The war In 1950, after getting the support of Russia and China, Kim IL Sung invaded South Korea.
The war went on as border clashes until 1953 when America's new president, Eisenhower, offered peace, but threatened to use the atomic bomb if China did not accept the offer.
Recently, historians have shown that the Korean crisis almost led to a third world war many United States advisers wanted to use the atomic bomb. 6 of 13 International tension When Stalin died, it looked like a new era was beginning between East and West.
He was a jolly man, who said to prevent the most destructive war in history, there needed to be ""peaceful co-existence"" between the superpowers.
He said Stalin was a terrible tyrant and he wanted to ""de-Stalinise"" Eastern Europe.
In fact, the period 1953-1960 was the time of greatest danger in the Cold War.
Khrushchev's statement that he wanted to ""de-Stalinise"" Eastern Europe led to anti-Soviet rebellions in 1956 in Poland and Hungary, and Khrushchev sent in Russian troops to re-establish Soviet control.
The Americans also used U2 spy planes to spy on Russia. 8 of 13 The Hungarian Revolution Hungary had been controlled by Russia since 1945.
The death of Stalin brought people in many Eastern European countries the hope of freedom and change, but as the 1956 uprising in Hungary proved, this was not to be the case.
A summit was arranged in Paris to try to sort things out, but shortly before it was due to take place an American U2 spy plane was shot down over Russia and the summit collapsed.
The arms race both sides accepted the need for some kind of Nuclear Test Ban treaty.
The Cold War had just become substantially more dangerous. 10 of 13 The Berlin Wall By the 1960s Berlin was still divided the USSR controlled the East and the USA guaranteed freedom in the West.
At the Vienna Summit of June 1961, therefore, Khrushchev demanded that the USleave West Berlin within six months.
