The “For Educators” link on the site ranks Graham T Allison’s book, Essence of Decision, number one on its list of Top 10 books on the subject.
There is no question but that Essence has been one of the most widely read books about the missile crisis—a political science best-seller—and extraordinarily influential.
While scholars have praised the book, an equal number have long questioned both its methodology and conclusions.
Robert Kennedy’s persistent hawkishness, Bernstein noted, did not stem at all from the fact that he was the attorney general—and that was but one example of how Essence’s supposedly key contribution was at odds with the facts.
Ultimately, Bernstein concluded that Allison/Zelikow’s seductive but reductive interpretation was of dubious value, and in fact, remarkably unhelpful in understanding the positions staked out by the ExComm participants.
Bernstein also took note of the problems attendant to issuing a revised Essence, instead of letting the badly-dated book die a natural death.
The new edition turned out about one-quarter longer and “considerably richer” in evidence and interpretation, Bernstein found.
But for the most part the book simply flicked off thoughtful criticisms as if they were pieces of lint.
Allison’s famous models remained more or less intact, even though, as Bernstein noted, “the models, despite the authors’ hedges, serve virtually as substitutes for adequate evidence in some important situations.
Given the historiography of the missile crisis, it would have been entirely appropriate to include Essence in the Top 10 ranking because of its role as a catalyst, inciting scholars to think about decision-making.
Reviewers of The Kennedy Tapes took the assurances of these Harvard scholars—that they had personally engaged in this demanding, laborious labor—at face value.
Three years later, historian Sheldon M Stern, writing first in The Atlantic Monthly and subsequently in Presidential Studies Quarterly, exposed the emperors as having no clothes.
Stern, the JFKL historian for 23 years, a member of Washington Decoded’s editorial board, and the first non-member of the ExComm to listen to all the tapes, persuasively challenged the accuracy and reliability of the HUP transcripts.
At first, editors May and Zelikow tried to stonewall their way out of the controversy by minimizing the significance of the Stern’s claims, insisting that any errors were trivial and historically insignificant.
Eventually, May and Zelikow acknowledged methodological errors, such as using court reporters to produce a flawed first draft of the transcripts, which were clearly not revised with any diligence or conscientiousness.
RFK’s book is clearly an important part of the history of the history of the missile crisis, but it can no longer be regarded as a reliable memoir.
It seems entirely reasonable to ask, in light of the educational parochialism and academic in-breeding discussed above, whether the Belfer Center “For Educators” link is actually focused on assisting teachers.
Educators should be excused if they are confused, because May and Zelikow actually have published four distinct versions of “authoritative” missile crisis transcripts.
HUP published two, a hardcover volume in 1997 and paperback in 1998, and Norton, in addition to the aforementioned hardcover, published in 2002 a still-in-print concise paperback that uses the HUP title but the Miller Center transcripts.
Amendments and corrections were incorporated in these various volumes without any notation or explanation, leaving it to scholars to sort out the muddle.
Unfortunately, the updates and corrections site is still not interactive.
