Kennedy's peccadillos outside the Oval Office were met by the American public with a collective blush.
The tragic end to the JFK era in Dallas on November 22, 1963, ripped the heart out of American innocence and stunned the world into recognizing the cataclysmic social and political changes that were occurring in every corner of the globe.
The early years Born in May 1917, John was the second child of Joseph and Rose.
Known in his Irish-Catholic neighborhood as ""Jack,"" he was a sickly child, having suffered from whooping cough, scarlet fever, and other maladies.
After taking a turn for the better, his family could easily joke that if a mosquito were to bite him, it would be the insect's life in danger.
Jack was part of a large household with elder brother Joseph Jr., younger sisters Rosemary, Kathleen, Eunice, and Patricia, younger brother Robert, sister Jean, and youngest brother Edward, better known as Teddy.
Despite his long list of illnesses, Jack was full of life and was well liked.
His father had endowed him with a competitive spirit, and Jack enjoyed a number of sports.
Kennedy tapped a promising future by attending an exclusive prep school, Choate Rosemary Hall, in Wallingford, Connecticut, and was a member of ""The Muckers,"" a select group of practical jokers.
Jack succeeded indeed, by graduating from Harvard just as World War II broke out.
His thesis was good enough to be published in book form with the title Why England Slept, iterating England's unpreparedness for war with Germany.
Soon after, Kennedy volunteered for PT boat duty and took his training in Rhode Island.
Nevertheless, Kennedy was named the commander of an 80-foot patrol torpedo boat, the PT-109, whose theater of operations was the Solomon Islands.
While on night patrol in August 1943, a Japanese destroyer came out of nowhere and sliced Kennedy's boat in half.
Others had leaped overboard moments before impact and made their way to a piece of flotsam.
The collision injured Kennedy's back, but he managed to rescue a burned crewman.
He hauled him to the wreckage where the other crewmen were clinging for dear life.
As dawn broke, they made their way to a small island a few miles distant.
Subsisting on coconuts and rainwater, the men were discovered by friendly natives and eventually rescued by the Navy.
In June 1944, Kennedy received the Gallantry in Action medal after earlier being honored with the Purple Heart.
In August of that year, brother Joseph was killed when his plane exploded shortly after takeoff while carrying more than 21,000 pounds of explosives meant for a German V-1 rocket launching pad in Normandy, France.
Jack the politician Backed by his father and ""Honey Fitz"" Fitzgerald, his maternal grandfather and ex-mayor of Boston, Kennedy campaigned hard for a seat in the United States Congress.
With his war heroics serving as a plus, he handily defeated his opponents.
Kennedy held that seat until 1952, when he ran for the United States Senate against the popular Republican incumbent, Henry Cabot Lodge Jr., who was from a family that could trace its roots to the Mayflower.
In 1953, he managed another upset by wooing and eventually marrying the beautiful Jacqueline Lee Bouvier.
During his lengthy hospital stay and rehabilitation, he wrote Profiles in Courage, a book that analyzed the lives of eight notable United States Senators.
The first bump in the road of Kennedy's political career arrived as he lay in the hospital.
The Senate censured Senator Joseph McCarthy for instigating a nationwide panic over Communists in the United States government.
Kennedy didn't cast a vote, so he was criticized for not jumping on the anti-McCarthy bandwagon.
McCarthy had been a guest at the Kennedy retreat in Hyannisport and brother Bobby Kennedy had served on McCarthy's staff.
Kennedy's persona drew more attention when he began to serve on the Senate Select Committee to Investigate Improper Activities in Labor-Management Relations.
The result was a bill that Kennedy sponsored, to rid the unions of criminal activities.
He had narrowly lost the nomination for the vice-presidential spot on the Adlai E Stevenson ticket for 1956, but was re-elected to the Senate with more than 73 percent of the vote.
When told by an old pol that he should easily capture the vice-presidential nomination in 1960, Kenndy replied, ""I'm not running for the vice-presidency anymore.
After securing the Democratic nomination in a close race with Lyndon B Johnson from Texas, Kennedy named Johnson as his running mate.
A crucial factor in the election was the first televised presidential debate.
The Republican nominee, Richard M Nixon, refused makeup and was feeling ill, owing to a knee injury on the way to the studio.
He expected to win voters with his foreign-policy expertise, but viewers beheld a pale, profusely sweating man with a five-o'clock shadow, wearing a gray suit that blended into the scenery while his rival looked tanned and well.
Later research indicated that those who had listened to the debate on radio thought Nixon had won, but the television audience gave the win to Kennedy.
The economic issue was the Soviet Union's high economic growth rate compared to that of the United States.
According to analysis at the time, the Soviet economy was expected to overtake the American economy by 1984.
Kennedy also claimed that the Republican administration had allowed a ""missile gap"" to open by not matching Soviet defense spending and allowing the United States military to weaken.
The claim was made more credible by Soviet superiority in the space program, as evidenced by their successful Sputnik orbit, contrasted by numerous United States launch failures.
The election results were so close that Nixon was urged to call for a recount in such key states as Illinois, Missouri, and New Jersey.
He publicly refused, but privately wanted 11 states included in the recount.
Legal battles stretched into the summer of 1961, long after Kennedy had been inaugurated.
Ask not what America will do for you, but what together we can do for the freedom of man."" -John F Kennedy, from his Inaugural Address At the age of 43, Kennedy became the second-youngest president* and first Roman Catholic ever, winning by the slimmest of margins — 115,000 votes.
As Kennedy entered the glare of the Oval Office, he did so amidst tensions in Southeast Asia and nearby Cuba, as well as the continuing space and arms race with the Soviets.
He suffered a rude awakening in April 1961 when the Bay of Pigs Invasion to overthrow Cuban dictator Fidel Castro turned sour.
The invasion facilitated Castro's call for more aid from the Soviet Union.
In June, Kennedy met with Nikita Khrushchev in Vienna for two days of meetings.
The Soviet leader carried away an impression that the United States president lacked resolve.
In February 1962, John Glenn became the first American to orbit the earth.
The program, which still exists, encourages Americans to give of their talents in Third-World countries.
Volunteers are trained for the opportunity to educate youth and elders, facilitate community improvement projects and care for the environment.
Kennedy then made good on his promise to get tough on Organized Crime by signing three bills into law that targeted the prohibition of telephone betting, interstate transportation for the purposes of racketeering,* and commercial transportation of betting equipment.
Following the missile crisis, Kennedy moved on to make civil rights a priority of his administration.
That fateful day On November 22, 1963, the president and first lady arrived in Dallas, to board an open-top limousine with Governor John B Connelly for a 45-minute ride to speak to a meeting of the Citizens Council.
As the vehicle approached a triple overpass, shots were heard, and the president slumped forward with a mortal head wound.
After solemn ceremonies, Kennedy's body was taken to Arlington National Cemetery.
