He had traveled throughout Europe while his father Joseph was ambassador to Britain, reporting on the political situations he observed.
During a short stint at Stanford, he studied business, but took courses in politics and international relations.
He also understood that foreign policy, and in particular, anti-Communism, were key issues for any politician of his day.
Foreign Policy Matters In a campaign speech for a Massachusetts State Senate seat in 1951, John Kennedy said, “Foreign policy today, irrespective of what we might wish, in its impact on our daily lives, overshadows everything else.
Anti-Communism Kennedy’s political career played out through the Cold War.
Bay of Pigs Kennedy didn’t wait long for the first confrontation of his presidency.
Only weeks after he took office he was told of a secret CIA plan to send an army of Cuban exiles to overthrow Fidel Castro and rid the western hemisphere of its first Communist regime.
On April 17, 1961 a brigade of Cuban exiles trained by the CIA landed at the Bay of Pigs in the south of Cuba.
Three days later, CIA officers in Washington listened to the rebel leader over the radio.
One hundred and fourteen of the exiles had been killed and 1,198 were captured.
A Lesson Learned President Kennedy had been in office for less than three months.
At a press conference on April 21, he accepted responsibility for the incident.
As documents become declassified, historians have placed the truth somewhere between these claims.
Within two years, more than 16,000 American troops would arrive in Vietnam.
United States involvement in Vietnam may be Kennedy’s most lasting legacy in American foreign policy, but at the time, not many Americans understood the depth of involvement that lay ahead.
Scholars continue to debate what Kennedy’s intentions would have been had he lived.
Aides to the president have said that he felt an American withdrawal from Vietnam would tarnish him as an appeaser — which would have been political suicide — but that he would have withdrawn after a re-election in 1964.
Historian Robert Dallek says, “Kennedy was really doubtful about the wisdom of escalating the war,” and was developing a plan as early as 1962 to remove all troops in stages.
The Berlin Wall In May 1961 Kennedy met with Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev in Vienna.
Kennedy was hoping that he and Khrushchev could find a solution to avoid confrontation.
Khrushchev moved to close off the flow of refugees from Communism in Berlin.
Kennedy met Khrushchev’s challenge with a force of his own, increasing the size of America’s combat forces and obtaining billions of dollars for nuclear and conventional weapons.
On October 15, American pilots photographed evidence that Soviet ballistic missiles were being installed in Cuba, despite Khrushchev’s personal assurances that there was no plan to arm Cuba with such weapons.
Cuba Blockade On October 22, Kennedy addressed the nation; it was the first time the Soviets understood that they had been spotted in Cuba.
In that speech the President announced a blockade of Cuba, declared that an attack from Cuba would be understood as a Soviet attack requiring response in kind, stepped up American military readiness and asked for an emergency meeting of the United Nations Security Council.
Russian Denial JFK meeting with Soviets including Anatoly F Dobrynin The next day at the Security Council, Adlai Stevenson, United States Ambassador to the United Nations, offered clear photographic proof of missile installations, even as the Soviet representative denounced the charges as false.
Following Stevenson’s presentation, world opinion began to sway toward the United States.
Late that night Robert Kennedy made contact with Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin.
Communication between the two men was understood to constitute a direct channel between President Kennedy and Premier Khrushchev.
Brinksmanship The world edged closer to war as Soviet ships approached the blockade, slowed, and then turned back.
Days later, a U2 reconnaissance plane was shot down, inciting American military officers to action; President Kennedy refused to launch an invasion.
Russians Back Down Finally, on October 28, Khrushchev publicly agreed to remove the missiles in return for assurances that the United States would not invade Cuba.
Privately, Kennedy promised to remove American missiles from Turkey but refused to publicly declare a quid pro quo.
A Biography, discussed the youngest of Joe and Rose Kennedy’s children.
The Kennedys | Article Robert Dallek Author Robert Dallek discusses John F Kennedy’s health, the war in Vietnam, and Americans’ enduring interest in Kennedy and his family.
The Kennedys | Article Michael Beschloss Historian Michael Beschloss talks to American Experince about the Cold War, Cuba, JFK' s private life, and Robert Kennedy's role in American politics.
