April, 1962 Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev is walking near his villa on the Black Sea.
On the far shore is Turkey, where, months before, President Kennedy had stationed nuclear missiles.
If you want to get your Khrushchev on, check out the link in the description.
A time when, for thirteen days, two great powers hurtled toward a global suicide pact.
Following the launch of Sputnik in 1957, Khrushchev had regularly bragged to foreign press about the Soviet missile system.
In reality though, his intercontinental missiles were super inaccurate and took hours to launch.
Meaning that they weren't much of a deterrent against an American first-strike.
These long-range missiles were little more than an empty threat, but Khrushchev did have reliable medium and intermediate-range missiles and if he could station those in Cuba he could credibly threaten the United States, in much the same way NATO had encircled and threatened the Soviet Union.
From that position of power he could probably negotiate for Berlin, or demand that Kennedy withdraw his missiles from Turkey.
And, as a bonus, the United States would never again dare to invade Cuba.
No, Khrushchev would have to sneak them in, and only unveil them once they were operational.
The man across from him, traveling undercover as an agricultural engineer, is the head of Soviet rocket forces.
If the Yankees discover a secret deployment, they'll think that the missiles are intended for a first strike.
On August 25th in Sevastopol, a timber freighter pulls out of port, riding high on the water.
It's only one of 85 commercial ships ferrying troops and equipment to Cuba.
The luckiest of these soldiers travel on cruise ships, disguised as tourists, but the majority are crammed into sweltering freighters.
By early September the missiles begin arriving And they're not alone; 42,000 Soviet troops come ashore dressed in civilian clothes or Cuban army uniforms.
On October 16th at 11:50m. in the Oval Office, President Kennedy and a handful of advisers sit at the briefing table, looking at blown-up photos from a U-2 spy plane.
If one launches it can hit Washington in 13 minutes Kennedy is furious at Khrushchev's betrayal.
The midterms are coming up and his political rivals have made the Soviet buildup in Cuba a campaign issue.
They accuse him of letting the Soviets install missile platforms 90 miles from Florida.
Privately, Khrushchev had told Kennedy that the build-up was defensive meant to avoid another American invasion and that it wouldn't include missiles.
With this assurance in hand Kennedy had drawn a red line pledging to take action if the soviet station's nuclear weapons in Cuba.
He had made that pledge thinking that he'd never have to go through with it.
He thinks that the President should either order an airstrike or maybe an airstrike followed by an invasion.
At 6:30m. in the White House, gathered around in the Cabinet Room our 14 men.
It's the first meeting of what will be known, as the Executive Committee of the National Security Council.
Khrushchev could just send more missiles to replace the destroyed ones, and Soviet bombers in Cuba could still hit Florida.
Kennedy's brother, Bobby, the Attorney General, loves this plan because he hates Castro.
But the others point out that air strikes are never a hundred percent effective.
And, of course, if Soviet soldiers are manning the missiles, killing them in an airstrike could lead to war.
But he had pledged to take action, and if he reneges, Khrushchev might see it as weakness and start sending missiles to hot spots everywhere.
Instituting a naval blockade to stop any more weapons from coming in and calling for the missiles removal.
Publicly warn that any offensive move against the US would lead to a nuclear strike on the Soviet Union.
EXCOMM goes back-and-forth debating possible outcomes, but Kennedy keeps coming back to Khrushchev's thinking.
On October 17th at 12:00m. in the Caribbean, 40 United States warships plunge toward a tiny island.
But in Washington, EXCOMM is still discussing whether they'll do this for real.
On October 19th at 9:45m. in the White House the new intelligence reports are ominous.
In the last several days discussions in EXCOMM have increasingly turned away from the air strike invasion option.
If he attacks Cuba, Khrushchev will attack Berlin and that'll leave only one alternative: A nuclear strike.
He compares it to Nazi appeasement, which is a shot at Kennedy's father who once advocated negotiating with Hitler.
But Kennedy knows that winning a nuclear war might still mean millions of American deaths.
The general responds that the Air Force will be ready for an attack in two days if ordered.
On October 20th at 9am in Cuba, the 79th Missile Regiment gathers around a political officer.
He stands on a mound of dirt brought from the Soviet Union, a reminder that these men are here to defend their homeland.
Kennedy is scheduled to broadcast a television address at 2:00m., Moscow time.
The United States Embassy has told him to expect a communication an hour before.
He runs through his options, from announcing a mutual defense pact with Cuba over the radio to transferring the missiles to Cuban control and letting them defend their own country.
One carries nuclear warheads three times more powerful than all the bombs ever dropped in history.
