This imperative applies especially to times of crisis, when deals struck at the superpowerlevel may exacerbatefears of states who see their securitybeing bargainedaway, thus leading to dangerous reactions.
We illustrate our argument by retelling the classic tale of the Cuban missile crisis.
Our account, however, is triangular, because in addition to Americanand Soviet perceptions, the Cubanperspective is a focus of our analysis.
Finally, we derive triangular lessons of the missile crisis using the theory of mutual security.
Fidel Castro;Cuban missile crisis; positive sum; theory of mutual security.
What we may be witnessing is not just the end of the Cold War, or the passing of a particularperiod of postwarhistory, but the end of history as such ... the universalization of Western liberal Democracy as the final form of human government.
Dreamingthattherewill be an end to revolutions, no matterwhat happens, is just dreaming.
Moreover, Baker and his Soviet counterpart, Foreign Minister Aleksandr Bessmertnykh,now speakby telephoneas often as a half-dozentimes per week, often to work out common strategies on tough issues, and to arrange their travel schedules to permitas many face-to-face meetingsas possible (AnonymousState Departmentofficial.
The name of the game is ""positive sum,"" at least as far as the United States and Soviet Union are concerned.
Yet it was only with the adventof the first worldwidecrisis of the post-Cold Warorder, following Iraq's August 2, 1990, invasion of Kuwait, that the new collaborative possibilities became fully apparent.
Secretary Baker and thenForeign Minister Shevardnadze,fishing together in the U.S.S.R., immediately condemnedthe invasion in a toughjoint statement.Therefollowed in the United Nations SecurityCouncil a degree of cooperationbetween the United States and U.S.S.R. previously not possible.
Beginning with the first vote to condemn the invasion and to impose sanctions, throughto the later votes authorizinguse of force, the United States and U.S.S.R. voted together.
And despite the recent rise of some reactionaryelements in the U.S.S.R.-many criticizing Soviet policy in the Persian Gulf war-few believe the Soviets will revert to the Cold Warunilateralismof the past.
OtherThird Worldstates, especially those like Iraqwith close ties to the Soviet Union, already find themselves on the wrong side of history and thus candidatesfor the kind of desperationthat can lead to acts-like Iraq'sinvasion of Kuwait-that seem foolhardy,even irrational,to outsiders, especially those who, like the United States and U.S.S.R., have agreed to play by the rules of mutual security.
At the very least, the coincidence of the end of the East-West Cold Warand the PersianGulf war illustratethat East-West collaboration,empathy,coordination, and all the other aspects of participationin a bipolarpositive-sumgame do not ensure peace, prosperity, or harmony in the post-Cold War world.
This brings us, finally, to our fundamentaltheoretical proposition:in the post-cold war world, a bilateralmutual security approachis not enough.
It is imperativethatthe mutualsecuritybe made triangular, incorporatingthe security concerns of third countries whose leaders may feel their security is threatenedby the great-powercollaboration.
The answers lay in the revolutionaryrequirementsfor psychology and se730 Belkin and Blight curity producedby the end of the Cold War.These are vast subjectsand we can only allude to them here.
First,psychologically, it is clear that while some small countrieshave benefited from the end of the Cold War,dozens fear two possible consequences of the end of superpowercompetition in their regions.
They fear being ignored, left alone to rot in regional cesspools-deemed by the great powers henceforth unworthy of concern because they are regardedas having nothing the larger countries want or need.
Leadersof virtually all sub-Saharan African countries, for example, fear this.
Or they may fear being singled out, manipulated,even attackedby one of the other formerCold Warcompetitors.In the CaribbeanBasin this is once more a rising concern.
In a regional crisis, this nascent anxiety and feeling of increasinghelplessnesscould become transformed into desperation,with concomitantdecisions and actions thatappearirrationalto those without the empathic ability to understandthe desperationthat lies behind them.
In this way, new world disorder may lead to Third World desperation, resulting in regional tension, chaos, or war.
The answer, we believe, is evident as the membersof the anti-Iraqcoalition, led by the UnitedStatesand U.S.S.R., try to managethe unintendedconsequencesof the PersianGulf war:hundredsof oilwell fires; a catastrophicallyaffected local environment;millions of refugees; a hated dictatorshipstill in power; the prospectof a costly, long-termconventional presence of allied forces in the Gulf; and the resurgence,aftera few brief months of Arab cooperation, of old rivalries, hatreds, and disputes in the region.
The securityof all partiesto the dispute was compromised-security in the deeper, broadersense requiredby the post-ColdWarenvironment,security in the longer term, and securitycalculatedas a function of the total well-being, or its lack, of the tightly integratedworld system to which we all belong.
During these anxiety-provokingepochs, the old order appearsto have been invalidated,while the outlines of the new ""paradigm""have yet to come clearly into focus.
The bipolar Cold War,having dominated world affairs for almost half a century, has come to a surprising, abrupt,almost total termination.Furthermore,it had scarcelybeen declaredover when the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait occurred.
In our view, the heart of the new ""order""is a new triangulardimensionto mutualsecurityrequirements,a dimension in part unseen by the superpowersand thereforenot fully appreciatedby them, but nonetheless decisive.
The answer-the episode on which it is logical to focus-is at first counterintuitive:the Cubanmissile crisis of 1962.
U.S.-Soviet involvement;anxiety, and eventually desperation in a third party that had adverse security consequences for both the United States and U.S.S.R.; and contemporarypolicy relevance.
Ourapproachis counterintuitivebecause, of course, the missile crisis is generallyregardedas the puristsuperpowerconfrontationof all time, the nadir of the Cold War, a 13-day super-dramawith a clean-cut conclusion, and thus irrelevantto a world moved beyond its unfortunateand constrainingbipolarities.
But such a view is itself a productof Cold War,bipolarmyopia, according to which scholarshave focused on the missiles-the deployment, the crisis, and their withdrawal-and ignored the piece of geography on which the missiles were emplaced and removed, Cuba.
We are learningmuch more than we knew before aboutCubanorigins, decision-making,consequences, and interpretations of the crisis of October 1962.
To those of us engaged in recovering the Cuban reality in the Cuban missile crisis, it has become clear that for one brief dark moment in 1962, a ""moment"" stretchingfrom late October to late November, the Cuban leadership felt abandonedby the Soviets, threatenedby the United States, and more desperatethan we ever knew.
In short, the recovery of the Cuban perspective on those events has also allowed us, quite fortuitously,to recover a previously unappreciated""tangled triangle""of just the sort that is most to be fearednow.
It turnsout that we have been there before, though briefly, during that ""unipolar moment"" that took our health away in 1962.
Thus, in the following two section we provide the equivalentof a brief tourof the new informationthathas recently come to light on Cuba and itsmissile crisis.
FROM United States AND SOVIET SOURCES The story of the origins of the Soviet missile deploymentin Cubais familiar to studentsof postwarU.S.-Soviet relations.
It appearsthatKhrushchev'sfear of the nuclear imbalance, as well as his wish to protectthe Cubanrevolutionfrom Americanattack, were primarymotives for the deployment.
Following the Kennedyadministration'sOctober 16, 1962, discovery of the deploymentof mediumand intermediate-rangeballistic missile sites underconstructionin Cuba, seniorofficials of the EXCOM, or ExecutiveCommitteeof the National Security Council, deliberatedin secret for an entire week.
On October 22, PresidentKennedy announcedhis decision to quarantineCubawith a navalblockade, preventingthe delivery of additionalmissiles on ships which had alreadyset sail from the Soviet Union.
During the next few days, the leaders in both the United States and U.S.S.R. began to feel they were losing control of events.
American surface ships, for example, may have tried to force Soviet nuclearsubmarinesto surface without permission from the president.
On October 26, Khrushchevoffered to remove the missiles in exchange for an American commitment not to invade Cuba.
However, before Kennedy could respond, the administrationreceived a more demandingproposal in which Khrushchevalso insisted on the removal of Turkish-basedJupitermissiles.
As EXCOM debatedits response, word reached the White House that an AmericanU-2 reconnaissanceplane had been shot down near the Cuban port of Banes.
The president dispatchedhis brotherRobert to negotiate privately with Soviet AmbassadorAnatoli Dobrynin.
The United States would agree publicly not to invade Cuba and privately to remove Jupitermissiles in Turkey within several months.
The Soviets would agree to remove all nuclearground-toground ""offensive"" missiles from Cuba.
The resolutionof the missile crisis foreshadowedthe patternof the tangled triangularrelationshipbetween Washington,Moscow, and Havanaover the next 28 years.
On the one hand, the United States and Soviet Union entereda period of decreased tensions.
When they mutuallycame to believe that they were uncomfortably close to annihilating each other, they reconciled their differences.
To a greater degree than at any time since the two governments cooperated during World War II, the American president took the Soviet general secretary's interests into account, as Kennedy was sensitive to Khrushchev'sneed for a facesaving way to back down.
The improvedstateof relationspersisted after the crisis as the two sides installed the Washington-Moscow hotline-a teletype machinefor directcommunicationsbetween the presidentand the general secretary-and signed the 1963 Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, which prohibits above-ground and underwaternuclear explosions.
The Cubans, on the other hand, were infuriatedby the terms of the resolution.
Although Americanintentionsat the time remainunclear, the administrationdid, in fact, appearto be laying the groundworkfor an attackeven before the discovery of the missiles, and the Cubanswere aware of the preparations.
He said Castro claimed to have reliable informationthat the Americans were preparingwithin a certain numberof hours to strike Cuba.
Our own intelligence also informed us that an invasion would probably be unavoidableunless we came to an agreement with the president quickly.
My comrades in the leadership and I realized that our friend Fidel totally failed to understandour purpose.
We had installed the missiles not for the purposeof attackingthe United States but to keep the United States from attackingCuba.
Yet many studentsof Castro'sCubacontinueto believe that if Cubahad had control of nuclear weapons in October 1962, there would have been a nuclear war.
FROM CUBAN SOURCES2 Recently, Fidel Castro and other Cuban officials have begun to speak in detail about their experience of the missile crisis, particularlythe threatthey felt from the United States, and their fear of abandonmentby the Soviets.
McNamara, supportedby all his former colleagues from the Kennedy administration,said that however compelling the evidence may have appearedto the Cubans (and Soviets), an invasion of Cuba was out of the question.
Believing otherwise, he said, while understandable,was neverthelessto fall victim to a serious misperception, since in his view contingency plans for a United States invasion of the island would never have been enacted.
At a subsequent triangularconference held in Antigua in January 1991, Cuban InteriorMinistry official GeneralFabianEscalanterejectedMcNamara's ""misperception"" theory.
Cubans believed uniformly in the inevitability of a frontalassault by United States forces on the island.
After they defeatedthe U.S.-backed invasion at the Bay of Pigs in April 1961, Cubanleadersturneddesperatelyto the Soviets for assistance.
The Soviets had never deployed such weapons anywhereoutside Soviet territory.
Nevertheless, when offered, they were gratefullyreceived by Cuba, as the feeling grew on the island that the ultimatedeterrentto the United States invasion was about to arrive and become operational.
Yet the secret, deceptive deployment had hardly begun, when the Cubans began to suspect that the Soviet gambit was not well-thought-out.Che Guevara and Emilio Aragones, two membersof the ruling six-man secretariat,were sent to Moscow in late August to urge the Soviets to go public with the deployment, lest the United States discover the missiles in mid-course,and use theirpresence on the island as an excuse to attackand invade Cuba.
From the moment of receiving Khrushchev's dubious assuranceregardingthe Baltic Fleet, the Cubansappearto have felt increasingly uneasy about having placed their fate in the hands of the Soviets.
We are only now coming to appreciatethe fear and anger in Castro'sCuba that accompaniedKhrushchev'sagreementto remove the missiles, in returnfor a public pledge from Kennedynot to invade the island, and a privateassurancethat ""analogous""Turkishmissiles belonging to NATOon the Soviet southernborder would be removed within a few months.
The deal seemed to Castro to have placed Cuba in imminent danger, and he was furious in any case at the Soviets for having struck such a deal without consulting Cuba.
As has recently been revealed by the declassification of his crisis correspondencewith Khrushchev, Castrobecame sufficientlydesperateto make a contingentrequestto the Soviets that they launch their nuclear missiles at the United States should an invasion take place.
Khrushchev, horrifiedby what he took to be a requestfor nuclearpre-emption,togetherwith other information indicating that the United States was indeed preparing to invade the island, immediatelyagreedto Kennedy'stermsand therebyended the intense phase of the superpowercrisis.
Soviet abandonmentof Cubaduringthe missile crisis, andthe Soviet refusal to consult with Cuba over the terms of the resolution, still rankleCubanofficials nearly 30 years later.
If Nikita's message to Kennedysaid, 'We are willing to withdrawthe missiles from Cuba, providedthat Cuba's security is guaranteed,in Cuba's view' . . . and there would be no negotiationsabout Cuba withoutCuba . . . that problem .. .would have been resolved. ... .we always told our Soviet friends that we disagreedwith Cuba'sexclusion from the negotiations.
Khrushchev's response to Kennedy . . . had to be resolved in a conference where Cuba was present.
Had he added five more words to his message ... the problemsbetween Cuba and the United States that led to the crisis in the first place would also have been discussed.
Mikoyan's task was to convince Castro that giving up the missiles was necessary.
Castro's reaction, as recordedby Alekseev, shows the depth and the object of Cuban concern.
It never occurredto him, that is, that superpowers-especially superpowersostensibly in the grip of a Cold War-might act to preservetheirown securityinterestsratherthansustain a small ally.
It is useful to recall why the Cubans were excluded from the resolution of the crisis.
Consider the minimumobjectives of the superpowers:for the United States removal of Soviet missiles; for the U.S.S.R., a pledge by the United States not to invade Cuba.
In the presence of nascent nuclear danger, Kennedy and Khrushchevfound themselves able to meet one another'sneeds.
Castro's contingent request of Khrushchevfor a launch need not thereforebe viewed as being crazy in the least, because from the Cubanpoint of view the situationwas becoming so perverseas to seem almost unavoidablycatastrophic.Faced with an arrayof choices essentially reduced to meaningless catastropheor martyrdom, the latteris a perfectlyrationaloption.
We now know thatin late October1962, a leader actually came very close to reachingthis conclusion because of the unexpected rapprochementbetween the superpowers.
First, when Washingtonand Moscow push aroundthirdparties, theremay be consequences.
In response, the Cubanstried with every means at their disposal to prevent an American invasion, and a U.S.-Soviet deal they thought would insure it.
And as a result, there are unhappy consequences in U.S.-Soviet-Cuban relations even today deriving from the failure to integrate Cuba into the solution.
With this self-assertingmilitaryforce, Cubahas pursuedwhat the United States has, since the missile crisis, called an adventurist foreign policy, for example in Angola and in the Horn of Africa.
Although the administrationdid promise not to invade Cuba in returnfor removal of the missiles and bombers, the pledge clearly was not enough to allay Cubanfears of an imminentattack.Because the pledge coincided with removal of the missiles, many Cubansrecall feeling most at risk of American attackafter Kennedy'spromise.
To the extentthatpolicy-makersof the 1990s seek mutuallysecure, triangularrelationshipsthat addressthe needs and perceptions of all sides, it is importantto examine the rationale behind the Cuban disbelief in the Americanpledge.
For Cuba, which felt itself to be isolated and abandoned, the specter of annihilationwas so vivid as to prevent its leaders from noticing changes in their situation caused by a bargain struck at the great-powerlevel.
Castrowas able to thinkonly in worst-caseterms, completely discountingverbal security guaranteesissued in good faith.
With the exception of Kennedy's appreciationof Khrushchev'sneed to back down with honor, the threeleadersseem to have been largely out of touch with one another's perceived reality.
Castro wrongly assumed that the SovietCubanrelationshipwas more valued in Moscow thanwere U.S.-Soviet relations.
He believed he would retain some leverage over the deploymentbecause of his ability to play the superpowersoff against each other.
The sudden, traumatic discovery of this miscalculationno doubt contributedto his desperation.
The Kennedyadministrationdid not understandCastro'sfear, a fear thatdeveloped in response to a pattern of harassmentand interference as well as considerable evidence of an Americanassassinationconspiracy.Nor was Kennedysensitive to Khrushchev'sfear of the global consequences of the nuclear imbalance.
As a result, presidentialadvisers were shocked at their discovery of the missile deployment, even thoughthe possibility had been discussed for monthsin Congress and in the media.
Khrushchevdid not appreciateKennedy'sfear of appearing weak in the face of communism, especially Cubancommunism, and thus failed to anticipatestiff Americanresistanceto the deployment.
He also failed to take into account Castro's dependence on the Soviets for deterring an American invasion.
And neither he nor Kennedy anticipated Castro's sense of powerlessness and fury which followed their agreement.
What is of interest is that, in this case, the prioritiesof the superpowersshifted and converged when Kennedyand Khrushchevcame to realize they would have to sacrifice secondary objectives in order to avoid war.
THEORETICAL OBSERVATIONS While our purpose is not primarilytheoretical, it may be useful to state as clearly as possible what we take to be the most importantgeneralizationthat follows from our case study of the Cuban missile crisis.
In other words, the security of both sides in such a relationship is connected, or wired together, in one single system.
Both sides are in the same boat, and if the boat sinks, both sides sink.
While the theoryof mutual security has been applied primarily to bilateral systems, Cuban experiences during the missile crisis suggest that it may be possible to apply positive sum thinking to three-sided situations.
The Possibility of Triangular Wiring, and the Danger of Triangular Incompleteness In the missile crisis, the U.S., Soviet Union, and Cuba belonged to a single security system, in which the security of all three sides was wired together.
In other words, each country'ssecuritywas connectedto thefate of the entire system, and the systemitself was afunction of the securityof each side.
As a result, no two sides were able to advance their securityat the expenseof a third party.
And this was true despite thefact that one of the countriesdid not possess weapons of mass destruction.
American and Soviet policy-makers failed to appreciateCuba's perverse fear as well as its sense that there was nothing to lose in the face of imminent attack.
Moreover,as arguedabove, the Cuban style of deterrence,in large parta productof Cubanexclusion fromthe resolution of the missile crisis, has had significant, negative long-term consequences for both superpowers.
These examples show that the three nations belonged to a single security system, and that their security was wired togethereven though this was not obvious to policy-makersduringpeacetime or during the crisis.
In the post-Cold-Warworld, Washingtonand Moscow may againparticipate inadvertentlyor even unconsciously in an East-Westcondominiumthat foments desperation for a third party.
Leaders of third parties experiencing a sense of abandonmentand/or loss of control may turnto desperatemeasuresthat might seem irrational,even suicidal, to those who are ignorantof the profoundperversity which seems to the thirdparties to characterizethe situation.
However, in the same way that a positive sum solution could have been found for all three sides in the missile crisis , post-Cold-Warpolicies thatpromotepositive sum outcomes for all three sides may lead to results that satisfy all sides' concerns.
TOWARD ""REALISTIC EMPATHY"" IN TRIANGULAR RELATIONS When Kennedy decided to give Khrushcheva face-saving way out of the crisis, he was thinking in positive sum terms despite a political context which stressed unilateralgain.
When large states develop policies toward small ones, however, the sense of threat may be quite low.
In other words, policy-makersin large countries may find it difficult to believe or even to imagine that their securityis wired together with the security of smaller countries.
One lesson from the missile crisis, however, is that in certain cases the security of the superpowers may be wired together with the security of Third-Worldnations, even though this may not be apparentdespite or until the outbreakof crisis.
In 1962, the United States and Soviet Union did not realize that they were in a triangularsecuritysystem-that their own fates were connected with the fate of Cuba.
But the crisis increased Castro's anxiety, anger, and, because of heavy U.S.-Soviet involvement, his ability to provoke superpowerwar.
As a result, the securityof all three nations became intertwinedduringthe height of the crisis to an extent we are just now beginning to appreciate.
Although Moscow and Washingtonmay act deliberatelyin some cases to back desperate leaders into corers in order to force a showdown, a triangular perspective on mutual security suggests great powers may unintentionallydecrease their own security by decreasing the security of smaller Third-World states.
Therefore, the superpowersshould try to develop sophisticatedtriangular sensibilities before crises unfold.
And when troublesdo develop, East and West need to be aware thatjoint resolutionswhich exclude thirdpartiesmay increase the dangerfor all.
Severalcountriesin the Middle East would destroy significant sources of oil in minutes;the Cubanscould, if pressed sufficiently,wreakhavoc on the United States from Texas to Florida;even the Lithuaniansor Ukrainians could assassinateleadersand withholdgoods.
These and many otherpossibilities suggest that, while history has indeed ""returned""and, with it, a good deal of instability,there is risk involved when great powers throw their weight around.
Psychologically speaking, the risk is related to insufficient empathy, in Ralph White's useful phrase.
In the Cubanmissile crisis, for example, President Kennedy could draw on the empathic analyses of Llewellyn Thompson, a member of EXCOM, a nearly lifelong studentof Russian culture and language, and personal friend of Khrushchev.Unfortunately,no one in that decision-makingbody knew Cubaand Cubansin ways analogousto Thompson's knowledge of the U.S.S.R. and Khrushchev.Not one had ever met Fidel Castro, nor had any back-channelcommunicationsbeen established.The Soviets were in the same bilateral boat as they tried to navigate that triangularstorm in 1962.
United States specialists abounded,and Khrushchevhimself had met Kennedyand some of the others at the Vienna summit in June 1961.
This time around, in what we hope is an extended ""moment""at the end of the Cold War, we must do better at providing vehicles for the developmentof realistic empathy for Third Worldcountries.
We should also encourage governmentaland nongovernmentalinteractionsbetween representativesof the United States and U.S.S.R., on the one hand and, on the other, representativesof potentially explosive Third Worldareas.
In the canonical rationalscenario, a leadercalculatesthatthe cost/benefit payoff of nuclear pre-emptionoutweighs the payoff ratioof othercoursesof action.
But it generally has been assumed that this cognitive condition could never materialize-that a leader could never rationally arrive at a decision to begin, say, an all-out a nuclear war.
The missile crisis is often taken as proof that leaders will never choose nuclear war.
We contendthat, in the worse case of a nuclearwar in 1962 arriving out of the unacknowledgedtriangularity,the cause would have been neither rationalitynor irrationality,but ignorance; ignoranceby both suddenly secure superpowers of Cuba's sense of imminent annihilation and resulting desperation.
This mindset may include a sense of martyrdom,standing for the ""have-nots,"" and ""gong down fighting"" because there is no other choice.
The answers remain elusive because, in our bilateralEast-West elation over the demise of the Cold War,we have yet to address them seriously.
And this, finally, is why we believe the missile crisis mattersurgentlyin a world beyond the Cold War:first, at its moment of supremedangerand resolution, there was no Cold War;for that brief moment, history returnedbenignly, wonderfully,to those two formerallies, the United States and U.S.S.R.; second, because that moment also bore witness to precisely the kind of third country feelings of helplessness, anxiety, abandonment, and anger that seems increasingly to characterizeone result of the Cold War'send; and third, the first largely was the cause of the second.
The missile crisis mattersbecause in 1962, tiny Cuba, the repositoryof Soviet weapons of mass destruction,had acquired the capacity to raise the odds of their use.
Now, there are dozens of countrieswith this capacity.The greatpowers are thus well advised to avoid the triangularignorance of yesteryear if, sorting though the ruins of some present or future triangularcrisis, they are not to find themselves pining away pitifully for the good old days of the Cold War.
Remarksto Anastas Mikoyan, recordedby AleksandrAlekseev, November 3, 1962.
Available from the Director of Archival Administration, Soviet Foreign Ministry, Moscow.
Speech to the Fifth Congress of the Federationof CubanWomen, March7, 1990.
Superpowersand regional conflict in a SouthernAfrica and the Caribbeanbasin.
Cuba betweenthe superpowers,unpublishedtranscriptof a conference in Antigua, January3-7.
Remarksto a symposiumon ""Counterfactualsin Nuclear History"", American Academy of Arts and Sciences, May 11.
