Before joining Stanford’s faculty in 1971, he taught at MIT and was on the research staff at IBM’s Watson Research Center.
Hellman is best known for his invention, joint with Diffie and Merkle, of public key cryptography – the technology that provides secure communications over the Internet.
His many honors include induction into the National Academy of Engineering and the National Inventor’s Hall of Fame.
His current project involves the application of risk analysis to a potential failure of nuclear deterrence.
He is an Associate of the Nuclear Age Peace Foundation, a founder of NAPF’s Silicon Valley Chapter, and serves on the Federation of American Scientists’ Nuclear Security Advisory Board.
Charles Ferguson, president of the Federation of American Scientists, and Dr.
David Krieger, president of the Nuclear Age Peace Foundation, for their support, encouragement, and advice during the writing of this paper.
It has consultative non-profit organization, provides rigorous, status to the United Nations Economic and objective, evidence-based analysis and Social Council and is recognized by the UN as practical policy recommendations on national a Peace Messenger Organization. and international security issues connected to science and technology.
Founded in 1982, the Foundation is comprised of individuals and organizations worldwide FAS educates policymakers, the public, the who realize the imperative for peace in the news media, and the next generation of Nuclear Age. scientists, engineers, and global leaders about the urgent need for creating a more secure and VISION better world.
Founded in 1945 by many of the scientists who built the first atomic bombs, FAS is devoted to MISSION the belief that scientists and engineers have the To educate and advocate for peace and a world ethical obligation to ensure that the fruits of free of nuclear weapons and to empower peace their intellect and labor benefit humankind. leaders.
This paper shows that society’s complacency is ill-founded, and that we are still bluffing in a deadly game of nuclear poker.
The paper’s next section, Current Risks and Actions for Reducing Them, identifies eleven current events with the potential to produce a comparable crisis today and provides suggestions for reducing each such risk.
Because this paper is written for an American audience, the ameliorative steps are all actions on which we can take the lead.
Take our missiles off hair-trigger alert, and de-emphasize the role that first use of nuclear weapons currently plays in our warfighting plans.
Reduce the number of nuclear weapons and the amount of fissile material that is vulnerable to theft by terrorists.
Recognize that any war with Russia runs an unacceptable risk of going nuclear, and start acting accordingly.
Ensure that our actions are consistent with our repeated claims that Russia is not the target.
Even though terrorists, North Korea, and Iran dominate American thinking about nuclear threats, for reasons detailed in the section on Current Risks and Actions for Reducing Them, this paper places more emphasis on the potential for a modern-day Russian-American crisis, mistake, or accident.
One reason for that emphasis is that Russia and America possess 95% of the world’s nuclear weapons, creating unique potential for destroying civilization.
Web links in that section are “clickable” in this paper’s PDF at www.wagingpeace.org/nuclear-poker.
Kennedy and Khrushchev created the conditions for the 1962 Cuban crisis by bluffing at nuclear poker.
In today’s less polarized world, the cards may be dealt If we continue to less frequently, but if we keep playing this risky game, it is only a matter of time bluff at nuclear before a crisis arises, neither side is willing to fold, the bluffs are called, and poker, we civilization is destroyed. automatically subject each new Each individual risk may be small, but taken together over an extended period of generation to a time, the risk becomes unacceptably high.
If we continue to bluff at nuclear poker, we automatically subject each new generation to a round of nuclear roulette.
After fifty years, it is high time we stopped playing those deadly games and started creating true national security.
However, as will be shown below, considerable, needless risk persisted for months afterward, and is still present today.
American destroyers unknowingly attacked Soviet submarines armed with nuclear torpedoes.
On October 27, at the height of the crisis, American destroyers intercepted a Soviet submarine near the quarantine line and forced it to surface by dropping depth charges.
Only forty years later did we learn that the sub carried a nuclear torpedo.
American decision makers who favored invading Cuba did not know that the Soviets had deployed battlefield nuclear weapons.
While President Kennedy eventually decided on a naval blockade, he and almost all the other American decision makers initially favored airstrikes to destroy the missiles, likely to be followed by an invasion to solve the problem once and for all.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff wanted to invade even after Khrushchev had backed down, because they did not trust the Soviet promise to remove the missiles.
None of those counseling an invasion – indeed, none of the American decision makers – knew that the Soviets had placed battlefield nuclear weapons on Cuban soil to deter, and if need be repel, such an assault.
Not surprisingly, General Wade gave this assessment after General Power had died.
At the height of the crisis, an American U-2 strayed into Soviet airspace, creating a risk that nuclear air-to-air missiles would be used.
On October 27, a U-2, on an intelligence mission over the Arctic, became lost and accidentally flew into Soviet airspace.
MiG fighters were scrambled to shoot it down, while F-102 interceptors from Alaska were sent to escort it home.
Due to the crisis, the F-102s’ conventional air-to-air missiles had been replaced with nuclear warheads.
As noted by Stanford Professor Scott Sagan, “the only nuclear weapons control mechanism remaining was the discipline of the individual pilots in the single seat interceptors.
We have been concerned about Russian leaders having their fingers on the button while under the influence, but the problem is far more general and included President Kennedy.
Along with a number of other celebrities, JFK received massive doses of amphetamines from Dr.
Feelgood” for the effect of his treatments.,8 Possible side effects of amphetamine use include euphoria, anxiety, aggression, grandiosity, and paranoia.
In chronic or high doses, such as Kennedy received, amphetamine psychosis is also possible.
In 1969, a Jacobson patient died of “acute and chronic intravenous amphetamine poisoning,” according to the medical examiner.
A new medical doctor brought in to treat the president, was aghast at the amphetamine treatments and reportedly warned Kennedy two months after the crisis, “that if I ever heard he took 3 another shot, I’d make sure it was known.
The goal of a two-week-long American military exercise involving tens of thousands of military personnel, which started the day before the crisis erupted, was to execute an amphibious assault on a Puerto Rican island whose fictitious dictator was named “Ortsac” – “Castro” spelled backwards.
In the months before the missiles were discovered, congressmen, senators and the American media excoriated Kennedy for allowing the conventional Soviet military buildup in Cuba, many demanding an invasion.
Knowing of the Soviet battlefield nuclear weapons on Cuba, he also believed that an all-out nuclear war would follow.
He therefore pleaded with Khrushchev to launch the nuclear-armed Cuban missiles in a preemptive strike on the American mainland, so that the United States would suffer as much as possible.
To create support for an invasion, the Joint Chiefs of Staff suggested blowing up an American ship in Guantanamo Bay and blaming Cuba.
Seven months before the crisis started, the JCS sent Defense Secretary Robert McNamara a list of proposals known as Operation Northwoods, outlining ways to generate American public support for an invasion of Cuba.
When Khrushchev backed down, Kennedy became emboldened by his success in bluffing at nuclear poker and seized on a wording ambiguity to expand his list of demands far beyond removal of the Soviet missiles, thereby reigniting the crisis out of public view.
When a more minor part of the deal fell apart, Kennedy also added risk by questioning whether our pledge not to invade Cuba was still effective, even though that commitment was comparable in importance to the Soviets’ promise to remove their missiles.
In fact, CIA-sponsored attacks in Cuba and assassination attempts on Castro’s life continued until at least 1963.17 American invasion plans peaked on November 15, three weeks after the public thought the crisis had ended.
Under pressure from Congress and the press over the Soviet buildup, on September 4, the President warned the Soviets that “the gravest issues would arise” if they introduced “offensive ground-to-ground missiles” into Cuba.
On September 11, Moscow drew its own line in the sand when it warned that “one cannot now attack Cuba and expect the aggressor will be free from punishment.
In the spring of 1962, nuclear-armed American missiles became operational in Turkey, putting the idea in Khrushchev’s mind to base similar Soviet weapons in Cuba.
A risk of that nature had been foreseen several years earlier by President Eisenhower, when the Turkish deployment was first considered.
Related concerns occurred to President Kennedy, but he approved deployment of our Turkish missiles the year before the crisis broke.
During the crisis, Kennedy forgot that we had similar missiles in Turkey.
On the first day of the crisis, October 16, JFK expressed shock at Khrushchev’s recklessness in deploying nuclear-armed missiles so close to our shores.
Obviously forgetting that he had deployed similar missiles in Turkey, JFK argued, “It’s just as if we suddenly began to put a major number of MRBMs in Turkey.
Kennedy’s National Security Adviser, McGeorge Bundy, was forced to remind him that we had done exactly that.
Then, instead of seeing Khrushchev’s move in a new light, Kennedy and his advisers used tortured logic to portray the Soviet’s Cuban missile deployment as fundamentally different from ours in Turkey.
Today, five more nations – China, India, Pakistan, Israel, and North Korea – have joined, and Iran may be knocking at the door.
The firestorms created as their megacities burned would send dust and smoke into the stratosphere, where it would choke off sunlight, devastate agriculture, and lead to global famine.
India’s and Pakistan’s war-fighting plans increase the likelihood that a conventional war between them would escalate to the use of nuclear weapons.
Do not allow lesser considerations to reduce the priority given to nuclear nonproliferation.
While nuclear nonproliferation is often said to be a top United States priority, history shows that much lesser concerns can trump nuclear nonproliferation.
Stop inadvertently giving incentives to would-be nuclear proliferators.
North Korea’s and Iran’s nuclear ambitions derive largely from perceived threats to their existence.
Reducing such threats would reduce the motivation for proliferation, but we have inadvertently done the opposite.
While there 5 may be situations where we need to use force even if it encourages nuclear proliferation, that should be a conscious decision – unlike our attack on Libya, where the issue of nuclear proliferation was absent from the debate.
In addition to possibly losing an American city and causing a financial panic, a nuclear terrorist attack runs the risk of being mistaken for a Russian attack, which then could catalyze a full-scale nuclear war.
That risk is increased if the terrorists disguise their attack, either in the hope that Russia and America will destroy one another, or because they have an apocalyptic bent.
Negotiate large reductions in the number of nuclear weapons that might be stolen by terrorists.
The United States and Russia currently have thousands of nuclear weapons,33,39 making it hard to keep track of them all, and increasing the risk of theft or illicit sale to terrorists.
In fact, in 2007, the United States Air Force lost six nuclear weapons for over a day, during which time they were not properly guarded.
A B-52 was supposed to carry cruise missiles with dummy warheads on a flight from North Dakota to Louisiana, but instead, accidentally was loaded with six nuclear warheads.
Each had a destructive force roughly 10 times greater than the Hiroshima bomb.
It took 36 hours for the Air Force to become aware of this error and correct it.
This might be an acceptable risk if 8,000 warheads were needed to ensure United States national security, but a number of former military leaders have argued that deep cuts are both possible and desirable.
General Cartwright is well versed in nuclear strategy – from 2004-2007, he commanded the United States Strategic Command , the successor to the Strategic Air Command.
As little as 25 kg are needed to create a nuclear weapon.,37 While both HEU and plutonium can be used as the fuel for an atomic bomb, HEU is more dangerous because it is much easier to fashion into a bomb.
The “gun assembly” used for an HEU weapon is so simple and reliable that the Manhattan Project scientists did not even test it before using it on Hiroshima.
In contrast, the more complex plutonium-fueled “implosion” design used on Nagasaki required a test shot in the New Mexico desert before there was adequate confidence it would work.
Such problems persist today, with North Korea’s first plutonium-fueled nuclear test being somewhat of a fizzle.
Reduce the amount of fissile material that can be stolen by terrorists.
While progress is being made on reducing the risk posed by this huge stockpile that can be made into nuclear weapons, efforts should be accelerated and greater concern paid to security.
South Africa’s supposedly secure Pelindaba nuclear facility provides a good example of the danger.
South Africa secretly developed nuclear weapons during the apartheid era, but dismantled them during the transition to majority rule and stored their HEU fuel at Pelindaba.
In 2007, two groups of armed men simultaneously broke into the facility and shot one of the operators who resisted.
Even though these attackers did not steal any HEU, this breach of security is a warning sign with implications that should not be ignored.
Although plutonium is more difficult to fabricate into a bomb than HEU, the huge stockpiles created by commercial nuclear power reactors warrant greater attention as well.
In 1962, the Soviet Union had roughly 3,000 nuclear weapons, whereas today Russia has 10,000.
Stop pretending that very large nuclear arsenals are needed for deterrence.
Even though President Kennedy and his advisers were deterred from attacking the Soviets’ Cuban missiles out of fear that even one might be fired in retaliation and destroy an American city,40 they sometimes acted as if our numerical superiority made a difference,41 thereby providing some of the motivation for the massive Soviet arms buildup which followed.
Reductions in the numbers of nuclear weapons to more reasonable levels will not occur so long as we pretend that thousands are needed for deterrence.
As noted above, former USSTRATCOM Commander General Cartwright has argued that a 90% reduction in our arsenal35 would enhance our national security.
Due to American conventional military superiority, Russian war-fighting plans depend heavily on nuclear weapons.
Our military spending is about ten times larger than Russia’s, giving us unquestioned conventional military superiority.
This causes Russian war-fighting plans to be heavily reliant on the use of nuclear weapons if our nations come into conflict over Georgia or some other hot spot.
We have been called the world’s sole remaining superpower so often that we have come to believe it, even though Russia still can destroy us in under an hour.
We therefore neglect Russia’s vital interests at our peril, but have done so a number of times, most notably with respect to NATO expansion44 and missile defense.
We should not let Russia dictate our behavior, but neither can we afford to dismiss its concerns out of hand.
Operating on the mistaken assumption that our military power allows us to overrule all Russian objections puts our homeland at needless risk.
In 1962, most nuclear weapons were carried on bombers which took hours to reach their targets.
Today, the primary nuclear delivery vehicles are ICBMs with 30minute flight times and submarine-launched ballistic missiles which can reach their targets in under 10 minutes.
Given how long it takes to detect and verify a launch and then pass the word to military decision makers, who in turn must contact the president, it is questionable whether any warning time remains.
Many former American political and military leaders have made this recommendation, but it has not yet been implemented.
De-emphasize the role that first use of nuclear weapons plays in our national security strategy.
While many Americans believe that our nuclear weapons are intended solely to deter a nuclear attack on our own nation or one of our allies, that is not and never has been our nuclear war-fighting strategy.
Our most recent public pronouncement, President Obama’s 2010 Nuclear Posture Review, even held open the possibility of preemptively using our nuclear weapons against Iran, currently a non-nuclear nation.
We have repeatedly resisted joining China and India, the only two nations with a stated “no first use” policy.
While 7 legitimate questions have been raised about the strength of such pledges, they remove one level of bluffing at nuclear poker.
Create greater awareness of needless threats which increase the nuclear risk.
Even though our national security requires that we stop needlessly threatening Russia, most Americans have no way of learning of these provocations.
I read three newspapers every day, but only learned of McCain’s threats and Fox News’ substitution through the Moscow News and the Russian news agency Ria Novosti.
I then checked them out, even joining Twitter to see McCain’s “Dear Vlad” tweet first-hand.
Fox News’ substitution of Athens’ riots for Moscow's much tamer election protests was believable to most Americans because our media have given the impression that Putin is an unpopular dictator.
While many Russians resent Putin’s authoritarian rule, others see it as a welcome change from the chaos of the Yeltsin years.
Independent polls predicted Putin would win last March’s presidential elections with 66% of the vote – a margin of victory unheard of in recent United States elections, and close to the actual 64% which he garnered in the election.
There are voting irregularities in Russian elections, but the same has been true for a number of our allies, and even within our own nation.
Even if Russia’s voting irregularities were unique, we need to consider to what extent our objections will correct the problem, to what extent they will hinder protestors by tarring them as “foreign agents,” and whether the irregularities threaten our national security.
Most American media coverage of the 2008 Russo-Georgian War gives the impression that Russia is guilty of totally unprovoked aggression,54 even though an EU commission determined that Georgia bears some of the blame and fired the first shots.
A second round in that war is possible,59 and having Obama as president could make it more dangerous since his political opponents – unlike Bush’s in 2008 – would be unlikely to remain quiet in the face of inaction.
In September 2008, as a vice presidential candidate, Sarah Palin stated that we would be expected to go to war with Russia if such a rematch occurred.
The root causes of that war have not been resolved, increasing the likelihood of a second round.
Most Americans see any Russian military intervention as unwarranted, but all of our own as justified.
In the case of Afghanistan, this double standard has even been applied to the same country and some of the same adversaries – many of the mujahideen “freedom fighters” we armed in the 1980’s are now our Taliban and al Qaeda enemies.
Even if Russia’s military actions were uniquely heinous, we need to consider to what extent our actions will correct the problem, and to what extent they threaten our national security.
Some alliances enhance our national security, but others can threaten our very existence.
We also need to warn any of our allies who jeopardize our national security by needlessly poking the Russian bear that NATO’s security guarantees do not apply in such cases.
Actions taken by Congress and some of our NATO allies reinforce Russian fears that our missile defense system is aimed at them.,64,67 We say our missile defense system is directed solely against “rogue nations” such as Iran, and reject as paranoid Russian objections that it threatens their nuclear deterrent.
Yet the Eastern European nations that will host parts of the system justify it primarily as protection against Russia.
Russia’s fears are exacerbated by articles – including one in the prestigious journal Foreign Affairs – which claim that missile defense will give us the capability to destroy Russia and China while suffering only limited damage ourselves.
While such claims are highly questionable, they create fear, and therefore risk.
In fact, the dispute over our missile defense plans came close to causing a “Cuban Bomber Crisis” in July 2008, much as our Turkish missile deployment played a key role in Khrushchev’s decision to base Soviet missiles in Cuba in 1962.22,66 On July 21, 2008, Izvestia quoted an anonymous, high-level Russian Air Force official as saying that Russia was considering deploying nuclear-capable bombers on Cuba to offset the threat that it believes our missile defense system poses to its nuclear deterrent.
Fortunately, the mini-crisis was defused when the Russian Defense Ministry claimed the original story was a false rumor.
This incident ended less than two weeks before the outbreak of the August 2008 Russo-Georgian War.
If it had overlapped or occurred in the highly charged environment which followed, the risk of a full-blown crisis would have been increased.
Ensure that our actions are consistent with our repeated claims that Russia is not a target.
While we have repeatedly rejected Russian objections that our missile 9 defense system threatens them, Congress limited President Obama’s ability to share data with the Russians to allay such concerns.
If the system is directed at Russia, then our government needs to publicly admit that, so that the American public can assess the system in that light.
And if, as we currently maintain, the system is not aimed at Russia, then we need to make sure our deeds match our words.
A Russian-American conflict therefore has unique potential for destroying civilization.
Resolving Russian-American disputes is therefore the low-hanging fruit, and should be addressed before considering more entrenched conflicts.
Bush would make it much easier to settle those more entrenched conflicts, including dealing with Iran’s nuclear program.
These need to be brought to the public’s attention so pressure can be brought to stop this needless, risky behavior.
CONCLUSION Although the Cold War is over, many of its basic attitudes persist, limiting cooperation on nonproliferation and counter-terrorism – the two greatest threats to both Russian and American national security.
These counter-productive attitudes also make the risk of a major Russian-American crisis much higher than most people realize.
To reduce the risk of major international standoffs comparable to the 1962 Cuban crisis, we need to adopt a more rational approach to national security.
Where human Considering the July 2008 Cuban Bomber Mini-Crisis described above, while survival is Russian bombers on Cuba would be a dangerous provocation, they would have concerned, we no real impact on our national security.
Similarly, American missiles in Poland cannot afford to are a dangerous provocation, but have no real impact on Russia’s national let emotional, security.
But gut-level each nation also needs to be more sensitive to how its actions will be perceived. reactions prevail.
That would avoid needless provocations that increase the risk of a nuclear disaster.
Where human survival is concerned, we cannot afford to let emotional, gut-level reactions prevail.
Because the most relevant gut-level reaction relates to whether nuclear weapons are essential for preserving the peace or will inevitably destroy civilization, an excellent first step would be for the National Research Council to assess the level of risk posed by our current nuclear strategies.
If the risk is found to be unacceptable, the analysis should also identify the most likely failure mechanisms, so that ameliorative efforts can be applied where they are most effective in reducing the risk.
The National Research Council stands ready to undertake such a study, but needs authorization and budgeting from Congress.
Otherwise, it is only a matter of time before our bluff is called and we have to choose between the humiliation of a great nation backing down versus unleashing the horror of a nuclear holocaust.
The weapons of war must be abolished before they abolish us.” -President John F Kennedy, 1961 “A nuclear war cannot be won and must never be fought.
The only value in our two nations possessing nuclear weapons is to make sure they will never be used.
But then would it not be better to do away with them entirely?” -President Ronald Reagan, 1984 “The one thing I convinced myself of after all these years of exposure to the use of nuclear weapons – is that they were useless.
Why not continue on – why not get rid of them altogether.” -General Colin Powell, Former Secretary of State and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, 2010 “Once nuclear weapons are used we will be driven to take global measures to prevent it.
Soviet Submarines in the Caribbean Crisis of 1962,” Military Parade, 2002.
Sheldon Stern was the Historian at the John F Kennedy Presidential Library from 1977 to 1999 and is recognized as one the world’s leading experts on deciphering the low-quality audio tapes which JFK secretly made of many meetings during his presidency.
This book is derived from those tapes, and is firsthand source material.
Power was a brutal, easily angered man who struck Air Staff officers outside SAC as dim-witted and insensitive to the dilemmas that the bomb raised.
Even Kahn was outraged, and sternly lectured Power that he should not discuss human life so cavalierly.
Kaplan told me that he obtained this information from direct interviews with Herman Kahn and William Kaufman.
Through much of 1962, Jacobson made occasional professional visits to the White House.
Inconclusive lab tests, however, allowed Jacobson to continue treating Kennedy through at least the fall of 1962.
Note that the page numbers are for the 1998 edition, not an earlier one.
After being deposed, Khrushchev put his memoirs on tape and smuggled them out of the Soviet Union.
Their authenticity was initially questioned, but after censorship was lifted, Khrushchev’s son Sergei vouched for their authenticity.
We received a telegram from our ambassador in Cuba… He told us in great detail that Castro informed him he had reliable information that the Americans were preparing within a certain number of hours to strike Cuba.
He concluded that an attack was unavoidable and that this attack had to be preempted.
In other words, we needed to immediately deliver a nuclear missile strike against the United States.
When we read this I, and all the others, looked at each other, and it became clear to us that Fidel totally failed to understand our purpose.
Only then did I realize that our friend Castro, whom I respect for his honesty and directness, had failed to understand us correctly.
We had installed missiles not for the purpose of attacking the United States, but to keep United States from attacking Cuba.
Lemnitzer, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, clearly showing the authenticity of these otherwise hard-to-believe facts.
Castro [who was livid at not having been consulted in the decision to remove the missiles, and who viewed American promises as worthless] remained adamant in his refusal to cooperate in any of the external inspection and verification measures that the United States had demanded and that the Soviet Union had accepted.
As a result, the Kennedy administration withheld its quid pro quo and refused to issue the promised formal assurances that the United States would not invade Cuba.
Richard Ned Lebow and Janice Gross Stein, We All Lost the Cold War, 25.
Richard K Betts, Nuclear Blackmail and Nuclear Balance, The Brookings Institution, Washington, DC, 1987, page 112.
Richard Ned Lebow and Janice Gross Stein, We All Lost the Cold War, 425, footnote 43.
In a matter of six or seven minutes missiles launched from that base could devastate major centres in the Ukraine and southern Russia.
Zbigniew Brzezinski, “Reflections on Soviet intervention in Afghanistan,” memo to President Carter, December 26, 1979.
The latter link is to a large collection of documents, but searching on cannot be dictated will take you to the memo in question.
Hecker is a former Director of Los Alamos National Laboratory and has visited North Korea seven times since 2004 on “track 2” diplomatic missions.
George W Bush, “Libya Pledges to Dismantle WMD Programs,” speech in the James S Brady Briefing Room, December 19, 2003.
DPRK Information Center, “DPRK Foreign Ministry Spokesman Denounces United States Military Attack on Libya,” March 22, 2011.
Walter Pincus, “4 Colonels Lose Their Air Force Commands,” The Washington Post, October 20, 2007.
Micah Zenko, “A Nuclear Site is Breached,” The Washington Post, December 20, 2007.
The Joint Chiefs, and especially Air Force Chief of Staff General Curtis LeMay, argued that if the United States threatens the Soviet Union, Khrushchev will have no option but to back down.
While not explicitly basing their argument on our numerical superiority, that would seem to be the primary logical basis for their believing that, in such a stand-off, Khrushchev would be more deterred than we.
Jon Kyl, “What’s at Stake in the Missile-Defense Debate?”, The Wall Street Journal, April 2, 2012.
This report shows 2010 United States and Russian military spending to be $698 billion and $58. billion respectively.
Viktor Surikov, Director, Institute of Defense Studies, September 10, 1996 “One of the reasons for Russia's increased emphasis on nuclear weapons … has clearly been NATO's expansion.
While it has sometimes been argued that our missiles are not on hair-trigger alert, the roughly 30minute flight times of ICBM’s and 10-minute flight times of SLBM’s require such rapid decision making on indication of launch that the question appears to be one of definition.
Unless a decision can be made and ICBM’s launched in a matter of minutes, they are vulnerable to a first-strike attack and lose much of their value as a deterrent.
If unilateral United States de-alerting of its strategic offensive forces would cause Russia to follow suit, it would buy a large margin of safety against the accidental or mistaken launch of Russian missiles on hair-trigger alert aimed at the United States.
In a December 2003 column, unfortunately no longer accessible, former Minuteman launch control officer and now president of the World Security Institute Dr.
Ironically, the United States hair-trigger posture forces Russia into an identical stance, and the risks of a false alarm on the Russian side have grown since the end of the Cold War due to the steady deterioration of its early warning and command system.
By acting as though Russia may intentionally attack, the United States is exposing itself to a real threat of unintentional Russian attack.
They knew full well that the United States nuclear command system would collapse under the weight of such a Soviet first strike … To his great credit, one senior general spoke candidly of the matter soon after retiring from his exalted position as commander in chief of the Strategic Command in 1994.
Modernizing United States Nuclear Strategy, Force Structure and Posture,” May 2012.
While emphasizing that our nuclear weapons will only be used in situations involving great peril to us or our allies, those conditions are never defined.
JFK’s statement that, “Last month I should have said we don’t care ,” is but one piece of evidence that the crisis was over appearances, pride and domestic politics, not a grave threat to our national security.
The media picked up on the threat to use our nuclear weapons against North Korea and Iran, as did the leaders of those nations.
Note 46 above is also relevant, showing that the purpose of our arsenal is not to retaliate for a nuclear attack.
As noted there, we do not intend to “ride out” a nuclear attack and then retaliate, creating the possibility that a false alarm could trigger an accidental nuclear war, especially if it occurs during a time of heightened world tensions.
The “tweet” in which Senator McCain threatened Putin is no longer accessible on Twitter’s web site, but I confirmed the wording given inThe Moscow News while it was still accessible.
While both American politicians mentioned in this paper as threatening Russia are Republicans, the problem is, unfortunately, bipartisan.
NATO expansion into the former Warsaw Pact started under President Clinton, with the inclusion of Poland, Hungary, and the Czech Republic.
Similarly, President Obama’s administration has reiterated President Bush’s promise of NATO membership for Georgia.
The Levada Center, which performed the poll, is an independent, nongovernmental, Russian research organization.
Russian strategic bombers and jet fighter planes pounded targets in many parts of Georgia on Saturday, hitting apartment buildings and economic installations, as well as military targets in an escalating war that is killing more and more civilians and confounding international efforts to secure a cease-fire.
Russia continued to pour troops and tanks into South Ossetia, the breakaway region of Georgia that triggered the conflict, to confront Georgian forces that are attempting to reclaim the region.
While the article may be factually correct, it gives the impression of naked Russian aggression by describing only the Russian attack, whereas Georgia used heavy artillery on the civilian population of South Ossetia’s capital.
It also failed to mention Georgian actions which played a role in starting the war.
Unpublished documents produced by the European Union commission that investigated the conflict between Georgia and Moscow assign much of the blame to Georgian President Mikhail Saakashvili.
But the Kremlin and Ossetian militias are also partly responsible. … a majority of members tend to arrive at the assessment that Georgian President Mikhail Saakashvili started the war by attacking South Ossetia on August 7, 2008.
The facts assembled on Tagliavini's desk refute Saakashvili's claim that his country became the innocent victim of “Russian aggression” on that day.
The path of freedom you have chosen is not easy but you will not travel it alone.
And as you build a free and democratic Georgia, the American people will stand with you.
The USS McFaul is a huge guided missile destroyer, that was pressed into service on a humanitarian aid mission delivering supplies to the Republic of Georgia.
USS McFaul pulled into the port of Batumi, Georgia, Aug. to deliver humanitarian relief supplies … The United States Coast Guard Cutter Dallas and USS Mount Whitney have also on-loaded humanitarian supplies destined for Georgia.
United States and Russian warships took up positions in the Black Sea today in a risky war of nerves on opposing sides of the Georgia conflict.
In August, the Georgian navy seized a Turkish tanker carrying fuel to Abkhazia, Georgia’s former province … Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili – who launched and lost a war for South Ossetia in 48 hours in August 2008 – has declared the blockade of Abkhazia, which he claims as Georgian national territory, will remain in force.
He seems intent on provoking a new crisis to force NATO to stand with him and bring the United States in on his side – against Russia.
I mean, that is the agreement when you are a NATO ally, is if another country is attacked, you're going to be expected to be called upon and help.
On November 23, 2011, President Medvedev gave a speech in which his demeanor communicated that he saw our current approach to missile defense as a grave danger.
First, I am instructing the Defence Ministry to immediately put the missile attack early warning radar station in Kaliningrad on combat alert.
Today, for the first time in almost 50 years, the United States stands on the verge of attaining nuclear primacy.
It will probably soon be possible for the United States to destroy the long-range nuclear arsenals of Russia or China with a first strike.
The Izvestia article is only available in Russian, but with the help of Dr.
Inna Sayfer, I was able to confirm the accuracy of the English language reports concerning it.
Section 1227 of the defense law prohibits spending any funds that would be used to give Russian officials access to sensitive missile-defense technology, as part of a cooperation agreement without first sending Congress a report identifying the specific secrets, how they would be used and steps to protect the data from compromise.
This paper makes a detailed argument for a National Academies study of the risk that nuclear deterrence could fail.
