Analyzing the Sources Directions:​ Read the following sources pertaining to the Cold War.
Highlight any key details or important quotes that emphasize the messages of the sources.
The roots of the crisis ran back to Krushchev’s ICBM-orientated foreign policies after 1957 and his intense concern with removing NATO power from West Berlin.
By 1962 these policies were related, for the Soviets needed credible strategic force if they hoped to neutralize Western power in Germany.
By the spring of 1962, however, American high officials had publicly expressed their skepticism of Soviet missile credibility.
President Kennedy further observed in a widely publicized interview that under some circumstances the United States would strike first.
In June Defense Secretary McNamara insisted that American missiles were so potent and precise that in a nuclear war they could spare cities and hit only military installations.
Despite the firm belief of an entire generation of American policy-makers and some prominent historians that Krushchev's gamble in Cuba was actually aimed at West Berlin, there is little evidence of that on the Soviet side.
What pushed Krushchev into his worst avantyura was not the pragmatic search for the well being of the Soviet empire.
What mattered for Krushchev was to preserve the impression of communism on the march, which in his opinion, was critical to dismantling the Cold War on Soviet terms.
Only a fool would think that we wanted to invade the American continent from Cuba.
We sent the Americans a letter asking the president to promise there would not be an invasion of Cuba.
It was a great victory for us, though, a triumph of Soviet foreign policy.
Cartoon showing Khrushchev and Kennedy engaged in a trial of strength over the Cuban missile issue.
An extract from a speech by Nikita Khrushchev to the Supreme Soviet, 14 January 1960.
There exist two camps in the world today, each with a different social system.
The countries in these camps form their policies on entirely different lines.
In these circumstances the problem of peaceful coexistence that is, of safeguarding the world against the disaster of a military conflict between these two essentially hostile systems, between the groups of countries in which the two systems dominate is of supreme importance.
Each side will demonstrate its advantages to the best of its ability, but war as a means of settling this dispute must be rejected.
Since Brezhnev came to power, the Soviet revisionist clique has intensified its suppression of the Soviet people and increased the restoration of capitalism.
Externally it has stepped up its collusion with US imperialism and its suppression of the revolutionary struggles of the people of various countries, intensified its exploitation of the various east European countries, and increased its threat of aggression against China.
Its decision to send hundreds of thousands of troops to occupy Czechoslovakia and its armed provocation against China on our territory are two unacceptable acts carried out recently by Soviet revisionism.
The age of America's nearly total dominance of the world stage was drawing to a close.
America's nuclear superiority was eroding and its economic supremacy was being challenged by the dynamic growth of Europe and Japan, both of which had been restored by American resources and sheltered by American security guarantees.
Vietnam finally signalled that it was high time to reassess America's role in the developing world, and to find some sustainable ground between abdication and over-extension.
New opportunities for American diplomacy were presenting themselves as serious cracks opened up in what had been viewed throughout the Cold War as the communist monolith.
Khrushchev's revelations in 1956 of the brutalities of Stalin's rule and the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968, had weakened the ideological appeal of communism for the rest of the world.
Even more important, the split between China and the Soviet Union undermined Moscow's pretence to be the leader of a united communist movement.
All of these developments suggested that there was scope for a new diplomatic flexibility.
Understanding the Messages Directions​: Answer the following Question 9a’s and 9b’s.
The Values and Limitations Directions​: Answer the following Question 10s.
Remember to use the proper language and include at l​ east​ one of every category.
Comparing and Contrasting Directions​: Answer the following Question 11s.
Remember to use the proper language and include at l​ east​ two comparisons and two contrasts for each question.
Try to cover the major events highlighted in her scrapbook as well as major events you know.
