Monthly Guide Events Community Calendar Community Calendar About KUNM People Contact Info Job Openings Radio Board Information UNM Board of Regents Coverage Area KUNM Memories People Contact Info Job Openings Radio Board Information UNM Board of Regents Coverage Area KUNM Memories Support Give Now Thank You Gifts Membership Underwriting Vehicle Donation Gifts Of Stock Or Securities Our Underwriters Give Now Thank You Gifts Membership Underwriting Vehicle Donation Gifts Of Stock Or Securities Our Underwriters © 2022 KUNM Menu 89.
Kennedy enacted the blockade in response to the deployment of Soviet nuclear weapons in Cuba.
The small town of Bejucal, 20 miles south of Havana, looks much as it did in October 1962.
Horse carts carry passengers and fresh-cut green bananas through narrow streets lined with pastel-colored homes.
The sleepy town doesn't seem like the kind of place to put an arsenal of nuclear weapons.
But a military bunker here was the biggest storage depot on the island for the Soviet nuclear weapons 50 years ago.
Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev had secretly put dozens of intermediate and short-range nuclear-armed missiles on the island, disguising some of the rockets as palm trees.
On the morning of October 16, 1962, President John F Kennedy was first told the Soviet Union had installed nuclear weapons in Cuba, and the tense 13 days that followed brought the world as close as it's ever been to nuclear war.
Talk Of A United States Invasion When the United States imposed a naval blockade, Cuba's 36-year-old leader Fidel Castro lined Havana's seafront boulevard with anti-aircraft battalions and told Cubans to brace for an imminent United States invasion.
Carlos Alzugaray, a university student and defense analyst at the Cuba's Foreign Ministry in 1962, remembers coming back to the ministry late at night exhausted after spending the day digging trenches, and getting questions from his colleagues about the United States Army nuclear warfare manual he'd been reading.
They wanted to know what happened would happen if there was a nuclear war.
Like Fidel Castro, he insists it was the failed Bay of Pigs invasion by U.S.-backed Cuban exiles in April 1961 that led directly to the missile crisis, pushing Castro to reach for an equalizer to deter future United States intervention.
Now 86-years-old, the ailing revolutionary hasn't been seen in public since March.
His brother Raul now runs Cuba but doesn't have the same affection for re-hashing the glory days with old foes.
In 2002, Fidel Castro hosted a gathering that brought together aging Soviet commanders with former Kennedy advisers like Robert McNamara and Arthur Schlesinger Jr.
A Low-Key Commemoration This year's commemoration will be far more low-key.
But Cuban scholar Esteban Morales was there 10 years ago and, ironically, he and other Castro supporters have come to see the episode just as many of their American adversaries do.
Because what we've learned over the years about the United States is that you have to have something to negotiate with.
Kennedy gave Khrushchev his word that the United States would not invade Cuba, but Morales says the missiles could have been bargaining chips to end the United States trade embargo, or the covert operations against Castro that carried on for decades.
But by late November 1962, the Soviets removed them anyway, wary of the hot-tempered young Castro.
Over the years, Castro leveraged that perceived betrayal to secure other military hardware and the generous Soviet aid that ensured his survival.
