THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS An Analysis of Soviet Calculations and Behavior* By ARNOLD L HORELICK I N A television interview not long after the Cuban missile crisis of October 1962, President Kennedy observed that both the United States and the Soviet Union had made serious miscalculations in the Cuban affair.
In the months that have elapsed since the first post-crisis flurry of speculation and analysis, a great deal of valuable new information has come to light, particularly in testimony before Congressional committees by high Administration officials.
In mid-December 1962, Khrushchev broke the silence he had maintained for some six weeks and presented before the USSR Supreme Soviet the first in a series of detailed explanations of his actions.
Although the new American and Soviet materials for the most part bear only indirectly on the questions posed above, they provide an improved basis for attempting to answer them.
However, views or conclusions contained in this article are those of the author and should not be interpreted as representing the official opinion or policy of the United States Air Force.
Though these questions cannot now be resolved definitively, we must at least arrive at some provisional answers that can be tested against Soviet behavior in the coming months and years.
If we fail to do this, we reduce the momentous U.S.-Soviet Caribbean confrontation of October 1962 to mere episodic proportions.
Among those who criticized the Administration for acting recklessly as well as among those who regarded its policy as too cautious, the argument was encountered that the Soviet Union, directly or indirectly, had achieved much of what it intended.
Those who criticized the Administration for reacting too cautiously tended to regard the outcome of the crisis as coinciding less with specific Soviet intentions than with general Soviet interests.
He forced them to retract the move, and for a brief while aired their malice before the world.
But to regard the outcome of the Cuban missile crisis as coinciding in any substantial way with Soviet intentions or interests is to mistake skillful salvage of a shipwreck for brilliant navigation.
If the success achieved by the United States in October 1962 proved to be more limited in scope than many believed it would be or had to be, the outcome hardly constituted a net gain for the Soviet Union.
Even if they had been fully achieved, these objectives would have been blatantly disproportionate to the means expended, and to the costs and risks incurred by the Soviet Union in the undertaking.
The Chinese and Albanian Communists, and Castro, too, have correctly — from the Communist point of view — drawn attention to the emptiness of mere verbal pledges by the enemy.
Khrushchev has publicly treated the President's conditional pledge as if it were in full force because he has little else to show for his efforts.
As to any credit Khrushchev may have gained for saving the peace, it is doubtful whether his ""reasonableness"" persuaded many observers of his dedication to peace who were not so persuaded before the crisis.
On the other hand, the ranks of those, both in the Communist camp and outside of it, who regard Khrushchev as an ""adventurer"" or ""capitulator"" have certainly been augmented.
The growth of such beliefs about Khrushchev is not likely to enhance his future political effectiveness.
Finally, to achieve the limited political objectives imputed to them by those who contend that the outcome of the crisis was the one intended by the USSR, the Soviet leaders need not have invested so heavily or risked so much.
At least 42 IL-28 bombers and an equal number of strategic missiles were brought into Cuba by Soviet ships; nine missile sites were established, six of them with four launchers each for the MRBM's, and three of them, fixed sites for the IRBM's, each designed to include four launching positions.
Yet a token force of a few conspicuously deployed MRBM's would alone doubtless have sufficed to provoke a United States demand that the Soviet Union remove them from Cuba.
The magnitude and character of the Soviet strategic weapon deployment in Cuba cast doubt also on a related hypothesis — namely, that the Soviet Union sought merely to compel the United States to withdraw its missiles from Turkey in exchange for the withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba.
The costly and essentially unsalvageable fixed sites that were being prepared to receive IRBM's with a 2,200-mile range were altogether superfluous to any intended Cuba-Turkey missile-base exchange since the United States had no equivalent missiles in Turkey, or anywhere else for that matter.
Of course, a mutual withdrawal of missiles from Cuba and Turkey was explicitly proposed by Khrushchev in his October 27 letter to President Kennedy.
But the mere fact that Khrushchev proposed such an exchange at one point during the crisis, after the United States had demanded the withdrawal of Soviet strategic weapons, no more proves that this was his objective from the start than his subsequent withdrawal of the missiles without such a quid pro quo proves that his ultimate ob7 The Chinese Communists have accused him of being both.
It is true that the withdrawal of United States strategic weapons from Turkey, under apparent Soviet duress, would have given Khrushchev a more tangible return for his trouble than a conditional verbal pledge by the United States not to invade Cuba.
It is one thing for the United States and an allied host country to decide jointly to substitute for some bases other means of defense, such as Polaris submarines in adjacent waters; it is quite another for the United States, under Soviet duress, to withdraw from its bases, regardless of the wishes of its allies.
It seems questionable, however, that the Soviets would accept the costs and risks of deploying missiles in Cuba merely in order to remove them in return for the withdrawal of United States missiles from Turkey.
The phasing out of United States missiles deployed overseas, without a Soviet quid pro quo, was already known to have been under consideration long before the October 1962 crisis,11 though the Soviet leaders may not have been certain regarding United States intentions.
Moreover, because of geographic considerations and the large United States advantage in intercontinental nuclear delivery capabilities, a strategic missile base in Cuba was a far more valuable military asset to the Soviet Union than a comparable base in Turkey to the United States.
It is more likely that the base-exchange proposal was an improvised or perhaps even a prepared fall-back position to cover unfavorable contingencies, but not the Soviet-preferred culmination of the Cuban venture.
Khrushchev's official rationale is that Soviet strategic weapons were deployed in Cuba solely to defend the island against United States attack; and that once the threat of such an attack was removed (by the President's 10 Had the United States accepted the Soviet base-exchange proposal of October 27, Khrushchev would also have received such a United States pledge since a reciprocal exchange of no-invasion pledges was part of the proposed bargain.
Of course, even on its own terms this rationale is deficient, for Khrushchev also acknowledged, presumably to demonstrate that his decision to withdraw the missiles was not a needless concession, that he took that decisive step only when urgent word reached him that a United States attack on Cuba appeared imminent.
Far from deterring the ""imperialists,"" by giving them, in Khrushchev's words, ""a more realistic idea of the danger of thermonuclear war,"" the discovery of Soviet strategic missiles in Cuba provoked a United States naval quarantine, a rapid build-up of United States Army and Tactical Air Forces in the southeastern part of the country, and a world-wide alert of the Strategic Air Command.
We regarded the telegrams received as a signal of utmost alarm, and this alarm was justified.
It must have appeared to Khrushchev, then, that the United States had not only been prepared to attack Cuba despite the presence of Soviet weapons, but precisely because the weapons had been brought in, since evidently only by agreeing to withdraw them did Khrushchev believe he could secure from the President assurances that the United States would not attack.
Presidential statements, made repeatedly in the months preceding the deployment of Soviet missiles in Cuba, that the United States did not intend to invade if offensive weapons were not deployed in Cuba, had apparently not been deemed sufficient; only when such an assurance was made conditional on the removal of Soviet strategic weapons from Cuba, with appropriate international verification, did it become acceptable.
The strange logic of Khrushchev's face-saving explanation of Soviet motives and behavior does not in itself disprove his contention that Soviet missiles were deployed in Cuba solely to deter a United States attack; it 13 Pravda, December 13, 1962; emphasis supplied.
But there are other reasons for doubting Khrushchev's account of Soviet objectives.
These have to do with the appropriateness of the weapons selected to be deployed in Cuba for the ostensible purpose of deterring a United States attack on that country.
Surely a threat to destroy several southeastern United States cities, or even Miami alone, // credible, would have been adequate to deter such an attack.
For this, tactical missiles with a range of several hundred miles would have sufficed.
It could have been claimed that such weapons were designed to strike at airfields and marshaling and embarkation points in the Florida area from which a United States invasion might be mounted.
Perhaps by employing a high lofting technique, the MRBM's that were deployed and the IRBM's that were being prepared could have been used to strike close-in targets, but such long-range missiles are not designed for that purpose.
Whatever marginal incremental value for local deterrence might have been obtained by deploying missiles with ranges in excess of several hundred miles was more than outweighed by the added provocation they offered.
In the United States Castro had gained a reputation for impulsive, irresponsible behavior.
Once an operational missile capability was established in Cuba, such beliefs on the part of Americans might have lent substantial deterrent value to the missiles deployed in Cuba.
On the other hand, to bring Cuba-based missiles to bear in support of Soviet interests in confrontations with the United States (for example, in Berlin), belief that the missiles were at the disposal of the Soviet leaders would have been essential.
Until such time as the Soviet Union might wish to bring the missiles so to bear, however, the Soviet leaders probably would have preferred to keep the question of control in an ambiguous state.
Vague, generalized statements, such as characterize most Soviet strategic threats, might have been employed.
A consideration of probably lesser importance may have been that a premature explicit announcement on control would have obliged Khrushchev to accept certain political liabilities, regardless of whether he claimed that the Soviet Union retained control over the missiles or not.
According to Knox, Khrushchev acknowledged that Soviet ballistic missiles had been furnished to Cuba, but were completely controlled by Soviet officers.
Whatever value the Soviet weapons may have been intended to have as a deterrent of a local United States attack on Cuba was seriously diminished by this reassurance.
It is questionable, however, whether deterrence of a local United States attack on Cuba was ever regarded by the Soviet leaders as more than a subsidiary and derivative effect of a venture intended primarily to serve other ends.
Certainly the size and character of the intended deployment indicate that it was meant to achieve some broader purpose.
T h e implication is that if the weapons had been under Cuban control, the possibility that they might be ""accidentally used"" could not be excluded.
It was not in order to assure our own defense, but first of all to reinforce socialism on the international scale.
Of course, the deployment of Soviet missiles in Cuba, to the extent that it would have strengthened the Soviet position in its ""world-wide"" confrontation with the United States, would also have added credibility to Soviet strategic threats, including the threat to defend Cuba against United States attack.
These bases could have been covered by IRBM's. 23 he Monde, March 22, 1963.
T h e March 22 TASS version of Castro's denial omitted both of the statements quoted above.
After this article was written, Castro was questioned by two other journalists regarding the origination of the plan to deploy Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Cuban leaders, however, consistently interpreted Khrushchev's words as if they represented a firm, though tacit, commitment.
It was presumably to secure such a commitment, which the Soviet Union was evidently reluctant to give, that Castro in effect volunteered Cuba for membership in the ""socialist camp"" in 1961.
As between an explicit and unequivocal Soviet guarantee, on the one hand, and the stationing of Soviet strategic weapons on Cuban soil, on the other, Castro might well have preferred the former under certain circumstances.
But the forces which protected Cuba n o w exist a n d are growing in strength every day.
It does n o t matter where the rockets are located, in Cuba, or elsewhere.
He may have agreed to the Soviet proposal not only because of his dependence on the Soviet Union, but also because, from the Cuban point of view, if the Soviet leaders believed their ""world-wide"" position vis-a-vis the United States was such that it required reinforcement by drastic means, the reliability of Soviet pledges to defend Cuba with Soviet-based weapons—equivocal pledges to begin with—must have seemed seriously compromised.
From the start, the bulk of the USSR's strategic nuclear capability has been effective only out to ranges of about 2,000-2,500 miles.
But the Soviet heavy bomber and ICBM forces—that is, the long-range weapons required to reach the United States—did not attain the strength levels that Western observers anticipated they would reach in the 1960's.
Inflated beliefs in the West, actively promoted by misleading and deceptive Soviet claims, that the Soviet Union was rapidly acquiring a large intercontinental strike force tended, until the fall of 1961, to deprive continued and even growing United States strategic superiority of much of its political value.
Whereas the Soviet leaders, presumably to placate Castro, offered increasingly strong pledges to defend Cuba, Cuban leaders ignored them and vowed to resist any United States attack with their own resources.
Later, however, as Soviet-Cuban relations recovered from the estrangement of the fall of 1962, Cuban leaders began to welcome Soviet pledges with great public enthusiasm.
The Alternatives to Total War,"" Saturday Evening Post, December I, 1962, 18.
The deployment of strategic weapons in Cuba may have recommended itself to the Soviet leaders as a ""quick fix"" measure to achieve a substantial, though far from optimal, improvement in Soviet strike capabilities against the United States.
Of course, a large increase in the programmed Soviet-based ICBM force would have provided the Soviet leaders with a military capability far more effective (certainly for second-strike purposes) than could be achieved by the emplacement of highly vulnerable MRBM's, IRBM's, and light bombers in Cuba.
But such an expansion of the ICBM (and missile-launching nuclear submarine) force could be achieved only gradually and at far greater cost.
The Cuban deployment may not have been undertaken as a substitute for such a build-up, but as a stopgap measure, pending its completion.
Certainly the deployment of limited numbers of MRBM's and IRBM's in Cuba would not have solved the Soviet Union's strategic problem.
The evident deficiencies of such a force have led some observers to conclude that military considerations were of little importance in the Soviet decision to emplace strategic weapons in Cuba.
It is true that the missile sites were soft, very close to the United States, and, after detection, under close and constant surveillance.
As a Soviet first-strike force, the Cuba-based force deployed or being readied as of October 1962 was in itself too small to destroy the United States strategic nuclear strike force.
Even together with the larger long-range strategic force based in the USSR, it seems most unlikely that the force would have been adequate in the fall of 1962; moreover, there would have been a problem, though perhaps not an insurmountable one, of coordinating salvoes from close-in and distant bases so as to avoid a ragged attack.
By the same token, however, the installation of Soviet strategic missiles in Cuba would have complicated a United States first strike, improved Soviet capabilities to launch a preemptive attack, and hence reduced the credibility of United States strategic deterrence of local Soviet aggression, say, in Europe.
As to the first-strike potential of Cuba-based Soviet missiles, they could have brought a substantial portion of United States nuclear 30 Soviet strategic pronouncements after the fall of 1961 shifted from claims of superiority to efforts to deprive American claims to superiority of political value by emphasizing the adequacy of Soviet retaliatory capability.
The emphasis in claims regarding the USSR's strike capability against the United States shifted from the high level of destruction that could be inflicted to the certainty that some unspecified level of retaliation would occur.
Whatever their strategic shortcomings, the additional capabilities with which Cuba-based missiles would have provided the Soviet leaders were not insignificant.
It is difficult to conceive of any other measure that promised to produce so large an improvement in the Soviet strategic position as quickly or as cheaply.
That the Cuban missile deployment would not in itself have provided the Soviet Union with a retaliationproof first-strike capability against the United States is hardly a reason for dismissing it as of limited strategic importance, as some observers have attempted to do.
As the President subsequently said, the Soviet leaders tried materially to change the balance of power.
It had become evident, since at least the second half of 1961, that the forward momentum of the Soviet Union in international affairs had largely exhausted itself without yielding the gains which the Soviet leaders had anticipated and the West had feared since the mid-i95o's.
These expectations had been fed by mounting evidence of the growing military, scientific, technological, and economic power of the Soviet Union vis-a-vis the West.
Some of this evidence was real enough, but much of it, particularly in the realm of strategic power, was illusory.
The effects of other striking achievements, as, for example, in space exploration, were amplified, sometimes out of all proportion to their intrinsic political and military worth, by their presumed bearing on the strategic balance.
With the discovery that the ""missile gap"" had failed to materialize, or had actually materialized in reverse, there was a perceptible change in the world political climate.
Western self-confidence was restored and Soviet anxieties must have grown.
Western European prosperity had reached a new peak, and despite de Gaulle's intransigence the prospects for growing European economic and political unity must (then, at least) have looked distressingly good to Moscow.
At the same time, the unity of the Communist camp was being shattered by the escalating conflict between its two most powerful members.
Indeed, the Chinese Communist attack on Khrushchev centered precisely on the unfavorable trend in the cold war which the Chinese attributed to Khrushchev's faulty and overcautious leadership.
Finally, there was the long-smoldering, still unresolved problem of Berlin.
After almost four years of threats and retreats, Khrushchev had still not succeeded in compelling the West to accept a Berlin settlement on Soviet terms.
Khrushchev may therefore have sought some quick and dramatic means for achieving a breakthrough that would strengthen the USSR's position — militarily, diplomatically, and psychologically — on a whole range of outstanding issues, and particularly on Berlin.
It is most unlikely that the Soviet leaders drew up a precise blueprint or detailed timetable for exploitation of the improved military-political position they would have attained had the Cuban venture been successful.
But they probably anticipated that the emplacement of strategic missiles in Cuba and their acceptance by the United States would contribute in some degree to the solution of a whole range of military-political problems confronting the Soviet Union and would alter the environment of the cold war in such a manner as to promote new opportunities for political gain whose nature could not be precisely foreseen.
Khrushchev may have hoped to discourage any new United States action in regard to Cuba until after the elections , by offering, in return, to desist from fomenting a new crisis in Berlin, and then, after establishing a strategic base in Cuba, to use this new leverage to press for a favorable settlement in Berlin.
With the benefit of hindsight, many Western observers have concluded that Khrushchev's bold move in Cuba was doomed to failure from the start.
This in turn has led to the conjecture that Khrushchev never intended to leave the missiles in Cuba, but wished merely to exact political concessions from the United States in return for their withdrawal.
Others, who also believed the odds against success for the Soviets were very high, concluded that Khrushchev's Cuban gamble explodes one of the articles of faith of Kremlinologists about Bolshevik behavior— namely, the tenet that holds that good Bolsheviks will not engage in adventurism, adventurism being defined as the taking of even small risks of large catastrophes, such as the destruction of the citadel of communism, the Soviet Union.
But while the Soviet leaders evidently did accept some unusually high military and political risks in embarking on the Cuban venture, the risk of an immediate United States thermonuclear response against the Soviet Union was almost certainly not one of them.
Moreover, whatever errors they may have made in anticipating the character and intensity of the U.S. response, they were doubtless correct in excluding that one.
This established a very crucial upper limit on the risks they did willingly accept.
This was true when the strategic balance was far more unfavorable to the Soviet Union than it was in October 1962.
In part this confidence has been based on the powerful indirect deterrent threat of Soviet military power, at first only conventional, and then nuclear, poised to strike Western Europe, the hostage.
Later it was reinforced by the threat of even a quantitatively modest intercontinental strike force and of growing United States uncertainty regarding the size of that force and the possible upper limits of damage that it could inflict upon the United States.
Even when the United States enjoyed decisive strategic superiority, its leaders showed themselves to be strongly disinclined to initiate general war so long as the Soviet Union avoided extreme measures of provocation that could not be dealt with by other means.
Increasingly it must have appeared to the Soviet leaders that nothing short of the actual application of violence against the United States or an important United States ally would risk a United States nuclear attack on the Soviet Union.
The history of the cold war demonstrates that the Soviet leaders have sufficient reason for such an estimate.
This estimate is crucial for assessing Soviet risk calculations in Cuba.
If one excludes from Soviet precrisis calculations serious concern that the United States, even if it detected the missile build-up before completion, would launch a thermonuclear attack against the Soviet Union, then the venture no longer appears to have been a reckless long-shot gamble, but a more familiar calculated and limited risk accepted for sufficiently weighty stakes.
This does not mean that as the crisis unfolded the Soviet leaders did not become concerned that a situation might be arising in which a real danger of nuclear war might be created.
In fact, the quick withdrawal of their missiles, as we shall see, may be interpreted as a decision to end the crisis quickly before it became necessary to accept even greater losses which could be avoided, if at all, only at the cost of facing serious risk of nuclear war.
Undoubtedly, the Soviet leaders' understanding (or misunderstanding) of United States Cuban policy was a major factor in their decision.
The illfated Bay of Pigs invasion attempt of April 1961, while it may have demonstrated the depths of United States hostility toward Castro, may have also suggested to the Soviet leaders that United States reluctance to engage its own forces directly in military action against Cuba was so great that even the emplacement of Soviet strategic weapons on the island would be tolerated, or at least resisted by means short of the direct use of U.S. armed forces.
At the same time, the fact that the United States had attempted, even though ineffectually, through the use of Cuban exile proxies, to overthrow Castro, both increased Castro's desire for Soviet military assistance and made such assistance seem legitimate to many third countries.
The Soviet arms build-up in Cuba was conducted in fairly distinct phases, beginning with the delivery of basic conventional weapons, then working up to more sophisticated weapon systems of a tactical type, and finally to advanced SA-2 surface-to-air missiles, which had been at least partially deployed before strategic missiles were introduced into the island in September 1962.
Doubtless the United States reaction to the arrival of each new type of weapon was closely observed in Moscow.
If so, the Soviet leaders evidently resolved these uncertainties in favor of assuming United States toleration.
The President's warnings may have raised anxiety in Moscow, but they clearly did not deter the Soviet leaders.
They may further have relied on their ability to achieve an operational capability with the missiles quickly enough to ensure the success of the venture.
T h e missile sites would still have been highly vulnerable to attack a n d Soviet reluctance to initiate a U.S.-Soviet nuclear exchange would presumably still have been sufficiently great to make the threat of a United States attack on Cuban bases highly credible.
However, sufficient doubt might have arisen on the United States side so as to cause a different United States policy to be adopted for dealing with the crisis.
Allegations, sometimes attributed to Cuban refugees and sometimes even to unnamed members of the intelligence community, that Soviet strategic missiles were present in Cuba had been publicized in the United States even before the first shipment of these weapons is believed to have arrived in Cuba.
From the Soviet point of view, the airing of these charges may not have been harmful.
Moreover, the Soviet leaders may also have believed that the Administration would be reluctant to expose the Soviet Union publicly on the eve of national elections out of concern for unfavorable domestic political repercussions that might be expected if the elections were held with the missiles still in Cuba and no Soviet commitment to withdraw them.
In general, the Soviet leaders probably believed that time worked in their favor and that it was therefore necessary to utilize deception and diplomacy to gain it.
They could hardly have expected to be able to maintain their deception indefinitely; indeed, the objectives they pursued required at some point that the new Soviet military capabilities be discovered or revealed.
In the event of premature detection, the Soviet leaders may have relied on diplomacy to take over from deception.
They may also have expected that there would be some significant opposition in the Organization of American States to any United States proposals for immediate joint action requiring the use of military forces.
In short, the Soviet leaders probably estimated that the likelihood of prompt unilateral action by the United States was small.
The collapse of confidence which evidently caused Khrushchev on October 26 to send off to President Kennedy a private communication in which he reportedly indicated that he was prepared to yield may have been the culminating point of a whole series of disappointed expectations.
Because these expectations were not realized, however, does not necessarily mean they were without reasonable bases.
One other consideration that may have weighed heavily in Soviet planning must be mentioned here—Berlin.
But there was no lack of evidence available to the Soviet leaders to make it appear plausible to them that United States policy on Cuba might be influenced critically by United States concern over the threat to West Berlin.
But, again in this regard, their expectations were not entirely without foundation.
Implicitly, some reasons have been adduced in the preceding discussion of probable Soviet pre-crisis miscalculations.
As it turned out, however, the Soviet deployment was not yet completed when the President instituted the quarantine and demanded the withdrawal of Soviet strategic weapons.
By imposing a quarantine on strategic arms shipments to Cuba as the first in a series of measures designed not only to prevent a further build-up, but to secure the removal of weapons already on the island—the other measures remained deliberately unspecified—the United States in some sense shifted on to the Soviet side the immediate burden of decision regarding the precipitation of violence.
As an initial response the quarantine was considerably less than a direct application of violence, but considerably more than a mere protest or verbal threat.
The United States Navy placed itself physically between Cuba and Soviet ships bound for Cuban ports.
Technically, it might still have been necessary for the United States to fire the first shot had Khrushchev chosen to defy the quarantine, though other means of preventing Soviet penetration might have been employed.
They could submit to the quarantine by permitting their vessels to be stopped, searched, and, if they carried contraband, to be seized; or they could avoid a showdown by keeping their ships out of the quarantine area—which, with the exception of an oil tanker clearly identifiable as such, is what they actually did;45 or they could precipitate the use of violence by attempting to violate the quarantine, perhaps with the aid of submarines.
Soviet prospects for success in such an undertaking were very poor; and the outlook could not have appeared any brighter to them at any of the successively higher local levels of violence that could be contemplated.
United States success in securing prompt and unanimous support for the quarantine in the OAS and the active participation of naval elements from some Latin American countries in the operation must have made the Soviet leaders pessimistic about the chances of bringing diplomatic pressure effectively to bear on the United States to lift the quarantine.
It removed the ground from under any Soviet effort to involve the United States in negotiations with the Cuban Government, as the Soviet leaders subsequently attempted unsuccessfully to do in connection with the IL-28 bombers.
Diplomatically and morally, the United States decision to confront the Soviet Union directly made it possible to separate the specific issue of the menacing Soviet weapon deployment in Cuba from the broad and controversial issue of U.S.-Cuban relations.
This refers not only to the prompt and successful implementation of the quarantine, the rapid securing of OAS cooperation and NATO support, but above all 45 Sixteen out of 18 Soviet dry-cargo ships en route to Cuba, presumably those containing quarantined items, reversed course and returned to the Soviet Union.
There is no doubt that these preparations were carefully noted by Moscow, and we can probably take at face value Khrushchev's statement of December 12, 1962, that he took his decision to withdraw Soviet missiles from Cuba after receiving urgent word that a United States attack was imminent.
These preparations must have persuaded him that he had to act quickly in order to limit his losses.
Whether it was mainly conventional United States military superiority in the Caribbean area or overall United States strategic nuclear superiority that won the day—a hotly debated question in the aftermath of the crisis—does not strike this writer as a useful way to pose the problem.
The immediate military threat confronting the Soviet leaders was, of course, that posed locally to Soviet forces in Cuba and to the Castro regime.
Extraordinary alert measures taken by the Strategic Air Command, including such conspicuous ones as the dispersal of B-47's to auxiliary civilian airfields, underscored this determination.
Manifest United States strategic superiority rendered Soviet strategic deterrence of a local United States attack on Cuba inoperable.
But United States strategic superiority also made it too risky for the Soviet Union to play or, under the circumstances, even threaten to play the Berlin trump card.
While some Western observers feared that the Soviet Union might attempt to dissuade the United States from calling the Soviet hand in Cuba by threatening to retaliate in Berlin, the Soviet leaders apparently feared that a threatening Soviet move in that city, particularly in the midst of a crisis in the Caribbean, would be dangerously provocative.
The role played by Berlin in the Cuban crisis during the fall of 1962 dramatizes the curious role that threats, expectations, fears, and hopes regarding that city have played in the cold war since Khrushchev in November 1958 opened the long second round of the East-West struggle over the divided city.
Many regarded the Cuban missile deployment as designed chiefly to improve the Soviet bargaining position in the renewed crisis that was expected to be raised by the Russians after the United States elections in 1962.
Since the Soviets appeared to be so intent on securing better leverage in Berlin, it would seem that they regarded it as too risky to proceed there without such leverage.
Yet many who believed that Berlin was the real objective of the Soviet missile deployment also believed there was great danger that the Soviet leaders would retaliate in 48 Pravda, December 14, 1962.
United States strategic superiority and the Western allies' determination to preserve their rights in West Berlin made it too risky for the Soviets to employ their local military superiority in order to impose a settlement; yet the West must proceed with great caution elsewhere lest it provide the Soviet Union with a pretext for imposing its will in Berlin, or compel the Soviet leaders to do so, even against their better judgment, in order to ""save face"" for a defeat in some other part of the world.
However, the Soviet leaders have never needed pretexts for plucking ripe fruits from the vine.
The foreseeable consequences of a Western defeat in Berlin provide more than enough incentive for the Soviet leaders to administer it if they think they can do so safely.
The four preceding years of bluster and retreat in Berlin had certainly been ""humiliating"" enough.
The Soviet threat to strike Western Europe in the event of a United States attack on the Soviet Union is highly credible because the ultimate catastrophe to the USSR would have already occurred when the threat would have to be executed; but to retaliate in West Berlin for some lesser Western ""provocation"" might cause that very catastrophe to be brought down upon the Soviet Union when it could otherwise be avoided.
But if United States nuclear power served no function other than to neutralize that of the Soviet Union, it is difficult to understand why preponderant Soviet conventional military power has not enabled the USSR to prevail in Berlin.
