The guides are created and maintained by the Museum’s librarian/archivist and are carefully selected to help users, unfamiliar with the collections, begin finding information about topics such as Dealey Plaza Eyewitnesses, Conspiracy Theories, the 1960 Presidential Election, Lee Harvey Oswald and Cuba to name a few.
For broader historical context, information about the history of Cuba, the Cold War, the Bay of Pigs invasion and the U-2 spy mission is provided.
Resources also shed light on how Americans dealt with the fear of imminent war and the legacy of the crisis.
BOOKS The selections below detail the Cold War politics that led to the confrontation between the United States’ and the Soviet Union over offensive missiles in Cuba.
Furthermore, the relationship between the assassination of President Kennedy and Lee Harvey Oswald’s desire to join the communist movement and the subsequent conspiracy theories involving Cuba that arose are also explored.
Resource Guide | Cuba, Communism, and the Cold War | August 2018 Page 1 of 9 Naftali, Timothy J., Philip Zelikow, and Ernest R May.
Several selections examine conspiracy theories which posit theories linking Cuba to the assassination of President Kennedy.
Resource Guide | Cuba, Communism, and the Cold War | August 2018 Page 3 of 9 COLLECTIONS The Museum’s collection provides access to a variety of primary resources; visit our online collections database for more information.
For research assistance, please contact the Reading Room at readingroom@jfk.org or 214.389.3070.
Artifacts This selection of artifacts, documents, newspapers and magazines from the Museum’s permanent collection highlights Cold War propaganda, United States government civil defense materials and Lee Harvey Oswald’s association with Cuba.
At Last The Truth About the Bay of Pigs booklet, September 1964 “Decision for Disaster: At Last The Truth About the Bay of Pigs” by Mario Lazo.
In the article, Lazo argues that the Bay of Pigs invasion failed because of changes to the military plan made by the White House.
Also discusses the John Birch Society and a “campaign of hatred” for communists in the United States.
Letter discusses a Cuban citizen’s fears of invasion, a desire for liberation, the decision of whether or not to go to the United States if nothing changes for its citizens, Fidel Castro, and revolutionary work against the communist government.
Letter discusses the fears and frustrations of Cuban citizens, feeling as if they are stuck in the middle between two governments.
The author refers to Castro as “the tyrant” and speaks of fighting for freedom for Cuba from communism.
The letter mentions Russian ships bringing arms and ammunition to Cuba, and the author talks about quietly trying to get a visa to leave the country and go to the United States.
Resource Guide | Cuba, Communism, and the Cold War | August 2018 Page 4 of 9 1996.006.0442 – Dallas Times Herald newspaper, June 25, 1976 Front section of the Dallas Times Herald contains an article titled “LBJ hinted at Cuban link to JFK death” begins on the front page and continues on page 5 of the section.
The article reports on claims made by ABC News commentator Howard K Smith that President Johnson had implied to him in a private conversation that Cuba was involved in the assassination of President Kennedy.
There are black-and-white photographs of men who participated in the invasion.
The tin is gold in color with writing on one end denoting its contents and weight 2000.033.0001 – “Fallout Shelter” sign Black-and-yellow metal fallout shelter sign.
These signs were used as demarcation for the location of fallout shelters for the United States public.
Pins of this nature were distributed during the 1950s and 1960s in response to the Cold War and communism.
Included are materials reading, “Hands Off Cuba!,” cameras, photographs, film, papers, binoculars and other unidentified objects.
Martin traveled to New Orleans and on August 9, while walking on Canal Street, he witnessed and filmed an altercation among several men, one of whom was Lee Harvey Oswald, who was handing out pro-Castro literature and was confronted by three anti-Castro Cuban exiles led by Carlos Bringuier.
One of the men sitting is named Rolanda Cubela, who claimed that he was a part of a plan with the CIA to assassinate Castro.
This is part of the HSCA investigation of Lee Harvey Oswald’s connections to Cuban and Soviet governments during his visit to Mexico.
The letter written by President Kennedy to American citizens discusses what to do in case of a nuclear attack.
What to Know and Do about Nuclear Attack” is the title of this 1961 pamphlet put out by the Department of Defense.
The pamphlet uses “the best consensus of the scientific community” to explain the dangers of a thermonuclear attack and also aims to provide an in-depth description of the national civil defense program.
These letters, originally written by Oswald 06/10/1962 09/01/1963 but likely copied for the Warren Commission in 1964, were collectively considered Exhibit #56 in the Warren Commission’s investigation.
Poster uses sarcastic motifs and red-and-yellow caricature drawings, reminiscent of travel advertisements used by the airline industry, to poke fun at Soviet ideology and the political figures involved in the Cold War.
Poster depicts the Soviet communist symbol of the hammer and sickle in yellow against a maroon-colored background.
Was given to a family who were living at the United States naval base at Guantanamo Bay in 1962.
When they arrived in Norfolk, VA, an enterprising person offered to make them an ashtray with the official evacuation orders on it as a souvenir of the event.
Resource Guide | Cuba, Communism, and the Cold War | August 2018 Page 6 of 9 ORAL HISTORIES The audio-visual Oral History Collection offers personal insights into the history and culture of the 1960s.
To listen to oral history interviews and request research assistance, contact the Reading Room at readingroom@jfk.org or 214.389.3070.
Oral history interviews may be recorded by appointment at The Sixth Floor Museum or elsewhere in the Dallas-Fort Worth area or by telephone for participants who live outside of north Texas.
The Museum’s Oral History Collection includes a wide variety of childhood recollections from the early 1960s.
Most interview subjects are asked to briefly reflect on their memories of the Cold War, including their participation in duck-and-cover drills in school and any conversations with family members about what to do in case of a nuclear attack.
The 2018 oral history with Raymond Sinibaldi is one example of this type of childhood recollection.
The curated selection below also offers personal recollections from Cuban nationals who fled Cuba and the Castro regime and participated in the Bay of Pigs invasion.
Assault Brigade 2506 Cuban nationals Estaban Caras, Rene Gonzalez, Felix Rodriguez and Juan Perez Franco served as part of the Bay of Pigs invasion force.
Eileen Albert A home economics teacher in 1963, Albert visited the Capitol Rotunda on the weekend of the assassination to pay her respects to President Kennedy.
Ruben Esquivel An ex officio member of the Dallas County Historical Foundation’s board of directors, Esquivel was a native Cuban who fled his homeland when Fidel Castro came to power.
Rick Kervin Kervin’s late father, Richard J Kervin, attended the breakfast at the Hotel Texas on November 22, 1963, and obtained one of President Kennedy’s last autographs, signed less than two hours before the assassination.
Previously, at the height of the Cold War in 1962, Kervin’s family built a bomb shelter in their backyard in case of a nuclear attack.
Resource Guide | Cuba, Communism, and the Cold War | August 2018 Page 7 of 9 Delia Reyes A Cuban native now living in Dallas, Reyes fled her homeland when Fidel Castro came to power.
Raymond Sinibaldi Sinibaldi’s late grandfather, William Kelly, became friends with John F Kennedy in 1935 and worked on his 1946 congressional and 1952 senatorial campaigns.
Living History with Captain Maury Seitz – The Sixth Floor Museum at Dealey Plaza A former United States Air Force captain who later served as a longtime captain for American Airlines, Seitz was co-pilot on numerous chartered flights that backed up Air Force One during the Kennedy presidency.
This symposium was moderated by Jim Riddlesperger, TCU Presidential Scholar, and panelists included John Hernandez, President of the Fort Worth Hispanic Chamber of Commerce; Carlos Fonts, native Cuban and Bay of Pigs veteran; Dr.
David LaFevor, UTA Assistant Professor of Latin American History and Digital Humanities, and Juan Hernandez, former advisor to Mexican President Vicente Fox.
The discussion includes Kennedy’s position on immigration and examines how the topic continues to affect the Cuban community.
Duck and Cover Duck and Cover was a social guidance film produced in 1951 by the United States federal government’s Civil Defense branch shortly after the Soviet Union began nuclear testing.
It was shown in schools as the cornerstone of the government’s “duck and cover” public awareness campaign.
The movie states that nuclear war could happen at any time without warning, and United States citizens should keep this constantly in mind and be ever ready.
Access to the historical archives is also available in the Museum’s Reading Room.
The JFK Presidential Library & Museum also offers Curricular Resources, educational resources and lesson plans sorted by grade level.
Covers basic concepts of capitalism, socialism, communism, containment, mutual armed destruction, the Monroe Doctrine and the Marshall Plan.
Marxist Internet Archive – The Militant newspaper By 1962, Lee Harvey Oswald had left Russia and was back in the United States and working in downtown Dallas.
The Marxist Internet Archive provides online access to the March 11, 1963 issue of The Militant, a copy of which was found among Oswald’s possessions.
National Archives DocsTeach – Photographs and Pamphlet about Nuclear Fallout As tensions during the Cold War between America and the Soviet Union escalated over nuclear war, the need to develop and popularize civil defense procedures became more apparent.
Shielding barriers such as “fallout shelters” and “duck and cover” drills became a part of life’s routine in the 1950s and early 1960s.
Whistlestop – Kennedy and Communism In this three-part podcast series, John Dickerson, co-host of CBS This Morning, takes an informative and fresh look at President Kennedy’s “bumbling” of the Bay of Pigs invasion and relationship with Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev.
