The Cold War was a political struggle between the Western world, represented by the United States and NATO allies and the Eastern Bloc, organized by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and its allies.
Initially, the superpowers focused on post-World War II Europe as they tried to win over states to their sides.
As the Cold War progressed and dividing lines in Europe were consolidated, the superpowers increasingly focused on the developing world in South America, Asia, and Africa.
John F Kennedy was President of the United States, having been elected in 1960.
Nikita Khrushchev assumed control of the Soviet Union in 1953 following the death of the previous leader Joseph Stalin.
The book The Kennedy Tapes, edited by Ernest May and Philip Zelikow, provides a transcript of the group’s deliberations.
Fidel Castro was a revolutionary who in 1959 overthrew the government of Cuba, an island state 90 miles away from the U.S., and became its new leader.
Castro first began his revolutionary struggle in 1953; after an initial defeat, he regrouped and launched a successful insurgency that caused President Fulgencio Batista to flee and allowed Castro to seize power.
The Cuban government was initially neutral to the superpower competition.
The Soviet Union initially was at first uninterested in Cuba, and Castro even toured the United States in 1959.
Yet Castro frayed the relationship with America when he threatened, and ultimately undertook, reforms that would harm American-owned property in the country.
The increasingly hostile relationship with the United States provided an opening for the Soviet Union.
Castro formed trade ties with Moscow and as Cuba grew closer to the USSR, relations with Washington deteriorated further.
The United States revoked its diplomatic recognition of Cuba at the beginning of 1961.
Founded in 1949, the alliance aimed to deter a Soviet invasion of Western Europe.
The alliance provided for collective defense, meaning that an attack against one member state was an attack against all members of the alliance.
NATO still exists and has added many ex-Communist countries in Europe as part of the alliance.
The alliance was formed to deter a Western invasion of the member states that were part of the USSR’s sphere of influence.
It was founded in 1955, in part due to West Germany’s accession to NATO, and was sometimes referred to as the Eastern Bloc.
The decline and fall of the Soviet Union led to the Warsaw Pact’s dissolution in 1991.
The Western allies established a democratic, capitalist government in their portion while the Soviets put in place a communist government in the territory they controlled.
Yet the former capital city of Berlin, situated in East Germany had also been divided into Western and Eastern zones.
Therefore, due to the Western occupation of half of Berlin, an exclave of West Germany was surrounded by East Germany.
In 1948, the Soviet Union tried to force the Western powers out of Berlin by blockading all land routes to West Berlin until full control of the city was handed over to the Soviets.
The Western powers overcame this by airlifting supplies to Berlin, until the Soviets ended the blockade in 1949.
In 1958, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev issued an ultimatum to NATO demanding that it relinquish West Berlin to East Germany.
Khrushchev originally gave a six-month deadline, but this was continually pushed back until the crisis escalated in 1961.
During the summer of 1961, Khrushchev met Kennedy in Vienna and demanded yet again that NATO hand over control of West Berlin to East Germany.
This summit preceded the Soviet/East German decision to seal off West Berlin by building the Berlin Wall.
Beginning on August 13, the Soviets and East Germans built a wall that bisected the city and prevented free passage between the Western and Eastern zones.
Beginning on October 27, American and Soviet forces faced off at “Checkpoint Charlie,” an access point controlling passage across the wall.
The Berlin Crisis was eventually resolved when the United States acquiesced to the wall’s construction in November 1961.
However, Khrushchev had not yet achieved his objective of establishing East German control over West Berlin.
Khrushchev believed that the installation of Soviet missiles in Cuba could be used as leverage in negotiations over Berlin.
Khrushchev thought that Washington might trade the removal of Soviet missiles from Cuba missiles for NATO’s retreat from West Berlin.
Additional reasons included defending Cuba from American invasion and bolstering Soviet prestige.
The United States had prepared for a possible war in Europe by placing nuclear weapons in allied countries.
Bombers and ballistic missiles capable of delivering nuclear weapons were intended as a deterrent against a Soviet invasion of Germany and other NATO countries.
Nuclear missiles were placed in Turkey, a NATO member that shared a border with two Soviet republics, because of its proximity to the Soviet Union.
Many members of EXCOMM argued in favor of a military strike to destroy the nuclear missiles in Cuba before they became operational.
President Kennedy, however, did not want to escalate to war so quickly.
Instead, he decided to blockade Cuba to prevent the installation of additional Soviet nuclear missiles.
While this step did not defuse the crisis, it bought the President time and avoided a direct attack against Cuba.
The Soviets installed 36 to 42 medium SS-4 medium-range ballistic missiles in Cuba.
Six of the missiles were decoy versions to deceive a potential American attack or for use in training.
Soviet commanders were initially authorized to use these weapons with no further input from Moscow.
That changed on October 27, when the Soviet government instructed them not to be fired without authorization from Moscow.
The Soviets also had 80 Sopka-variant cruise missiles in four missile batteries arrayed along the Cuban coast.
Many, if not all, of the warheads for these missiles were delivered to Cuba by the beginning of the Missile Crisis on October 14, 1962.
There were six nuclear bombs in Cuba capable of being carried by the IL-28s, each with a 12 kiloton yield.
Yes. intermediate-range ballistic missiles were also intended to be installed in Cuba.
These missiles could have hit as far away as Chicago, Boston, and even Newfoundland.
The United States blockade prevented these from being delivered to Cuba.
Yes. warheads suitable for use on the 36 MRBMs arrived on October 4, 1962.
Just before the blockade took effect on October 21, 24 warheads for the IRBMs had arrived; however, the missiles to carry those warheads were never delivered because of the blockade.
Had the Americans discovered the missile sites two weeks later, the MRBMs would have been armed and ready for launch against the United States.
Had the IL-28s successfully penetrated America’s air defenses in the southeast, they could have hit American cities.
If the United States had invaded Cuba, the local commander had been authorized to use tactical nuclear weapons in defense of the island.
If tactical nuclear weapons had been used against United States forces, escalation to full nuclear war between the superpowers would have been very likely.
At the time, according to Robert McNamara, the Americans did not believe there were nuclear warheads in Cuba.
They also only estimated that there were 10,000 Soviet soldiers in Cuba, not the 40,000 that were actually there.
On October 27, President Kennedy dispatched his brother Attorney General Robert F Kennedy to make an offer to the Soviet ambassador to the U.S., Anatoly Dobrynin, in the hope of defusing the crisis.
The United States refused to publically admit to removing the Turkish missiles because it did not want to appear weak.
The reasons why Khrushchev withdrew missiles from Cuba are still somewhat uncertain.
Khrushchev knew that war over Cuba could quickly escalate into nuclear war that would destroy both superpowers and the Soviet government won what Khrushchev considered significant concessions from the U.S: the pledge never to invade Cuba and to remove American missiles from Turkey.
Vice President Lyndon Johnson attended almost all of the key White House meetings.
UN ambassador and former presidential candidate Adlai Stevenson traveled to Washington and joined a few of the White House sessions, as did former Secretary of Defense Robert Lovett.
