The events brought to a head the ongoing attempts by the United States rulers to overthrow the Cuban revolutionary government.
The ‘Missile’ Crisis as Seen from Cuba, by Cuban author Tomás Diez Acosta, tells the story of what really happened.
Diez Acosta details how, in November 1961 the Kennedy administration put in place a series of covert operations aimed at invading the island.
Click here for Background to 1962 ‘missile’ crisis in Cuba ***** BY TOMÁS DIEZ ACOSTA As the Cuban people undertook huge efforts to develop their country despite the campaign of subversion, new plans for aggression were being drawn up in the United States.
A debate was under way in Washington over the most effective method of directing, applying, and controlling the many resources devoted to overthrowing the Cuban revolutionary government.
Just as in their earlier analysis of the Bay of Pigs operation, failures were ascribed to operational problems.
Once again Washington underestimated the capacity of the Cuban people and their revolutionary leadership to successfully confront the challenges that such a hostile policy posed for their country.
In practice, this meant the preparation of a new covert operation, not merely by the CIA but by the entire United States government.
The president asked Assistant Special Counsel Richard N Goodwin for his opinion.
Goodwin, who also headed the Interagency Task Force, replied in a memorandum, ""The beauty of such an operation over the next few months is that we cannot lose.
Operation Mongoose takes shape At a White House meeting on November 3, 1961, Kennedy authorized the development of a new program, much more sinister than its predecessors, designed to destroy the Cuban Revolution.
As a first step, several documents were prepared laying out the government’s existing action plans and its options against Cuba.
Among the scenarios foreseen in this paper was that a general uprising would occur in Cuba as the result of a power struggle and massive reprisals against political opponents of the regime.
In that situation, a devious plan would be implemented to prepare the ideological and political conditions for military intervention.
As for the acceptability and feasibility of an invasion of Cuba, the document asserted, ""American investments will suffer less in the long run than they would if Castro-Communism continued and spread throughout the hemisphere.
The Alliance for Progress program will not encounter serious obstacles as a result of this action.
Analyzing the repercussions that such action might have in Latin America, the document stated, ""Widespread organized Communist disturbances will occur immediately but the more quickly the Castro regime is crushed the greater the difficulty the Communists will encounter in maintaining existing disturbances and in mounting further disturbances.
On November 20, 1961, President Kennedy called the incoming CIA director, John A McCone, to inform him that a new program of action against Cuba was being studied.
Edward Lansdale, an expert on guerrilla and antisubversive operations, would be in charge of designing the project, under the direct supervision of the attorney general.
The president told McCone that he and his brother Robert wanted the plan to be ready in two weeks.
So obsessed were the Kennedys with the problem of Cuba that they proposed this committee be able to ""cut across"" the command structure of other agencies.
McCone opposed this course, explaining the difficulties that it might pose once the operation was under way.
Ten days later, on November 30, 1961, President Kennedy officially communicated the key decisions made concerning the new operation in a presidential memorandum to the secretaries of state and defense, the director of the CIA, the attorney general, Richard Goodwin, and Generals Taylor and Lansdale.
The memorandum ordered the use of all ""our available assets to... overthrow the communist regime"" and designated General Lansdale as chief of operations, with the responsibility to lead the project through the appropriate government organizations and departments.
Kennedy also directed the secretaries of state and defense and the director of the Central Intelligence Agency to appoint ""senior officers of their department as personal representatives to assist the Chief of Operations as required.
This document can be considered the first draft of the Cuba Project aimed at overthrowing the revolution.
Utilizing his authority to employ all available means in the project, Lansdale openly spelled out the tasks of different agencies involved--tasks that had already been undertaken covertly but had not been put in writing in documents such as this.
These included a proposal that the CIA undertake ""bold new actions"" and that it utilize the ""potential of the underworld"" and, in close cooperation with the FBI, ""enlist the assistance of American links"" to the Mafia in Cuba.
This draft of Operation Mongoose was discussed and approved by Group 5412 without changing or amending any of the projected tasks.
Based on those projections, Lansdale and his operational group conducted studies and coordinated with the departments and agencies involved to finalize their project of secret war against Cuba.
It envisioned thirty-two tasks to be carried out by departments and agencies participating in Operation Mongoose.
The program included a variety of political, diplomatic, economic, psychological, propaganda, and espionage actions, different acts of terrorism and sabotage, as well as encouragement and logistical support to armed counterrevolutionary bands.
In short, the operation was aimed at provoking a ""revolt"" of the Cuban people, which once begun would lay the basis for direct military intervention by the armed forces of the United States and its Latin American allies.
King for the CIA; and McGeorge Bundy and Goodwin of the White House staff.
Also present were Defense Secretary Robert McNamara, Assistant Defense Secretary Paul Nitze, and Gen.
Today this group is known as the 40 Committee, and its membership has been expanded to include the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
During 1962 another NSC subcommittee was established to oversee covert operations in Cuba.
In April 1961, Cuba’s revolutionary militias and armed forces crushed a U.S.-organized mercenary invasion at the Bay of Pigs.
In the spring and summer of 1962, in face of escalating preparations by Washington for a full-scale invasion of Cuba, the revolutionary government signed a mutual defense pact with the Soviet Union.
In October United States president John Kennedy demanded removal of Soviet nuclear missiles installed on the island.
Washington imposed a naval blockade of Cuba, stepped up preparations for an armed assault, and placed its armed forces on nuclear alert.
In face of the mobilization of Cuban workers and farmers to defend their national sovereignty and revolutionary gains, the United States government backed off its invasion plans.
Following an exchange of communications between Washington and Moscow, Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev, without consulting Cuba, announced his decision to remove the missiles on October 28.
