The shows the site at its maximum readiness on October 27, 1962, according to the U.S Department of Defense.
Unlike other Russian publications on this topic, this paper explores the Cuban missile crisis in the context of the evolution of strategic stability in relations between Russia and the United States from the 1960s to the present.
Among other things, the author pays attention to lessons that can be drawn from the Cuban crisis for the effective management of international crises.
The author discloses a number of little-known but important details about the behavior of the Soviet Union and the United States, including specific details that he learned through personal communication with a number of individuals who were actively involved in resolving the crisis.
This paper is intended for use by institutions of higher education, as well as for anyone interested in the political-military and military-strategic aspects of international politics, and in effective crisis management.
This topic has been the subject of many historical and political-science studies, both in Russia and other countries, but especially in the United States.
In October 1962, the two superpowers came to the brink of a large-scale nuclear war.
Harvard professor Graham Allison estimates that casualties from such a war would have totaled a hundred million Americans and more than a hundred million Russians.
The Soviet and American people learned about the October 1962 crisis in different ways.
Given the nature of the American political system, information about the crisis became quickly available to the mass media.
Evidence suggests that the news caused some Americans to panic over the real possibility that a nuclear war would erupt.
At the time, my father was an Air Force engineer serving in the central staff of the Soviet Ministry of Defense with the rank of lieutenant colonel.
He came home late on one of those days in October 1962, took his field uniform with the shoulder strap and holster for the pistol, and went back to his unit to work a night shift.
Before leaving, he told my mother that if he did not come home or call the following day, she should urgently buy train tickets and take me and my younger sister to his parents in a village located in the Arkhangelsk region.
My mother was born into the family of a Soviet army officer and worked as an English language teacher at military organizations.
Therefore she asked no questions, knowing that my father had no right to answer them.
The armed forces of both parties achieved a high state of combat readiness in the course of the crisis.
It should be noted that such a measure was justified from a military point of view and served to apply political pressure on the opponent.
However, this measure could also increase the probability of either accidental or unauthorized use of weapons, including nuclear weapons.
It is worth noting that the Soviet and American sides had yet to work out a common understanding of what constituted strategic stability.
Moreover, this important concept did not yet exist, emerging considerably later.
The military doctrines of both sides emphasized the requirement for victory in a war featuring all our armaments, including nuclear weapons.
Both the United States and the Soviet Union were actively conducting research and development to create strategic missile defenses.
There were great hopes on both sides that an antimissile shield could be created to defend the entire country from a massive nuclear missile attack.
No comprehensive studies were conducted at the time to discern what catastrophic medical, biological, and ecological consequences a nuclear war would entail.
However, even in the absence of such studies, both Soviet and American political leaders, as well as some members of the professional military establishment, were still gradually edging toward a realization of the consequences of a nuclear war.
It goes without saying that Soviet and American scientists who had sufficient knowledge of these issues understood these consequences.
A brigade of Cuban exiles who had been trained and armed by the United States landed at the Bay of Pigs on April 17, 1961.
Tensions around Cuba continued to run high even after the botched CIA operation of April 1961.
Both Havana and Moscow knew that Cuba was the intended target of United States naval, air, and marine forces.
American forces conducted various large-scale exercises that were explicitly anti-Cuban.
The Soviet leadership had ample reason to worry about the future of the Cuban revolution, the fate of the friendly regime, and of the government that was dedicated to Soviet-style socialism.
The fact that such a government existed and that the USSR had acquired a new ally in the Western hemisphere, which had been fully within the zone of United States influence for almost a hundred years, constituted a bold challenge to Washington.
Despite its small size, Cuba emerged as one of the most important elements in the two superpowers’ global standoff, which had ideological, political, socioeconomic, and military-strategic dimensions.
Although the Cuban issue was a very important factor in Soviet-American relations, many Russian experts believe that it was the Berlin issue that played a central role at the time.
In the later 1950s and early 1960s, the United States reinforced these deployments with the construction of missile bases, some of which were located in Turkey.
Given that the USSR was only beginning to station ICBMs on its territory, the deployment of mediumand intermediaterange missiles in Cuba was quite justifiable as long as these missiles were deployed in large quantities.
One should note that at the time, the Soviet Union lagged behind the United States in developing technology for the naval deployment of strategic nuclear forces.
It was the manner in which the Soviet Union addressed this imbalance that raised questions.
Almost no political-diplomatic preparations were made for the deployment of the Soviet missiles to Cuba, with the exception of communications within the framework of Soviet-Cuban relations.
Both political and military elements of the deployment were implemented in total secrecy.
Moscow and Havana concluded a secret treaty on the stationing of Soviet armed forces on Cuban territory.
The General Staff of the Soviet Armed Forces as a whole, and its Main Operational Directorate in particular, played a major role in preparing this treaty.
There is evidence that suggests that Khrushchev planned to announce the deployment of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba during his visit to the island in November 1962.
Khrushchev had also planned to notify the American side by visiting the United States during that trip.
We can only wonder why neither the political leaders nor the military commanders of the USSR had foreseen the possibility that the fairly elementary capabilities of United States air reconnaissance could expose the secret missile launch sites once under construction.
The answer to this question remains one of the unsolved puzzles of the crisis.
However, calculations done by military experts and given to McNamara showed that this supremacy did not guarantee that a preemptive United States nuclear strike would destroy all of the Soviet nuclear weapons capable of reaching United States territory.
One should also factor in that the Soviet Union had a formidable array of nuclear missiles and aircraft capable of striking the territory of United States allies, as well as United States troops located in countries outside the American homeland.
As American experts acknowledged after the crisis, all other measures of camouflage used during the deployment of Soviet troops and hardware were quite effective.
In accordance with the aforementioned treaty, a forty-thousand-strong assembly of Soviet forces in Cuba was formed under the command of Colonel General Issa Pliyev.
A division of the Strategic Missile Forces armed with forty nuclear-armed variants of mediumand intermediate-range R-12 missiles and R-14 missiles (NATO designation SS-5 Skean) formed the nucleus of the Soviet presence in Cuba.
The range of the R12 missiles was 2,200 km while the range of the R-14 missiles was 4,500 km.
R-14s could carry either a lightweight warhead with a yield of 1 megaton or a heavy warhead with a yield of 2.3 megatons.
Cuba , the “Island of Freedom,” also planned to host IL-28 bombers that were capable of carrying nuclear weapons, Luna tactical missiles with nuclear warheads , and Sopka coastal-defense missile systems that were also nuclear armed.
These units could provide cover for RVSN missile regiments and technical units.
They would also assist the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Cuba against enemy forces and counterrevolutionary groups in case of an air or sea invasion.
Batteries of Luna missiles were to be used in conjunction with motorized infantry regiments.
These missiles were operationally subordinated to the commanders of the infantry regiments.
Their mission was to help destroy enemy forces and strike the United States military base at Guantanamo Bay in the event the Americans attempted an air or sea landing in Cuba.
The Soviet leadership made continued attempts to convince the United States that the USSR was deploying only “defensive weapons” in Cuba through various communication channels until the very last moment when Washington, using data collected in the course of air reconnaissance, could demonstrate that offensive nuclear-missile and aviation systems were being deployed in Cuba.
Soviet Foreign Minister Andrey Gromyko asserted that there were only defensive Soviet weapons in Cuba during his visit to Washington on October 18, 1962.
The operation was camouflaged as a strategic exercise that featured deployment of troops and military hardware by sea to various regions of the Soviet Union.
For the operation to succeed, unprecedented secrecy measures were taken.
Cuba-bound military personnel were issued civilian IDs and ordered to change from uniforms into civilian clothes.
Even the commander of the Soviet forces in Cuba, General Issa Pliyev, had to give up his military uniform and leave his military ID at the General Staff.
Instead, he was issued a civilian Soviet passport in the name of Ivan Aleksandrovich Pivnov.
Posol v Washingtone pri shesti prezidentakh SShA (1962– 1986, gg.) , 63.
General Gribkov, who published an important article on the preparation for and conduct of the “Anadyr” operation, wrote that an attack with mediumand intermediate-range missiles on targets in the United States could have been launched by the commander of the RVSN division based in Cuba, only with authorization from Khrushchev, who was commander in chief of the armed forces.
There is evidence that suggests that the Soviet defense minister, Rodion Malinovsky, issued a follow-up order to Pliyev that said the Luna missiles could be used only with authorization from the Soviet leadership.
Despite the total superiority of the United States armed forces in the sea and in the air around the Caribbean, and America’s formidable reconnaissance capabilities along transportation routes, the Soviet secrecy and disinformation measures succeeded in concealing the military deployments.
This makes it all the more surprising that Soviet forces in Cuba did not take adequate, large-scale measures to conceal the construction of the mediumand intermediate-range missile launch positions.
We should all give them credit for their endurance, courage, and professionalism, which prevented a very dangerous situation from triggering World War III and catastrophic consequences for all.
Lessons for United States Foreign Policy Today,” Foreign Affairs 91, no. , 14.
President Kennedy set up a special body, the Executive Committee of the National Security Council that played an important role in resolving the crisis.
The channels of communication between the top leaders of the USSR and United States played an enormously important role in the crisis.
Both sides were extremely fortunate that such a diplomat happened to work in Washington at the time.
Diplomacy was beyond Robert Kennedy’s official duties, but he proved to be a skilled negotiator during the Cuban crisis.
In addition to the official channels for Soviet-American communication, there were two informal channels.
Feklisov worked under the cover of the Soviet’s Washington embassy, maintaining communications with ABC’s foreign-policy correspondent, John Scali, who had close ties to the Kennedy clan, including John F Kennedy.
It was extremely important to ensure that the information was not distorted when passing through such channels and that messages were communicated completely and rapidly, without intermediaries offering speculations about information they were passing on.
Bolshakov would send messages to Moscow through the GRU station’s channels, but would also sometimes brief Ambassador Dobrynin.
The establishment of the Bolshakov–Robert Kennedy channel was designated by the Presidium as an “unofficial channel for exchange of information,” according to Andrei Fursenko.
In the spring of 1961, Moscow gave Bolshakov detailed instructions on how to handle the channel.
From May 1961 to December 1962, Bolshakov and Robert Kennedy met and called each other a total of thirty-one times.
The United States State Department treated this channel with jealousy and the FBI intensified its surveillance of Bolshakov.
The GRU’s leadership also had a negative opinion of the channel since Bolshakov’s activities violated the entire military chain of command.
In his study of the crisis, Alexander Fursenko, a member of the Russian Academy of Sciences, revealed that Gromyko and Dobrynin managed to sideline Bolshakov from the confidential channel of communication with the United States leadership.
Later, Robert Kennedy again used the Bolshakov channel on November 9, 1962, after an agreement had been reached on both sides to end the crisis.
At that meeting, Kennedy told Bolshakov that Soviet IL-28 bombers should also be removed from Cuba, arguing that a conflict over these aircraft could lead to nullifying of the agreements that had been reached earlier.
It was, of course, the interaction between Dobrynin and Robert Kennedy that played the decisive role.
Defense Secretary Robert McNamara, who was a prominent representative of the American technocrats in upper echelons of the United States government.
He proposed a plan of action that helped buy time during the negotiations with Moscow that was needed in order to reach mutual understanding with the Soviets.
His proposal was to introduce a naval blockade around Cuba, which the American leadership decided to call a “quarantine,” which would sound less provocative to the international community.
According to Graham Allison and Philip Zelikow, the operation was also called a quarantine because experts at the State Department and Department of Justice determined that the Western Hemisphere mutual defense treaty allowed Washington to declare a blockade of Cuba only if the Organization of American States passed a resolution authorizing the United States to do so.
That resolution would have had to be authorized by two-thirds of the organization’s members.
From the American point of view, the blockade didn’t eliminate the danger that the Soviet missiles already in Cuba would become combat ready.
Citing Soviet sources, among others, Allison and Zelikow write that the quarantine was enforced selectively, and that a number of Soviet civilian vessels crossed the line of blockade without any consequences.
The adoption of McNamara’s quarantine proposal also made it possible to delay consideration of the plan to launch air strikes against Soviet missile launch positions in Cuba, despite support for this plan among senior United States military officials, including General Curtis LeMay, the Air Force chief of staff.
McNamara also controlled the actions that the United States military, and especially the Navy, was taking to enforce the blockade of Cuba.
As a number of witnesses recall, McNamara played an important role in preventing very dangerous confrontations between Soviet cargo ships that entered the zone of blockade and United States Navy ships enforcing the blockade.
McNamara even watched the actions of individual United States Navy ships to ensure that they acted appropriately and would not cause a further escalation of the conflict.
That was certainly a vital 27 Allison and Zelikow, Kvintessentsiya resheniya , 165.
The Navy has rich traditions and standard operating procedures for enforcing a naval blockade, but none of them were appropriate for use during an acute nuclear conflict.
He is not proposing inaction, but is recommending that decisions to carry out military strikes should not be rushed.
The Cuban missile crisis had a sobering impact on both Soviet and American leaders.
From the political perspective, it was resolved in a mutually acceptable way, and the ultimate solution had both public and nonpublic elements.
One of the consequences of the crisis was the creation of a hotline between Washington and Moscow, allowing leaders of the United States and the Soviet Union to communicate directly in a crisis if needed.
First, this line makes it possible to minimize distortions in communications with each other; second, it allows the sides to conduct direct negotiations at the highest level; and third, it provides significant time savings for crisis communications.
And time, as we know, is always a critical resource for senior leaders, particularly during crises.
A line connecting the leaders of Russia and the United States exists to this day, and it is kept constantly open by the appropriate services in both countries.
We should remember that the Cuban crisis not only taught us to avoid getting involved in future nuclear standoffs; it also led both sides to reinforce and improve the quality of their strategic intercontinental nuclear weapons.
It became especially important for the Soviet Union to acquire more of these weapons to achieve effective nuclear deterrence, because after withdrawing missiles from Cuba, Moscow was unable to forward-deploy missile systems capable of striking the United States mainland.
As General Gribkov has written, the Soviet military viewed United States military inspections of the ships that transported Soviet missiles back from Cuba as humiliating.
I have heard high-ranking Soviet military officials reminiscence about how a promise was made after the crisis to never let it happen again.
General Gribkov has argued that forty intermediate-range nuclear missiles in Cuba did not have a radical impact on the Soviet-American strategic balance as a whole.
Soviet R-12s and R-14s were far less precise than America’s Pershing II intermediate-range ballistic missiles, and less able to destroy targets deep underground, but the flight time of these missiles was short and they were capable of delivering a decapitating strike on the United States government and disrupting military command and control.
The strategic imbalance favoring the United States reached its apogee during the Cuban crisis, but it ended by the time the Soviet Union and United States signed the first strategic arms limitation agreement in 1972.
McNamara initiated signing the treaty at a 1967 summit meeting in Glassboro, New Jersey.
Later, the Soviets fought to preserve the ABM treaty as one of the cornerstones of strategic stability, in spite of the Reagan administration’s decision to pursue the Strategic Defense Initiative.
Regretfully, the George W Bush administration unilaterally withdrew from the ABM Treaty in 2002, complicating Soviet-American efforts to preserve reliable, unambiguous strategic stability.
This continues to have malignant effects on the Soviet-American relationship to this day, particularly on achieving the political and psychological consensus necessary to achieve strategic stability.
However the degree of uncertainty present at the time of the Cuban missile crisis has not returned.
Much has changed since then in the relationship between our two countries and in the development of our strategic nuclear forces.
The official name of the agreement was Interim Agreement on Certain Measures with Respect to the Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms.
