THE COLD WAR EXTENTION OF THE COLD WAR: THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISES CONTENT 1.
INFORMAL ASSESSMENT TASK Values 2 CONCEPTS COLD WAR A state of hostility between nations without physical fighting.
An economic and ideological struggle between the super powersUnited State of America and United Soviet Republic and their allies.
A spark for the biggest arms race in history with fears of a nuclear war.
Definition Cold War COMMUNISM It is a doctrine that advocates a classless society in which private ownership has been abolish and means of production belongs to the community.
Communist countries are often one-party state in which industry and agriculture are controlled by the state.
The government controls most aspects of a person’s life and there is strong censorship of what is written and said.
CAPITALISM It is an economic system based on the private ownership of the means of production and distribution of goods, characterized by a free competitive market and motivated by profit.
It is a government for the people by the people in the form of their elected representatives.
CONTAINMENT QUARANTINE BLOCKADE NATIONALIZATION 4 CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS Background on the History of Cuba before 1959 The consequences Events after 1959 of the Cuban in Cuba Missile Crisis Cuban Missile Bay of Pigs Crisis 1962 invasion 1961 5 1.
The crisis unfolds 1962  1962 August United States spy planes observed weapons in Cuba.
One member later recalled that Kennedy was more tense than he had ever seen him.
The experts said that the Soviets were working non-stop and that the missile sites were nearly ready.
The USSR was told that the USA would retaliate against any missile launched from Cuba against a Western nation.
That evening Kennedy went on television to make a live broadcast to the American people.
It was probably the most important speech made in the whole period of the Cold War.
Approximately twenty-five Soviet ships were spread across the Atlantic on their way to Cuba.
The USSR might withdraw the missiles if Kennedy promised not to invade Cuba.
A second message then arrived insisting that the USSR would only remove their missiles from Cuba if the USA removed theirs from Turkey.
Some of Kennedy's more hard-line advisers urged the president to attack Cuba.
Kennedy had already moved his wife and children to Washington so that they could be in the presidential bunker.
He suggested that the USA should reply to the first message and ignore the second, more aggressive one.
Kennedy's reply to 8 Khrushchev therefore said that the USA would promise not to invade Cuba but would not make a decision on Turkey until they had talked to their NATO allies.
In return for the Cuban guarantee, America demanded the withdrawal of the Soviet missiles from Cuba.
Privately, the Americans agreed to remove their missiles from Turkey as long as the USSR kept it a secret 5.
REMEMBER: The key question provides the focus of the content in the sources.
In most cases it will indicate what the source is about, why it was written, who wrote the source, when it was written and where the event took place.
The colours used in the contextualisation answer the questions indicated here.
We were quite convinced that the Americans would never reconcile themselves to the existence of Castro’s Cuba.
The fate of Cuba and the maintenance of Soviet prestige in that part of the world preoccupied me.
We sent a note to the Americans saying that we agree to remove our missiles and bombers on condition that the President gave us the assurance there would be no invasion of Cuba.
The two most powerful nations of the world had squared off against each other, each with its finger on the button From.
Explain the conditions laid down by USSR to remove missiles planted in Cuba.
Explain why the Russian President rides a horse whilst the Cuban President rides a donkey in the context of the Cold War.
The purpose of these bases can be none other than to provide a nuclear strike capability against the Western Hemisphere… The characteristics of these new missile sites indicate two distinct types of installations.
All ships of any kind bound for Cuba from whatever nation and port will, if found to contain cargoes of offensive weapons, be turned back.
Events leading up to the Communist takeover in 1949 The Cultural The Great Leap Revolution Forward Background: Events leading up to the Communist takeover in 1949  Hostilities between the Guomindang and CCP eased during WW2, as the Chinese struggled against Japanese occupation.
It was also intended to show the Soviet Union that the Chinese approach to economic development was more vibrant, and ultimately would be more successful, than the Soviet model that had been followed intensely until then  It was an ambitious plan to turn China into a modern state in a single generation  A massive industrialisation programme was followed with collectivisation of farm land  Mao’s plans to industrialise China resulted in mass famine.
Other historians, believe it continued until his death in 1976 China – Cultural Revolution 18 ESSAY QUESTION HOW TO WRITE ESSAYS  Essay questions require learners to take a stance and to develop a relevant and coherent line of argument.
Introduction  Should make it clear to the reader, what is going to be discussed and the line of argument that is going to be followed in the rest of the essay.
The opening sentence of your paragraph must make a clear statement or point.
The next few sentences in your paragraph should explain the point you have just made.
The next few sentences should give evidence to substantiate the statement you have made above.
This will be the dates, details, facts, figures from reading your textbook and source material.
At the end of your paragraph you must link back to the essay question and/ or forward to the next paragraph.
Your introduction should contextualise the question and directly address or answer the essay question.
This essay writing frame can be used for structuring any History essay.
Use it with the paragraph structuring frame and guidelines for writing introductions and conclusions.
Learners can adapt this frame to include as many paragraphs as they need.
ASSESSMENT African Socialism This is a belief in sharing economic resources in a traditional African way.
Afro-Marxism This is ideology adopted by many African countries wherein there is a one party state that exercises centralized policy making.
Neo-Colonialism Refers to the continued exploitation of Africa’s resources by the former colonial powers and the develop world.
Private sector The part of the economy that is not state controlled and is run by individuals in companies for profit.
Socialism An economic system based on the idea that the enterprises which produce wealth should be owned by those who work in them.
Democracy A political system in which all citizens are free to elect representatives to establish a multi-party government Neo-colonialism ironically Africa with its rich resources enriched foreign powers in a one-sided relationship which favored the former colonial powers.
Luanda UNITA: Huambo FNLA: Ambriz • Angola’s civil war soon became a proxy in which East and West played out their Cold War politics.
NP’s policy of destabilization in region to stop spread of communism; to destroy SWAPO bases.
Angola Battle of Cuito Cuanavale The Lusaka Accord of 1984 • The next major South African invasion took place in August 1983.
SOURCE 2A An extract from I Filatova and A Davidson, The Hidden Thread.
On the other hand, at the time of the war in Angola, SWA/Namibia was still legally in international terms under the administration of South Africa; and Namibia has common borders with Angola and South Africa.
Officially Soviet military advisers and specialists were fulfilling their ‘international duty’, defending the values of socialism and assisting friendly Angola in building its national army and repulsing external aggression.
But the then Soviet leadership had other motives for sending thousands of Soviet citizens to take part in a bloody civil war.
To spread their influence into Angola . . . and in future into Namibia, illegally occupied by South Africa, and finally into South Africa itself.
Explain the reference, “global confrontation with the USA” in the context of the Cold War.
The cartoon shows a large hand knocking ash from a cigar into an ashtray.
CIVIL SOCIETY PROTEST 1950’s to 1970’s QUESTION FOCUS ESSAY: CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT Reasons and origins The role, impact Short and Long and influence of term gains Martin Luther King Jnr.
Protest, Forms of protest Campaigns and through civil Demonstrations disobedience Reasons and origins of the Civil Rights Movement in the USA • Many African American people believed that their lives would change after the World wars.
The influence of passive resistance on Martin Luther King • King had been influenced by liberation struggle which Gandhi led against British colonial rule in India.
Forms of protest through civil disobedience MONTGOMERY BUS BOYCOTT • First phase of Civil Rights Movement was sparked off by Rosa Parks’ arrest in December 1955.
Freedom Rides • Although segregation on buses had been ruled unconstitutional, segregation was still practiced in Southern states May 1961, an interracial group of 13 students travelled on two Greyhound buses from Washington DC to the South • These protests became known as ‘Freedom Rides’ The Birmingham Campaign • Early 1963 King and the SCLC organised an economic boycott of white businesses and a series of protest marches in Birmingham, Alabama to desegregate Birmingham’s downtown department stores.
KENNEDY’S RESPONSE • President Kennedy was faced with a public outcry about treatment of black people in southern states.
CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT Question Explain TO WHAT EXTENT the different forms of civil-rights protests that occurred in the United States of America made an impact on the struggle for human rights 1960.
CIVIL SOCIETY PROTEST 1950’s to 1970’s BLACK POWER MOVEMENT CONCEPTS MIND MAP ASSESSMENT TASKS CONCEPTS Black Power Black nationalists believed that the use of force was justified in order to Movement gain social, political and economic power for African Americans.
Militant Military in attitude; assertive, achieving goals by using force.
Conspiracy A plot to do something which is harmful and illegal Elite A group of people considered to be superior in a particular society or organisation.
Enfranchisement Having the right to vote Enlightenment Being well informed, open to different views and ideas and free from prejudice or ignorance.
Martyr Someone who dies for what he /she believes in Nationalism The sense of belonging to a nation that people feel because they share similar backgrounds and common culture characteristics, which often produces a policy of national independence Oppressor A person of authority who dominates and subjugates others Supremacist A person who insists that one group is better than another, especially a group determined by race or gender 43 BLACK POWER MOVEMENT Reasons for the movement Short-term and Black Panther; long-term gains.
Civil society protests 1950s to 1970s Topic 3 Case Study: ‘The Black Power Case Study: The Black Power Movement This section includes: • Reasons for the movement; • Black Panther; • Roles of Stokely Carmichael and Malcolm X; and • Short-term and long-term gains.
Overview of the progress, if any, that was made towards equality and civil rights by the Civil Rights and Black Power movements Key figures:  Malcolm X and Stokely Carmichael: leaders of the Black Power Movement.
Reasons for the movement  While the Civil Rights Movement had helped achieve the gains of the Civil Rights Act and the Voting Rights Act, the economic situation of most African-Americans had not improved significantly.
Inadequate public transport made it difficult for people to take jobs far from their homes.
Inadequate health care resulted in a mortality rate for black babies being twice as high as that for white babies.
In June 1966, James Meredith undertook a solitary March against Fear to protest against racism.
When he was shot, others took up his march, including the Student’s Non-violent Coordinating Committee.
Although Carmichael did not invent the term ‘Black Power’ he now proceeded to popularise it.
Role of Malcolm X  An eloquent speaker and dedicated human rights activist, Malcolm X played a key role in the Black Power Movement  He was a member of the Nation of Islam , a Muslim group which taught that white society was deliberately preventing African Americans from empowering themselves.
Short-term and long-term gains  Greater racial pride and self-confidence among black people.
This included a sense of a unique African-American culture in music , fashion, hairstyles (e.g. the Afro), literature, art and even food.
An overview of the progress, if any, that was made towards equality and civil rights by the civil rights and Black Power  There can be no doubt that the Civil Rights and Black Power Movements helped to bring about significant progress towards equality and civil rights for AfricanAmericans and other minorities.
The most notable was that of 1964 which outlawed discrimination based on racial, ethnic, national, religious and gender identity.
The Act of 1968 made it illegal to discriminate in matter related to housing.
The Voting Act of 1965 made it illegal to discriminate in voting practice.
Evidence of this is the growth of the ‘Black is Beautiful’ movement and the rich development of black art and culture in a range of fields.
A symbol of this was the creation in 1983 of an annual Martin Luther King Jr Day.
A New Civil Rights Movement On June 5, 1966, JAMES MEREDITH was shot in an ambush as he attempted to complete a peaceful march from Memphis, Tennessee, to Jackson, Mississippi.
Civil rights leaders such as Martin Luther King Jr., Floyd Mcissick of CORE, and Stokely Carmichael of SNCC rushed to Meredith's hospital bed.
As Carmichael and McKissick walked through Mississippi, they observed that little had changed despite federal legislation.
Local white townspeople harassed the marchers while the police turned a blind eye or arrested the activists as troublemakers.
Carmichael and McKissick were heavily influenced by the words of Malcolm X, and rejected integration as a short-term goal.
Carmichael felt that blacks needed to feel a sense of racial pride and self-respect before any meaningful gains could be achieved.
He encouraged the strengthening of African American communities without the help of whites.
In the 1930s, skin lighteners and hair straighteners were used by fashionable black women in an effort to look whiter.
By the end of the 1960s, being proud of the African heritage dictated that afros and dark skin were desirable.
Chapters of SNCC and CORE — both integrated organizations — began to reject white membership as Carmichael abandoned peaceful resistance.
Martin Luther King Jr. and the NAACP denounced black power as the proper forward path.
But black power was a powerful message in the streets of urban America, where resentment boiled and tempers flared.
Soon, African American students began to celebrate African American culture boldly and publicly.
Colleges teemed with young blacks wearing traditional African colors and clothes.
Comment on the impact of the slogan, ‘Black is Beautiful’, as described in the source.
Name three concerns of black people with regard to the attitude of the police.
If the Federal Government will not send troops to your aid, just say the word and we will immediately dispatch some of our brothers there to organise self-defense units among people and the Ku Klux Klan will then receive of its own medicine.
The Organisation of Afro – American Unity Malcolm X … 54 SOURCE 3C – 2 Carmichael on non violence “This country has been feeding us a thalidomide drug (medication to treat a certain cancer) of integration; and some Negroes have been walking down a dream street talking about sitting next to white people.
That when we went to Mississippi, we did not go to sit next to Ross Barnett.
He was a prominent member of the Dixiecrats, Southern Democrats who supported racial segregation.
ACTIVITY 1 Source 1A The source below focuses on how the philosophy of Black Consciousness emerged in South Africa in the 1960s Biko and his young comrades promoted the philosophy of Black Consciousness, which urged black people to free themselves from the chains of oppression and for all blacks (including Africans, Coloureds and Indians) to work towards liberation.
Biko urged Black people to take the responsibility for their own struggle and not to rely on white liberals.
Rather, black people were to develop a pride in being black, and develop the self-confidence to determine their own future.
The Black Consciousness Movement challenged the entire white structure that existed in South Africa by developing alternative structures.
The students established the Black People’s Convention , which was an umbrella organisation to co-ordinate all Black Consciousness activities.
It encouraged self-reliance through the creation of Black Community Programmes.
Black Consciousness played an important role in inspiring the Soweto youth to action in 1976.
Its philosophy filled them with the selfconfidence to address their own harsh circumstances.
The South African Student’s Movement was a Black Consciousness organisation of high school students.
Identify three different groups whose living conditions Black Consciousness attempts to improve.
Explain why it was important for Steve Biko that black South Africans should be responsible for their own struggle.
Name TWO organizations that were established by Black Consciousness to encourage black South Africans to accept own responsibility for political change.
I became more conscious of the situation of black people in this country and this township.
I was able to go into town; I was able to see the contrast (between black and white), the differences and all that raised questions in my mind.
Among us, we began to develop a keen sense for wanted to discover more idea about the struggles, not only in this country, but also what was happening in other areas.
There was always a list published of books that were banned and for us it meant that whatever the government banned must be something good and it was part of our adventure as youngsters to actually go out to actively look foot these books.
The 1970s was not long after major student uprising in Europe, France, and the Civil Rights Movement and the Black Power Movement in the United States.74 was, of course, the year of the Portuguese defeat in Mozambique and Angola and, when that happened, I think it had a major boost on us.
Identify two international events that served as an incentive for students to oppose apartheid.
Comment on the usefulness of this source for a historian who do research on the influence of Black Consciousness on students of the 1970s.
It was used at Steve Biko’s funeral in 1977 to pay tribute to Biko’s contribution to the liberation movement in South Africa 1.3 Refer to Source 1C 1.3.
Explain the limitations of using the information in this source to a historian studying the impact of Steve Biko on the freedom struggle.
Use the sources and your own knowledge and write a paragraph of EIGHT lines to explain what contribution did Steve Biko make to the freedom struggle in South Africa.
One of those whose dedication to freedom, to justice, whose bravery, and whose appalling suffering, surely epitomise the ordeals of merciless oppression and resistance to them, was Steve Biko.
It is difficult not to speculate with enormous regret, on what he would have meant in the creation of the new South Africa in progress today; what his clear-mindedness and deep knowledge of the country’s and its people’s real needs would have contributed to our development.
SOURCE 1C The source explained how Black Consciousness influenced Murphy Morobe as a student.
There was always a list published of books that were banned and for us it meant that whatever the government banned must be something good and it was part of our adventure as youngsters to actually go out to actively look for these books.
Substantiate your line of argument with relevant historical evidence to assess the role of international resistance against Apartheid.
QUESTION 2 PW Botha's attempts at reforming the system of apartheid were met with intense international resistance.
THE COMING OF DEMOCRACY IN SOUTH AFRICA AND COMING TO TERMS WITH THE PAST CONTENT 1.
ASSESSMENT TASK Referendum Process of putting a legislative decision to the vote of the people for approval or rejection Constitutional The fundamental political and legal principles according to which a nation is governed – embodies the rights of the people and responsibilities of government Rolling mass Many people protesting, where there is a feeling that the more people action join, the quicker change will occur.
Armed struggle Was a strategy by both the ANC’s and PAC’s military wings (MK and Pogo) to launch covert military operations against the apartheid regime in order to attain democracy.
Third Force A term used by ANC leaders in the 1990’s to refer to an unknown political faction that was accused of being responsible for a surge in political violence in South Africa, especially in KwaZulu-Natal and on the Witwatersrand.
Consensus An agreement that is reached by various parties regarding key issues for example the consensus that was reached at CODESA 2.
Assassination Involves the deliberate killing of a political figure such as Chris Hani.
In the context of the above statement, critically discuss how South Africans reached a political settlement between 1990 and 1994.
The hope and optimism that greeted Nelson Mandela on his release from prison in 1990 soon ended, as the realities of negotiating a new future for South Africa began in earnest.
Critically discuss this statement in the context of the process of negotiations that occurred in South Africa between 1990 and 1994.
Negative aspects of TRC • Its work of reparation and rehabilitation has been found inadequate.
Important at many levels, not least in terms of their potential contribution to processes of reconciliation.
TRCCradock Four Amnesty provisions and problems with amnesty • Perpetrators were to apply for amnesty in relation to each of their offences, provide a full disclosure, and prove that their actions were politically motivated.
This probably would have taken the form of prosecutions along with reparations and other efforts.
It provides the basis and rationale for the work of the Commission • Volume 2: addresses the commission of gross violations of human rights on all sides of the conflict • Volume 3: Addresses gross violations of human rights from the perspective of the victim, is a companion to Volume Two • Volume 4: Seeks to address the nature of the society in which gross violations of human rights took place • Volume 5: The final volume of the report, contains the conclusions reached by the Commission, including analyses and findings and recommendations.
Activity 1 SOURCE A The extract below explains why the Truth and Reconciliation Commission was established.
After the end of apartheid, as well as the release of political prisoners in the early 90s and the country’s transition from repressive rule to democracy in 1994, South Africa witnessed the establishment of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission in 1995 which formed a crucial component of the transition to full and free democratic country.
The TRC was established by the first democratically elected president Nelson Mandela under the Promotion of National Unity and Reconciliation Act of 1995 and Archbishop Desmond Tutu with Dr Alex Boraine were appointed as its chairperson and vice chairperson respectively.
The Human Rights Violations Committee gathered testimony of politically motivated gross human rights abuses; the Amnesty Committee dispensed amnesty to perpetrators who gave ‘full disclosure’ of atrocities they had committed for political ends; lastly, the Reparation and Rehabilitation Committee which sought to recommend to the government a policy for providing long-term reparations for victims, as well as short-term relief payments.
The aim of the TRC was to combat impunity and recreate a culture of accountability, and most importantly to uncover truth about gross human rights violations and assist families of the victims in getting closure.
Use the source and your own knowledge explain the conditions for granting amnesty.
Explain whether you think the TRC succeeded in promoting national Unity in South Africa.
Benzien conceded that he could have dropped the pistol, so as to put it out of Kriel's reach but he did not do so because he was grappling with a terrorist and he believed that no purpose would be served by dropping the pistol.
He said that he did not cock the pistol as it was already cocked when he took it from Kriel.
He admitted that he could have subdued Kriel by hitting him on the head with the firearm but could not recall whether the thought of doing so had occurred to him at the time.
He conceded that it was more than likely that at some stage he pointed the firearm at Kriel and that his finger was on the trigger when the shot went off.
He maintained that he did not consciously pull the trigger but conceded that the shot went off while the gun was in his hands and he therefore accepted sole responsibility for Kriel's death.
Benzien's evidence did not convey a clear picture of the events or the sequence in which they occurred.
For instance, it is not at all clear whether Kriel was shot while he was attempting to get up or when he was standing.
Nor is it clear whether Benzien climbed onto Kriel's back when the shot went off.
He said that on Benzien's version the shooting of Kriel was accidental.
That being so, his conduct did not constitute an offence or delict and he was therefore not entitled to amnesty.
Explain how Benzien’s testimony differed from the conclusion of the Committee.
Compare Sources A and B Explain how these two sources differ regarding reasons for granting amnesty.
Use the visual clue in the cartoon to indicate the punishment for perpetrators.
SOURCE 2A The extract below explains why the Truth and Reconciliation Commission was established.
THE END OF THE COLD WAR AND A NEW WORLD ORDER 1989 TO THE PRESENT CONTENT 1.
Globalization implies the opening of local and nationalistic perspectives to a broader outlook of an interconnected and interdependent world with free transfer of capital, goods, and services across national frontiers.
However, it does not include unhindered movement of labor and, as suggested by some economists, may hurt smaller or fragile economies if applied indiscriminately.
South Africa’s success in avoiding outright civil war • Mandela’s policy of reconciliation.
Some believe that South Africa would benefit from a stronger central government, such as in the economically successful East Asian countries and Botswana.
To date this has involved the USA waging war in Iraq, Afghanistan and carrying out the assassination of Osama Bin Laden, al-Qaeda’s leader.
Environmental Movements • Climate change, deforestation, global warming, population growth and resource depletion are the key challenges facing the world in the 21 st century.
This movement, which became famous for its tree planting projects in East Africa, works with rural communities to help them address their need for essential basic services such as water, fertile soil and health ecosystems.
Greenpeace is an international and non-aligned environmental organisation.
NGO which works to publicise, oppose and eliminate the environmental problems facing the world.
ACTIVITY 1 SOURCE A The source below entitled ‘SAPing the Third World’ by Mike Davis the editor of the New Left Review newspaper in California, United States focuses on the impact of Structural Adjustment Policies on developing countries.
It consisted of common guiding principles, such as privatisation, deregulation, and liberalisation.
SAP, a ‘one-size-fits-all’ program imposed in the late 1970s/early 1980s, contains economic policies that debt burdened Third World countries must follow to qualify for IMF and World Bank loans.
These loans were meant to help the countries repay their older debts to commercial banks, governments, and the World Bank.
According to Davis, the IMF and the World Bank have been the driving force behind the creation of modern slums.
Davis explains that although the countryside still contains the majority of the world’s poor, this distinction will pass to urban slums no later than 2035.
In the first section, ‘Urban Poverty’s Big Bang’, Davis mentions how the 1985 Baker Plan was a way to attack the Third World debt crisis.
For example, in Abidjan (Capital of Ivory Coast) one of the few tropical African cities with an important manufacturing sector and modern urban services – deindustrialisation, the collapse of construction, and a rapid deterioration in public transit and sanitation took place because of the SAPs regime.
Explain how the programme instituted by the international institutions affected the ‘Third World’ countries.
In July 2001 the summit of the G8 was organised in Genoa.0,000 people demonstrated against the summit and the globalisation is represented.
In the demonstration and in many of the seminars linked to them the impoverishment caused by globalisation was highlighted.
In practice they have meant a reduction of public expenditure on healthcare, education infrastructure.
The prices of food and other necessities are rising because of the subsidies of rich countries, replace domestic food production and throw large numbers of people into unemployment… When SAP’s have taken jobs from men, women in impoverished families seek any employment opportunities available in formal and informal sectors, no matter how low-paying, dangerous, onerous and debasing they are.
While mothers are away, children have to take care of household duties to a far larger extent than traditionally.
Often a family cannot survive on the mother’s paltry earnings, and it has to send children to work.
Explain why a historian would consider the information in this source useful when researching the impact of Structural Adjustment Programmes on Third World countries.
Name one aspect of the society at the right which is sucked in by the big vacuum on the left.
How do these sources support each other regarding the impact of Structural Adjustment Programmes on developing countries.
SOURCE 3A The source below entitled ‘Shaping the Third World’ by Mike Davis the editor of the New Left Review newspaper in California, United States focuses on the impact of Structural Adjustment Policies on developing countries.
THE END OF THE COLD WAR AND A NEW WORLD ORDER: THE EVENTS OF 1989 Explain to what extent Gorbachev’s policies of Glasnost and Perestroika in the Soviet Union contributed to political changes in South Africa after 1989.
