Kennedy ultimately chose the second option and announced it on 22 October in his nationally televised address.
That option and the ªrst (direct military action against Cuba) have been exhaustively analyzed over the years by Western scholars.
Much less attention has been devoted to the third alternative, the diplomatic route.
This article shows, however, that a variant of that option—a variant that has never previously received any serious scholarly treatment—was actually adopted by Kennedy at the peak of the crisis.
The Kennedy administration chose, despite considerable misgivings, to employ the Brazilian government of President João Goulart as an intermediary in this highly sensitive and tightly concealed effort to reach Castro at the height of the missile crisis.
Kennedy at one point had regarded Goulart as a potential “New Frontiersman” and a valuable partner in the Alliance for Progress , but United States ofªcials increasingly viewed the Brazilian president with irritation, exasperation, and even suspicion for what they saw as his ªnancial mismanagement, political demagoguery, ºirtations with neutralism (and the Sino-Soviet bloc) in foreign policy, and, most alarming, cooperation with and toleration of leftist elements.
Some within the Kennedy administration even began to consider supporting a military coup in Brazil rather than risk seeing the country end up in Communist hands.
The story of this secret U.S.-Brazilian-Cuban triangular diplomacy thus sheds light not only on a previously little-known aspect of the Cuban missile crisis and the hidden efforts at dialogue between Washington and Havana, but also on the troubled U.S.-Brazilian relationship—and by implication the broader issues of alliance management and the limits of maneuver within a superpower’s sphere of inºuence during the Cold War.
Background The secret Brazilian mediation effort during the missile crisis, described in this article with the aid of newly available U.S., Brazilian, Russian, British, Cuban, and other sources, actually climaxed three years of ªtful Brazilian diplomatic efforts, spanning three Brazilian and two American presidencies, to play a direct role in efforts to limit the U.S.-Cuban confrontation.
Second, because Brazilian ofªcials were less alarmed than United States leaders by the supposed menace of Fidelismo, they watched with increasing dismay as Washington, in their view, became obsessed with Cuba to the detriment of United States relations with the rest of Latin America.
Third, at the height of the prestige of the newly formed non-aligned movement, Brazilian leaders ºirted with a more “independent,” quasi-neutralist foreign policy through which they could escape subservience and irrelevance within the United States sphere of inºuence and play a more balanced position between East and West, even while clearly leaning to one side.
Fourth, in domestic political terms, Brazilian leaders had to deal with substantial leftist and nationalist constituencies that were sympathetic to the Cuban revolution and resentful of the United States.
Achieving a settlement that preserved Cuba’s sovereignty and internal political orientation from American pressure, yet that also satisªed Washington, would thereby constitute a major achievement in both domestic and international political terms.
Fifth, mediation suited Brazil’s consistent emphasis on respect for the principles of self-determination and non-intervention with regard to Cuba and Castro’s socioeconomic system.
Brazilian leaders hoped to foster Cuba’s ultimate reintegration into the inter-American system, even while decrying Castro’s increasing “extra-continental” links to the Soviet bloc.
As U.S.-Cuban relations plummeted, Brazil’s ambassador in Havana, Vasco Tristão Leitão da Cunha, an early enthusiast for the Cuban revolution who was fast growing disillusioned, joined with his Argentine colleague, Julio Amoedo, to try to convince Castro to adopt a more moderate position toward the United States.
They also were in contact with the United States ambassador, Philip Bonsal, in a bid to foster a civilized dialogue.
Soon thereafter, U.S.-Cuban relations reached a new low when Castro accused Washington of responsibility for blowing up a French ship that was carrying arms to the Cuban government in early March, an explosion that killed seventy-ªve Cuban dock workers as well as French shipmen.
Despite this setback, the two Latin American envoys persisted in arranging all-night asados with Castro and his associates, as well as dinner parties and conversations with United States diplomats, to try to alleviate the conºict.
This overture received a cordial brush-off in Washington, but the Brazilian, Mexican, and Canadian foreign ministers continued to promote mediation during an Organization of American States foreign ministers’ meeting in Costa Rica.
All these efforts went nowhere, primarily because the positions of the two sides were incompatible.
Moreover, the Eisenhower administration had already decided to pursue a different route.
Despite politely expressing mild interest in patching up relations with Havana, the administration in fact had embarked on a covert effort in mid-March 1960 to overthrow the Castro leadership rather than seek an accommodation with it.
The covert operation was nearing a decision point at the beginning of 1961 when Kennedy took ofªce in Washington and Jânio Quadros—the governor of Sao Paulo who had raised eyebrows in Washington with a friendly campaign trip to Cuba and rhetoric hinting at a more “neutralist” foreign policy—succeeded Kubitschek.
The full rupture in diplomatic relations between volume numbers; and in the Brazilian Foreign Ministry Archives (Arquivo do Ministério das Relaçðes Exteriores, or AMRE-B), Brasília.
All quotations from Brazilian sources in this article are my unofªcial translations from the original Portuguese.
Sensing an imminent violent clash and encouraged by the Cuban chargé d’affaires in Rio de Janeiro,4 Quadros launched an intensive bid to broker some sort of deal between Castro and the incoming United States administration.
He enlisted the help of former ambassador da Cunha (who had become secretary-general of Itamaraty, the Brazilian Foreign Ministry) when the latter was visiting Havana in February and April 1961 to promote a “Finlandization” arrangement whereby Castro would relinquish Soviet-bloc military support and accept neutrality in the Cold War in exchange for ªrm commitments from the United States to abjure intervention and accept the island’s internal political orientation.
Although Cuban President Osvaldo Dorticós thanked Brazil for its efforts, he denied that his chargé had been authorized to request mediation and told da Cunha that in any event the United States, being “solely responsible for the existing state of tension,” must “take the ªrst step” to improve relations.
Even if the Cubans had been more receptive, Washington evinced little interest in compromise, for reasons that became obvious in mid-April 1961 with the failed invasion at the Bay of Pigs, which only deepened the mutual hostility.
Seeking to consolidate Latin American support after this United States setback, Cuba the following month requested aid from Brazil, along with Ecuador and Mexico, in opening a dialogue with Washington.
But that gambit, which sank amid diplomatic confusion,8 proved less signiªcant than an episode that took place in August 1961 when hemispheric leaders gathered at the Uruguayan resort of Punta del Este to discuss the Kennedy administration’s new Alliance for Progress.
At the close of the summit, Brazilian and Argentine diplomats arranged a late-night cocktail-party rendezvous between Cuban Fi4.
A National Security Council staff aide suggested just prior to the invasion that Washington might avail itself of Brazil’s services to “settle accounts” with Cuba, only to be told by McGeorge Bundy that a more favorable solution to the Castro problem might be obtained.
See documents in AMRE-B, including “Policy of Brazil in Relation to Cuba,” 1 September 1961.
On a more serious note, Guevara raised the prospect of achieving “at least an interim modus vivendi” between Havana and Washington, even if a genuine “understanding” remained impossible.
Goodwin advocated “some way of continuing this below ground dialogue which Che has begun,” if only as a means to “probe for a split in the top leadership” while simultaneously pursuing anti-Castro policies and covert operations.
In the end, however, the brief encounter between the Argentine-born revolutionary, “wearing green fatigues, and his usual overgrown and scraggly beard,” and the young adviser to the United States president failed to open any channel of ongoing U.S.-Cuban communication.
Only a few days after Guevera continued on to Rio de Janeiro where Quadros cordially greeted him (and decorated him with the country’s most distinguished award for foreigners, the cruzeiro do sul, triggering an outcry from conservatives), the Brazilian leader suddenly resigned, sparking a brief but tumultuous political crisis.
His replacement was the vice president, “Jango” Goulart, who had been a labor minister under and protégé of the strongman Getulio Vargas in the early 1950s.
He was judged by United States analysts to be “a demagogue and opportunist, without ideology or ideals” (and whose coincidental presence in “Red” China on a trade mission at the time of Quadros’s resignation hardly reassured them).10 9.
The problem, the president stressed, was not bilateral but hemispheric and did not stem from Cuba’s internal changes but from Castro’s devotion to international Communism.
Campos added that it would be useful to differentiate more visibly between acceptance of Cuba’s social reforms and rejection of its “satellitization” by Moscow, and to disseminate more widely evidence of Havana’s subversive inªltration.
Examples of Cuba’s “insolent attitude,” in the words of a secret analysis by the Brazilian Foreign Ministry in September 1961, included Castro’s open promotion of an “armed revolutionary struggle” in Brazil to prevent a military takeover during the political crisis that followed Quadros’s sudden resignation16 and Havana’s opposition to Brazil’s observer status in the September non-aligned movement conference in Belgrade.
Castro’s statement in December 1961 unabashedly describing himself and his revolution as Marxist-Leninist further irritated Brazilian ofªcials, whose resistance to harsh anti-Cuban measures steadily declined.
Later that month, at a secret Itamaraty strategy session, Dantas acknowledged a “slight difference” between Goulart’s policy toward Cuba and that of his predecessor.
Whereas Quadros had at times exhibited “a slight trace of ideological sympathy and a systematic denial and sometimes even evasive position” toward Cuba, the new Brazilian 14.
Castro made these comments during a televised address on 29 August 1961.
What would turn out to be a short-lived honeymoon between Goulart and Kennedy coincided with murky reports of a power struggle inside the Cuban leadership, with intimations of possible strains between Havana and Moscow.
During the ªrst three months of 1962, amid reports that an experiment in collective leadership was under way in Cuba, observers in Havana noticed that for the ªrst time since the revolution, Fidel Castro seemed to be taking a less prominent role.
Castro’s prolonged absences from public view prompted speculation that a behind-the-scenes battle for the leadership had begun.
Such rumors found conªrmation when Castro resurfaced on 26 March to deliver a spirited television address announcing a purge of senior members of the Cuban Communist party.
Targeted in the purge were ofªcials who were considered closest to Moscow, including one of the party’s leading ªgures, minister Aníbal Escalante.
Spring 1962 Although the “Escalante Affair” did not receive wide attention in the United States, it prompted a fresh secret Brazilian mediation effort during Goulart’s visit to the United States in early April.
This episode merits close attention here because it foreshadowed the initiative that would emerge during the missile crisis.
In June, Moscow named Aleksandr Alekseev, far more popular than Sergei Kudryavtsev in Castro’s circle, as the new Soviet envoy.
The visit even seemed to kindle a degree of personal rapport between the Brazilian and U.S. presidents.
The discussions focused mainly on bilateral relations, United States economic aid, the recent military coup in Argentina, and the ªnancial and political crisis in Brazil.
But on the evening of 4 April, after the two leaders concluded their talks, Foreign Minister Dantas raised the issue of Cuba with Secretary of State Rusk.
In the Brazilian’s view, the political and economic situation in Cuba was “rapidly” deteriorating, and Castro was “in a ªght” with (and “in danger of being discarded by”) the Communists, whose apparatus appeared to be gaining strength.
Noting that Khrushchev “despises” Castro, Dantas foresaw a nationalistic, nonaligned brand of Cuban socialism or Communism along the lines of Tito’s Yugoslavia as a plausible scenario.
Rusk allowed that if Castro made “a clear break with Moscow,” then a “change” in United States policy might ensue.
He seemed to agree that recent intelligence signaled a potentially signiªcant split in the leadership, alluding 21.
He added that a formal severance of diplomatic ties with the USSR would not be necessary even if it might be a logical and desirable result.
It had been no accident, the American responded, that Washington had never asked Brazil to break diplomatic relations with Castro’s Cuba.
To follow up on the idea, Dantas proposed to consult with his ambassador to Havana, Luís Bastian Pinto, in Mexico City a few days later, during the upcoming visit there by Goulart.
Importuning the Brazilian to keep the discussion secret, Rusk invited Dantas to join him for a cruise on the Potomac in the president’s boat, weather permitting, on the afternoon of 12 April to take up the matter upon his return from Mexico.
After Dantas left town, Rusk checked cautiously within the administration to see whether he could ofªcially authorize the Brazilian enterprise.
Given the proposition’s explosive nature, he presumably checked at some point with the president himself, although no record of such a conversation has emerged.
In any event, Rusk ran into hardline opposition on 10 April when he mentioned Dantas’s proposal to Director of Central Intelligence John A McCone, the Republican who had replaced Allen W Dulles after the Bay of Pigs debacle a year earlier.
McCone obviously abhorred the idea of making any sort of deal with Castro.
According to McCone’s secret account of the conversation,23 Rusk assured him that he had, in his conªdential discussions with Dantas, reafªrmed Washington’s non-negotiable points—that 23.
Dantas has told Rusk that the Castro regime was split at the top and that his Ambassador had reported a serious conºict existed between Castro and his followers on the one hand and the hard-line Communists on the other.
Dantas felt that this split might be capitalized on and the Communist regime disposed of.
Rusk envisaged a two-stage operation; ªrst the rupture between Castro and the Communist and, second the disposal of Castro.
The CIA was actively pursuing various schemes to assassinate the Cuban leader at the time, although the Secretary of State’s speciªc knowledge of them has not previously been documented.
The phrasing would not exclude Castro’s physical elimination, even if the context suggested merely his ejection from any role in ruling the island.
In any case, it appears that Rusk hoped to exploit the Brazilian initiative without informing Dantas or his associates of Washington’s ultimate aim—in other words, to set Rio up for a double-cross.
On Thursday afternoon, 12 April, the Brazilian foreign minister reported on his conversation in Mexico City with Brazil’s envoy to Havana.
After speaking to Dantas, Rusk telephoned McCone and asked for his “fellows’ best appreciation” of the Brazilian foreign minister.
The next afternoon, as requested, McCone sent over a one-page CIA proªle of Dantas.
It was a harshly critical portrait of a “brilliant, although unscrupulous” lawyer and politician, highlighting his alleged sympathy for “the authoritarian type of leadership”—from the Nazis during World War II to the Soviet bloc (including Cuba) during the Cold War—his distaste for the United States, and his ambition to become prime minister.
Using a message he cleared personally after it was drafted by Edwin M Martin, the assistant secretary of state for economic affairs (soon to become assistant secretary for inter-American affairs), Rusk sent a cable to the newly installed United States ambassador in Rio, Lincoln Gordon (a Harvard economist and former Marshall Plan administrator, who had been sent by Kennedy largely to promote the AFP29), informing him on an “eyes only” basis of his conversation with Dantas.
On 27 April, Martin sent Gordon a follow-up cable asking him to check with Dantas.
Echoing what he had told Rusk in Washington, the Brazilian ofªcial stressed the “impossibility” of a return in Cuba to the “pre-revolutionary status quo” for which Miami-based anti-Castro émigrés were clamoring.
The spring 1962 Brazilian initiative stalled there—perhaps because, as Dantas predicted, Castro never came back with concrete proposals.
Nevertheless, the hints of a potential split in Havana had not gone unnoticed in Washington.
In some quarters, the murmurings in Havana continued to generate support for an overture to Castro that would offer a plausible alternative to the Mongoose operations designed to overthrow him, an effort that was yielding few if any prospects for success.
In late May 1962, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Inter-American Affairs Richard Goodwin, who had shifted from his White House duties to the State Department but remained an important ªgure in policy toward Latin America, secretly raised the idea of such an approach.
From recent intelligence reports on the Cuban power struggle, Goodwin sensed “an opportunity for a tentative probe designed to test the 33.
Goodwin noted that although it would be “foolish” to speculate that Soviet-Cuban ties had reached “the breaking point,” he had always believed that a rupture between the two countries would more likely emerge from a “split in the top leadership” than from a popular anti-Communist revolt.
In order to appeal to the Cuban leader, they would have to assuage his fears that Washington would try to overthrow him or insist on the return of United States properties expropriated during the revolution.
However, reºecting the skepticism with which Washington viewed “neutralist” initiatives, Goodwin rejected the idea of a Latin American, particularly a Brazilian, mediator between Washington and Havana, given the danger of exposure.
Despite Goodwin’s proposal, the idea of a private message from Washington to Castro lay dormant during the summer and early autumn of 1962, as the Kennedy administration instead focused its attention on continuing its political and diplomatic efforts to isolate Havana (particularly within hemispheric organizations) and to tighten economic sanctions against the island.
The administration also was continuing and expanding its covert operations and assassination plots in the hope of eventually toppling Castro.
Beginning in the late summer, United States ofªcials were increasingly preoccupied and alarmed by the growing indications of a Soviet military buildup in Cuba, and they sought to counter Republican charges that Kennedy was being “soft” on Cuba in what was emerging as a central issue in the midterm congressional election campaign.
All of this militated against any overture, no matter how discreet, to Cuba.
Meanwhile, the Rusk-McCone disagreement over the feasibility of encouraging or exploiting Soviet-Cuban friction persisted.
The meeting turned back to ideas for intensifying Mongoose, but in the end, the minutes record, in addition to stepping up “economic sabotage” McCone also was requested “to emphasize measures to foment a Castro–oldline Com35.
It is not known what measures, if any, McCone and the CIA took to promote this aim prior to the missile crisis.
