Edgar Hoover, the legendary director of the FBI, has been dead for almost 50 years.
But his rule—“Don’t embarrass the Bureau”—is very much alive and well in corporate America.
Crosswell assembled an army of state troopers, set up roadblocks, and swooped down on the estate.
Even so, more than 60 underworld bosses were arrested and indicted following the raid.
Hoover had vigorously and vocally denied the existence of a nationwide Mafia.
Hoover feared that his agents—-long renowned for their incorruptibility—would fall prey to the bribes of well-heeled mobsters.
Hoover feared that his allegedly homosexual relationship with his longtime associate director, Clyde Tolson, would be exposed by the Mob.
Rumors still persist that mobster Meyer Lansky came into possession of a compromising photo of Hoover and Tolson engaged in flagrante delicto.
Hoover knew of the ties between moneyed mobsters and their political allies in Congress.
Hoover preferred flashy, easily-solved cases to those requiring huge investments of manpower and money.
Edgar Hoover He set up a Top Hoodlum Program and encouraged his agents to use wiretapping and electronic surveillance to make up for lost time and Intelligence.
Hoover imposed restrictions on these assignments that could destroy an agent’s professional and personal life.
William E Roemer, Jr., assigned to the FBI’s Chicago field office, was one of the first agents to volunteer for such duty.
If confronted by police or mobsters, agents were to try to escape without being identified.
If caught by police, agents were not to identify themselves as FBI employees.
If they were arrested by police and the truth emerged about their FBI employment, the Bureau would claim they were “rogue agents” acting on their own.
Anyone who doubts this need only examine the public scandal involving Applebee’s International, Inc.
Because workers were no longer supported by government stimulus, desperate workers would be forced back into the workforce regardless of wages, giving the company the upper hand when it came to compensation.
Pankratz said competing restaurants had been raising wages to attract more workers, leaving Applebee’s struggling to keep up.
The memo was posted to an r/antiwork forum on Reddit and then picked up on social media.
At least three managers quit their jobs at a Kansas Applebee’s over the memo, CBS News reported.
Suddenly, it was Pankratz who was desperate for employment—he was fired.
We understand that the franchisee who owns and operates the restaurants in this market has placed the individual on leave.
Niccolo Machiavelli Among the issues he confronted was how to preserve liberty within a republic.
And key to this was mediating the eternal struggle between the wealthy and the poor and middle class.
Machiavelli deeply distrusted the nobility because they stood above the law.
He saw them as a major source of corruption because they could buy influence through patronage, favors or nepotism.
Successful political leaders must attain the support of the nobility or general populace.
But since these groups have conflicting interests, the safest course is to choose the latter.
He who becomes prince by help of the has greater difficulty in maintaining his power than he who is raised by the populace.
He is surrounded by those who think themselves his equals, and is thus unable to direct or command as he pleases.
But one who is raised to leadership by popular favor finds himself alone, and has no one, or very few, who are not ready to obey him. it is impossible to satisfy the by fair dealing and without inflicting injury upon others, whereas it is very easy to satisfy the mass of the people in this way.
Machiavelli warns that the general populace is more honest than the nobility—i.e., wealthy.
The wealthy seek to oppress, while the populace wants to simply avoid oppression.
A political leader cannot protect himself against a hostile population, owing to their numbers, but he can against the hostility of the great, as they are but few.
The worst that a prince has to expect from a hostile people is to be abandoned, but from hostile nobles he has to fear not only desertion but their active opposition.
And as they are more far seeing and more cunning, they are always in time to save themselves and take sides with the one who they expect will conquer.
The prince is, moreover, obliged to live always with the same people, but he can easily do without the same nobility, being able to make and unmake them at any time, and improve their position or deprive them of it as he pleases.
Unfortunately, political leaders throughout the world—including the United States–have ignored this sage advice.
In 2012, Tax Justice Network, which campaigns to abolish tax havens, commissioned a study of their effect on the world’s economy.
By 2010, at least $21 to $32 trillion of the world’s private financial wealth had been invested virtually tax-­free through more than 80 offshore secrecy jurisdictions.
This happened while many of those countries’ public sectors were borrowing themselves into bankruptcy, suffering painful adjustment and low growth, and holding fire sales of public assets.
The assets of these countries are held by a small number of wealthy individuals while the debts are shouldered by the ordinary people of these countries through their governments.
The offshore industry is protected by pivate bankers, lawyers and accountants, who get paid handsomely to hide their clients’ assets and identities.
Bank regulators and central banks of most countries allow the world’s top tax havens and banks to hide the origins and ownership of assets under their supervision.
Although multilateral institutions like the Bank for International Settlements , the IMF and the World Bank are supposedly insulated from politics, they have been highly compromised by the collective interests of Wall Street.
These regulatory bodies have never required financial institutions to fully report their cross-­border customer liabilities, deposits, customer assets under management or under custody.
Less than 100,000 people, .001% of the world’s population, now control over 30% of the world’s financial wealth.
Assuming that global offshore financial wealth of $21 trillion earns a total return of just 3% a year, and would have been taxed an average of 30% in the home country, this unrecorded wealth might have generated tax revenues of $189 billion per year.
Assume evil among men—and most especially among those who possess the greatest concentration of wealth and power.
Carefully monitor their activities—the way the FBI now regularly monitors those of the Mafia and major terrorist groups.
Ruthlessly prosecute the treasonous crimes of the rich and powerful—and, upon their conviction, impose severe punishment.
Moviegoers flooded theaters across the nation to make The Godfather the highest-grossing film of 1972—and, for a time, the highest-grossing film ever made.
Audiences rooted for the Corleones and thrilled whenever a Barzini “soldier” bit the concrete.
And they moaned when Vito Corleone was shot and wounded at an outdoor market and Sonny Corleone got riddled by machine guns on a New Jersey causeway.
One reason was that, early in the film, Don Corleone rejects an offer by the Barzini Family to enter the narcotics-trafficking business.
And they don’t mind if people want to gamble, or drink, or even pay for a woman.
The other reason so many viewers identified with the Corleones lay in the brilliant casting of their members.
Marlon Brando—considered by many the greatest actor of his time—headed the cast.
Al Pacino, then an unknown, aroused sympathy as Michael, the Family outsider forced by the shooting of his father to become the Boss of All Bosses.
James Caan is handsome and the defender of his brutalized sister, Connie, against her abusive husband, Carlo Rizzi.
John Cazale is riddled with insecurities and not very bright, won the audiences’ sympathy by his sheer helplessness when compared to his ruthless siblings.
Yet the Corleones—for all their homilies about “honor” and “loyalty”—were every bit as greedy and lethal as their Mafia competitors.
All of which brings us to the current Mafia-like struggle between former President Donald Trump and most of the Republican party.
As President, Trump had Derided the value of NATO and traditional global security alliances; Lavishly praised Communist tyrants such as Putin, China’s Xi Jinping and North Korea’s Kim Jon-Un; Threatened to withhold $400 million in aid to Ukraine unless its president, Volodymyr Zelensky, manufactured “dirt” on 2020 Democratic Presidential Candidate Joe Biden and his son, Hunter, who had had business dealings in Ukraine; and Publicly took Putin’s word over that of the FBI, CIA and National Security Agency that Russia had intervened in the 2016 Presidential race.
And House and Senate Republicans had repeatedly backed him up—even refusing to impeach him on February 5, 2020, for his attempted extortion of Zelensky.
Former vice president Mike Pence, while refusing to criticize Trump, attacked Putin on Fox News.
NATO—which Trump dismissed as “obsolete”—is flexing its strength in response to Russia’s aggression.
Despite the wishes of isolationists, the United States can’t ignore the world’s problems.
Side with their continuing leader, Donald Trump, who has sucked up to Communist dictators since 2015, or Face the wrath of voters outraged by Russian barbarities against a helpless Ukraine.
Several Republicans—such as Pence—have attacked Putin without mentioning Trump.
But Trump’s embrace of Putin has been so fervent for so long that any attack on Putin must be seen as a repudiation of Trump.
PART TWO In Bureaucracy, Business, History, Law, Law Enforcement, Politics, Social commentary on January 20, 2022 at 12:13 am In 1959,, J Edgar Hoover, the longtime director of the FBI, declared war on the Mafia.
He set up a Top Hoodlum Program and encouraged his agents to use wiretapping and electronic surveillance to make up for lost time and Intelligence.
If he had been intercepted by the mobsters, he would have likely been shot.
The agents who took them on were so committed to penetrating the Mob that they willingly accepted Hoover’s dictates.
Oliver North’s mugshot In 1986, President Ronald Reagan’s “arms-for-hostages” deal known as Iran-Contra had been exposed.
To retrieve seven Americans taken hostage in Beirut, Lebanon, Reagan had secretly agreed to sell some of America’s most sophisticated missiles to Iran.
During this operation, several Reagan officials—including North—diverted proceeds from the sale of those missiles to fund Reagan’s illegal war against the Sandinistas in Nicaragua.
But when the time came for those superiors to step forward and protect him, they didn’t.
Roemer speculated that North had been led to believe he would be rescued from criminal prosecution.
Instead, in 1989, he was convicted for Accepting an illegal gratuity; Aiding and abetting in the obstruction of a congressional inquiry; and Ordering the destruction of documents via his secretary, Fawn Hall.
To carry out whatever assignments they are given and take the blame if anything goes wrong.
In March, 2005, Wal-Mart escaped criminal charges when it agreed to pay $11 million to end a federal probe into its use of illegal aliens as janitors.
Agents from Immigration and Customs Enforcement raided 60 Wal-Mart stores across 21 states in October, 2003.
An ICE raid The illegal aliens had been hired as janitors at Wal-Mart stores.
Many of the employees worked seven days or nights a week without overtime pay or injury compensation.
According to Federal officials, court-authorized wiretaps revealed that Wal-Mart executives knew their subcontractors hired illegal aliens.
Instead, it blamed its subcontractors for hiring illegal aliens and claiming that Wal-Mart hadn’t been aware of this.
Just as the FBI planned to have its agents take the fall in “black bag” cases, Wal-Mart meant to sacrifice its subcontractors for hiring illegal aliens.
The Feds had, for once, treated corporate executives like Mafia leaders and had tapped their phones.
Which holds a lesson for how Federal law enforcement agencies should treat future corporate executives when their companies are found violating the law.
Their phones should be tapped, their boardrooms and bedrooms bugged, and their closest associates should be given immunity to testify against them.
Widespread illegal and corrupt behavior cannot happen among the employees of a major government agency or private corporation unless: Those at the top have ordered it and are profiting from it; or Those at the top don’t want to know about it and have taken no steps to prevent or punish it.
This sounds great—as though the corporation is seeking people who will get along with their colleagues and work to achieve a worthwhile objective.
And, at times, that is precisely what is being sought in a potential employee.
Someone willing to commit any crime for the organization—and take the fall for its leaders if anything goes wrong.
Crosswell assembled as many troopers as he could find, set up roadblocks, and swooped down on the estate.
The mobsters, panicked, fled in all directions—many of them into the surrounding woods.
Edgar Hoover Up to that point, Hoover had vigorously and vocally denied the existence of a nationwide Mafia.
But he had carefully kept his own agency well out of the war on organized crime.
The arrests of more than 60 known members of the underworld—in what the news media called “a conclave of crime”—deeply embarrassed Hoover.
It was all the more embarrassing that while the FBI had virtually nothing in its files on the leading lights of the Mafia, the Federal Bureau of Narcotics had opened its voluminous files to the Senate Labor Rackets Committee.
Heading that committee as chief legal counsel was Robert F Kennedy—a fierce opponent of organized crime.
So Hoover created the Top Hoodlum Program to identify and target selected Mafiosi across the country.
He would wiretap the mobsters’ phones and plant electronic microphones in their meeting places.
The information gleamed from these techniques would arm the Bureau with evidence that could be used to strongarm mobsters into “rolling over” on their colleagues in exchange for leniency.
Organization chart of Mafia famiies Hoover believed he had authority to install wiretaps because more than one Attorney General had authorized their use.
But no Attorney General had given permission to install bugs—which involved breaking into the places where they were to be placed.
Before agents could install electronic surveillance devices in Mob hangouts, agents had to first request authority for a survey.
Romer: Man Against the Mob Agents faced not only the threat of arrest by police, but that of death at the hands of the Mob.
PART THREE In Bureaucracy, History, Law Enforcement, Politics, Social commentary on December 3, 2021 at 12:10 am Sean Penn is not the first celebrity to “get close to” a gangster.
Singer Frank Sinatra set the standard as far back as the 1940s when he was often seen in the company of notorious Mafiosi such as Charles “Lucky” Luciano and Willie Moretti.
But the mobster whom Sinatra was most-often linked with—by gossip and FBI reports—was Sam “Mooney” Giancana.
Giancana started out as a “wheelman” and enforcer for the teenage “42 Gang,” then joined the Chicago mob in the late 1930s.
Sam Giancana Sinatra often partied with Giancana, both in nightclubs and at his own residence in Palm Springs, California.
In December, 1959, financier Joseph P Kennedy summoned Sinatra to the family compound in Hyannis Port, Massachusetts.
His son, Senator John F Kennedy, was planning to run for President in 1960.
Joseph P Kennedy had done business with the mob as a bootlegger during Prohibition.
Now he wanted the Mafia to pressure local union members into voting for JFK—and making contributions to the Kennedy Presidential campaign.
Sinatra went to his friend, Sam Giancana, and asked for the mob’s support.
In return, Giancana—and other mobsters—expected to win an ally in the White House.
Since 1959, Giancana and other “Top Hoodlum” mobsters had been under increasingly heavy FBI surveillance.
And Sinatra had assured him that, under a Kennedy Presidency, it would stop.
On Election Night, 1960, John F Kennedy carried Illinois—and won the White House by a mere 120,000 votes nationwide.
Then, to the horror of the Mafia, JFK installed his brother, Robert Francis Kennedy, as Attorney General.
From 1957 to 1959, RFK had pursued gangsters as chief counsel for the Senate Rackets Committee.
Convictions against organized crime figures rose 800% during his four years in office.
He sent Peter Lawford—his Rat Pack pal and brother-in-law to the President—to talk with Robert Kennedy about laying off on the Mafia don.
FBI agents put a 24-hour “lockstep” surveillance on him, following him even into church and restrooms.
Let’s show those fuckin’ Hollywood fruitcakes that they can’t get away with it as if nothin’s happened.
Or I could whack out a couple of those other guys, Lawford and that Martin.
PART TWO In Bureaucracy, History, Law Enforcement, Politics, Social commentary, Uncategorized on December 2, 2021 at 12:11 am Actor Sean Penn believes the Mexican Government wants to put him at risk by convincing Joaquin “El Chapo” Guzman that Penn played a role—deliberately or negligently—in his capture.
By “we” Penn meant himself and Mexican actress Kate del Castillo, who had actually arranged the meeting.
Almost certainly this happened with the collusion of some prison guards.
El Chapo Already there is evidence that “El Chapo” regrets having given an interview to Penn and del Castillo in the Mexican jungle on October 2, 2015.
Mr Penn should be called to testify to respond about the stupidities he has said.
Guzman is responsible for the deaths of thousands of rivals, journalists and police.
An anonymous law enforcement official said that not only could Penn be in danger, but so could his entire family.
Guzman’s Competitors in the Drug Trade “The problem with dealing with someone like Guzman on this personal basis, where one is perceived as a ‘friend’ or an aide or a business partner of sorts to Chapo, is that you have to be prepared to inherit all his enemies, and there are many,” warned Michael Levine.
The notoriety gained by killing someone like Penn or even del Castillo will actually turn these bastards on.
Believe me it is there, and unwittingly these two may have stepped into a world where there is an actual competition to kill them,” said Levine, who has dealt face-to-face with Latin American drug lords.
Wannabe Cartel Members Countless men—in Mexico and the United States—would love to “do El Chapo a favor” by gunning down Penn and/or del Castillo.
The fame—or infamy—that the assassin of a “big celebrity” like Penn would receive.
John Lennon died at the hands of such a fame-obsessed, psychotic gunman.
This means that literally anyone could be a potential assassin—making it that much harder to defend against.
Deputy United States marshals, who operate the program, assume that a witness is the best judge of who poses the greatest danger to him.
Witness Security Program protection detail This works well when a witness is unknown and testifying against someone who is equally unknown to the public.
But when a witness is notorious—such as Sammy “The Bull” Gravano—and the defendant is equally infamous—such as John Gotti—all bets are off.
First, they are protected by the United States Marshals Service, which has an excellent track record in protecting its charges; and Second, they are expected to assume a low profile, which serves as their best protection.
PART ONE In Bureaucracy, History, Law Enforcement, Politics, Social commentary, Uncategorized on December 1, 2021 at 12:24 am Actor Sean Penn is used to being a tough guy—onscreen.
And in 2013, he played Willie Stark, a corrupt, Huey Long-type Southern governor in a remake of All the King’s Men.
As Cohen, Penn put out contracts on his enemies and even went mano-o-mano in a long-running fistfight with an LAPD detective.
And as Stark, he clawed his way to power and bullied both his enemies and his supporters.
Perhaps Penn should have paid more attention to the way those movies ended.
Sean Penn Mickey Cohen goes to prison, where he is brutally waylaid by other inmates.
And Willie Stark, at the height of his power, is shot by a longtime enemy.
Had he thought about it, he might have decided it could be a mistake to meet with Joaquin “El Chapo” Guzman, the notorious Mexican drug lord.
On October 2, 2015, Penn met with Guzman in an undisclosed location in the Mexican jungle.
So he had reached out to Mexican actress Kate del Castillo, asking her to meet with him to discuss such a project.
She, in turn, referred him to Penn, whom Guzman said could come along for the meeting.
Three months later, on January 8, 2016, Mexican Marines and Federal Police launched an early-morning raid on a house in Los Mochis, in northern Sinaloa, where Guzman’s drug cartel operated.
The Marines expected to find Guzman there, and they did—ending his almost six-month flight after escaping from prison in July.
One day after Guzman’s capture, Rolling Stone published Penn’s 10,000-word article.
Penn had not been allowed to bring a tape recorder or even take notes with pen and paper.
So he had been forced to memorize as much of Guzman’s tale as he could.
He’s wearing a casual patterned silk shirt, pressed black pants, and he appears remarkably well-groomed and healthy for a man on the run.
Joaquin “El Chapo” Guzman After the interview’s publication, Penn came under fire for having allowed Guzman to approve the article.
He also drew sharp criticism for having used his status as a movie star to play the part of a reporter.
Shortly after the capture of “El Chapo,” Mexico’s Attorney General Arely Gomez “credited” Penn with having played a vital role in the capture of the drug kingpin.
Suddenly, American experts on Mexican organized crime cartels began seeing Sean Penn in a new light—that of a movie star with a big target on his chest and back.
He argued that the risk is likely for del Castillo because she was the one in contact with Guzman.
She was the one whom Guzman’s associates supplied with a Blackberry—the phone they believed most secure.
And it was her and Guzman’s flirtatious exchanges that led to the meeting in the jungle with Sean Penn.
One of the traditional violent methods use is if they can’t get to the target, they’ll go after their family members.
PART FOUR In Bureaucracy, History, Military, Politics, Social commentary on August 20, 2021 at 12:12 am “John and Robert Kennedy knew what they were doing.
Oswald, a former Marine, was a committed Marxist—whose hero was Castro.
The CIA’s ongoing campaign to overthrow and/or assassinate Castro was an open secret throughout the Gulf.
Jack Ruby, a Dallas nightclub owner, murdered Oswald because he was distraught over Kennedy’s death.
Another book well worth reading about America’s Cuban obsession during the early 1960s is American Tabloid, by James Ellroy.
Although a novel, it vividly captures the atmosphere of intrigue, danger and sleaziness that permeated that era in a way that dry, historical documents never can.
That crisis stemmed from the American Right’s twisted obsession with Cuba, an obsession that continues today.
The CIA and FBI concealed the CIA-Mafia assassination plots from the Warren Commission assigned to investigate Kennedy’s murder.
Other government officials participating in the cover-up included Attorney General Robert F Kennedy and President Lyndon B Johnson.
Ironically, this secrecy ignited the widespread—and false—belief that the President had died at the hands of a government conspiracy.
Robert Kennedy feared that his relentless pursuit of Castro might have led Castro to “take out” JFK first.
Fearing his own assassination if he continued Kennedy’s efforts to murder Castro, President Johnson ordered the CIA to halt its campaign to overthrow and/or assassinate the Cuban leader.
The huge Cuban community throughout Florida—and especially Miami—continues to exert a blackmailing influence on American politics.
Right-wing politicians from Richard Nixon to Donald Trump have reaped electoral rewards by catering to the demands of this hate-obsessed voting block.
These Cuban ex-patriots hope that the United States will launch a full-scale military invasion of the island to remove Castro.
Having grown rich and soft in the United States, they fear to risk their own lives by returning to Cuba to overthrow the Castro regime—Castro he had overthrown Fulgencio Batista.
Only President Barack Obama had the political courage to re-establish diplomatic relations with Cuba—in 2015.
This occurred long after the United States had done so with such former enemies as the Soviet Union, China and Vietnam.
President Donald Trump. hoping to please anti-Castro voters in Florida, abandoned engagement and increased sanctions against Cuba.
Americans should initiate major changes in its foreign policy toward Cuba.
America should end the half-century contamination of American politics by those Cubans who live only for their hatred of Castro—and those political candidates who live to exploit it.
Those who continue to hate—or love—Fidel Castro should be left to their own private feud.
But that is a feud they should settle on their own island, and not from the shores of the United States.
PART THREE In Bureaucracy, History, Military, Politics, Social commentary on August 19, 2021 at 12:15 am On October 22, 1962, President John F Kennedy went on nationwide TV to announce the discovery of the missiles and his blockade of Cuba.
On October 26, the United States raised the readiness level of SAC forces to DEFCON 2—the step just short of war.
For the only time in United States history, B-52 bombers were dispersed to various locations and made ready to take off, fully equipped, on 15 minutes’ notice.
Twenty-three nuclear-armed B-52 were sent to orbit points within striking distance of the Soviet Union.
But the Kennedy Administration–and the American military—didn’t know that the Russian soldiers guarding the missiles had been armed with tactical nuclear weapons.
And a full-scale nuclear exchange between the United States and the Soviet Union would have almost certainly followed.
At the height of the crisis, Attorney General Robert F Kennedy offered a solution.
The first had agreed to remove the missiles, but the second had demanded that the United States remove its own missiles from Turkey, which bordered the Soviet Union.
The administration should ignore the second message—and announce that it had accepted Khrushchev’s offer to remove the missiles.
Under enormous pressure, Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles from Cuba.
Behind his decision lay a secret promise by the Kennedy administration to remove its obsolete nuclear missiles from Turkey, which bordered the Soviet Union.
On the night the crisis ended, there occurred a prophetic exchange between the two Kennedy brothers.
John F and Robert F Kennedy But President Kennedy was not finished with Castro.
Now the Kennedys planned such an attack on Cuba just one month before the November, 1964 Presidential election.
On November 22, 1963, while the President rode through Dallas in an open-air automobile, a rifle-wielding assassin opened fire.
But for some of those who had waged a secret, lethal war against Fidel Castro for the previous two years, Kennedy’s death—at least in retrospect—didn’t come as a surprise.
Robert Kennedy, in particular, spent the remaining years of his life agonizing over the possibility that his highly personal war against Castro had backfired.
That Castro, fed up with the CIA’s assassination plots against him, had retaliated with one of his own.
Robert Kennedy’s fears and guilt were compounded by the fact that, while waging war on Castro, he had waged an equally ruthless crusade against organized crime.
He knew that some of the mobsters he had tried to send to prison had played a major role in the CIA’s efforts to “hit” Castro.
Chistka@aol.com Former reporter, legal investigator and troubleshooter.
Fighting political and bureaucratic arrogance, incompetence and/or indifference.
WordPress.com WordPress.org Follow Blog via Email Enter your email address to follow this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email.
Follow TIP OF THE WEEK When making complaints in writing, carefully review your email or letter before sending it.
If necessary, note any regulatory agencies that can make life rough for the company or agency if your complaint isn't resolved.
But do this only after you have stated you hope your complaint can be settled amicably and privately within the company.
