Through his eyes, we gain knowledge about President Kennedy's inner most circle during the whole crisis.
President John F Kennedy and his advisors had to come up with a plan of action against the Soviets.
In addition, Kennedy is determined to show that he is strong enough to stand up to the threat, and the Pentagon advises United States military strikes against Cuba which could lead the way to another massive war.
However, Kennedy is not eager to follow through because a United States invasion could cause the Soviets to retaliate in Europe.
Throughout the movie, it seemed like war was unavoidable, but through John F Kennedy’s decisions, it saved the lives of millions.
Although the term “war” was in the labeled name, nobody engaged in violence.
During that time, rumors were made that the Soviets had access to weapons of mass destruction which later found out to be true.
Armies were set up on both sides, but neither army had launched an attack.
Consequently, the fear of communism speaking was common in the United States.
The Iron Curtain was a result because of the Soviets and the United States.
It is told from the perspective of Robert F Kennedy, senator and brother to President John F Kennedy.
These thirteen days were the time period in which the fate of the world was decided.
The focus of the book was on the decision of both the United States and Russia.
The United States learned that the Soviet Union was placing missiles with nuclear weapons in Cuba.
The movie follows President John F Kennedy and his advisors as they are trying to come up with a plan of action for how to handle the situation.
It shows how JFK’s leadership saved the world from having World War III , or worse, Nuclear War.
JFK’s crisis management and decision-making skills was tested during this period.
Unlike other tragic stories written about suicide and various types of bullying, the author, Jay Asher, takes an innovative approach in telling Hannah Baker’s story.
The book will touch its readers more than they ever thought possible, stimulating their emotions and creating new thoughts and perspectives regarding the issues of suicide and bullying.
That argument being the decision of what was the foremost factors in Tracy’s, the main actress, life that caused her to be such a defiant thirteen year old.
It is not disscussed or even contemplated by most, yet it is important to everyday life and yes even your health.
There are advances in technology today that would have blown your mind not only a century ago but thirty years ago as well.
But with this technology has come much lower levels of faceto face communtication, causing misconceptions to arise.
The key players were President John F Kennedy and the Soviet Premier Khrushchev.
