Military & Defense 56 years ago, the Cuban missile crisis took the world to the brink of nuclear war — here's what it looked like from sunny Florida beaches Christopher Woody 2018-10-28T13:00:00Z Save Article IconA bookmark Email iconAn envelope.
Copy Link Download the app Soviet missiles in Cuba, seen in reconnaissance photos taken on October 14, 1962.
JFK Library On October 14, 1962, one of the United States Air Force's vaunted U-2 spy planes soared over Cuba.
The photos it took during that high-altitude pass revealed the assembly of Soviet SS-4 medium-range ballistic missiles.
To that point, Soviet nuclear weapons were vastly outnumbered by United States nuclear weapons.
But Soviet missiles parked in Cuba could reach most of the United States within minutes.For President John F Kennedy, less than a year and half from the disastrous Bay of Pigs invasion, staring down the business end of Soviet missiles was unacceptable.For 13 long days in October 1962, the world waited to see who would blink first.
Cuban leader Fidel Castro responded to Kennedy's decision to set up a blockade over Cuban radio and television on October 23, 1962.
Associated Press Members of a 14-man detachment of air police exit a Southern Airways plane at the Key West International Airport, October 24, 1962.
The detachment was from Seymour Johnson Air Force Base near Goldsboro, North Carolina.
Members of a 14-man detachment of air police unload from a Southern Airways plane at the Key West International Airport, October 24, 1962.
The detachment is from Seymour Johnson Air Force Base near Goldsboro, North Carolina.
Two women watch United States soldiers setting up anti-aircraft missile launchers on a beach in Key West, Florida, October 26, 1962.
The Army took over a large section of public beach named after United States Senator George A Smathers.
Two girls focus their attention on United States Army soldiers setting up anti-aircraft missile launchers on a beach in Key West, Florida, October 26, 1962.
Smathers, a dedicated Cold Warrior, served two terms in the United States House of Representatives and three terms in the Senate.
He was also close to Kennedy, speaking at his wedding rehearsal dinner, and to Richard Nixon, to whom Smathers sold his home in Key Biscayne, Florida.
Two kids watch a United States soldier make adjustments on anti-aircraft missile equipment set up on a public beach at Key West, Florida, October 26, 1962.
The Army obtained permission from the City of Key West to use the beach for the installation.
Two youths watch a United States Army soldier make adjustments on anti-aircraft missile equipment that was set up on a public beach at Key West, Florida, on Oct., 1962.
A sentry salutes an incoming car at the gate of the Casa Marina resort hotel in Key West, Florida, which is occupied by United States troops who moved into the city, October 26, 1962.
A sentry salutes an incoming car at the gate of the Casa Marina resort hotel in Key West, Florida, which is occupied by United States Army troops who moved into the city, October 26, 1962.
Two soldiers sit in a machine-gun emplacement beside anti-aircraft rocket positions on a beach at Key West, Florida, October 27, 1962.
United States Army anti-aircraft rockets mounted on launchers and pointed out over the Florida Straits in full view in Key West, Florida, October 27, 1962.
United States Army anti-aircraft rockets mounted on launchers and pointed out over the Florida Straits are in full view in Key West, Florida, October 27, 1962.
Two soldiers sit in a sandy dugout beside a machine-gun position on a beach at Key West, Florida, October 27, 1962.
Key West sightseers have an extra attraction on a tour of the beach facing Havana, November 1, 1962.
Key West sightseers have an extra attraction on the tour the military installations on the beach facing Havana, November 1, 1962.
United States troops string barbed wire along the Key West shore facing Havana, November 1, 1962.
Military installations, rushed in during the Cuban missile crisis, line the beach in the background.
Military installations, rushed here during the Cuban missile crisis, line the beach in the background.
Soldiers on their first day off-duty since their arrival seem to be enjoying themselves, fish or no fish, in Key West, Florida, November 4, 1962.
Even if the fish are not biting it’s nice to have girls around to talk to.
These soldiers having their first day off-duty since their arrival seem to be enjoying themselves fish or no fish in Key West, Florida, Nov., 1962.
Soldiers manning Army installations on the barricaded beach may look relaxed to the tourists driving along the road, but they are on the alert for anything that comes along in Key West, November 5, 1962.
In a message on October 26, Khrushchev said the Soviet Union would remove the missiles if the United States promised not to invade Cuba.
The next day, he sent another message saying the USSR would remove the missiles if the United States removed its missiles in Turkey.
Robert Kennedy, the attorney general, delivered the message to the Soviet Embassy, and the crisis drew down on October 28.
The following April, the United States removed its Jupiter missiles from Turkey.
