So to consider the legacy of Pacem in terris, putting war and peace in the context of solidarity with the poor and stewardship of creation, seems to fit perfectly within the spirit of Blessed John XXIII, whom this important conference wants to honor with the greatest gratitude and respect.
My remarks this morning begin with recalling the geopolitical context of the Pacem in terris when it appeared, and the influence of senior Church figures in striving for peace.
Then I will invite you to step back with me in order to appreciate the sources, unique perspective and perennial value of the encyclical.
Finally I will reverse direction in order to look forward and explore with you how the encyclical can assist us in our future peace-building, thus furthering the legacy of Pacem in terris.
Before I turn to the 1960s, I wish to point out that the Holy See has worked for decades with other governments to promote incremental disarmament and the banning of all nuclear weapons.
He said that “The great problem confronting the world after almost two thousand years remains unchanged.
Men are either with Him and His Church, and then they enjoy light, goodness, order, and peace.
Vatican II, Sessions 1 and 2, Floyd Anderson, ed.65, The National Catholic Welfare Conference, Inc., 2.
Challenges and responses As all of you know, and as those of you who are about 60 or older vividly remember, Pacem in terris was issued at a time when nuclear disaster seemed imminent.
In 1963, not yet two decades after the conclusion of the Second World War, and despite the pledged commitments of Nations to stop wars and to maintain world peace, the human family stood again at the brink of international war.
Rival political ideologies had more or less forced the nations of the world into opposed political blocks that competed desperately for supremacy.
By erecting the Berlin Wall in 1961, the German Democratic Republic had completely cut off West Berlin from East Berlin and the rest of East Germany.
The Eastern Bloc had claimed that the purpose of the Wall was to protect its population from fascism.
Yet, in reality, the Berlin Wall served as a barrier to prevent emigration and defection of its suffering population.
The following year saw nuclear missile sites constructed in Cuba to deter any future invasion attempt by the United States.
The United States responded with an air and sea blockade to prevent nuclear weapons from being delivered to Cuba, and it demanded that the Soviet Union dismantle the missile bases and take back all weapons.
It showed how precarious world order can be in the face of opposed militarized camps based on rival ideologies.
Fortunately, Pope John XXIII learned that an intervention of his might be welcomed.
He was trusted by Khrushchev, from whom he had received Christmas wishes the year before.
The Holy Father made a statement on Vatican Radio that was published in newspapers all over the world, including Pravda, the official newspaper of the Soviet Communist party.
As we come ahead in the years and decades, we find the same foundations of the Church’s interventions.
For instance, John Paul II exercised influence on ending the Cold War by speaking in Poland, beginning in 1979, of truth, human dignity and liberation of the spirit.
While Archbishop of Cape Coast, I chaired Ghana’s National Peace Council.
My beliefs in the deep yearning of all people for dignity, respect and peace were essential to how I led this group.
We were involved in a wide variety of issues, but none more difficult than the tense national elections in late 2008.
We constantly brought stakeholders together for dialogue and kept communication lines open.
I have been assured that we played a major role in achieving social peace during this period.
The results of another mission, to Côte-d’Ivoire in 2011, were not positive.
Pope Emeritus Benedict sent me there to express his “solidarity and that of the universal Church to the victims of the hostilities as well as encourage reconciliation and peace.
I therefore address a new heartfelt appeal to all the parties concerned, that the work of peace-making and dialogue be initiated so that further bloodshed may be avoided.
However, a Pope or Cardinal is not exclusively a crisis-intervener on the world stage.
A more typical role, and just as crucial, is to keep reminding the world of the deepest truths.
For example, in September 2010, I led the delegation of the Holy See to the UN to discuss the Millennium Development Goals and the chance of attaining the goal of eliminating global poverty by 2015.
Curiously, some of the methods of the anti-poverty campaign tended to target the poor in ways that suggest that the solution to global poverty is to eliminate the poor.
Reflecting on human dignity and personhood, we reminded the assembly that combating poverty requires investments in the resourcefulness of the poor, making them protagonists in their emergence out of poverty, and not eliminating them.
The poor need education to transform them from dependency to resourcefulness.
Old Testament We often hear the word “peace” spoken: we want peace within our family, our community, in society, among nations.
The Compendium of the Social Doctrine of the Church has a beautiful section devoted to the nature of peace that begins with its biblical aspects.
I invite you to study, reflect and pray about it, because it provides a keen presentation of the nature of peace and thus about what this Conference is addressing.
Violence is caused by interpersonal and social relationships, and violence and peace are mutually incompatible.
Peace is not merely the absence of war but represents the fullness of life ; it is a gift of God; and it involves obedience to His plan.
The promise of peace runs through the entire Old Testament; it is the messianic attribute par excellence, in which all other beneficial effects of salvation are included.
The Hebrew word ‘shalom’ expresses this fullness of meaning in its etymological sense of ‘completeness’ (cf.
Whether our translation says men of good will or men whom God loves, the heart of the matter is that peace is a gift of God to all, because God loves all.
But this gift comes to fruition, it becomes real, only for those who 8 Compendium of the Social Doctrine of the Church, Pontifical Council for Justice and Peace , 488493.
Deeds of peace and not worldly weapons grace the escutcheon of King Jesus.
In this sense, then, peace does not belong to human nature as such, but under some circumstances – defined and illustrated with the expression “men whom He loves” – it can be a human experience to the degree that humans embrace this gift of God.
The coming of Jesus brings something into the world; something that is necessary because of our eternally fallen human nature.
This grounds the entire plan of human salvation as such and applies to all humans, not just to a particular chosen group.
Thus Christ’s birth was announced not just to the Jewish people, represented by the shepherds who heard the angels, but to the entire world in the persons of the three Wise Men who came from other lands.
One of the great lessons, if not the greatest lesson, that humanity learnt, especially, from the world wars , was that safeguarding the well-being and interest of humanity, and especially peace, is the task of all.
Thus, after the First World War, the League of Nations was developed as a fruit of the Paris Conference which ended that war.
It was the first international organization whose principal mission was to maintain world peace.
Though the League’s initiative reflected humanity's sense of brotherhood and its desire for peace, it failed to prevent World War II and safeguard the peace of the nations.
Inheriting most of the ideals and values of the League of Nations, the United Nations aimed to stop wars between countries, and to provide a platform for dialogue, cooperation in international law, security, economic development, social progress and human rights.
But the building-block of nation has persistently been a stumbling-block.
The humanly established order does not inherently promote peace, because nations compete.
The sovereign nation considers the particular good of its own constituent citizenry to be a higher value than the common good of all.
Envy and greed and other base human tendencies have not disappeared, they are still present and they continue to motivate even what we call diplomacy and national interests.
Such interests have a largely egotistic origin and lead to many of these consequences.
Pope John’s radical insight was to write about peace rather than about absence of war, and to address Pacem in terris to all people and only secondarily to all nations.
History showed him and has shown all of us the inadequacy of the humanly established order.
And although he expects the Church to be most acutely attentive, he embraces all people in this vision.
This pan-human intuition of the ultimate common good can animate everyone of good will – as Lumen Gentium explains, only those are excluded who exercise their freedom to choose cynicism, selfishness, and collaboration with Evil.
The pressing question now is the manner in which everyone of good will may make peacebuilding their own personal practice, rather than leaving it to a few in high office.
Peace-understanding Pacem in terris was issued in 1963 when the Cold War was at its height.
Although many of the problems of that period persist today, our context is different now in important ways, especially because of rapid globalization.
The flows of information, services, 7 innovation, hard goods, pollution, investment, diseases, displaced people, fashions etc., are so global, so fast and pervasive, that no nation has the capacity to achieve common good on its own.
This only reinforces the need for everyone to be the agents as well as the beneficiaries of peace.
The attainment of peace, according to the teaching of Pope John XXIII, is not essentially with reference to and by the observance of some institutional setup, like the United Nations and its declarations,12 however universally representative it may be.
Peace on earth is achieved ultimately with reference to the truth about God and the observance of his established order that includes men and women and the human world.
Its starting point and core topic is human beings, humans created by God, endowed with dignity and bearers of rights and duties.
It is also the starting point for understanding the relationships among all people, with the purpose of assuring those rights for all.
Accordingly, Blessed Pope John devoted the first section of Pacem in terris to the order that should exist among all people and thus first affirmed the nature of personhood.
As such he has rights and duties, which together flow as a direct consequence from his nature.
They are inviolable insofar as they are inherent in the human person and in human dignity, and because the proclamation of these rights demands their respect fully by all people, everywhere and for all people.
Finally, these rights are inalienable insofar as no one can legitimately deprive another person, whoever they may be, of these rights, since this would do violence to their nature.
Let us understand our right to peace and our duty to work for peace within these parameters.
After having introduced the value of the human person at the outset, the Holy Father went on to describe those rights which belong to men and women by nature, by creation.
Human beings have the right to live; to bodily integrity and to the means necessary for the proper development of life; and to the necessary health and social services.
Pope John affirmed as well that along with rights come duties, as a matter of natural law.
Second, this gives rise to reciprocity of rights and duties between persons.
One person’s natural right gives rise to a corresponding duty in others of respecting that right.
We are not only called to claim our human rights but we are also called to respect the human rights of others.
Francis of Assisi – love for the poor20, the striving for peace for which truth is essential, and care for all of nature.
Further, he suggests a link between peace-building and bridge-building.
Pope Francis referred to his title of “Pontiff, that is, a builder of bridges with God and between people.
Indeed, proper arrangements between nations and careful observance of others’ rights are essential in this globalized era, but they are not enough.
We must also build bridges of true dialogue and true fraternity if we are to build peace.
At the Mass marking the beginning of my ministry, I greatly appreciated the presence of so many civil and religious leaders from the Islamic world.
Then we drew on its Biblical sources to better understand its key ideas.
This led to several guides for our future peace-building efforts, which will be the legacy of Pacem in terris.
May the risen Jesus bring comfort to the victims of natural disasters and make us responsible guardians of creation.
Over lunch you will be discussing Solidarity and United States Foreign Policy.
I hope that as you savor your meal, you will also savor some of the tenets of Good Pope John’s teaching in Pacem in terris and the hints we have already seen and heard from Pope Francis that help us to be peace-makers, peace-builders, channels and instruments of peace.
I thank the Conference organizers once again, and all you participants, for this opportunity to enhance the study and practice of Catholic peace building.
May the Holy Spirit assist us all to build pacem in terris, starting today and never giving up on this most human and most holy mission.
