After the failed 'Bay of Pigs Invasion', the USSR gained trust and support from Fidel Castro, Cuban leader, by supporting Cuba with their communist regime.
Khrushchev secretly installed missiles in Cuba, and when United States spy planes found missile construction zones, President Kennedy imposed a blockade surrounding Cuba using their naval warships.
He threatened the USSR that if any missile was launched from Cuba then the United States will attack the USSR and he also demanded that the USSR remove all of their weapons from Cuba. ...read more.
Middle Khrushchev knew the consequences of sending the ships there; a nuclear war that could destroy the whole world.
He turned the ships away to avoid further conflict and to avoid hot war.
On the 25th October, Kennedy took away the naval blockade/Cuban quarantine line.
The next day Khrushchev sent a letter proposing to remove Soviet missiles from Cuba if the United States promised/guaranteed not to invade Cubathis released some tension between the relations as they were making some fair decisions.
But on October 27th an American U2 spy plane was shot down over Cuba and a second, more tough, letter from Khrushchev was received demanding the removal of United States ...read more.
Conclusion Khrushchev appeared to be weak and a laughing stock amongst communist politicians as, the removing of missiles from Turkey, were not made public at the time It appeared as though Kennedy had won conflict as Khrushchev had been humiliated; the Russians were seen as retreating from circumstances that they had started.
Its purpose was so that the leaders of the two countries can communicate directly, efficiently and quickly in the case of another crisis.
He had done nothing for the Berlin Wall and the Bay of Pigs incident had been a disaster.
There were under the impression that Khrushchev could take advantage of this inexperienced, young man.
Firstly, the author of ""The Brink"", Detzer, is a United States historian.
However he does not publish a book for the purpose of glorifying his nation.
History Cuba Missile Crisis whereby both nations agreed to stop producing nuclear bombs unless the technology became outdated.
This was another treaty designed to ease the tension, which suggests Detente was working effectively and acting as previously designed.
This build up of agreements lead to a rapid improvement of relations between the two nations.
The USSR under Khrushchev and Brezhnev By doing this Khrushchev wanted to make people realize the change he tried to make to the USSR and wanted to make sure that people knew that Stalin's rule was over.
He needed initiative and independence for his economical reforms and to get this independence he needed to tell the truth about what Stalin did during his regime.
Arab Israeli Conflict There have been a number of sanctions which have taken place.
This is because; before Hamas were is power the Palestinians were still receiving aid and money, however once Hamas got into power everything changed.
This was because of the aims and ambitions of the Hamas group. superpower relations questions of the wall there was little the Western powers could do to stop it.
This banter also shows the Cold War developing as it is obvious to see that relations are deteriorating between the two superpowers.
That is, even if attacked first, the United States could response with such force as to cuase great damage to the attacker.
