Nonetheless, Sevareid was remarkably perceptive in emphasizing the emotional impacts of this president on the population.
His shocking grotesque murder continues to reverberate in our collective lives, even after a half century.The administration’s disastrous failed invasion of Cuba at the Bay of Pigs dogged President Kennedy from the start, and provided Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev with strong incentive to deploy offensive missiles on the island.
In recent years, meetings between surviving officials from both sides in the confrontation have revealed that nuclear war was even closer than realized in that tense time.The President, a combat veteran of World War II, resisted powerful pressure to attack Cuba and was highly imaginative.
He and his advisers were able to get the missiles out of Cuba through a blockade, combined with a secret Cuba-Turkey missile trade.
Kennedy’s outlook contrasts markedly with the administration of President George W Bush regarding Iraq.In the aftermath of the missile crisis, Kennedy and Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev achieved a treaty banning nuclear tests in the atmosphere, a major breakthrough.
JFK was careful on race relations, addressing the subject decisively only when pressed to do so by a massive public march on Washington.RFK was relentless in pursuit of the mafia, while simultaneously gangsters were recruited for the effort to kill Castro.
Regarding organized crime, a decade passed before the Nixon administration returned to prosecution, notably with the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations legislation.People around Robert Kennedy were puzzled by his marked disinterest in possible conspiracy in the assassination.
In hindsight, RFK no doubt avoided that dark tangled path because he might come face-to-face with it himself.Senator John Kennedy’s book ‘Profiles in Courage,’ about United States Senators who put principle above political expediency, received the Pulitzer Prize.
While critics cracked President Kennedy should show less profile and more courage, he actually demonstrated considerable personal strength.Professor Herbert Parmet has documented exceptionally serious health problems that plagued JFK from birth.
Despite this, he managed to enlist in the United States Navy in World War II, then volunteered for hazardous PT boat duty.Sevareid’s observation applies perhaps most tangibly to the American space program.
President Kennedy early on made a dramatic public commitment to carry out a successful manned moon landing, including safe return to earth.
A number of technological innovations resulted from the mammoth space effort, including extreme miniaturization of electronics.
