We are also reproducing the letter as it was abridged by the editors of the Times and run in its letters column Saturday, December 2.
The Militant had planned to reproduce Lipscomb's article in this issue as well, so our readers could examine the entire record and make up their own minds.
Mary-Alice Waters is the editor and author of the introduction to The Bolivian Diary of Ernesto Che Guevara, published in a new translation by Pathfinder Press in 1994.
The Episodes is Guevara's account of major military battles and political events through which the leadership of the Cuban revolution was forged in the course of the popular war and mass uprising that brought down the U.S.-backed dictatorship of Fulgencio Batista in January 1959.
It was a news account by Jon Lee Anderson, identified by the Times as a United States journalist working on a biography of Guevara to be published by Atlantic Monthly Press.
Mario Vargas Salinas had revealed what was done with Guevara's body in October 1967 following his capture and murder by the Bolivian army in a CIA-organized operation.
Vargas said he had participated in dumping the bodies of Guevara and five other slain guerrillas into a mass grave under the airstrip in the town of Vallegrande on October 11, two days after Guevara had been shot and killed in the rural mountain village of La Higuera.
Lies about Cuban leadership Anderson wrote a relatively straightforward article echoing none of the long-standing stories about alleged divisions between Guevara and Cuban leader Fidel Castro.
These lies have circulated ever since April 1965 when Guevara, with Castro's agreement, resigned his government, party, and military posts in Cuba in order to return to South America to help advance the anti-imperialist and anticapitalist struggles that were sharpening in several countries, especially in the continent's Southern Cone.
Having spent much of the latter half of 1965 in Africa aiding the national liberation movement in the Congo , Guevara, after several intermediate stops, returned to Cuba in secret in December.
There he prepared to leave for Bolivia within a few months to lead a guerrilla movement of Bolivian, Cuban, and other volunteers against that country's military dictatorship.
Guevara was in Bolivia from November 1966 until his death 11 months later.
In October 1965, a few months after Guevara dropped from public view, Castro released a letter Guevara had written him.
In that letter, which Castro read in full to a rally that was broadcast over Cuban television, Guevara said that ""other nations of the world summon my modest efforts of assistance.
I have always been identified with the foreign policy of our revolution, and I continue to be.
Despite Guevara's letter, the falsifications about his political divergence with the leadership of the Cuban revolution continued to be spread.
As Waters points out in a portion of her letter not printed by the Times, this hearsay fell on particularly fertile ground among liberals and middle-class radicals who had turned against the Cuban revolution by the mid-1960s under mounting pressures of bourgeois public opinion.
Self-serving `accounts' With Guevara's capture and murder in October 1967, enemies of the Cuban revolution from La Paz to Washington seized the opportunity to stoke these lies.
But several weeks later, as the regime's story that Guevara had fallen in battle was already coming unstuck, Ovando took a different tack.
He presented the first in a string of self-serving accounts of alleged ""final conversations"" with the captured communist leader.
At the same time, Ovando continued to insist that Guevara had died of battle wounds.
This lie was rapidly exposed as news leaked out from the autopsy that Guevara had been shot through the heart the day after his capture.
Thomas Lipscomb was evidently incensed that lies that had been fertilized for years had simply been disregarded by journalist Jon Lee Anderson in filing his dispatch on General Vargas's revelations.
The Times editors, true to their 35 years of support to overturning the socialist revolution in Cuba, gave Lipscomb a prominent spot in the Sunday ""Week in Review"" to rectify this oversight.
It is the kind of ""run-it-because-I-say-so"" hack work that must irritate at least some of the more conscientious professional copy editors at the Times.
Lipscomb then enumerates the allegations refuted by Waters in the accompanying letter.
Several points should be made about the Times's abridgment and treatment of Waters's letter.
First was their decision to print it in the Saturday edition, rather than the Sunday ""Week in Review"" where Lipscomb's article had appeared.
The Sunday Times has a substantially larger circulation than either the weekday or especially Saturday editions; it is regularly bought across the United States and around the world by readers who don't follow that paper on a daily basis.
And the ""Week in Review,"" which contains the editorial and letters pages, is among the features for which the Sunday Times is most widely known.
Second, while the Times editors carefully changed each of Waters's references from ""Castro"" to ""Mr Castro"" and from ""Lipscomb"" to ""Mr Lipscomb"" (although ""Guevara"" remained ""Guevara""), they were immeasurably more scrupulous in removing each and every sentence by Waters that called attention to their failure to observe even the most minimal standards of verifying facts and citations in Lipscomb's article.
But that sentence, as Militant readers can see, was dropped from her letter.
Waters added that ""a new English edition of Guevara's Episodes, of which I am the editor, allows Times readers to check the facts for themselves.
At the same time, the Times's lapse in copyediting brought to light a useful revelation about the publishing history of Guevara's Bolivian diary.
James, who died a year ago, was a United States journalist who for a time was editor of The New Leader, a pro-State Department social democratic magazine.
It is possible, even likely, that he actually did edit Che's diary, perhaps under the aegis of institutions beyond Stein and Day itself.
Those in the Times management who, upon request, placed Lipscomb's article in the ""Week in Review"" undoubtedly know who edited the Stein and Day edition, and under what auspices.
In his 1969 book The Kingdom and the Power, former Times reporter Gay Talese recounts how the newspaper's publisher Orvil Dryfoos and Washington bureau chief James Reston put a stop to a preinvasion story by reporter Tad Szulc on the planned 1961 assault that had been scheduled as the frontpage lead the following day.
According to Talese, Dryfoos ""ordered the story toned down, moved to a less prominent place on the page, its headline minimized, and any reference to the imminence of the invasion eliminated.
They accepted it on the simple theory that what appeared in The Times must be true, and this blind faith made monks of many men on The Times.
There had been Timesmen who were less than truthful, or truthful in their fashion, or not truthful in the journalistic sense, which is a truth that is limited but verifiable.
Or they had perhaps been too truthful, so controversial as not to be in the national interest or the newspaper's interest, which was often the same thing.
October 1962 `missile crisis' The very next year, in October 1962, the administration of President John Kennedy photographically confirmed the installation of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
The Cuban government had agreed to this installation earlier that year in face of Washington's escalating aggression.
Washington had implemented its Operation Mongoose campaign of terror against the Cuban people and their leaders.
And large-scale preparations for a United States assault aimed at crushing the revolution had already been set in motion by the Kennedy administration.
All this has been confirmed by previously secret documents released by the United States government in recent years.
In light of its information about the Soviet missile sites, the National Security Council in October 1962 was meeting long hours in secret in the White House to discuss what course to take.
They eventually settled on an armed naval blockade of Cuba and put the United States military on nuclear alert.
According to government documents and tapes declassified in recent years, when news of the White House discussions was leaked to Reston on October 20, the Times's chief Washington correspondent, Kennedy administration officials asked him to hold the story in the ""interests of national security,"" and Reston agreed.
The following day Kennedy himself called the editors of the Times and the Washington Post, telling them not to go into print with what they knew, and neither did so.
She pointed out that the Cuban government itself had published the relevant correspondence between Castro and Khrushchev in the Dec., 1990, issue of Granma Weekly Review in Spanish, English, and French, and that these documents had subsequently been reproduced in numerous other publications as well.
Yet, the Times rejected Waters's letter, and the falsifications by Burlatsky remained unanswered.
Support for Bolivian operation The third point worth noting about the Times editors' abridgment of the letter submitted by Waters is their deletion of the final sentence of a short quotation from a 1987 interview by Fidel Castro with Italian journalist Gianni Mina.
Given Lipscomb's opening remark that among the key remaining questions ""is how much support Fidel Castro really gave Guevara's Bolivian expedition,"" these words by Castro seem relevant to the matters under dispute.
CIA called the shots Felix Rodriguez, the CIA officer who by his own account issued the order to kill Guevara, has also written his version of a supposed final conversation with Guevara.
Rodriguez, using the name Fe'lix Ramos, was on the scene in La Higuera and Vallegrande directing the operation in October 1967, and he was photographed standing beside Guevara shortly before the revolutionary leader was murdered.
Rodriguez is the Cubanborn son of a wealthy family who went into exile in Miami following the 1959 victory over the Batista regime.
Fidel Castro had once been thrown into jail by Batista, only to be subsequently released.
So when the regime in La Paz decided Guevara should be executed, Rodriguez claims, he ordered Bolivian soldier Mario Tera'n to shoot Guevara not ""in the face, but from the neck down.
Rodriguez's account, of course, is no more reliable than that of several Bolivian army officers.
Even this professional CIA killer and liar, however, apparently concluded he could not credibly quote Guevara saying he felt betrayed by his long-time comrade and fellow communist leader, Fidel Castro.
In fact, Rodriguez's entire account of his alleged talks with Guevara has been repudiated by Captain Gary Prado, the Bolivian officer who captured Guevara and to whom Lipscomb falsely attributed this statement.
Read the interview with Cuban Brigadier General Harry Villegas that is quoted by Waters and that appears in this issue of the International Socialist Review supplement to the Militant.
And buy some of the books and pamphlets on the Cuban revolution and on working-class politics that are advertised on these pages.
