Find and explain TWO other pieces of evidence in the source that prove that this was a top-secret telegram.
Using the information in the relevant sources and your own knowledge, write a paragraph of about EIGHT lines explaining how superpower conflict over Cuba brought the world to the brink of a nuclear war in 1962.
The following source is an extract from Nikita Khrushchev’s memoirs called Khrushchev Remembers that was published in 1970: We welcomed Castro's victory, of course, but at the time we were quite certain that the Bay of Pigs invasion was only the beginning and that the Americans would not let Cuba alone.
It was a great victory for us ... a success without having to fire a single shot.
A term applied to all of the Spanishor Portuguese-speaking nations south of the USA SOURCE 1B: This source is an extract from the speech that JF Kennedy delivered on 22 October 1962 in which he announced that the Soviet Union was setting up missile bases in Cuba and explained how the US government intended to deal with the crisis.
These long-range weapons of sudden mass destruction constitute an explicit threat to our peace and security.
All ships bound for Cuba ..., if found to contain cargoes of offensive weapons, will be turned back.
We are not at this time, however, denying the necessities of life as the Soviets attempted to do in the Berlin Blockade of 1948.
The photographs were analysed by military intelligence experts who immediately confirmed that the sites were bases for medium-range ballistic missiles.
This is a telegram sent by the Soviet Ambassador in Washington, Anatoly Dobrynin, to the USSR Foreign Ministry in the Kremlin on 27 October 1962.
A telegram was a message sent by telegraph and then delivered in printed form like a letter.
In the following source the telegram has been deciphered, translated into English and shortened.
Kennedy said that he realized that we had different approaches to these problems and it was not likely that we could convince each other.
I think that in order to withdraw these bases from Turkey,” R Kennedy said, “we need 4 to 5 months.
