United States USA Date: 1962 Duration: 11 min 5 sec Sound: Yes Color: Monochrome Clip Type: Edited Language: English Clip: 65675038963 The Castro-led revolution in Cuba.
Film opens with bongo drummer playing and other Cuban musicians playing instruments while dancers in fetching costumes dance and enjoy themselves.
Scene shifts to view from water of Havana skyline and then to automobile traffic on a busy street in a commercial district of the city.
View of water rushing into the irrigation ditches and entering the area of crops.
Shoppers at an open-air market filled with all kinds of fruits, vegetables and other agricultural products.
Fulgencio Batista y Zaldívar is seen next to his wife, Marta Fernández Miranda, as they cast ballots in the 1952 Presidential election.
Next, members of Fidel Castro's resistance movement are seen silhouetted against the sky, as they walk, carrying arms, in the mountain regions of Cuba.
Views of Castro's men moving through the rugged mountain terrain as shots are being fired.
Scene shifts to a public square in Havana as it fills with people celebrating the downfall of Batista on 1s of January, 1959.
The crowds cheer him wildly. as the hero, and liberator of the Cuban people.
Castro addresses the crowds from a balcony, promising them elections, land reform,freedom and the rights guaranteed under the Cuban Constitution of 1940.
View of Manuel Urrutia raising his hands to acknowledge the crowd, when he was named President on January 3rd, 1959.
In Washington,DC, he is seen placing a memorial wreath at the Statue of Abraham Lincoln in the Lincoln memorial.
Speaking from a podium, in English, he states emphatically that he is not a communist.
Castro is seen later, back in Havana at a large political gathering, where he and Che Guevara along with other revolutionaries, engage others in publicly broadcast discussions and debates.
Communist propaganda seen dominating papers and magazines at a news stand.
United States USA Date: 1962, October 16 Duration: 4 min 50 sec Sound: Yes Color: Monochrome Clip Type: Edited Language: English Clip: 65675070167 Anastas Mikoyan, vice-prime minister of the Soviet Union, visits Cuba soon after the Castro revolution.
Havana Cuba Date: 1959, February Duration: 5 min 14 sec Sound: Yes Color: Monochrome Clip Type: Unedited Language: Spanish Clip: 65675034280 Fidel Castro welcomed in Havana while refugees stream into Miami, and Batista's son gets into a scuffle at the Florida Airport.
Rebel leader Fidel Castro in Havana, Cuba after taking power following fall of Batista government in January 1959.
Refugees of the Batista government and anti-Castro Cubans stream into Miami to escape reprisal in Cuba.
The son of exiled Cuban President Fulgencio Batista gets into a fist fight with an anti-Batista Cuban at the Florida Airport.
Castro with fellow rebel Celia Sanchez who serves as his private secretary.
Cuba Date: 1959 Duration: 1 min 20 sec Sound: Yes Color: Monochrome Clip Type: Edited Language: English Clip: 65675033309 Cubans welcome revolutionaries Fidel Castro, Ernesto Che Guevara, Camilo Cienfuegos and their men in Havana.
Cuban people come out onto the streets to celebrate the fall of President Fulgencio Batista.
They break and burn the belongings of the Batista government, raiding government buildings and burning government material.
They attack and destroy buildings and casinos run by Batista loyalists.
Castro names Manuel Urrutia Lleo as the President of the Provisional Government of Cuba.
The number '26' for the 26th of July Movement painted on people's foreheads, helmets and clothes.
Castro with his bearded anti-communist rebel commander Camilo Cienfuegos at the podium.
Rebels on trucks and tanks pass through the crowd as they cheer and welcome them.
