GRAAD 12 NATIONAL SENIOR CERTIFICATE GRADE 12 HISTORY P1 NOVEMBER 2011 ADDENDUM This addendum consists of 11 pages.
We welcomed Castro's victory, of course, but at the time we were quite certain that the invasion was only the beginning and that the Americans would not let Cuba alone … one thought kept hammering away at my brain.
It would gravely diminish our stature throughout the world, but especially in Latin America.
If Cuba was to fall, other Latin American countries would reject us, claiming for all our might, the Soviet Union hadn't been able to do anything for Cuba but make empty protest to the United Nations.
We had to think up some way of confronting America with more than words … The logical answer was missiles.
I had the idea of installing nuclear missiles in Cuba without letting the United States find out they were there until it was too late to do anything about them.
We sent the Americans a note saying that we agreed to remove our missiles on the condition that the president gave us his assurance that there would be no invasion of Cuba by the forces of the United States ... he gave in … It was a great victory for us … a success without having to fire a single shot.
SOURCE 1B This source is part of a speech that JF Kennedy, President of the USA, delivered on 16 October 1962.
In this address he talks about the Soviet Union's deployment of missiles in Cuba and how the government intended to deal with the crisis.
The purpose of these bases can be none other than to provide a nuclear strike capability against the Western Hemisphere … These long-range weapons of sudden mass destruction constitute an explicit threat to our peace and security … I call upon the Soviet government to halt this offensive build-up.
I have instructed a strict quarantine on all offensive military equipment under shipment to Cuba.
All ships bound for Cuba …, if found to contain cargoes of offensive weapons, be turned back.
We are not at this time, however, denying the necessities of life as the Soviets attempted to do in the Berlin Blockade of I948.
I call upon Chairman Khrushchev to abandon this course of world domination, and to join in an historic effort to end the perilous arms race and to transform the history of man.
The missile sites were dismantled and with them went Khrushchev's prestige in the Soviet Union.
Yet Khrushchev showed equal statesmanship, restrain and firmness to Kennedy throughout the crises.
He did not mobilise Soviet troops, as Kennedy had done with his own, and his message to Kennedy showed his coolness as well as courage.
SOURCE 2A This source highlights socialism and self-reliance in Tanzania under Julius Nyerere's leadership.
Nyerere's vision of a future Tanzania was of a prosperous, self-reliant and classless society.
Tanzanian socialism was to be based on local resources rather than imported, high-technology industrialisation.
The country's main banks and foreign-owned capitalist companies were to be 'nationalised', that is, taken over by the state on behalf of the people.
A 'Leadership Code' banned political leaders from accumulating private wealth.
The main emphasis of government was on rural development, leading to self-reliance.
Nyerere proposed the gathering together of Tanzania's mass of small remote rural settlements into larger, more effective villages.
This would make it easier for government to provide better roads and rural markets combined with agricultural advice and improved technology.
Better water, health and education facilities could also be provided more efficiently to larger, centralised villages.
A vital aspect of 'ujamaa' was the promotion of the 'African socialist' principles of communal labour for the benefit of the community.
Applied to the new large villages it would, Nyerere believed, increase agricultural productivity, enabling communally cultivated fields to produce a surplus for sale to the towns or for export.
SOURCE 2B The sources below consist of viewpoints on how Nyerere implemented his policies.
Both these viewpoints are taken from The State of Africa by M Meredith.
Between August and November 1974, it was as if a tidal wave had washed over the country, with millions of people being moved in a dictatorial manner, sometimes overnight, onto waste land that they were expected to turn into villages and fields.
During the month of October the country seemed to be emerging from some national disaster, with huts made from branches and foliage stretching in untidy rows beside the roads.
Martin Meredith gives his opinion on the outcome of the villagisation programme.
Food production fell drastically, raising the spectre of widespread famine … The shortfall was made up with imports of food, but the country's foreign exchange reserves were soon exhausted.
Far from helping Tanzania to become more self-reliant and to reduce its dependence on the international market economy, Nyerere's ujamaa programme made it dependent for survival on foreign handouts.
Throughout the summer of 1963, civil rights protests continued to grow, with marches, sit-ins and picket lines across the country.
In the White House, President Kennedy decided that, at Iast, the time had come to ask Congress to pass a civil rights bill which would put an end to segregation.
On the night of 11 June, the President appeared on national television to talk about justice and civil rights.
Although the proposal was not as wide-ranging as he had hoped, it was a step in the right direction.
The following night, Medgar Evers, a leader of the National Association for the Advancement of Coloured People , was shot dead by a white man in front of his house in Jackson, Mississippi.
SOURCE 3B The source below focuses on the march to the Lincoln Memorial for jobs and freedom held on 28 August 1963.
But on 28 August, 1963, an estimated quarter of a million people, about a quarter of whom were white, marched from the Washington Monument to the Lincoln Memorial, in what turned out to be both a protest and a communal celebration.
The heavy police presence turned out to be unnecessary, as the march was noted for its civility and peacefulness.
The march was extensively covered by the media, with live international television coverage.
The entire civilrights struggle needs a new interpretation, a broader interpretation.
SOURCE 4A The following is part of the evidence that Steve Biko gave at the Black People's Convention and South African Students Organization trial in May 1976.
Taken from I Write What I Like – A Selection of his Writings by S Biko.
I think basically Black Consciousness refers itself to the black man and his situation, and I think the black man is subjected to two forces in this country.
He is first of all oppressed by an external world through institutionalized machinery , through laws that restrict him from doing certain things, through heavy work conditions, through poor pay, through very difficult living conditions, through poor education, these all external to him, and secondly, and this we regard as the most important, the black man in himself has developed a certain state of alienation , he rejects himself, precisely because he attaches the meaning white to all that is good, in other words he associates good and he equates good with white.
This arises out of his living and it arises out of his development from childhood.
When you go to school for instance, your school is not the same as the white school, and ipso facto the conclusion you reach is that the education you get there cannot be the same as what the white kids get at their schools.
SOURCE 4B This source is a transcript of an interview with Gertrude Fester.
Feeling inferior because you are black is something that takes a very long time to get rid of.
Perhaps being out of South Africa and mixing with other people in another country helped me to value myself for what I am.
And participating in the Black Consciousness Movement helped a lot too.
Through it I came to understand that there's nothing wrong with me because I'm black.
The project was introduced by S Biko in order to make the ideas of Black Consciousness more practical and achievable.
History of Fifty Years of Independence (London; J Ball) Puckrein, G 1993.
The Civil Rights Movement and the Legacy of Martin Luther King Jr Ross, S 2001.
