By Heather A Purcell and James K Galbraith**********TOP SECRETEYES ONLYNotes on National Security Council MeetingJuly 20, 1961General Hickey, Chairman of the Net Evaluation Subcommittee, presented the annualreport of his group.
General Lemnitzer stated that the assumption of this year's study was asurprise attack in late 1963, preceded by a period of heightened tensions.After the presentation by General Hickey and by the various members of theSubcommittee, the President asked if there had ever been made an assessment of damage resultsto the U.S.S.R which would be incurred by a preemptive attack.
In recalling General Hickey's opening statement that these studies have been madesince 1957, the President asked for an appraisal of the trend in the effectiveness of the attack.General Lemnitzer replied that he would also discuss this with the President.Since the basic assumption of this year's presentation was an attack in late 1963, thePresident asked about probable effects in the winter of 1962.
GeneralLemnitzer added a word of caution about accepting the precise findings of the Committee sincethese findings were based upon certain assumptions which themselves might not be valid.The President posed the question as to the period of time necessary for citizens to remainin shelters following an attack.
June, 1993*******During the early 1960s the intercontinental ballistic missile introduced the world to thepossibility of instant total war.
Thirty years later, no nation has yet fired any nuclear missile at areal target.
Orthodox history holds that a succession of defensive nuclear doctrines and strategies-from ""massive retaliation"" to ""mutual assured destruction"" -worked, almost seamlessly, todeter Soviet aggression against the United States and to prevent the use of nuclear weapons.The possibility of United States aggression in nuclear conflict is seldom considered.
Virtually nothing in the public record suggests that high United States authorities ever contemplated a firststrike against the Soviet Union, except in response to a Soviet invasion of Western Europe, orthat they doubted the deterrent effect of Soviet nuclear forces.
The main documented exceptionwas the Air Force Chief of Staff in the early 1960s, Curtis LeMay, a seemingly idiosyncratic case.But beginning in 1957 the United States military did prepare plans for a preemptive nuclear strike againstthe U.S.S.R, based on our growing lead in land-based missiles, And top military and intelligenceleaders presented an assessment of those plans to President John F Kennedy in July of 1961.
Atthat time, some high Air Force and CIA leaders apparently believed that a window of outrightballistic missile superiority, perhaps sufficient for a successful first strike, would be open in late1963.
It describes a meeting ofthe National Security Council on July 20, 1961.
At that meeting, the document shows, thechairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the director of the CIA, and others, presented plans for asurprise attack.
They answered some questions from Kennedy about timing and effects, andpromised further information.
The meeting recessed under a Presidential injunction of secrecy thathas not been broken until now.The Real Missile GapIn 1960, claims of a ""missile gap"" favoring the Soviets had given the Democrats a critical electiontheme, and many millions of Americans entered the Sixties feeling intensely vulnerable to the newSoviet ICBM threat.
But as Richard Reeves has recently written, intelligence based on satelliteslaunched in August of 1960 soon challenged the campaign assessment and public view.
The United States had beaten the USSR to an operational ICBM and enjoyed clear, andgrowing, numerical advantage.
We were far ahead, and our military planners knew it.Kennedy was quickly convinced of this truth, which was further confirmed as new satellitesbrought back new information.
Later in 1961, a National Intelligence Estimate came throughshowing only 4 Soviet ICBMs in place, all of them on low alert at a test site called Plesetsk.
Byfall, Defense Undersecretary Roswell Gilpatric was to acknowledge in a public speech that USforces were vastly superior tothose of the Russians.It was in this context, of an increasing nuclear edge based on a runaway lead in land-basedmissiles, that Kennedy faced his first nuclear-tinged crisis, which erupted over Berlin in July of1961.
The Berlin CrisisThe July 20th meeting took place under conditions of unusual tension.
Only three months before,Kennedy had suffered the failure of the Bay of Pigs invasion and his loss of confidence in both theCIA and the Joint Chiefs.
One month before, he had been shaken by his Vienna confrontationwith Nikita Khrushchev.
Now, the Soviets were threatening to turn control of access to WestBerlin over to the East Germans, and to conclude a separate peace treaty with that satellite state.At the crucial National Security Council discussion of the brewing Berlin crisis on July 13,Secretary of State Dean Rusk had opposed negotiations with the Soviets until the last moment.
As Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., then a special assistant, later summarized for thePresident, adviser Dean Acheson had prepared a paper arguing thatwe are in a fateful test of wills, that our major task is to demonstrate ourunalterable determination, and that Krushchev will be deterred only by a USreadiness to go to nuclear war rather than to abandon the status quo.
While not directly challenging Acheson, heencouraged Schlesinger to produce an unsigned memo critical of Acheson's stance.Schlesinger advised caution.
In a passage especially pertinent to the larger issue, he wrote:The paper hinges on our willingness to face nuclear war.
Before you are asked to make the decision to go to nuclearwar, you are entitled to know what concretely what nuclear war is likely to mean.The Pentagon should be required to make an analysis of the possible levels andimplications of nuclear warfare and the possible gradations of our own nuclearresponse.
It is possible that the decision to bring the Net Evaluation to Kennedyoccurred in response to the raising of these concerns.
Declassified only in June of1993, it has not previously received any public attention so far as we have been able to determine.The first paragraph introduces General Hickey and his group, the Net Evaluation Subcommittee.Although the Subcommittee report is described as ""annual,"" this would be the first one given toPresident Kennedy and his advisors, and it is not clear whether President Eisenhower receivedsuch reports in person.
Lemnitzer then cautioned against putting too much faith in the findings since the assumptionsmight be faulty.
The President receives a qualified estimate of 2 weeksfrom a member of the subcommittee.
Other Accounts of the MeetingSo far as we know, the official record of this meeting remains secret.
The excellent ForeignRelations of the United States, volume XIV, ""Berlin Crisis 1961-1962,"" published in late 1993,though replete with memoranda detailing the nuclear aspects of the Berlin confrontation, makesno mention of it.
On the other hand, the fact of a meeting, and Kennedy's personal reaction to it, has been reported.The President was displeased.
Kennedy received the Net Evaluation, an annual doomsday briefing analyzing thechances of nuclear war.
Numerous other apparent accounts of the meeting exist, though they do not refer to it by name ordate.
As UnderSecretary of State Roger Hilsmanwrote in 1967:As the intelligence community looked at their estimates in 1958, 1959, and 1960,and even through the first half of 1961, they saw a missile gap developing thatwould come to a peak about 1963.
What Hilsman does not say explicitly is that the estimated missile gap was in America's favor.
TheSoviets had virtually no operational ICBMs in 1961, a fact known to American intelligence atleast by the end of 1960.
Dean Rusk describes the meeting as an ""awesome experience"" in his memoirs, As I Saw It,published in 1990.
President Kennedy clearly understood what nuclear war meant and was appalledby it.
If any of us had doubts, that 1961 briefing convinced usthat a nuclear war must never be fought.
What Rusk does not say is that the problem of a ""stable deterrent"" in 1961 did not lie in aninsufficiency of American missiles.
It lay, rather, in the need for the Soviets to develop sufficienteffective ICBM forces, to deter us.
Rusk goes on, a pagelater, with comments that appear almost anguished, and for which his own account of the meetinggives no apparent rationale:...the United States has never renounced possible first use of nuclear weapons.
Ipersonally think that the United States is committed to a second strike only, afterwe have received nuclear weapons on our own soil.
Under no circumstanceswould I have participated in an order to launch a first strike, with the possibleexception of a massive conventional attack on Western Europe.
The July 25 Speech on BerlinNuclear conflict was very much in the air that week.
Another document of the time indicates thedirections Kennedy's nuclear thinking was actually taking -quite the Cold Warrior, but at thesame time far removed from pre-emptive strikes and the inflexible all-out attack envisioned by theJoint Chiefs.
This is a paper entitled ""Nuclear Strategy in the Berlin Crisis,"" by the economistThomas C Schelling, which was sent to Hyannis Port over the weekend of July 21, 1961 andwhich, as Bundy noted, made a ""deep impression"" on the President.
In it Schelling presentedarguments for a capability, which did not then exist, to wage limited nuclear war:the role of nuclears in Europe should not be to win a grand nuclear campaign, butto pose a higher level of risk to the enemy.
The cumulative impact of this diverse advice can be seen in Kennedy's televised address to thenation on July 25, 1961.
He asked for increased military appropriations and called out 150,000reserve personnel.
The wall was allowed to remain intactwhen constructed in August of 1961, a symbolic column of soldiers was sent through to WestBerlin, and a fallout shelter program was undertaken in the United States.
With the Burris memorandum, the reasoning behind the fallout shelter program now begins to fallinto place.
As a civil defense measure against a Soviet nuclear attack, the flimsy cinderblockshelters Americans were told to build were absurd.
But they could indeed protect those in them,for a couple of weeks, from radiation drifting thousands of miles after a United States pre-emptive strikeon the Soviet Union.
Yet the military continued to press for a rapid build-upof strategic missiles.
Curtis LeMay had asked for at least 2400 Minutemen; Thomas Powers ofthe Strategic Air Command had asked for 10,000.
All were to be unleashed in a single paroxysmof mass annihilation, know as SIOP, the Single Integrated Operating Plan.SIOP was a recipe for blowing up the world, whether in a first or a second strike.
All agree that the current strategic war plan is dangerously rigid and, if continuedwithout amendment, may leave you with very little choice as to how you face themoment of thermonuclear truth.
We believe that you may want to raise thisquestion with Bob McNamara in order to have a prompt review and new orders ifnecessary.
Kennedy and Defense Secretary Robert McNamara eventually imposed a limit of 1,000Minuteman missiles, angering the Chiefs.
Kennedy also launched efforts to gain operationalcontrol of the nuclear force, then far from being securely concentrated in the President's hands.The Burris memorandum may help to explain both the military's drive for a vast United States nuclearbuild-up, despite the fact that America was already far ahead, and the resistance from JFK andMcNamara.
United States nuclearsuperiority so complete that a first strike might be successful.
American nuclear superiority might then be so complete, that rogue elements from themilitary and intelligence forces, seeking to precipitate an American first strike, might not feeldeterred by fear of Soviet retaliation.
In marked contrast, the Soviet strategic missile threat consisted of a fewtoken ICBM deployments whose unreliability was so great that it was uncertainexactly whom they threatened.
Soviet long range bomber forces consisted only of100 Tu-Bears and 35 May Bison, whose range and flight characteristics forcedthem to fly at medium and high altitudes, and which made them extremelyvulnerable to United States fighters and surface-to-air missiles.
Kennedy resisted strong pressures to test this advantage in October of 1962, as he might have hadto do, had he agreed to launch bombing raids on the Cuban missile installations.
If the situationcontinues for much longer, the President is not sure that the military will notoverthrow him and seize power.
The American military could get out of control.Not even the American editors of Khrushchev's memoirs took these remarks seriously at the timethey were first published.
Looking down the road, the Net Evaluation calendar of 1961 implied that the period from Cubato Dallas and just after was, perhaps, critical to the survival of the world.
Had tensions escalatedor been aroused in some violent way in late 1963, the President might have faced an excruciatingchoice -to strike first, or to give up ""victory"" during the last brief moment in all history when itcould conceivably have been won.We cannot say whether Kennedy believed the Net Evaluation calendar, or indeed, perhaps equallyserious, whether he believed that others in the government might believe it.
By November of 1963, the potential for ""heightenedtensions"" leading to uncontrollable pressures to strike first had indeed been reduced.
And, sometime later, the Soviet Rocket Forces did evidently shut the window, building ICBMs more rapidlythan the United States could target them; the Soviets also improved their submarine force.
One meeting, even in the White House, does not establish that first-strike was in fact the nuclearpolicy of the United States.
Kennedy's recorded response, moreover, indicates his personaldetermination, shared by his civilian advisers, that it never become so.
But we do know, fromHoward Burris's notes, that a first strike plan had authors close to the decision center.
Kennedy'ssubsequent actions and Johnson's eerie remark are consistent with the possibility that the calendarand risks of a first-strike window remained in the minds of both men as late as November, 1963and possibly in Johnson's mind for a good deal longer.In any event, the fact that first-strike planning got as far as it did raises grave questions about thehistory of the Cold War.
Surely it is now time to declassify all records on this and related history.
Choices About the Bomb in the First Fifty Years, NewYork: Random House, 1988.
