The commanders-in-chief of the United States Navy and the United States Air Force under the Atlantic Command are directed to position thier forces to execute the first stage of the airstrike, and ready themselves for a full-scale invasion of Cuba.
On October 8, 1962, Cuban President Dorticós, addressing the United Nations General Assembly, calls upon the United Nations to condemn the United States trade embargo against Cuba.
Near the end of his address, Dortic´s declares, ""If we are attacked, we will defend ourselves.
In the early morning of October 14, 1962, A U-2 spy aircraft flies over western Cuba, revealing MRBM sites in Cuba.
Two days later, Kennedy learns about the data collected on the missile deployments.
The United States government discusses several options from a surgical airstrike on the missile bases to a full-scale invasion.
On October 16, 1962, the United States Guided Missile and Astronautics Intelligence Committee concludes that there is no evidence that nuclear warheads are present in Cuba and that the missile installations do not appear to be operational.
In fact, no SS-5 missiles were ever shipped to or located in Cuba, although this is denied by United States officials during the crisis.
Two days later a Defense Department spokesperson publicly states that the Pentagon has no information regarding nuclear missiles in Cuba and that no emergency military measures are being implemented.
United States diplomat to the United Nations, Adlai Stevenson, aggresively protests to his boss that the blockade is invalid, citing analogies to a new Berlin wall, and point out the United States nuclear missiles already operational in Turkey and the United States naval base already inside of the sovereign territory of Cuba.
Stevenson's protest produces strong reprimand, and on the following day Kennedy and Robert Lovett decide that Adlai Stevenson is not capable of handling negotiations at the United Nations and ""should be assisted"" by John McCloy.
A nuclear warhead storage bunker is identified at one of the Cuban MRBM sites for the first time.
United States spy agencies do not detect whether warheads are actually in Cuba at any time, however, the ExComm naturally believes it prudent to assume that they are.
On the following day, the National Security Council proclaims to the International community what will happen to ships who do not abide by the United States military blockade of Cuba.
Any ships who refuse to be boarded will have a shot fired across their bow.
On October 22, 1962, Soviet Colonel Oleg Penkovsky is arrested in the Soviet Union.
From April 1961, Penkovsky has been a spy for British and United States intelligence services, providing them with material on Soviet military capabilities, including important technical information on Soviet MRBM and ICBM programs.
On the same day the United States State Department informs its NATO allies about the Cuban missile crisis, and the aggressive military options it has plans to pursue.
SAC initiates a massive alert of its B-52 nuclear bomber force, ensuring that one-eighth of the force is airborne at all times.
All aircraft, both on the ground and in-flight, are armed with nuclear weapons.
By United States nuclear bombers alone, 17 times more nuclear weapons are ready to drop on Cuba than all of Cuba has, while the United States has nuclear missiles in Puerto Rico and nuclear capable bombs in Guantanamo Naval Base, Cuba, all ready for use against the island.
At this time, the United States has a total arsenal of 27,100 nuclear weapons, while the Soviet Union has 3,100 nuclear weapons.
United States military forces worldwide go to DEFCON 3 and encourage all NATO forces to do the same.
President Kennedy addresses the United States public for the first time about the crisis later in the day, in a televised seventeen-minute speech, stating that the United States will not permit any offensive military equipment in Cuba.
In Response to United States threats of war over Cuban armaments The Cuban government places its entire armed forces on their highest alert status.
The entire civilian population is armed and ready to fight ""to the last person"" in defense of Cuba.
In an extraordinary further effort towards peace, Cuba and the Soviet Union hitherto refuse to make any attempt to forcibly prevent the flyovers, though it is well within their means.
In the early morning of October 24, 1962, Soviet ships en route to Cuba slow down, alter or have reversed their courses.
Sixteen of the nineteen Soviet ships en route to Cuba when the United States military blockade was announced, reverse course and are returning to the Soviet Union.
Only the oil tanker Bucharest continues toward the military blockade line.
At 8m., the United States detonates a hydrogen bomb on Johnston Island.
Khrushchev responds to Kennedy's demands as aggressive and unreasonable.
In his first communication with President Kennedy and Premier Khrushchev during the crisis, United Nations Acting Secretary General U Thant, at the request of more than forty non-aligned states, privately calls for the voluntary suspension of arms shipments to Cuba together with the voluntary suspension of the military blockade.
U.S.: Pushing Mankind Toward the Abyss of a World Nuclear War The United States military increases its alert posture to DEFCON 2 for the first time in history.
On October 25, 1962, the aircraft carrier USS Essex and the destroyer USS Gearing hail attempt to intercept the Soviet oil tanker Bucharest.
Khrushchev responds to and agrees with the proposal of peace sent by the United Nations General Secretary, agreeing to suspend all arms shipments to Cuba.
Kennedy, on the other hand, refuses to respond to the request of lifting the military blockade.
After United States demands, the United Nations General Secretary sends another message solely to Khrushchev, supporting the United States military blockade and telling Khrushchev to keep his ships outside Cuba.
Meanwhile, a CIA sabotage team in Cuba whose aim is to destroy the Matahambre copper mine, is caught before its attack by the Cuban Committee for the Defense of the Revolution.
On the water, the Lebanese freighter Marucla is targeted by the United States Navy as the first ship to be boarded by the warship USS Kennedy.
On October 26, 1962, President Kennedy tells the ExComm that he believes the military blockade by itself will not force the Soviet government to remove the missiles from Cuba, and that only an invasion or a nuclear deployment ""trade"" will succeed.
After discussing the airstrike option at some length, Kennedy agrees to apply further pressure by increasing the frequency of low-level incursions over Cuba from twice per day to once every two hours.
Further, Kennedy orders the State Department to proceed with preparations for establishing a government in Cuba after an invasion of the country.
Aleksandr Fomin, Soviet Ambassador to the United States, desperately arranges a personal meeting with the State Department correspondent for ABC News, John Scali.
Explaining that ""war seems about to break out,"" he asks Scali to contact his ""high-level friends"" in the State Department to ascertain if the United States has any desire to solve the situation peacefully.
Later in the day, Khrushchev publicly reaches out again for peace, composing, in the words of Robert Kennedy, a ""very long and emotional"" letter.
Be Sensible — We Want Peace John Scali tells Dean Rusk and Roger Hilsman of Aleksandr Fomin's proposal.
United States officials assume that Fomin's personal message was initiated by the Soviet government and interpret Khrushchev's letter in light of Fomin's offer that the Soviet Union remove its missiles under United Nations inspection in return for a United States non-invasion pledge.
Later that evening, unknown to any of the ExComm members, Anatoly Dobrynin and Robert Kennedy meet at the Soviet embassy.
Dobrynin repeats that if Soviet nuclear missiles are intolerable in Cuba, then United States missiles are also intolerable in Turkey.
Robert Kennedy phones the president, and returns explaining the President is willing to negotiate.
Meanwhile, fears continue to ride high in Cuba as United States naval vessels continue their military blockade and aircraft continue low-altitude flights all over the country.
Finally, unable to bear the continued harassment, Fidel Castro orders Cuban anti-aircraft forces to open fire on all United States aircraft flying over the island.
When Soviet Ambassador to Cuba Alekseyev asks Castro to stop being defensive, Castro tells him he is going to protect his country from the clearly imminent United States invasion.
Meanwhile, the United States Air Force determines that 1,190 bombing sorties will be carried out in their first day of airstrikes against Cuba.
On October 27, 1962, The CIA reports that three of the four SS-4 MRBM sites at San Cristóbal and the two sites at Sagua la Grande appear to be fully operational.
United States spy agencies continue working around the clock, around the world.
When a U-2 spy plane flies over the Eastern Soviet Union, in what the State Department would explain as a ""routine air sampling mission"", the U-2 pilot radios for F-102 fighter aircraft to ""escort"" him.
At the same time, Soviet MiGs takeoff in response to intercept the U-2, which immediately turns and flies out of the Soviet Union.
This act was a direct violation of what Eisenhower had promised Khrushchev after the Soviet Union shot down a U-2 plane on May 5, 1960.
It should be noted that the Soviet Union never flew any of its military aircraft over the United States, while this military incursion was far from last United States incursion over the Soviet Union.
A U-2 plane flying over Cuban airspace is shot down, killing its pilot.
After the success, the Soviet generals order the anti-aircraft batteries to desist.
The next 4 F8U-1P's to fly at a low altitude over Cuba are shot at with anti-aircraft weapons and small arms.
One aircraft is hit by a 37 mm anti-aircraft weapon, but manages to limp back to its base.
Kennedy begins replying to Khrushchev's request for peace, sending out U Thant to talk to the Soviet government for him.
In response to the downed U-2, while there had been definite plans to destroy any SAM site that shot at United States planes intruding over Cuban airspace, Kennedy says, not this time.
McNamara argues that the Jupiters in Turkey should be removed, but only as a prelude to a full invasion of Cuba; Maxwell Taylor forwards the JCS recommendation simply to initiate the airstrike and invasion plans and plan for a nuclear war; and the State Department drafts a letter flatly rejecting the Soviet proposal of a nuclear deployment trade.
Kennedy agrees to ignore Khrushchev's proposals for removing United States missiles in Turkey, and to respond only to the October 26 letter.
Further, Kennedy has Dobrynin told that if the Soviet Union does not remove its missiles, the United States will attack Cuba.
The group secretly concedes that United States nuclear missiles must be removed from Turkey, but that this should not be made public to save face.
Fomin and Scali meet again, the latter of who is outraged by Khrushchev's demand that the United States remove its nuclear missiles from Turkey, on the border of the Soviet Union.
Fomin urges restraint and caution, patiently assuring Scali that the Soviet Union is being completely forthright and honest.
When Dobrynin repeats the demand that the United States remove its nuclear missiles from Turkey, Kennedy responds that the United States would not make any deals.
Fidel Castro agrees to the request of the United Nations to stop building Cuban missile sites, so long as United States also agrees to end its military blockade.
U Thant informs Adlai Stevenson that Soviet representative Zorin refuses to adhere to the United States military blockade.
On October 28, 1962, the United States sends instructions to its NATO allies that military actions to attack Cuba are imminent.
A new message from Khrushchev, broadcast on Radio Moscow, effectively ends the missile crisis.
In Havana, Fidel Castro, who was not consulted or informed of the decision beforehand, is outraged.
Kennedy orders that no further incursions over Cuban air space take place on this day, but moves for the removal of all IL-28 airplanes in Cuba.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff update their plans of a military invasion of Cuba based on new reconnaissance, and determine whether tactical nuclear weapons should still be used though Cuba's nuclear weapons are being dismantled.
On October 29, 1962, Soviet First Deputy Premier Vasily V Kuznetsov meets with U Thant explaining that Soviet missiles are being dismantled and shipped out of Cuba; when this has been completed a United Nations team could be sent to Cuba for ""on-site"" verification.
The deal set by the United Nations was that if the Soviet Union stopped its arm shipments to Cuba, the United States must stop the blockade — the Soviet Union not only discontinued arms shipments to Cuba, but went a step further and removed its nuclear missiles from Cuba.
Regardless, President Kennedy orders that the United States military blockade around Cuba stay in effect and further, he orders new low altitude reconnaissance flights over Cuban airspace.
U Thant explains to United States representatives that they must fulfill their agreement and end the military blockade.
The United States refuses, demanding that its blockade will end only after all missiles have been removed from Cuba.
Meanwhile, the Joint Chiefs of Staff decide that if the United States attacks Cuba, they will employ tactical nuclear weapons.
The Soviet Union continues to strive for peace, Anatoly Dobrynin brings Robert Kennedy an unsigned letter from Premier Khrushchev explicitly spelling out the terms of the arrangement, including Robert Kennedy's former pledge that the Jupiter IRBMs will be removed from Turkey.
Robert Kennedy refuses to respond immediately, and the next day entirely disagrees with any written agreement involving the Jupiter missiles in Turkey.
On October 30, 1962, Shortly after his arrival in Havana, U Thant and his aides meet with Fidel Castro, Cuban President Osvaldo Dorticós and Foreign Minister Raúl Roa.
New demands for verification are on-site inspections by United Nations personnel, aerial inspections by United Nations reconnaissance planes, and verification by the International Committee of the Red Cross.
Castro rejects these proposals, explaining that the United States and United Nations is trying to manipulate the situation.
Khrushchev insists that the United States comply with its agreements, and lift the military and economic blockade of Cuba, and asks that, in accordance with the requests of Cuba, the United States withdraw from its base in Guantanamo, Cuba.
In regards to United States nuclear missiles in Turkey, Robert Kennedy tells Ambassador Dobrynin that day ""You asked me about missile bases in Turkey.
After almost a year of continual operation, Task Force W is told to temporarily halt its terrorism against the Cuban government.
Despite this order to halt, a new mission is dispatched by William Harvey to CIA operatives in Cuba — the agents in Cuba are disgusted by counter-orders within the United States government, and they collectively send a message to Attorney General Robert Kennedy to verify that continued missions are in order.
Kennedy, angered to learn that CIA missions are continuing, chastises Harvey and asks CIA Director McCone to terminate the operations.
Despite this, three of ten sabotage teams of 6 terrorists each have already been dispatched to Cuba.
On November 8, one of the teams successfully carries out its assigned sabotage mission, blowing up a Cuban factory.
On October 31, 1962, Fidel Castro, Dorticós and Roa meet with U Thant for the second time during his stay in Cuba.
