IMAGEPDFIMAGEPDFPDFPDFIMAGERESOURCEVIDEO Saved by 62 educators This lists the logos of programs or partners of NG Education which have provided or contributed the content on this page.Program Killing Kennedy logo Twitter Facebook Pinterest Google Classroom Share to Microsoft Teams Email Print Download DIRECTIONS OBJECTIVES PREPARATION BACKGROUND & VOCABULARY 1.
Before reading, ask the remaining students to listen to identify what problem President Kennedy faces in this scene.
Explain to students that they will be acting as Kennedy’s advisers during this thirteen-day period.
Tell students that President Kennedy had several options in responding to the threat posed by the placement of missiles on Cuban soil.
Use the discussion to prompt students to include all of the options listed below.
Newly placed missiles in Cuba made little strategic difference in the military balance of power.
Send a message to Castro to warn him of the grave danger he, and Cuba, were facing.
Use the United States Navy to block any missiles from arriving in Cuba.
Explain to students that after the failure of Bay of Pigs invasion, Kennedy encouraged dissent among his advisers.
If an idea was bad, Kennedy wanted his advisers to tell him; he did not want “yes men” to help him make decisions.
Explain to students that during the Bay of Pigs invasion, members of Kennedy’s staff who disagreed with the action refused to voice their negative opinions, not wanting to criticize the larger group.
After this failure, Kennedy altered his leadership style, wanting to explore all options before making a decision.
List of pros and cons for the group’s policy choice Visual aid—on poster paper—to present pros and cons to the class Divide the class into groups and assign one policy option per group for further exploration.
Distribute a T-Chart to each group and instruct them to use it to make a pros/cons chart.
Distribute poster paper and markers to each group to develop a visual aid that will identify their policy option as well as the pros/cons of that option.
Acting as EXCOMM, students present their policy arguments and the class comes to consensus on one response.
After groups finish drafting their pros and cons with visual aids on poster paper, have each group present their policy and its accompanying pros and cons.
After each group presents, students may ask questions about the group’s policy and thinking.
Have the whole class summarize the presentation by determining the most significant pro and con for the policy.
After all groups have presented, have students discuss all the options that were presented.
Project these points in a PowerPoint presentation or write them on a piece of poster paper.
After the blockade, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev sent a letter to Kennedy.
Khrushchev agreed to remove missiles from Cuba if the United States promised not to invade Cuba and to eventually remove missiles from Turkey.
Informal Assessment Have students respond to the following questions, supporting their responses with evidence from the activity.
Required Tech Setup: 1 computer per classroom, Projector, Speakers Plug-Ins: Flash Physical Space Classroom Setup For this activity, it would be useful to have desks or tables arranged to facilitate students working in small groups.
Grouping Large-group instruction Other Notes This activity is extremely student-centered, involving small group work and student-led discussion.
CTE-Lilly Teaching Fellows: Group Work and Collaborative Learning: Best Practices For more information on facilitating excellent discussions, please see Human Rights Education Associates: Establishing Rules for Discussion Background Information Following the Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961, Fidel Castro, the communist leader of Cuba, became convinced that at some point the United States would attempt to remove him from power.
As a result, he grew increasingly defiant of American policymakers and courted the leaders of the Soviet Union to bolster the strength of his small island country.
Castro eagerly accepted Khrushchev’s offer, believing nuclear missiles in Cuba would deter American aggression and secure Cuba’s safety.
President John F Kennedy demanded that all nuclear missiles be removed from Cuba and blockaded the island to prevent further deliveries of nuclear warheads.
During the thirteen-day standoff between the United States and the Soviet Union, the world teetered on the brink of nuclear war.
Soviet Union Noun large northern Eurasian nation that had a communist government.
Tip In Step 2, if students brainstorm other feasible options, you may choose to incorporate them into the activity at your discretion.
Tip This activity is extremely student-centered, involving small group work and student-led discussion.
For more information on establishing procedures for these types of activities in your classroom, please refer to the Other Notes in the Preparation section.
Credits Media Credits The audio, illustrations, photos, and videos are credited beneath the media asset, except for promotional images, which generally link to another page that contains the media credit.
User Permissions For information on user permissions, please read our Terms of Service.
When you reach out to them, you will need the page title, URL, and the date you accessed the resource.
Media If a media asset is downloadable, a download button appears in the corner of the media viewer.
Text Text on this page is printable and can be used according to our Terms of Service.
They research possible measures President Gerald R Ford could take to alleviate the crisis and distill the information to key points.
He collects data and assembles real-time maps that help local relief organizations deliver aid to disaster victims.
View Article Inauguration Day United States presidential inaugurations are celebrated in many ways, with some standard traditions.
View leveled Photograph Related Resources The Energy Crisis of the 1970s Students read and annotate a briefing about the energy crisis of the 1970s and identify stakeholders in the United States energy system in 1975, both foreign and domestic.
