Her Majesty The Queen HONORARY JOINT PRESIDENTS H M LORD LIEUTENANT OF DEVON H M LORD LIEUTENANT OF CORNWALL Number 68 Covering Devon and Cornwall December 2012 “THE CORPS and the CUBAN CRISIS 50th ANNIVERSARY” By Lawrence Holmes 1962 was the year that Hollywood screen goddess Marilyn Monroe died and Tom Cruise, another future screen icon, was born.
But in the autumn of 1962 a deadly game of nuclear chess was being played out.
During one week, while two world superpowers wrangled over missile bases in Cuba, the world held its breath and prayed that neither player would make a final, fatal mistake.
As early as 1960 Cuba, and its controversial Prime Minister Fidel Castro, had aligned itself with the Soviet Union.
Then on 31 August 1962 America found evidence of Soviet missiles being placed in Cuba.
American President J F Kennedy ordered U-2 reconnaissance flights over Cuba on 9 October, and on 14 and 17 October missile sites were discovered.
What the American spy planes confirmed put United States cities for the first time within range of a nuclear attack.
By the 22 October 1962, President Kennedy had addressed the nation about the crisis, rejected the option of an immediate military strike, and he announced that he would place a naval blockade around Cuba to prevent the arrival of more missiles and other deadly cargo.
He also demanded that the Soviet Union dismantle and remove the weapons.
On the 23 October USSR leader Khrushchev claimed the missiles were in Cuba for the country’s own defence.
Days of diplomatic moves and counter-moves followed, with the world following every move with frozen fascination.
Then on Friday 26 October Khrushchev suggested that he would consider removing the missiles provided the US promised not to invade Cuba.
On 27 October there was also talk of trading off United States missiles in Turkey against Soviet missiles in Cuba and embarrassingly a U-2 spy plane was shot down over Cuba.
But also on that day Kennedy wrote to Khrushchev saying he would not invade Cuba provided the Soviet missiles were removed.
After a nail biting weekend, on Sunday 28 October 1962 Khrushchev promised to dismantle the Cuban bases under UN supervision.
On the 45th anniversary of the Cuban Crisis, 10 Group Newsletter No 52 July 2007, carried an article on the crisis which gave a general account covering the period from mid to late October.
This account, on the 50th anniversary of that traumatic time, seeks to explain steps taken by the British Government, the RAF and the Royal Observer Corps to meet the challenge of a possible nuclear war.
Like most defence plans of the time, there was an agreed procedure of alerting the deterrent, followed by the dispersal of V bombers to widely scattered dispersal airfields.
However, the UK Government considered the agreed acceptable policy was only ever to use nuclear weapons in retaliation.
The C in C Bomber Command would assume the responsibility for launching an attack only in extreme circumstances.
Coincidentally, Macmillan had agreed, in the early Cuban leader Fidel Castro and Soviet 1960s, to the building of an alternative seat of Government outside Union Premier Nikita Khrushchev at the of London.
This was built deep underground beneath the Cotswold height of their friendship around the time countryside near Corsham and was, of course, at the time, a closely of the Cuban Crisis. guarded secret since, if discovered, would be a prime target for Soviet missiles.
Unknown to the public the giant 185ft dish antennae at Jodrell Bank telescope near Manchester was temporarily handed over to the RAF in an attempt to track any possible incoming Soviet missiles.
This was because the new early warning system at Fylingdales, Yorkshire, was not due to become operational until 1963.
The Jodrell Bank move was in effect a desperate stop gap measure and would only give the RAF minimal response time.
The Chiefs were also told that any United States invasion of Cuba would not take place until after 29 October 1962.
At this stage Macmillan was just hours away from calling a crucial cabinet meeting that would have taken fateful steps towards nuclear war and dispersing central government to its secret bunkers.
By 1547hrs on the 28 October, the number of aircraft armed with nuclear weapons and ready to go was increased.
However, the V Force was not dispersed to their designated airfields since Macmillan did not want to highlight attention to possible pending military action.
Senior Officers were brought to ‘stand by’ but were told not to inform middle or junior ranks of the situation.
At RAF Marham, West Norfolk, three Valiant Squadrons came under the control of Commander Europe and therefore under the direct orders from American General Landon.
A total of 24 Valiant bombers were each armed with two American nuclear bombs then the aircraft were placed back under RAF Bomber Command control.
Undoubtedly the flashpoint for triggering WW3 came on Saturday 26 October 1962 when Soviet submarines carrying nuclear tipped torpedoes were heading towards Cuba and United States ships were ordered to track the submarines.
Missile bases at Feltwell and Driffield were indeed brought to within 7-8 minutes of firing.
The V bomber force air crews in East Anglia and Lincolnshire were ordered to 15 minutes readiness.
At RAF Coningsby and Wittering, aircraft were at times at ‘cockpit readiness’ with each aircraft loaded with free fall thermonuclear weapons, route and target information.
The civil population were, by and large, unaware of the pending Cuban Crisis.
Only rudimentary plans existed to protect the population and the Home Office did nothing to activate the Civil Defence Plans during the Cuban Crisis.
No steps were taken to warn the public or to initiate evacuation from prime target areas such as the V bomber and Thor missile sites.
The Government did not even activate the large Civil Defence organisation despite having some half a million trained volunteers.
It is now clear that this policy was adopted so as not to cause public panic and Macmillan in particular did not want to alarm the British public.
While Britain’s deterrent forces were poised on an unprecedented level of war readiness, the Civil Defence Organisation was not brought to any form of readiness.
It can be assumed that the very senior officers of the United Kingdom Warning and Monitoring Organisation were informed of possible action and were on some form of alert but this alert was not passed downwards.
None of the 95 ROC posts in Norfolk and Suffolk, areas considered to be prime Soviet targets, were brought to any form of readiness.
Yet this was where important RAF and USAAF bases and Thor Launch Pads were located.
None of Lincolnshire’s 55 ROC posts were activated yet this was home to many V bomber bases.
In short there was no alert to call out the ROC volunteers in October of 1962.
However, even if this callout had happened, there is some significant doubt whether the Corps would have been able to perform the nuclear task.
The ROC took on the nuclear role on 4 April 1955 and ‘Fallout Training Instruction No 1’ was issued on 19 September 1955.
Fallout training commenced immediately although posts and Ops Rooms did not have any protected accommodation.
For several years from 1955, nuclear and aircraft recognition training took place side by Thor missile on the launch pad. side.
Between 1955 and 1958 the ROC Gazette The Thor had a range of 1500 miles. contained training articles on nuclear warfare, the dosimeter, the radiac survey meter, underground bunkers and the effects of nuclear weapons.
But aircraft recognition was still the main thrust for even the forward thinking ROC Gazette.
The Recognition Journal was much slower in producing articles on nuclear warfare, understandably concentrating on aircraft recognition lessons.
However, almost immediately after taking on the nuclear role, the ROC held nuclear training exercises.
The first nuclear exercise called ‘Cloverleaf’ was held on 7/8 April 1956 and a further 26 nuclear exercises were held in the period up to October 1962.
The exercises were called a variety of names like Treble Chance, Vigilant, Dutch Treat, Four Horsemen, Night Bird, Cloud Dragon, Dust Devil and Signal Fire.
Exercise ‘Observe Wun’ was held on 9 October 1960 and the Observe series of exercises were a feature of ROC life for many years.
At first there was little nuclear equipment, no underground posts or controls, and unlike the former aircraft exercises the nuclear version was almost totally synthetic.
Also in the period 1955 to 1962, there were little or no alert procedures nor any ‘Transition to War’ plans.
No callout exercises like ‘Fandango’ were ever held in that period and the Corps had no idea how effective any personnel callout would be.
The post nuclear building programme commenced in September 1956 and the plan was to build 1563 underground bunkers for posts and provide 31 protected or semi protected Ops Rooms or Controls.
The building of protected accommodation appeared to be somewhat piecemeal with some posts being built early and others being built much later.
By October 1962 twelve ROC Ops Rooms had still not been provided with their protected accommodation.
Only 19 fully protected ROC Ops Rooms were available as at October 1962, some 61% of the total required.
In retrospect it is noticeable that in the prime target areas of East Anglia and Lincolnshire, the Ops Rooms at Norwich, Colchester and Lincoln all had protected accommodation by 1961.
Out of a total of 1563 posts requiring underground bunkers, some 1136, or 73%, had been built by October 1962.
But a significant number had only been in existence for about a year thus limiting the value of training.
Scotland alone had 84 posts without bunkers, Wales had 45 and Northern Ireland 42.
This does not mean to say that the ROC personnel could not be trained in nuclear procedures since this could still be done in their old aircraft reporting Ops The construction of F1 Post in 7 Rooms, Post, or town/village training room.
But this environment would Group Bedford in the late 1950s. have been somewhat unreal and lifelike training could not be provided.
It is now clear that the seriousness of the Cuban Crisis was told to only a few of very senior officers in any service and was kept from the British public at large almost totally.
Although the cause of the conflict was over 6000 miles away from the UK, a global war could have affected the country.
But Groups were not informed, no callout was ordered nor was there any increase in general ROC readiness.
Any evidence for any plans for a full scale Corps callout is difficult to find although many older members feel that they came within 24 hours of being called out for real.
More than one observer can remember being told to tell their employers that they may have to leave their place of work and man the ROC in an emergency.
Whether that was due to any order from above or was instigated at a person’s own evaluation of the situation is hard to judge.
The book ‘Attack Warning Red’ does not even mention the Cuban Crisis and Group Routine Orders , Journals and other ROC publications for the period are also illusive on the matter.
In No 11 Group Truro, on the 1st October 1962, Obs Commander Vivian Green took over from the well informed Obs Cdr Boret.
GROs for October and November 1962 contained large sections on ‘Security’ and ‘Safeguarding Technical Equipment’ but no mention of the Cuban Crisis.
Then in the Christmas Message December 1962, by the ROC Commandant, Air Commodore C M Wight-Boycott CBE, DSO, came the first ROC official acceptance that the Cuban Crisis had occurred.
A few personal memories by former members of the Corps at the time of the Cuban Crisis go a long way to explaining the atmosphere at the time.
Lawrence Holmes was a Ch/Obs of 8/J2 Farnsfield Post in Nottinghamshire at the time and he recalls that they had only just received their underground post a year before the crisis.
People generally knew about the Cuban Crisis but thought it was a long way away and would not affect them.
Certainly no personal items were packed in anticipation of a callout and no real callout plans were made.
I have no recollection of any orders or advice coming down the chain of command from HQROC to Groups and to my Group Officer, in the weeks and days before the crisis.
I had only been married for two years, bought our first house and was studying hard to be chartered mining surveyor, so I had many more things on my mind than even the Cuban Crisis.
Cuba was, in their estimation, a distant island in the Caribbean of no importance.
The St Columb Post members commented on the Cuban situation as a crew and I made sure that our callout arrangements were updated and understood.
I was working at F J Reeves Builders Merchants at Redruth and our typist had a brother on one oil tanker in the Caribbean area and her father and another brother were on another tanker in the same area.
She was very emotional and we listened avidly to the news on the radio each time it was on.
Graham Cook and his father were both serving in 12 Group ROC Secondary Ops Room in Gloucester attending exercises at other centres where requiredg.
The personnel on the ground were not alerted or called to a state of readiness in any way, so far as I know.
That does not mean that there was no discussion behind the scenes, or that prudent action was not taken.
In fact I can remember preparing a duty roster that could have been used for at least two weeks.
A final further lesson from the events of 1962 was the conclusion that “A crisis comes to a head in a matter of hours rather than days, and if the Corps ever had to stand to, there would be little warning.
It received the whole hearted approval of the Committee and we hope you will agree with the new look, design and content.
The National Committee had no hesitation in adopting it as the Official National ROCA web site with immediate effect.
We are also delighted to announce that Mick agreed to become the ROCA Web Master to administer and update it on our behalf.
There are a number of pages that contain confidential contact details and information for members only.
Contact your Group Secretary for the new password to access the member pages.
To keep the pages closed to the general public please DO NOT UNDER ANY CIRCUMSTANCES publish the password in newsletters or in articles that are likely to reach the public domain.
Please include the site address in all future headed papers and letters.
In your comments and feedback do kindly remember Mick has worked very hard from a standing start to design this for you in his own time with only very basic IT knowledge.
It is an evolving site please let Mick or your Area Reps have constructive feedback and suggestions for any other items you would like included.
The National organisation would not have developed this site without Roy McDowell using his initiative to set up the original site that he ran so successfully and tirelessly on our behalf for the past 12 years.
Mick and the national committee are also indebted to Roy for the support that he has given us in the development of the new site.
We had used the hotel for a reunion some 17 years ago so this was a return to slightly familiar territory.
The norm was for people to attend from Friday afternoon until Sunday morning and dinner bed and breakfast was provided.
The hotel had not changed all that much since 1995 and there was a slightly tired look about the place which besides the ROCA, was well used by coach parties on a 4 or 5 day break.
But the bedrooms were very acceptable, food good and staff very friendly.
Lawrence Holmes attended on the Thursday and he was surprised to meet in the same hotel that evening Rose Mason from 10 Group.
Rose did not realise that the ROCA Reunion was being held that weekend at that hotel.
She was there on a 4 day break with a friend and was to leave on the Friday morning.
Friday was meet and greet time and after dinner, in the aptly named ‘Jenny’s Restaurant’, people gathered for the first official meeting of the weekend in the Lancashire Suite.
Many people had taken prizes for the Friday evening raffle and there were a staggering 56 prizes.
Of special interest was a display of pieces of different granite which could be used for the proposed ROCA Stone at the National Memorial Arboretum.
After the welcome by national Chairman John Sharpe the raffle was held and due to the large number of prizes this took some time.
This was the first time the ADM had been held in conjunction with the Reunion and it was a marked success.
On Saturday afternoon people were free to see the sights in Manchester or simply stay in the hotel and take advantage of the leisure facilities.
For the aircraft minded, Neville Cullingford held an Airborne Headaches Competition in the afternoon.
On Saturday evening it was the Gala Dinner in the Lancashire Suite followed by music with Graham Clark.
President Cliff Spink was present and as always he made a point of going round everyone to say ‘hello’ and be updated about the ROCA in the various parts of the country.
A guest at the dinner was Air Vice Marshal Michael Jackson, Trustee of the Bury St Edmunds Guildhall Restoration Project.
Chairman John Sharpe gave a short speech and Cliff Spink also addressed the assembly in his usual sparkling way.
On the down side the Gala meal was poor and not as good as the standard dinner on the Thursday and Friday evenings.
After the dinner Cliff Spink presented the President’s Certificate to John Shere of 7 Group and Mick Marks also of 7 Group was presented with a new Trophy for all his hard work over the years and also setting up the new ROCA web site.
John Shere being presented with his Certificate by President Cliff Spink.
After the formal proceedings members chatted or danced for the remainder of the evening.
However, the national committee had a meeting as did the Heritage Team.
Overall the Reunion 2012 was what might be described as a standard reunion, hotel could have been better and Manchester is still a long way north for most southern attendees.
The experiment worked well and undoubtedly all future ADMs will be held in conjunction with the Reunion.
This year there were no resolutions so the meeting was expected to be somewhat short.
The room was well filled with 37 Group Delegates, national committee members and also ordinary members of ROCA attending the reunion.
Justin Keeble Secretary of the new Colchester Group ROCA was present for the first time.
In matters arising Lawrence Holmes thanked Jenny Morris for putting forward 10 Group’s views at the ADM 2011 in his absence.
In his report John Sharpe said that the national committee had met 4 times in the year 2011 and national membership stood at 1897 including full, associate and honorary members.
The national standard was paraded on 11 occasions at various venues from St Clement Danes to St Peter Port Guernsey.
He commented on the large gathering at the National Memorial Arboretum to celebrate the 25th anniversary of the ROCA and also said that capitation fees were kept at £2 for members and £1 for associates.
There was an excess of expenditure over income of £280 and assets totalled £8342.
Individual items were fairly normal with committee expenses on the low side.
The new Heritage cost items totalled £478 (over the last two years this was £1161) and Diana warned that heritage expenditure, which was becoming a main item, was likely to increase. £2600 had already been donated for the new ROCA Stone at the NMA but more was needed.
Air Marshal Cliff Spink had now been our President for 17 years and he has agreed to continue for another year as have the Hon Vice Presidents Norman Greig, Hilary Daniel and Joyce Shrubbs.
In the Area Reps item, MET Area had John Millidge and there was a vacancy, in SOU Murray Whitcher was re-appointed and in SCOT Mary Bruce was appointed.
John Sharpe was appointed as national Chairman and Murray Whitcher was appointed as Vice Chairman, Diana Mothersole was Treasurer, Les Mitchell was Membership Secretary, Keeper of the Standard was Joyce Shrubbs and Deputy Keeper was Murray Whitcher.
Mick Marks then gave an update on his work in connection with the formation of the new ROCA web site.
Mick had constructed the new site from scratch and all input was to be in PDF format.
He said he was willing to run the new site for a maximum of three years.
The cost of running of the new site would be about £30 pa and would be paid for from national funds.
There would be a private part on the site where a password would be needed to enter.
There would be links to the old ROCA site, the Heritage site and the ROCBF site.
Edwina Holden then gave a report about the Heritage Team when members stood at the front of the hall for all to see.
Members present were Edwina Holden, Simon Craine, John Shere, Paddy Malone, Justin Keeble, Cheryl Stewart and Roy McDowell.
The HT had been formed a year ago and was anxious for any ideas from Groups about heritage matters.
The heritage web site was operating well and was going from strength to strength.
Edwina as Archivist was always ready to receive items of ROC memorabilia.
She also pointed out that the HT do not claim mileage or hotel costs when attending venues.
One of their aims was to raise funds for the HT and John Simmonds had donated a Heritage Hamper which was raffled off at the reunion and raised £300.
Lastly, John Shere said he had been looking into Insurance for Post Preservers but had made very little real progress.
In 2010 there had been 48 cases and £51,000 had been given out in grants, in 2011 there were 64 cases and £45,314 was given out.
Posters were still available and he said that the ROCBF Banner should appear in every issue of every newsletter.
In Any Other Business, Jim Millington informed all that York Control was now called ‘The Bunker’ and were holding film nights showing Cold War style films.
John Sharpe was adamant that the Scottish people would vote ‘No’ to this question.
There was also a plea for ROCA to do something special in 2015 which was the 90th anniversary of the formation of the ROC in 1925.
Jenny Morris dealt with tickets for the Cenotaph Parade in London, St Clement Danes tickets and mentioned the Bury St Edmunds Ops Room Project.
Jenny then told delegates that the proposed unveiling date for the new ROC Stone at the NMA would be May 2013.
This ADM only lasted 2 hours and a lot of debate and topics were covered.
New Award to Recognise Meritorious Service to the Association ~ The Jock Burnie Trophy Observer W Burnie joined the Royal Observer Corps in 1956 and served on Crew Two in No 7 Group Bedford, reaching the rank of Chief Observer on his appointment to Post Supervisor, a position he held for many years.
In 1988 he transferred to Riseley Post, on age grounds, where he served until the Corps was stood down in 1991.
Jock’s expertise and enthusiasm for the Corps was greatly appreciated by his peers, especially by Post Observers on Exercises when communication problems arose.
When new recruits came along he would take them under his wing making them feel at home in their new surroundings.
Jock was well known not only in Bedford Group and Midland area, but in many other Groups too.
He was a regular attender at ROC Camps and made many friends around the country.
He was awarded the C in C Strike Command’s Certificate of Commendation in 1975.
The Jock Burnie Trophy was donated by his son Andrew after his death in 1995, and is to be used to help preserve his memory into the future.
John Sharpe on behalf of the National Committee accepted The Jock Burnie Trophy kindly donated on loan by No 7 Group Bedford.
Much to his surprise Michael Marks became the first recipient of the Trophy awarded in recognition for his many years of dedication and service to the Association.
The Cup remains the property of No 7 Group Bedford ROCA, and is on permanent loan to the National Committee for the purpose of awarding it annually, to selected members at the National Reunion, for their meritorious service to the Association.
Recipients are asked to maintain the cup in good condition and arrange for it to be returned to the National Committee at the end of their year, or earlier if they so wish.
Should the National Committee no longer wish to continue with this award, the cup is to be returned to the Chairman of Bedford Group at that time.
The Arboretum Grove Memorial ~ Fund raising for the Memorial stone continued at this year’s Reunion.
Project leader Jenny Major reports “Firstly, a very big thank you to all of you who have generously sent in your donations to this project.
Following a recent visit to the stone mason, I came away with a number of samples of granite, one was a dark grey, one a very pale grey and a third was a buff colour.
The general consensus considered that the dark grey was the most appropriate, with the carving being picked out in silver enamel.
This memorial is representative of the service of ALL members of the ROC, and you were part of that.
The fund is growing quite steadily and the target remains at approximately £6000.
At the start of the reunion we had just under £2500 and managed to add a further £300 during the weekend.
This was achieved through auctioning of a bottle of limited edition whisky, silent auction of some donated books, personal donations and contributions from the sale of Christmas cards.
Our next target must be to double our money in the next few months to ensure a satisfactory outcome.
Any further donations please with cheques made out to ROCA and sent to J Major at 56 Wordsworth Road, Rugby.
Annual Delegates Meeting 13 October 2012 ~ Next Steps Report from the National Committee ‘The way ahead’ ~ In the report sent to Groups last March listed on page 2 are the priority questions for discussion :1.
Review the options for the selection and election of the member’s representation.
The NC will look at the viability to reshape itself away from the Area focus and if this is appropriate to replace with an alternative selection process.
To look at who is best placed to be the member’s representative for example should this be a representative selected from the Group Chairman, on a regional, geographical, Group/Cluster basis based on membership levels.
The National Committee proposal to the Delegates at the ADM was to form a small sub group to review the options.
There would be a need for one or two face to face meetings but much of the discussion and gathering of ideas could be done by email or modern technological means.
The sub Group will be formed of 6 volunteers with 3 National Committee and 3 other members.
The first meeting will be called early in the New Year at a venue that keeps travel reasonable for all.
The full report and the original No 1 Group paper can be obtained from Group Secretaries and is accessible on the web site.
If interested in being part of this important discussion whether as a sub Group member or to contribute to the discussion please let either Murray Whitcher or me know by 16 February 2013.
It is Scotland Area’s turn to carry the Standard and have first call on the 10 tickets.
I need names by 21 January 2013 if you wish to have tickets or to be placed on a reserve list please let me know as quickly as possible.
The service is followed by a special reception in the Royal Courts of Justice.
Bentley Priory Battle of Britain Trust Appeal ~ the construction, renovation and conservation work is under way.
The Trust now needs to raise the final £1.8m to create the museum and education centre.
You can help by making individual donations and by local Group fund raising to support the appeal, follow progress and make online donations please visit www.bentleypriory.org.
Those with access to the internet can catch up with the latest progress and see the photos and report of the National Heritage support provided by members at the open weekend last September go to our web site www.rocatwentytwelve.org.
Finally a message to all from the National Secretary ~ Another busy year with 2012 marking new landmark events in our evolving Association.
Heighten awareness of our roles continues with the growing public interest in the Cold War period.
The growing number of the younger generation now preserving Posts is astonishing.
They deserve our support and encouragement to continue the education into the future.13 promises to be just as busy with preparations for the Dedication of the Arboretum Memorial Stone, opening of Bentley Priory Museum and planning to support forthcoming National events in 2014 to mark the start of WW1 and the anniversary commemorations for D-Day.
As we approach Remembrance many of you will take part in Parades and Services we will fall silent to remember not only those who have given their lives in all conflicts but also time to remember our friends and colleagues no longer with us.
The festive period fast approaches, all my best wishes to you and your families for Christmas and a peaceful New Year.
Re-enactors attended this event including Bernie Porter and Trevor Sampson who were there in ROC uniform.
On the Saturday there was a 1940s Dance and on the Sunday there was a memorial Parade where 10 Group Standard was carried by Trevor Sampson and Bernie Porter was in attendance.
The Kilkhampton Battle of Britain Service took place on Sunday 2 September 2012 and the weather for once was wet but this did not stop quite a few people gathering at the Village Hall.
There were about 8 standards including 10 Group standard carried by Paul Hingston.
It was one of the few occasions that some of the standard bearers and members of the Veteran’s contingent wore macs.
There was no band this year but there was a drum which kept the marchers in some sort of step.
The church was less full than normal perhaps because of the wet weather.
Several stirring hymns were sung about ‘our men who fly in the air’ and the wonderful lady lay preacher gave another marvellous sermon about the Battle of Britain and those who took part.
Afterwards, in fairly heavy rain, the standards and Veterans marched back to the Hall where the ladies had again put on a very good spread of food for everyone.
All in all a very good service and one which ROCA should attend year by year.
The Battle of Britain Service at Illogan and RRH Portreath took place on Wednesday 12 September 2012.
Unfortunately due to the illhealth of Jeff Carson the 10 Group standard was not paraded.
The first service took place at newly renovated Illogan Church and was conducted by the Rev Brian Mavers, officiating chaplain at RAF St Mawgan.
After the service everyone walked to the moving War Graves section at Illogan Church graveyard.
Here all the names of those killed at RAF Portreath in WW2 were read out and wreaths laid.
Before we left Illogan there was another small ceremony at the Church War Memorial, to commemorate two local soldiers from the Parachute Regiment killed at Arnhem.
Everyone then drove up to RRH The impressive memorial at RRH Portreath Portreath where standards were again paraded around the showing the two plaques.
There was a killed from the Station and the other to those short service and again wreaths were laid. killed from the Glider Regiment.
On the reverse of the Station Memorial is a plaque commemorating members of the RAF and the Glider Regiment killed in Operation Beggar.
This operation was the towing of Horsa gliders by Halifax aircraft from Portreath to Tunisia thence to take part in the Sicilian landings codenamed Operation Huskey which took place in July September 1943.
The plaque is the only one in the UK commemorating those killed in Operation Beggar.
The brigadier of the Glider Regiment again made a small speech but this year one of the glider pilots who took part was present.
His name was John Sale and he gave a very moving account of one of his flights from Portreath to Morocco in September 1943.
During one operation, on 18 September 1943, the Halifax piloted by Norman was en route from Portreath in Cornwall to Rabat in Morocco when it came under fire over the Bay of Biscay from three German Junkers Ju88s.
The glider pilot, John Sale, unselfishly cast off as Norman tried to evade the attackers.
The Halifax sustained major damage, but its rear gunner, Sgt John Grant, succeeded in shooting down one of the Junkers.
The glider and its two pilots were also shot down, but its occupants survived and the Halifax limped to Morocco on three engines.
After all the ceremonies people retired to the Peregrine Club for cream tea.
Readers will be aware that one of WW2’s best deceptions called ‘Operation Mincemeat’ was to confuse the Germans about the details of Operation Husky, the invasion of Sicily.
Dave Flower reports that on Sunday 14 October 2012 the Exeter Branch met up with the Tamar Branch for a guided tour of RAF Harrowbeer by Michael Hayes, starting with lunch at the Knightstone Tearooms.
The Tamar Branch members then went back for a cream tea at the restaurant.
The Exeter Branch members had to leave but we did not miss out as Michael arranged for us to take our cream teas with us.
For more information or confirmation of events contact Dave Flower on 01392-438956.
At the July meeting Denis Ellery gave a Power Point Presentation on ‘Cornwall from the Air’ when he showed many superb aerial shots of Cornwall’s landscape.
Coupled with Denis’s sparkling comments made for an interesting evening.
Due to Jeff Carson being indisposed the programme was changed and a DVD was shown.
On 22 November for the second time we returned to the Merchant House Hotel for the branch Annual Dinner.
Everyone has now paid their subs and Lawrence thanks everyone for their support.
The branch still continues to subsidise annual subs and will do so until 2013 when the situation will be reviewed.
The branch had also made a £100 donation to the proposed ROC Stone at the National Memorial Arboretum.
The branch continues to produce about 2 to 3 newsletters per year thanks to editor Dave Bray.
All normal branch meetings take place at the RBL Truro at 1930hrs unless otherwise stated.
Future programme :10/12/12 Christmas Quiz by Brian Stoddern, and nibbles.
Work on the Decoy Command Bunker is expected to take place in the winter/spring and next year both bunkers should be open to the public.
Next Spring the bunker will require a complete clean and re-paint and help will be needed.
Open Days 2013 were about to be defined and sent to the National Trust.
It is also planned to invite the Cornwall Military Vehicle Trust to visit the bunker in 2013.
For any more details on Veryan Bunker phone Lawrence Holmes on 01872-278234.
Shirley Abell reports that the Tamar branch summer programme was quite busy.
We were represented at the National Armed Forces Day in Plymouth by Paul Hingston carrying the National Standard and Ron Toll carrying the 10 Group Standard.
In July a group went to explore the Exeter Tunnels which was quite an experience and highly recommended.
The road was blocked by an overturned car near Tavistock and we had to be diverted around the back roads.
The driver from Plymouth had no idea where to go, so Gerald took over the navigating to get us to Tavistock bus station.
With all the delays we arrived late at Okehampton, and then found the train we were to catch was also running late.
September saw a small contingent of eight members attend a very damp Kilkhampton Battle of Britain Parade.
There was a large contingent of Standards with Paul Hingston carrying our 10 Group Standard.
Parade Marshall was Mr Peter Paice BEM and the service was conducted by Mrs Gloria Street Lay Preacher.
Sunday 23 September we met again for a visit to Dingles Heritage fair ground at Lewdown.
The start of the Round Robin Day trip. undercover venue was ideal because of the inclement weather.
The October Film Show had to be cancelled due to Lawrence Holmes being called to do film work in the south east.
The branch attended Remembrance Day Services in Launceston and Callington.
Forward Programme :8/12/12 Branch Christmas Meal at Trethorne Park, Launceston.45 for 1915hrs.
IMPORTANT SPITFIRE TROPHY ENTRIES DEADLINE IS 18 FEBRUARY 2013 Ron Gage died on 19 July 2012 aged 96 years.
He will be remembered by many OBITUARY people through his association with ROC Camps where he was invariably the Entertainments Officer.
He joined the Corps in November 1956 as an observer on 3/M3 Swindon Post.
He then moved to 14 Group Winchester where he became actively involved in the ROC Museum.
He retired from the Corps in February 1981 but reverted to an observer on 14/36 Kingsworthy Post for 3 years.
He was well known for his knowledge and collection of ROC badges, buttons, insignia and ties.
Basil joined the Corps in 1950 at the Newhaven Post which closed in the 1968 reorganisation.
He transferred to the Cuckmere Haven Post where he served until retirement.
BOOK REVIEW ‘Burlington The Central Government War Headquarters at Corsham’ by Nick Catford.
For fifty years the bunker now known as 'Burlington' was the most secret place in Britain.
In the early 1950s it was felt that an alternative seat of government should be available in case London became untenable in the event of a nuclear war.
The bunker at Corsham in north-west Wiltshire would be the size of a small town and accommodate over 4,000 ministers and civil servants including the Prime Minister and War Cabinet, the Chiefs of Staff, the Ministry of Defence and Joint Intelligence Committee.
Also accommodated would be other military and civil government departments such as the Air Ministry, 12 Foreign Office, Home Office and so on, required both to prosecute the war and oversee post-attack civil reconstruction.
It would have a power station, water works, sewage works, a telephone exchange, ventilating systems, and catering facilities allowing it to operate in a closed down condition for up to ninety days.
The bunker had a number of code-names during its life time Subterfuge, Stockwell, Burlington, Turnstile, Chanticleer and Peripheral, but 'Burlington' is the name by which it is remembered.
This book tells the fascinating story of 'Burlington' from its inception in the early 1950s until 2004 when the site was finally declassified.
Published by the Lincolnshire Aviation Society. pages with many excellent photographs and diagrams.
This book in some ways is meant to be an update of Charles’s previous book called ‘The Royal Observer Corps in Lincolnshire 1936-1991 published in 1991 but the new book is much more than an update.
Charles has packed in an inordinate amount of different and new information.
The book sets the scene for early warning with the historical Beacon Warning System.
The book continues with a short history of aircraft tracking in the First World War, including airships, LADA and Ashmore.
Next comes the Formation of the Corps in 1925, sound location, early plotting instruments, the invention of radar and the spread of the Corps into Lincolnshire and Humberside.
There are more post plotting instruments and the start of WW2, aircraft silhouettes and the Royal Observer Corps Club.
There is an excellent write up of ‘Operation Gizela’ and the Death of Obs Kelway.
After the end of WW2 Charles then deals with the ROC Revival with the low level plotting role of the late 1940s and early 1950s, and even the running of the Farnborough Flyer trains is covered.
In the latter part, the book covers Rocmet, Royal Reviews, exercises and early warning systems.
Charles sensitively describes uniforms, the last few years of the Corps where systems are getting old and communism is collapsing.
In all, the body of the book covers 80 pages but then there are a staggering 32 pages of appendices.
There is a superb list of ROC equipment with many photographs and specifications.
Appendix 4 contains a rare write up about the NRCs of the ROC and a description of the three NRCs in the Lincolnshire area.
The appendices continue with the ROC Spitfires, ROC Camps in Lincolnshire and Yorkshire, What remains today to be seen and a short description of the ROC Association.
The beauty of this book is that, although written primarily about the Lincolnshire and Humberside area, much of what appears through its pages could apply to any Group.
The quality is excellent, there is much to read and the book covers so much.
A visit held on Tuesday 4 September 2012, arranged by the Cornish Aviation Society, answered that question.
On a rather damp overcast morning eight members of the society approached RAF St Mawgan just in time to see a low loader with a WW2 Hurricane fuselage aboard leaving the main approach road headed eastwards.
We knew instantly that we had missed at least part of the reason for our visit.
Our destination was the premises of GateGuards Ltd based in HAS2, St Mawgan, near Newquay Airport.
This relatively new company are manufacturers and suppliers of full sized replica aircraft for museums, collectors and the film industry worldwide.
After seeing the departing Hurricane fuselage we went by RAF St Mawgan main gate and on to the top of the airfield where stood nine curving hardened aircraft shelters constructed in the 1980s to house Buccaneer bombers in their anti shipping role.
The HAS were not specifically to house nuclear armed aircraft, but to protect the airframes from missile or aircraft ordnance.
Their use as bomber shelters ceased some years Members of the Cornish Aviation Society ago with the end of the Cold War and I, for one, thought they stand at the side of the original Bentley were derelict.
But GateGuards, Ltd occupied two of the former Priory Spitfire at Gateguards Ltd, Newquay. daunting shelters in which they constructed fibreglass replicas of aircraft.
After signing in and being given a site pass to wear like a necklace, the first aircraft we saw was a wingless Spitfire.
This was the aircraft which formerly adorned the front of Bentley Priory along with the Hurricane.
GateGuards had made a complete replica of this aircraft and the completed replica was due to be taken to Bentley Priory by the end of the week.
The original Bentley Priory Spitfire was to be restored and taken to the Cosford Aerospace Museum.
In his introduction Richard told us about the recently completed replica P51 Mustang delivered to the USA to commemorate black aviators in WW2.
This beautiful replica now rests at Tuskegee, Alabama, the wartime base of the black airmen.
Richard explained that fibreglass moulds were made from the original aircraft picking up fine detail like rivets, lights and gun openings.
All the panels were bolted on special steel framework until the complete aircraft was built up very much like a giant jigsaw.
This had been used to ensure that the cockpit of the replica P51 could indeed hold an average black airman and had been brought over from the USA by the clients.
Here we saw the two wings still being worked on which belonged to the Hurricane fuselage we had seen earlier leaving the station.
This aircraft was also from Bentley Priory and the original replica had just been fully restored and was being sent back to the new museum at Bentley Priory.
Next to the Hurricane wings was the fuselage and wings of a The replica Bentley Priory Spitfire having brand new Spitfire replica also destined as a ‘Gate Guardian’ at roundels painted on the fuselage.
The propellers were still to be attached and the workmen were busy taping the painted surfaces of the Spitfire fuselage and wings prior to the roundels being sprayed on.
The client had provided detailed drawings of the colours and insignias to be used.
Some add-on extras like landing lights, gun barrels and wheels had already been fitted.
Richard also said that it took about a week for two or three workmen to paint a full aircraft.
The real aircraft was so secret that BA would not let GateGuards copy an original nor would they provide any plans, yet they wanted a fibreglass replica for some exhibition or other.
In the end sanity prevailed and somehow the replica was faithfully built.
It seemed quite strange to see moulds at one side of the hangar and the replica at the other.
Almost all of Gateguards’ work to date has been of an aviation nature but one project currently underway is not.
The completed cross, which will be some 40 feet high, is due to be erected at the gateway to Cornwall at the Tamar Bridge, Saltash.
The finish of the cross is to be like weathered copper and Richard said slightly tongue in cheek that he thought it was to be the Cornish version of 66 feet high ‘Angel of the North’ in Gateshead, Tyne and Wear.
Many thanks go to Richard Islip for a most unusual and interesting visit.
SELECTED ITEMS FROM 10 GROUP ROCA COMMITTEE MEETING HELD ON 8 SEPTEMBER 2012 1.
The three board display Lawrence Holmes had borrowed and used at AFD in Plymouth, had been a success.
The 3 board version is light and can be lifted and placed in a car easily.
Lawrence offered to produce material required for a variety of displays for the boards.
The boards could be taken around the Group in a similar manner to the standard.
The Truro branch had already sent in a donation of £125 and the Exeter Branch has also sent in a donation.
The Tamar branch was asking members to donate at the rate of £3 per member.
The committee appreciated that some Independent Members may wish to contribute and indeed are urged to do so.
Any such donation cheques should be made payable to ‘ROCA’ and sent to Jenny Major.
The committee debated 10 Group wreaths laid at services like the Remembrance Day Service.
They agreed that 10 Group would pay for three wreaths at Truro, Exeter and Tamar.
The wreaths at Truro and Exeter would be laid as normal on Remembrance Sunday.
The Tamar branch would have to decide whether to use the 10 Group wreath at Remembrance Sunday at Plymouth, Launceston or Callington, or whether to use the wreath at the June Allied Aircrew Monument Service.
Any branch could purchase their own additional wreath and lay anywhere they choose.
To save on costs, Branch Secretaries have been asked to make a list of any members who would be prepared to receive newsletters by e-mail.
Taking the December 2012 newsletter as a first trial, Lawrence Holmes is to send the Secretaries of the Truro, Tamar and Exeter branches an electronic copy of the newsletter.
They would then be responsible for sending out the newsletter by e-mail to all members on their lists.
Any Independent member who is willing to receive a newsletter by e-mail should contact Lawrence in the first instance.
When operational 10 Group ROC had some 59 Honorary Members most of whom have now sadly died.
Honorary membership of the ROC was normally granted when a member retired and only for exceptional service to the Corps.
REMEMBRANCE 2012 On Sunday 4 November Lawrence Holmes attended the Garden of Remembrance at Truro Cathedral and planted a cross in memory of Seaborne Observers Salter and Bancroft.
He also attended the RBL Festival of Remembrance at the Royal Albert Hall, London on 10 November.
The ROCA contingent at the Cenotaph, London this year had very good weather but was less than 50 members.
Paul Hingston carried the 10 Group standard at Torpoint British Legion Festival on Thursday 25 October and also in attendance was David Weaver.
Paul also paraded the Group standard at Plymouth on 9 November when Group Chairman Tony Child was in attendance.
The ROCA wreath was also laid at the Remembrance Service in Truro where our Joint President, Colonel Edward Bolitho was in attendance.
I am currently on a tour of the regions as Master of the Guild of Air Pilots and Air Navigators I write this in Australia having already visited New Zealand with Hong Kong next.
Anyway, it was a real pleasure to see so many of you at the Annual Reunion at Manchester and in such good heart.
Sadly the years continue take members from our ranks but we remember them all with great affection, none more so than at the Christmas season.
However, Caroline and I send our very best wishes to you all for a peaceful Christmas and a happy and successful New Year.
CHRISTMAS MESSAGE 2012 FROM CHAIRMAN JOHN SHARPE Once again it’s that time of year for sitting down and reflecting on the year, which is rapidly coming to its close.
I’m sure we all ask ourselves where does the time go, as the year seems to get shorter and shorter.
As time goes by our numbers continue to slowly decrease but it’s not all bad news as we are delighted to welcome Colchester Group back into the national family.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank all of the Groups for all their efforts over the last year in what is an ever increasingly difficult task.
Never forget that you are the Association and we on the National Committee are only here to reflect your views and wishes.
I know that you will all do your utmost to continue to promote the Association and encourage former colleagues that the ROCA has something to offer them.
It is also important to promote the Royal Observer Corps Benevolent Fund and let former colleagues know that the Fund is there to help out in times of need.
Our 23rd Annual Reunion took place in mid October at the Britannia Country House Hotel in Didsbury Manchester.
This was our first visit to the hotel for some 15+ years and we had a really enjoyable weekend where we all had the opportunity to meet old friends from all parts of the Association.
Unfortunately, our numbers were a little down on last year’s Chester Reunion but I think that those who came along enjoyed the weekend.
Next year our Reunion will be returning to the Britannia Country House Hotel in October and the hotel are keeping the cost at this year’s level.
Further details will be issued as soon as the final arrangements have been resolved.
Once again, I will be writing on your behalf to Her Majesty to convey our very best seasonal greetings and to assure her of our continuing loyalty and devotion.
We now have a new web site and our thanks go to Mick Marks who has produced a vibrant and exciting site.
Please make use of this new resource that I am certain you will find easy to navigate through.
Finally, as ever, I would like to take this opportunity to send my very best wishes and seasonal greetings to all of you and your families as we approach the Christmas festivities.
May I also wish each and every one of you health and happiness in 2013 and I look forward to having the pleasure of meeting many of you during the course of the next twelve months.
Christmas Message from 10 Group ROCA Chairman “Despite the conflicting and almost as important claims on our time from the Jubilee and a sporting event of some kind, 10 Group members have had a busy year.
However, I know that Members have substantial reserves of strength to call on when necessary, and so I wish you all an active and enjoyable Christmas, while still saving enough energy to continue your support for 10 Group ROCA during the coming years.
All good Yuletide wishes Tony Child"" 16 ROC SOUTHERN AREA REUNION FRIDAY 15 TO SUNDAY 17 MARCH 2013 THE WESSEX HOTEL, STREET This year we return to the Wessex Hotel, Street, BA16 0EF from Friday 15 to Sunday 17 March 2013.
The location is situated in the heart of Somerset and steeped in history.
Please indicate if you are interested in a coach trip to experience the local area during Saturday.
There will be plenty of time for shopping at the nearby Clark’s Village.
The cost of the two nights’ weekend is £75 per person sharing a Double/Twin room.
Single room cost for 2 nights is £105, of which there is a limited number available.
Extra Sunday night, 3 nights total DBB cost is £110 per person double/twin or Single £155.
The Friday evening three course dinner and the Saturday evening Gala Dinner will be served in the Wessex Suite.
Please fill in the booking form and return to Jenny Morris, 11 Melita Road, Bristol, BS6 5AZ by 11 January 2013.
September 2012 was the 70th anniversary of the first edition of the Inter-Services Aircraft Recognition Journal.
The journal emphasised the importance of aircraft recognition to all sections of the services and contained articles on aircraft recognition as well as silhouettes and tests.
The Inter Services Journal spelt the end of the marvellous ROC Club Journal which issued its final Journal at Christmas 1942.
A new book called ‘Watch and Warn – The Story of Canada’s Aircraft Detection Corps’ by Allan F Coggan is available from Amazon priced at £28.95.
This book is only relatively small and tells the story of Canada’s Observer Corps.
In memory of the dark days of the Cuban Crisis, the government is listing the remains of two nuclear missile sites in Rutland and Northamptonshire.
The two bases being listed at Grade II are the former RAF North Luffenham in Rutland and RAF Harrington in Northamptonshire.
The anniversary will also be marked by special events at the York Cold War Bunker , and the cold war tunnels under Dover Castle.
North Luffenham was a main Thor missile site and Harrington was under its command and was armed with Thor missiles in 1959.
The Thor missiles could be brought to operational readiness in 15 minutes after receiving the authenticated order to launch, and in October 1962, 59 of the 60 missiles were made ready.
Development of the Bentley Priory site is continuing with developers and estate agents making the most of the site’s potential.
One such property advert referred to ‘Stanmore’s best kept Secret’ – Bentley Priory Mansion now available for viewing.
On offer is an exclusive selection of apartments with luxurious bathrooms, sleek lined kitchens and serene views over parkland to London.
The 50 acre site is being brought back to life by the City and Country Group, and Barratt Homes are building lavish new properties.
In the 19th century it became home to the Abercorn family and was the residence of the Dowager Queen Adelaide.
The building was then a hotel, a girl’s school and then gave its most famous role, that of HQ Fighter Command.
Air Chief Marshal Lord Dowding set up his office and Ops Room in the elegant rooms and oversaw the Battle of Britain and the D-Day Landings.
As well as stunning apartments, the mansion house will also contain the Bentley Priory Museum to interpret the history of the property and honour its past.
In mid September 2012 next to the ROC window, has been placed a new window dedicated to the Civil Defence in the Blitz.
The two previous Gate Guardians, a Spitfire and a Hurricane, have been renovated or renewed by the Cornish Company called GateGuards based at Newquay Airport.
These two ‘new’ aircraft were put on their pedestals on 14 September 2012.
But in this case they appeared to make crosses and at least 12 crosses have been observed.
Rumour says that they are ‘chemtrails’ and that aircraft are spraying particles of chemicals out, making cloud cover and leaving residue over a large area.
A very fine grey dust which sparkles in the sunlight can be seen on cars and windows.
The three posts are at national level but are not part of the national committee.
The first is a short film showing the old Royal Observer Corps Post on the outskirts of Billingshurst, West Sussex as it appeared in July 2007.
Originally opened in June 1958 at the height of the Cold War, it was decommissioned in October 1968.
The second concerns the restoration carried out at Cuckfield Post by Mark Russell in 2009/2011.
Mark gives a detailed history lesson on the surface and then descends to complete an informative tour of this fascinating, underground and historical time capsule.
This was made for Lincolnshire Heritage and comprises of approx 17 min of documentary about the work of the Royal Observer Corps at the Lincoln 66 Post, Holbeach underground monitoring Bunker.
It features a History given by ex-Chief Observer Frank Sauntson and then a walk through the actual Post and a look at the ‘Cold War Years’ equipment and how it worked by ex-Observer John Kinder.
DEADLINE FOR RECEIPT OF INFORMATION FOR THE NEXT ISSUE OF THE NEWSLETTER IS 16 MARCH DUE TO BE PUBLISHED EARLY APRIL 2013.
The Truro Hospital Raid of ’42, Article by Donald Skeggs, The Connors of Veryan, The Satellite Posts of the ROC 1940 – 1945, The POW Camp at Hayle, North Wales Anson Crash, the Holman Projector plus all the latest ROCA news and comments.
