Inspired by the real-life events that took place in the Kennedy White House.
Inspired by the real-life events that took place in the Kennedy White House.""@en""Oct.62, for thirteen extraordinary days the world stood on the brink of destruction.
The film is set during the two-week Cuban missle crisis in October of 1962, and it centers on how President John F Kennedy, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, and others handled the explosive situation.""@en""Dramatization of the Cuban missile crisis, covering 13 extraordinary days in October 1962.""@en""For thirteen extraordinary days in October 1962, the world stood on the brink of an unthinkable catastrophe.
After the discovery of Soviet weapons in Cuba, events and tension escalate between two military superpowers and within the White House.""@en""The story of how the Kennedy administration dealt with the Cuban missile crisis.""@en""For thirteen extraordinary days in October 1962, the world stood on the brink of an unthinkable catastrophe.
For thirteen extraordinary days in October 1962, the world stood on the brink of an unthinkable catastrophe.
Oct.62, for thirteen extraordinary days the world stood on the brink of destruction.
In Oct.62 the United States and the USSR were on the brink of a nuclear war.
For thirteen extraordinary days the world stood on the brink of destruction.
Krushchev wouldn't back down, President Kennedy wouldn't give in, but Kennedy knew airstrikes on the Soviet missiles placed in Cuba would end the world as we know it.
Inspired by the real-life events that took place in the Kennedy White House.""@en""For thirteen extraordinary days in October of 1962, the world stood on the brink of destruction.
Oktober 1962 Zwischen den USA und der Sowjetunion herrscht der Kalte Krieg.
Präsident John F Kennedy steht nun vor der schwierigsten Aufgabe seines Lebens.
Wenn er seine Militärs und Geheimdienste nicht von einer friedlichen Lösung überzeugen kann, steht der Dritte Weltkrieg unmittelbar bevor.
Die Situation scheint beinahe aussichtslos und Kennedys Bruder Robert und sein engster Berater Kenny O'Donnell veruschen alles, um einen diplomatischen Ausweg zu finden.
Events of Oct.62, when for thirteen extraordinary days the world stood on the brink of destruction.
Inspired by the real-life events that took place in the Kennedy White House.""@en""October 1962, for thirteen extraordinary days the world stood on the brink of destruction.
Inspired by the real-life events that took place in the Kennedy White House during the Cuban Missile crisis.""@en""October 1962, for thirteen extraordinary days the world stood on the brink of destruction.
After the discovery of Soviet weapons in Cuba, events and tension escalate between two military superpowers and within the White House.
Tormentato dall'insonnia, angosciato succubo dell'ideologia dell'individualismo competitivo, desideroso di appartenenza, un giovane americano in carriera frequenta gruppi di terapia nel vano tentativo di condividere il dolore altrui.
These are the thirteen days that shook the world and put the United States and the USSR on the brink of a nuclear apocalypse.""@en""Zwischen den beiden grossen Weltmächten USA und der Sowjetunion herrscht der Kalte Krieg.
Als US-Piloten Kontrollflüge über Kuba starten, machen sie eine furchtbare Entdeckung.
Gut verborgen im Dschungel liegt eine Basis mit sowjetischen Nuklearraketen.
Präsident John F Kennedy steht vor der schwierigsten Aufgabe seines Lebens.
Die Situation scheint beinahe aussichtslos und Kennedys Bruder Robert und sein engster Berater Kenny O'Donnell versuchen alles, um einen diplomatischen Ausweg zu finden.
Wachsamkeit ist gefragt, denn in diesen 13 Tagen könnte jede Entscheidung die falsche sein.
Strana idea quella di imbastire un docudrama di suspense sul possibile scoppio di un conflitto nucleare quando nell'ottobre 1962 a Washington si venne a sapere che a Cuba i sovietici stavano installando basi missilistiche e il presidente John F Kennedy si trovò per tredici giorni davanti a diverse opzioni.
Ltd.This is a placeholder reference for a Organization entity, related to a WorldCat Entity.
