After a week of secret deliberations in the White House, the President announced on the evening of 23 October both the existence of the Soviet threat and the imposition of a naval quarantine.
More recently, revisionists such as James G Hershberg have suggested that long before the missiles were discovered, the Kennedy Administration was supporting a renewed effort by Cuban exiles to overthrow Fidel Castro's regime.
Unlike the 1961 disaster at the Bay of Pigs, this 1962 plan, code-named ""Mongoose,"" allegedly was to be accompanied by conventional American air and ground attacks on Cu ba 2 Quite apart from the alleged Mongoose Plan, the crisis began much earlier for the Defense Department, and continued for at least a month after Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles.
More important, however, the American contingency operation in connection with the Cuban missile crisis was the largest of the Cold War.
As such, this incident illuminates continuing questions of joint operations and contingency planning.
In essence, the Army and Air Force units in the United States belonged to their own services for training and administration but to US Strike Command for the process of deployment to reinforce the unified commanders.
Once those forces were deployed, control would pass from STRICOM to the appropriate unified command, which planned and conducted actual operations.
The service headquarters that controlled these forces were Continental Army Command , for ground combat troops, and the Air Force's Tactical Air Command , for fighter, reconnaissance, and selected airlift units.
Because LANTCOM lacked Army and Air Force component headquarters in peacetime, CON ARC and TAC had to function as those headquarters in the event of hostilities in the LANTCOM area.
Technically, CON ARC and TAC would assume the titles of Army Component, Atlantic and Air Force Component, Atlantic when they passed under LANTCOM control.
Planning In April 1961, the United States had sponsored the abortive invasion of Cuba at the Bay of Pigs.
The invasion was planned and carried out by the Central Intelligence Agency, but President Kennedy and his staff blamed the Joint Chiefs of Staff for a large measure of the Bay of Pigs failure, and excluded most professional soldiers from their councils in future crises.
Only the soldier-intellectual General Maxwell Taylor had access to Kennedy, first as Military Assistant to the President and then in September 1962 as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs.
Nevertheless, it was obvious to the Joint Chiefs and their planners that the Administration remained unreconciled to the Castro regime in Cuba, Major Jonathan House is assigned to the Defense Intelligence Agency.
Major House has served in tactical intelligence and engineer units in the United States and Korea, and has taught at the US Army Armor School, Intelligence Center and School, and Command and General Staff College.
A 1983 graduate of the staff college, he researched this article as part of a larger study of joint operations while assigned to the United States Army Center of Military History.
Chain of command, planned Cuban operations, as of 18 October 1962. and therefore that military operations against Cuba remained a distinct possibility.
In February 1962 the Joint Chiefs instructed the Commander-inChief, Atlantic , Admiral Robert L Dennison, to make Cuban contingency plans his highest priority.
The amphibious phase of the operation would be controlled by Headquarters, Second Fleet, acting as Joint Task Force 122.
Once the initial landings were completed, Headquarters, XVIII Airborne Corps, would become JTF Cuba to control all further operations.
To facilitate the 'expected popular uprising against Castro, a separate Joint Unconventional Warfare Task Force, Atlantic, would deploy Special Forces teams and other elements into Cuba.
Given such short notice, the Marines would be unable to load and deploy by sea, so the initial assault would be restricted to the XVIII Airborne Corps, supported by the few Marine units already at sea or at Guantanamo.
His Army commanders, however, all objected to the long delays necessary for the Marine elements to prepare for OPLAN 314.
They argued strongly that such a delay would not only endanger any hope of surprise, but also leave masses of Army and Marine troops in crowded staging areas where they might be lucrative targets for Soviet nuclear attack.
Regardless of which plan was executed, XVIII Airborne Corps intended to use all available airfields in Florida both to stage its troop transports during the assault and to provide a logistical base to support later operations.
Throughout the summer of 1962, staff officers from Third United States Army headquarters who were responsible for Army administration in the southeastern United States visited all the airbases in Florida, coordinated with local Air Force commanders for support, and planned a support structure of supply, communications, and medical units for the area.
Troops Available Contingency plans mean nothing without the forces to execute those plans, and Third Army was hard-pressed to find the personnel for this elaborate support structure.
Throughout the Cold War, the Army gave troop units in the continental United States lower priorities for personnel and equipment than units overseas, where a war might occur at any time.
This shortage was Spring 1991 95 aggravated in 1962 by the beginning of conflict in Southeast Asia.
The Kennedy Administration would find it politically difficult to recall the Army Reserve and National Guard so soon after the previous mobilization.
As a result of all these factors, Continental Army Command was short-handed in terms both of available units and of the more specialized individuals within those units.
The average deployable strength even in high-priority Strategic Army Corps units was only 80 percent of their authorized strength.
The 2d Armored Division, which was earmarked to provide the heavy forces for Cuba, was organized on the older Pentomic structure, as were similar divisions in Europe.
This difference prompted the CONARC commander, General Herbert Powell, to switch the assignments of the two divisions at the last moment.
Unfortunately, the 1st had been reactivated only in February 1962, in order to replace a federalized National Guard division.
As a result, the newly formed, poorly equipped 1st Armored Division found itself assigned as the mechanized force for the Cuban invasion virtually overnight.
The Corps commander, Lieutenant General Hamilton Howze, headed this operation until the situation relaxed on 10 October.
Origin of the Crisis For practical purposes, military operations for the Cuban crisis began with the United States discovery of Soviet IL-28 medium bombers in Cuba on 30 September, and ended with the Soviet Union's announcement on 19 November that those aircraft would be withdrawn.
On 1 October 1962, Defense Secretary McNamara held his weekly meeting with the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
When informed of the presence of the bombers and the strong possibility of missiles in Cuba, McNamara told the Joint Chiefs to intensify both contingency planning and the readiness of forces not only for blockade, but also for air attack or invasion of Cuba.
In a letter to General Taylor the next day, McNamara enumerated six possible circumstances 96 Parameters that would trigger United States military action, including some-such as the positioning of Soviet offensive weapons in Cuba and Cuban support of subversion elsewhere in the hemisphere-that had already occurred.
The Joint Chiefs were therefore quite justified in considering invasion to be imminent.
This memorandum explains why the military was thinking in terms of offensive action long after Kennedy's civilian advisors had rejected such extreme measures. to In response to McNamara's guidance, on I October Admiral Dennison, the CINCLANT, directed his subordinate Army and Air Force headquarters to undertake all possible actions so as to be ready to execute the three operations plans at any time on or after 20 October.
Thus, quite apart from any support for the Bay of Pigs sequel, Mongoose, the armed forces began preparations two weeks before missiles were actually sighted in Cuba on 14 October.
There was no longer a joint commander on the scene to coordinate Navy and Air Force air strikes, Army paradrops, and Marine or Army amphibious landings.
Dennison's reasons for this change in command structure are unclear, particularly his motive for trying to run a war in Cuba from his headquarters in Norfolk.
However, by removing the JTF commander interposed between himself and the tactical units, he may have been reflecting the desires of the Kennedy Administration to maintain extremely tight, centralized control over all military operations.
Both were composed of staff officers with little knowledge of previous plans.
The additional burden of these two headquarters overwhelmed the makeshift communications arrangements in Florida.
At the same time, these new headquarters suffered because of belated changes in Air Force plans.
As a result, the Air Force bases in Florida lacked sufficient space for both fighter-bombers and troop transports.
This forced recomputation of the entire plan for the airdrop, because of different flight times from alternate airbases in Florida to drop zones in Cuba.
In theory, the Joint Chiefs of Staff would transfer operational control of the appropriate CON ARC and TAC forces from STRICOM to LANTCOM when execution of the operations plans for Cuba appeared imminent.
The immediate problem was Exercise Three Pairs, a complex series of maneuvers scheduled to occur at Ft.
Adams was naturally reluctant to abandon the exercise unless war appeared inevitable.
Moreover. he believed that cancellation of the highly publicized Three Pairs would telegraph American intentions to attack Cuba.
Faced with this massive change, General Adams concluded that the exercise could not be salvaged and canceled it despite General Taylor's desire to continue it as a deception operation.
This was a normal procedure when CINCSTRIKE transferred forces cleanly to an overseas unified command, but the situation here was fuzzied by the fact that CONARC/ARLANT and TAC/AFLANT were dual-hatted under CINCLANT, with five of the headquarters geographically collocated in the Ft.
Monroe/Langley AFB/Norfolk area of Virginia, and with STRICOM in Florida.
CONARC and TAC continued to report to both STRICOM and LANTCOM as they struggled to prepare for war.
On the afternoon of22 October, priorto the President's announcement, the Joint Chiefs of Staff decided to bring the armed forces to Defense Condition 3, an increased state of readiness, and to begin positioning ground forces for possible implementation of OPLAN 316.
That night, General Powell directed the movement of 1st Brigade, 1st Armored Division, and the other elements of Task Force Charlie, the mechanized force for the invasion, from Ft.
The purpose of this movement was to locate the forces near the ports of Savannah, Georgia, and Everglades, Florida, from which Task Force Charlie would deploy.
Because the 1st Armored had to be ready to move on short notice, the vehicles were kept mounted on flatcars rather than offloading at Ft.
Third Army transportation officers turned to the rail sidings at nearby Hunter Air Force Base, on the outskirts of Savannah.
At the time, however, Hunter was a Strategic Air Command base, and the local commander would not accept Army railcars until the Army's Deputy Chief of Staff for Operations, Lieutenant General Theodore W Parker, appealed to the Air Force Chief of Staff.
The final step was to load the first wave of Task Force Charlie aboard ships in Savannah and the Port of Everglades.
In the process, staff officers Spring 1991 99 discovered numerous technical problems.
For example, the two lower decks of the roll on/roll off ship USNS Comet lacked sufficient clearance to accommodate M48 tanks unless the commander's cupolas were removed.
This same problem, on the same ship, had arisen during the 1958 deployment to Lebanon, but it had not subsequently been fixed.
After eight days of loading ships, the II Marine Amphibious Force was aboard the largest collection of amphibious shipping assembled since the Korean War.
The 5th Marine Expeditionary Brigade, from California, reinforced the 2d Marine Division by air and sea deployment.
Seven hundred and fifty fighter-bombers waited on airfields and aircraft carriers.
On 27 October President Kennedy approved McNamara's suggestion, calling to active duty 24 Air Force Reserve squadrons of troop-carrier aircraft.
These aircraft made it possible to airlift the first wave of the airborne invasion, consisting of 34,800 paratroopers at Ft.
At this point, the forces controlled by CINCLANT went into a kind of suspended animation, waiting for an execution order that never came.
Equipment of the 1st Armored Division is loaded aboard Navy ships for maneuvers during the Cuban missile crisis.
This prolonged alert, like the prolonged preparation prior to the discovery of missiles, indicates the seriousness with which the Administration contemplated the possibility of attacking Cuba.
In effect, the United States Army had prepared for a major war without mobilizing its reserve forces, an anomaly that presaged a similar situation during the Vietnam War.
This high state of readiness was achieved only at substantial cost, both in dollars and in the long-term efficiency of the services.'s The call for equipment and personnel to bring units up to strength seriously depleted the Army school system.
The Army never received authority to extend soldier enlistments or recall reservists, although McNamara granted such authority to the Navy and Marines on 27 October. l6 Without such mobilization measures, the Continental Army Command cannibalized its schools and support bases to meet the situation.
In essence, the commanders and staff officers involved ""ate the seed corn"" for the sustained prosecution of the Cold War and for the approaching Vietnam conflict, although the schools eventually recovered.
Powell argued that the commander of the conventional invasion forces had to control the unconventional troops operating in his area.
Admiral Dennison declined, instead retaining JUWTFA directly under CINCLANT control.
He indicated, however, that unconventional warfare elements actually located in proximity to invasion forces could be subordinated to such forces on a case-by-case basis.
Given the complexity of any airborne or amphibious invasion and the difficulties of special operations teams engaged in the enemy's rear, Dennison's compromise might well have proved unworkable.
Conclusion President Kennedy ended the quarantine on 21 November 1962, and within a week the return of units to their home stations was in full swing.
The crisis is justly regarded as a classic case of national decisionmaking during diplomatic confrontation.
Yet historians and political scientists should not study it in isolation from the military aspects of the crisis, aspects which were highly visible to the Soviet leadership and which went far beyond a quarantine of Cuba.
Since no combat ensued, the American mobilization for the Cuban missile crisis is unfortunately all but forgotten.
It shared many characteristics of previous and subsequent joint operations.
Continental Army Command was caught between Strike Command, which controlled its assets in peacetime, and Atlantic Command, which assumed control to implement contingency plans.
Coordination between the services, especially with regard to base usage in Florida, left much to be desired.
The time lag required to deploy Marine amphibious units by sea when compared with the air deployment of paratroops fueled interservice rivalry.
The problems of the Army in providing trained manpower for the operation clearly illustrated the importance of reserve components to conducting even limited warfare.
Those familiar with the joint command structure for the American interventions in the Dominican Republic and in Grenada will instantly recognize the equivalent structure in 1962.
Atlantic Command's decision to control the operation from Norfolk, without ajoint task force headquarters on the scene, was potentially disastrous.
More important, the absence of a joint land forces headquarters to coordinate Army and Marine elements from the start of the invasion would have posed insoluble difficulties in coordinating airspace management, fire support, and a host of similar matters.
Fortunately, the crisis subsided before the command structure's flaws were revealed in battle.
