It was triggered on 16 October 1962 when the United States discovered that the Soviet Union had stationed nuclear capable missiles in Cuba, placing Washington and other major cities within reach.
The United States reacted by implementing a blockade or “quarantine”, preventing Soviet ships from delivering further weapons to Cuba.
In response, United States military leaders unanimously urged Kennedy to bomb Cuba.
Soviet naval officer Vasili Arkhipov vetoed the launch of the nuclear torpedo.Later that same evening, in waters near Cuba, the destroyer USS Cony fired depth charges near a Soviet B-59 submarine in an effort to force the soviet submarine to the surface.
Cut off from communications with Moscow, and under the impression that war had started, Captain Vitali Grigorievitch Savitsky wanted to retaliate by launching the nuclear-tipped torpedo warhead that the vessel was carrying.
However, naval officer Vasili Arkhipov refused to grant his authorization that was required for the nuclear attack and persuaded the captain to surface and await orders from Moscow.
This fact was only revealed in 2002 at a conference to mark the 40th anniversary of the crisis.
After tense negotiations, the crisis ended on 28 October when Chairman Khrushchev agreed to the removal of Soviet nuclear weapons from Cuban soil.
In return, President Kennedy agreed to the non-publicised removal of United States missiles from Turkey and gave assurances that the United States would not to invade Cuba or assist others in doing so....it is important to reach an understanding to both these problems in order to make a good gift to the people, to let them rejoice in the news that a nuclear test ban agreement has also been reached and thus there will be no further contamination of the atmosphere.
Heeding the wake-up call In the following months, both parties, alongside the United Kingdom, continued negotiations on banning nuclear testing.
While a comprehensive ban on all nuclear tests was on the table, only a partial ban could be achieved owing to pressure from the military establishment on both sides.
If it does represent a possibility of avoiding the kind of collision that we had last fall in Cuba, which was quite close, and Berlin in 1961, we should seize the chance.President Kennedy on the prospect of banning nuclear tests in 1963Nuclear testing increased in number after 1963 – click to enlarge.While the PTBT limited the atmospheric fallout from nuclear tests, nuclear testing subsequently not only continued, but increased in number, enabling the development of ever more destructive nuclear weapons by an increasing number of countries.
