He has published more than 20 titles, including DK books Battle, Soldier, Flight, and History.
THE SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION David K Allison is Associate Director of Curatorial Affairs at the National Museum of American History.
He served as the Chair of the Division of Information Technology and Communications from 1995 through 2009.
His research specialties are military history and information technology.
Established in 1846, the Smithsonian Institution—the world’s largest museum and research complex—includes 19 museums and galleries and the National Zoological Park.
Introduction The history of the past century is a history Today, cell phones, computers, and mass air travel are of extraordinary contrasts, of incredible widespread, while the tribes that worked in stone live achievements and tragic disasters. on the poorer fringes of the new world of consumption.
The past century was the most violent in history, but it also The German socialist Karl Marx observed that modern saw the most rapid progress in medicine, science, welfare, industrial capitalism contained a remarkable imperative and economic security.
Soviet and Chinese emancipation, but one in which many women lived in leaders attempted to prove Marx wrong and establish poverty or were forced to follow standards of dress and global communism.
In the greatest communism represented perhaps half the paradox of all, nuclear weapons were a The 20th century was _ world’s population.
It was seen as so triumph of man over nature, but possess the most violent in dangerous that, in 1941, Hitler mounted the the power to wipe out human civilization. history, but it also bloodiest military campaign of all time to It was also a century of rich discovery. destroy the Soviet Union, while after 1945 saw rapid progress.
In 1900 the most technologically advanced the USA and its allies fought to prevent its communities in Europe and North America spread.
In the end, Marx was proven right. were using telephones, driving the first cars, and waiting for The Soviet bloc collapsed due to economic as well as powered flight.
This book contains a great many images and modern citizenship went hand-in-hand with rising living of violence, discrimination, and coercion that seem to standards.
But before we write off the last hundred freedom to choose a job, what to buy, how years as a disaster, it is important to recall to be educated.
Attempts by outside forces to international cooperation to extend political intervene often caused more harm than good, and it was freedom, broaden economic opportunity, and preserve popular resistance that proved most successful.
If these lessons are learned, the many heroes of this process, Nelson Mandela stands out as images of the 21st century may tell a brighter story. a remarkable example in recognizing that, whatever crimes the apartheid regime may have committed, vengeance and Richard Overy, hatred would not build a better South Africa.
The result was a bitter Pguagempecocmmty to ’ the Boer states, and had t lasted for three years. already gone to war once in 1880-1881.
The British used armored trains to transport supplies, and destroyed vast swathes of crops and farms in a bid to starve out the guerrillas.
He took advantage of _ his fame, going on to found the Scouting movement in 1907.
Since | Bcirclarer-lamunearcsnavem-naalovalemnats) inalomvr-Naalcyc1e) 0M aHe mm @auler-yanar-lel ultlanders working Jolbnihem-halemcrepunne)e\-lom-lam-n aaah’ A mle) am Aalcuvco)ar-venatss-J0)0hge mere) (e| He issued a counter ultimatum | % fields.
He would then “restore” opavahale meals ms} @intsjam-soMalelenacmne * calm and take control.
Ladysmith, British Field Marshal Lord Roberts led ~~” the advance into Orange _ Free State.
Oxen "". trains were used to move » armament and supplies ) across rough terrain.
CHANGE OF FORTUNE The celebrated Boer general Piet Cronje rN ALO M0010 Mo ymm anim aalcyal surrendered to the British at the Battle of Paardeburg on February 27, 1900.
Louis |sYo) Hake Mm aeyanrlals) ie ale)-yare 0l-)eallk-mer-nanley-nlenen | became the first Prime )) Minister of the Union of south Africa in 1910.
The race to Pein tt they were bring aviation to the world would turn a seeming slow and cumbersome.
The impossibility into everyday life in a few short years. fe eg create a taster, more reliable alternative.
Wilbur and Orville tossed a coin to decide who would make the historic attempt.
Orville won and took the controls for the first successful powered flight, lasting 12 seconds.
His passenger, Army Lieutenant Thomas Selfridge, was killed, English Channel from Calais to Dover.
He was competing for a £1,000 prize offered by the London Daily Mail, and was flying the FESTIVAL OF FLIGHT A 1909 poster becoming the world’s world’s first successful hailed a “Grand Week of Aviation” at first airplane fatality. monoplane, built to Reims, France, and offered large cash Orville was badly injured. his own design. prizes.
They traveled ~ each summer to the sand dunes of Kitty Hawk in North Carolina to test their designs, attempting both unmanned and piloted flights.
Based on their earlier success with glider designs, the new machine was made of wood and canvas, and powered by a fuel-injection engine.
Cast in aluminum, the engine weighed 791b and generated 12 horsepower. 10/05/1905 ee INTO THE SKIES | 12/08/1903 | ms neo oe an satis 5. 7 a THAT SINKING FEELING Other pioneers were less successful.
Aerodrome, a powered airplane designed by Samuel Langley, crashed into the Potomac River on takeoff.
FRENCH MILESTONE In front of a large crowd, | confess that in 1901 I said to my brother Orville that man would not fly for 50 years.
Secretive by nature, they refused to publish details of their designs while pursuing patents for their machine, so news of their success was muted.
Aviation had caught the popular imagination and would change transportation forever.
The Wright brothers’ achievements were _ virtually unknown , in Europe, so the © Aero-Club de France proclaimed the flight a world record.
Gradually, improving technology made powered flight practical and reliable.
Passenger 1900-1930 Wilbur and Orville Wright made the first sustained heavier-than-air flight at Kitty Hawk, North Carolina, in 1903.
Experiments with powered lighter-than-air craft, notably promoted by German Count Ferdinand von Zeppelin, were also under way, and for years the winged airplane and the airship developed side by side.
By the end of the first decade of the century, the world was in the grip of a flying craze.
Crowds flocked to air shows to see intrepid pilots risk their lives in flimsy flying machines, and newspapers offered cash prizes for longdistance air races.
At first there appeared to be little practical use for aircraft, but this changed during World War I when they were much in demand for reconnaissance and for bombing the enemy.
Tens of thousands of pilots were trained to fly and aircraft began to be mass produced in factories, rather than made by hand in workshops.
INSTRUMENT PANEL Early aircraft had few instruments in the cockpit and those that did exist were often unreliable.
This early device has airspeed and altitude gauges. / 4920s BLERIOT MONOPLANE In July 1909, Louis Blériot became the first man to fly a heavier-than-air machine across the English Channel, crossing from Calais to Dover in 37 minutes.
As flying became part of everyday life, it generated new challenges for science, and a whole new frontier of exploration opened up in space.
Pioneering intercontinental flights by individuals such as Charles Lindbergh, Amelia Earhart, and Amy Johnson blazed the trail for commercial airlines.
At first, airships looked set to dominate long-distance travel, providing the first airborne trans-Atlantic passenger services in the 1930s, but they proved too slow and too vulnerable to bad weather.
Concerns about their safety came to a head when a fireball engulfed the airship Hindenburg in 1937.
Winged aircraft, in contrast, grew bigger, safer, faster, and steadily more comfortable.
Aircraft began to be constructed out of metal LONG-HAUL PASSAGE This 1931 poster advertises Zeppelin airship flights between Europe and South America.
HELICOPTERS EVOLVE The first prototype helicopters had been developed in the 1930s by French pioneer Louis Breguet.
Igor Sikorsky launched the first mass-produced helicopter, the Sikorsky R4, in 1940.
The first jet aircraft entered service during the war, as did the first practical helicopters.
In the following years, military aviation continued to set the pace, achieving phenomenal speed and altitude records with jet airplanes in the 1950s.
Commercial aviation was slower to abandon the propeller, but the arrival of the jet-powered de Havilland Comet in 1952 definitively marked jet air travel as the way of the future.
SPY PLANE A high-altitude military reconnaissance aircraft capable of flying at a speed of more than 2,200 mph , the Lockheed SR-71 Blackbird was revolutionary when it entered service in 1966. 4950s FIRST PASSENGER JET In 1952, the de Havilland Comet became the first commercial jet to take to the skies.
Though a groundbreaking technical achievement, it suffered a series of high-profile disasters and was overtaken by rival models.
Scientists had experimented with rockets since the early part of the century, but it took the military advances of World War II for these ideas to become reality.
The Soviets took an early lead when Yuri Gagarin became the first human being in space in 1961, before United States astronaut Neil Armstrong became the first man on the Moon in 1969.
Supersonic passenger flights in Concorde, a joint French and British enterprise, were the height of luxury in the 1970s, but soon technological progress 1950s JET BOMBER The English Electric Canberra was one of the first post-World War II military jets.
By the end of the 20th century, airlines were carrying billions of passengers every year.
Wealthy tourists were A CENTURY OF FLIGHT SPACE TRAVEL From 1981 until its retirement in 2011, the Space Shuttle was the backbone of the United States manned space program. taking flights into space, while the USA set its sights on a manned mission to Mars.
The modern airplane creates a new geographical dimension... the world is small and the world Is one.
WENDELL WILLKIE, AMERICAN POLITICIAN, 1943 1970s | CONCORDE TAKES FLIGHT The world’s first supersonic passenger aircraft entered service in 1976.
Concorde enabled rapid | trans-Atlantic flights but rising costs and fears over safety led to the retirement of the fleet in 2003.
A smaller force then continued to push the Russians back toward Mukden , Manchuria’s capital.
Liaoyang 26 Aug-2 Sep 1904 mBeijing Jan 1905 QING Sea 05/25/1904 SLOW PROGRESS TO PORT ARTHUR ey.
With the the last major land battle of | wrecked ships still _ the war, fought over a 90-mile visible in the harbor, OATOD cen) acoyaummnalom-innlel.enaley and most of his own Japanese gradually encircled aol001010)8 (ol-1 the Russian lines.
The battle IVEN{oy @@xevalcyeaWarelne)hy quickly turned into a rout as Stessel surrendered Port #) the Russians abandoned Arthur to the Japanese. |) their weapons and supplies.
NEW RUSSIAN FLEET 05/28/1905 Russia’s last hope of | victory lay with its Baltic Sea fleet.
At the same The strikere caledaen time, socialist movements inspired by political theorist Karl Marx were better pay and working Hi f k ; b Hi Th ioe th t f | d Id h conditions, and for the the face of Russian politics, and sow the seeds of future revolution. committee to represent the workers in disputes.
Nervous authorities ordered troops to prevent the crowd from reaching the palace.
Urging concessions, he persuaded the Czar to sign the October Manifesto granting freedom of the press and } h | | ] 12/19/1905 other basic civil rights.
MOSCOW REVOLT Dismissing the October Manifesto as a cynical sham, Crucially, an elected revolutionary groups of Mensheviks and Bolsheviks organized an armed national parliament uprising in Moscow.
Bombs were manufactured, and barricades, manned would be formed. by workers and students, were erected in the streets.
As popular support grew, tens of thousands of workers joined the strike, paralyzing industry ’ in St.
UNREST GROWS As news 03/10/1905 of the Bloody Sunday killings WAR WEARINESS spread, workers’ strikes erupted all across the Lino ass SMe ei eis country.
Universities closed co eae ee tne and Russian army had been down and students joined defeated by the Japanese the protests.
PETERSBURG SOVIET FORMED Leon Trotsky, a Marxist revolutionary who had been living in exile, secretly returned to * oe Russia and made his 4) a way to St.
Similar sailors would come to their support and flocked soviets were soon to the port.
As unrest spread, troops fired on the established in some crowd and parts of the city were set ablaze. cities.
Then the confirming his right to army brought in artillery dismiss the Duma and ¥ to shell the factory retain an absolute veto district of Presnia, the over legislation.
The _ main stronghold of the Czar remained absolute workers, and the ruler, and thousands ., resistance was crushed. were imprisoned or ' Large areas of Moscow executed for their part were left in ruins. in the rebellion.
Petersburg soviet were put on trial and deported to Siberia, a harsh, isolated region in Russia’s far north.
It is never less than 40ft deep, and is 300ft wide at its narrowest point.
More ats halomem o)ilhteyamelelo Loman @molOmasniinlovamelle)lomaa) me) rubble was removed in its construction.
Before it was built, ships traveling between the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans were forced to undertake a long and dangerous diversion around Cape Horn, the southern ~ tip of South America.
The new route would provide vital trade links to the American West Coast and to the countries of the Pacific.
Over the next 10 years, the USA jeXolungalemnc)Alsme)mnaanllnkolatcmelmelo)t-hacmnalKemnalcm@r-harele which was completed in 1914.
It remains a vital artery ey1 nig-lol-murnate mr-Wnyi)alel-yane)mmanlolel-iaem-valepbalcr-ianalen 1900-1909 San Francisco Earthquake 1906 At 5:13m. on the morning of April 18, Angeles in the south, and as farinlandas the city of San Francisco was struck by a central Nevada.
As the tremors subsided, massive earthquake, measuring between the wealthy city of San Francisco—the 7. and 8.25 on the Richter scale.
The violent largest on the West Coast and the ninth shock, which shook the city for 48 seconds, largest in the USA—lay in ruins, with much was felt from Oregon in the north to Los of its population homeless and desperate.
At least warning that looters Se 25,000 houses were would be shot on sight.
Estimates 250,000 people. of the damage ran to Makeshift tents were more than $200 million. erected in parks and Officials gave the on beaches.
It would be number of dead as 375, ae months, in some cases in an effort to prevent years, before many of panic, but the actual the displaced returned figure was probably to their rebuilt homes. closer to 3,000.
SAN FRANCISCO EARTHQUAKE | 04/18/1906 F | 04/18/1906. er a ; a EARTHQUAKE Man STRIKES Citizens of i _ San Francisco were awakened in terror by the first tremors.
The city was both a center of culture and finance, and one of the largest industrial ports on the Pacific coast, with a large working-class and immigrant population.
San Francisco ers ——s . | rose as a new City, but CLEANUP BEGINS Work started immediately on clearing away its future trajectory had | the damage.
In 1910 he was approaching 80, and hopes were high that he would retire.
Instead he ran again for president, declaring victory in a fraudulent election.
This time, however, the 06/07/1911 |; HERO’S RETURN Madero entered Mexico City in triumph.
He had promised land reform to his peasant allies, and his failure to deliver led to further unrest.
On February 19, 1913 army general Victoriano Huerta overthrew Madero and claimed the Presidency. os — 04/15/1915 ALLIES NO MORE With Huerta defeated, the Big Four started to fall apart.
Obregon and Carranza came from wealthy backgrounds, and were suspicious of Villa and Zapata, who called for better rights for peasants.
Before long violence erupted again, as Obregon defeated Villa’s cavalry at the Battle of Celaya.
Lawyer Venustiano Carranza and wealthy farmer Alvaro Obregon were also opposed to the regime and raised their own Constitutional Army to join the battle.
Villa, Zapata, Carranza, and Obregon—the so-called Big Four—formed an uneasy alliance.
A diplomatic dispute with Huerta led United States me President Woodrow — Wilson to impose a ban on arms imports to Mexico.
He campaigned vigorously election, seemed certain and announced his own opposition mounted.
BATTLE OF ZACATECAS Pancho Villa, the bandit turned ~ state governor of Chihuahua, used everything from train robbery to forced loans to equip his formidable army, the Division of the North. j In June 1914 he attacked thesia heavily defended city of Zacatecas and inflicted a 7 crushing defeat on Huerta’s forces.
Huerta resigned and fled the country, and Villa’s fame and popularity spread.
United States General Pershing was sent at the head of an American expeditionary force to capture Villa.
CALL TO REVOLUTION Madero escaped from jail and was smuggled across the border to Texas.
There he declared the election null and void, issuing a call to the Mexican people to rise up in armed revolution at 6 pm on November 20, a day the Mexican people still celebrate as Revolution Day.
However, Zapata’s rebels continued to fight, defying Carranza’s attempts to stamp them out.
Zapata was finally killed in an ambush on April 10, 1919, but a year later Obregon ousted Carranza, claiming he had betrayed the constitution.
Carranza was assassinated while trying to flee the country. pleysel-yat-h fe 02/14/1911 s 400) Vin b7-40 ae THE MEXICAN REVOLUTION UNLIKELY ALLIES In need of an army, Madero joined forces with Pancho Villa, a former bandit.
They also recruited Emiliano Zapata, a campaigner for peasants’ rights, who raised a guerrilla army in the south.
Together they defeated Diaz, and the President was forced to resign on May 25.
Obregon, who had lost his right arm fighting against Villa, proved a popular leader.
While violence and instability continued in some areas, his election marked the end of the Mexican Revolution.
This “Heroic Age of Antarctic Exploration” saw men from around the world battle extreme cold and hostile conditions with only basic equipment.
By 1910, the geology and meteorology of the continent had been widely explored, but no expedition had made it farther AMUNDSEN’S FLAG This Norwegian flag was retrieved from the South 04/03/1911 WAITING FOR SPRING With their base camps set up, both expeditions sat out the intense cold and bitter storms of the Antarctic winter.
Two men, British explorer Robert Scott and Norwegian Roald Amundsen, were each determined to break that record and reach the Pole in 1912, sparking a desperate race that would end in victory for one, and tragic failure for the other.
They left letters for both Scott and the Norwegian king, Haakon VII, before setting out on their successful return journey.
By January 4, a team of five was left to make the final march to the Pole.
Hampered by their thick woolen clothing, many of his men suffered frostbite and exposure.
Norwegian Amundsen was an experienced Polar explorer, who had already achieved fame for his Arctic discoveries.
THE JOURNEYS BEGIN On October 19, Amundsen and four companions set out with four sleds, each pulled b Vietoarug aon hae tam of 13nusky dogs.
When | Wietory awaits him who has the dogs became exhausted, everything In order —— luck, they were shot and their meat used for food.
Scott’s journey began on ROALD AMUNDSEN, IN November 1, but immediately THE SOUTH POLE, 1912 encountered difficulties.
Scott relied on mechanical sleds, _ which quickly failed, and pack ponies, which died within days from cold and exhaustion. — 02/17/1912 | A BITTER ARRIVAL Robert Scott and his four companions reached the South Pole only to discover that Amundsen had beaten them by 35 days.
Exhausted and demoralized, they spent the next two days resting, after which they began the long trek back to their base camp on Ross Island.
But the long, ' grueling descent of the Beardmore Glacier was still to come.
The glacier caused the first casualty of the expedition on February 17, as Edgar Evans died after a fall.
The remaining members of _ the team struggled on in appalling conditions.
Titus Oates, barely able to walk, voluntarily left the party and walked to his death on March 16, and on March 19 Robert Scott, Edward Wilson, and Henry Bowers were hit by a blizzard and forced to halt.
With no supplies and unable to leave their tent, the three men succumbed to ——_— , cold, hunger, and exhaustion, SCOTT’S SUNDIAL Scott carried and died a range of devices to monitor . weather and aid navigation.
Beginning in the developed world, crop yields increased beyond farmers’ wildest dreams, while vast areas of 1900-1930 Seismic changes in farming began with the development of tractors and combine harvesters.
Machines took over the work of men and animals at a fraction of the cost and at a much greater speed and scale.
New, industrially produced chemical fertilizers replaced manure and guano, hugely increasing land fertility.
At the same time, ph-JelerHORSE-DRAWN PLOW Before 1900, agriculture was small-scale and labor intensive.
THE NEW STANDARD In 1917, the Ford Motor Company of Detroit introduced the Fordson, the world’s first mass-produced tractor. improved transportation links and the development of refrigeration and container shipping made it much easier to transport goods to markets over long distances, to support evergrowing cities.
Large-scale monoculture—in which one crop 1910s | CHEMICAL PIONEER In 1910, German chemist Fritz Haber discovered a way to synthesize ammonia.
His work allowed fertilizer to be produced cheaply on an industrial scale. previously barren land were brought under the plow.
New equipment and new farming methods spread around the globe, and by the end of the century the sudden increase in food production had fueled a global population boom.
Many countries was grown over a vast area— became the dominant system of farming in the developed world.
In the USA and Canada, the problems were exacerbated by drought and dust storms, which tore off fertile topsoil and rendered vast swathes of farmland useless.
Intensive monoculture, JOIN THE MOBILIZED FOR FOOD Limits on overseas food supplies during World War II encouraged intensive farming.
Women’s Land Armies filled the labor shortage as men fought abroad. r Py Bla mn) that ee at.
FORDSON TRACTOR The birth of the gasoline-driven engine spurred industry to mass-produce general purpose tractors that allowed ordinary farmers to mechanize their work.
However, while intensive farming practices increased Output, scientists became increasingly aware of the cost to the natural world.
Monoculture led to the destruction of traditional farmland and wilderness areas.
Pesticides such as DDT were found to have 1960s | COLLECTIVIZED FARMING Experiments with state-run, quota-based farming caused widespread famine in China.
A CENTURY OF AGRICULTURE unexpected consequences, poisoning birds and mammals.
A growing environmental movement called for responsible agriculture, seeking to feed the world without sacrificing animal welfare or natural ecosystems.
At the other end of the spectrum, a growing organic movement rejected chemical MODERN FARM HORSE Highly mechanized farm machinery like this Case IH Magnum series tractor has dramatically increased yields and profit. fertilizers and pesticides to grow more “natural” produce.
By the early 21st century, scientific management of food production had made basic nutrition cheaper and safer than ever before, but millions still lacked sufficient food.
The challenge became balancing the needs of the hungry with sustainable food production, a problem that continues to provoke debate.
The first essential component of social justice is adequate food for all mankind.
GENETIC MODIFICATION Genetically modified foods may come to define farming in the 21st century, but concerns remain about their safety.
Puyi, seen here with his father Zaifeng and baby brother, was taken to live in the Forbidden City, where his father served as his regent. 09/07/1901 © ~ a 03/01/1898 PEASANT UNREST yANoiceliomalolanalcieem@rannatee groups of discontented peasants joined forces.
They formed a secret society known as the League of Righteous and Harmonious Fists.
They were ge backed by Oing Empress Cixi, who had taken power after usurping her nephew, the reformist Guangxu Emperor.
Cixi NiVEe Foi otole MRO MONAY rage of the Boxers away from the imperial family.
Alliance army, a large RELIEF OF BEIJING The international force stormed Beijing, ‘.{ force representing the reducing the Oianmen Gate of the Inner City to ruins.
Cixi escaped from the imperial palace disguised as a peasant * the Legation, was sent and fled to the ancient capital of Xi’an. to lift the siege and protect Western | interests.
Cixi, permitted to ’ remain Empress, began » to make overdue reforms, but the rebellion had permanently weakened the Oing Dynasty.
Yuan ""% brought about the abdication of Puyi and | was inaugurated as first president of the Republic of China. This marked the end of ~ 4,000 years of imperial jqvllomhale mAatom ohanale)i modern China.
On one day of violence they smashed shop Windows across London's West End and attacked government buildings.
By 1912 women had been campaigning for the vote for more than half a century, but only a few countries had agreed to their demands.
Women’s suffrage movements, angered by the broken promises of male politicians, became increasingly militant.
By the end of the decade, the movement had spread beyond Western borders and had caught the imagination of women in Asia. 01/28/1914 06/04/1913 | i a i WOMEN’S PARLIAMENT Canadian social activist Nellie McClung staged a mock women’s parliament in a theater in Winnipeg, Manitoba.
Debating whether to give men the vote, it satirized male politicians and their attitudes to women.
In 1916 Manitoba became the first Canadian province to grant women the vote.
TRAGEDY AT EPSOM In Britain, suffragette Emily Davison died after throwing herself in front of the King’s horse at the Epsom Derby.
WOMEN’S INTERNATIONAL DAY This 1914 German poster exhorts women to go out to support women’s right to vote.
O0G6G/O06/1921 MOVEMENT SPREADS TO JAPAN In 1921 the Japanese parliament overruled Article 5 of the Police Security Act and granted women the right to attend political meetings.
This led to a surge in the number of women’s groups, who campaigned for the right to vote.
SUFFRAGETTE COLORS A jeweled pendant in the colors chosen by Emmeline Pankhurst for the suffragettes— purple for dignity, white for purity, and green for hope. had ratified the 19th Amendment, which prohibits any United States citizen to be denied the right to vote based on sex.
It was the 36th and deciding United States state that tilted the balance in favour of women’s suffrage.
Ff lawyer Inez Milholland Alice Paul and Lucy led a huge suffrage parade held in Washington, DC on the day before President Woodrow Wilson’s inauguration.
Influenced by the British a —— ~ | suffragettes movement, MARCHING IN STEP The suffrage march they advocated civil injured.
At the outbreak of World War I, she suspended the suffragette campaign and turned her energies to the war effort. not at all in national elections. to publicize their cause.
The French . women's suffrage movement was largely middle-class and citybased.
Although it seemed | poised for success, female suffrage was delayed } until 1945 because of deep-rooted conservatism in France’s male | population. lam alaw breaker because | want to be alaw maker.
AMERICAN SOCIAL ACTIVIST ANNE COBDEN SANDERSON SPEAKING IN COURT, OCTOBER 1906 Ford’s Factory Revolution The world of industry had been revolutionized in the 19th century by the introduction of the factory.
However, complex products such as machines were still produced in workshops, by teams of mechanics working on a single unit at a time.
Rather than mechanics moving from one unit to the next, the units themselves would move along a track, stopping at each station for workers to perform a specific task.
At a stroke, the rate of manufacture could be greatly increased, and the price of individual units slashed.
The moving assembly line made his iconic Model T automobile the first car to be widely affordable, not a luxury item.
Britain’s HMS Dreadnought was the world’s first modern a Europe at the turn of the 20th century was a complex network eee ena oe | of alliances and counter-alliances.
The precarious balance of sums of money on their own power was upset by the assassination of the Austrian Archduke fleet.
BOSNIAN CRISIS ey $C Jo, 08/10/1913 The situation in the Balkans was summed up in a French cartoon.
Emperor Franz-Joseph of Austria-Hungary is shown snatching Bosnia away from the Ottoman Sultan, while the King of Bulgaria declares his independence.
The neighboring state of serbia had already formed an alliance with Russia.
OTTOMAN COLLAPSE Conflict erupted in the Balkans in 1912 when, driven by a wave of Slav nationalism, the Balkan states attacked the Ottoman Empire.
After the conflict ended in 1913, Ottoman prisoners were marched through the streets of the Serbian capital.
EAGLE EMPIRE This spiked helmet is adorned with an imperial eagle, symbol of the German Empire.
Germany then pie declared war on France, invading Belgium to reach the French border.
Italy left the Triple Alliance and the Ottomans joined Germany F and AustriaHungary as the Central Powers.
As expected, Russia mobilized its troops in defense of Serbia and, on August 1, Germany declared war on Russia.
SIR EDWARD GREY, BRITISH FOREIGN SECRETARY, AUGUST 3, 1914 o _——— a Ay Sei 08/31/1907 TWO CAMPS Europe was dominated by vast imperial powers, which competed for economic and colonial gain.
Germany, Austria-Hungary, and Italy were joined in the Triple Alliance, forming a buffer between Britain and France in the west, and Russia to the east.
With the signing of the AngloRussian Entente in 1907, Britain, France, and Russia made up an opposing alliance, the Triple Entente.
Smaller, independent states, such as Belgium, sought protection in treaties THE POWDER KEG Austria-Hungary was k een to gain control of Bosnia-Herzegovina in the Balkans but the Ottoman Empire also laid claim to the region.
Heir to the throne of Austria-Hungary, Archduke Franz Ferdinand, was visiting the Bosnian capital Sarajevo when he and his wife were shot dead.
The killer was Gavrilo Princip, a 19-year-old Bosnian-Serb _ nationalist.
With members of the Triple Entente and the Triple Alliance involved, the crisis was poised to engulf all of Europe.
TANNENBERG The Russians mobilized faster than expected and advanced across the German border into East Prussia.
Commanded by General Paul von Hindenburg and » his chief of staff, Erich > ™ Ludendorff, the German army outmaneuvered the ‘a Russians at Tannenberg in | oe a stunning victory. ei A soldier who can no longer advance... must be killed where he stands rather than draw back.
FRENCH GENERAL JOSEPH JOFFRE, SEPTEMBER 5, 1914 09/12/1914 FIGHTING AT YPRES The fight developed into a race to the sea.
A series of battles were fought closer and closer to the northern coast, ending in a savage encounter at Ypres in western Belgium, where the two sides fought to a standstill.
At Christmas some declared a spontaneous truce, climbing out of the trenches to exchange gifts and play soccer.
But the truce quickly ended and the war continued, with no victory in sight for either side.
These vast armies were moved to the front with impressive speed and efficiency.
During the fight, Gallieni | commandeered taxis and buses to rush reserves from Paris | to the front.
THE FRONTS ARE ESTABLISHED 08/09/1914 08/04/1914 FRENCH AND BRITISH LOSSES French troops attacked along France’s border with Germany.
Wearing bright uniforms, they made easy targets for German machine guns and suffered massive casualties.
The British Expeditionary Force , which crossed the Channel to aid France, found itself in the path of the German advance through Belgium.
BELGIUM INVADED The Germans invaded neutral Belgium, intending to march swiftly on to France, but the small Belgian army put up a stiff fight.
At the city of Liege, the Germans had to deploy massive siege guns to batter down fortifications.
But the long i march exhausted and Seiet disorganized the German forces.
The French . commander, General Joseph Joffre, prepared a counterattack. committed suicide.
The Germans, shaken by Gallieni’s attack on their flank, reversed direction and withdrew, abandoning all hope of a quick victory in the West.
Infantry and cavalry units charging over open ground were easy prey for machine guns and artillery.
Conditions were miserable—the trenches filled with mud, ice, and rats, and shells, snipers, and ecmere] UNO me)mnalemelcr-1Aam-lmr-Hahvanaale)aal-yalemm sh’ an alc end of the war, new weapons such as tanks, and new tactics such as the creeping artillery barrage had evolved to break through defensive lines.
The face of warfare had changed forever, but at the cost of the lives of a generation of young men.
One such aircraft was the Rumpler Taube, recognizable by its swept-back, birdlike wings.
As the war TPAC ialmoyavmnenloycomsye)e)ahtcincer-ln-rel ~ Boetosenloy-var-vicereclim-\ice)his-vommvaleal automatic release mechanisms | and aiming devices.
The »» effectiveness of bombing was ») limited by the small weight _ Beascimeticecctim-imermntent-mereyvilel _ carry.
This German Zeppelin L15 was British schoolchildren “y among those shot down by antiaircraft guns were taught how to over the Thames estuary.dzys] Ole )alemKomole)aaleynalemmyvainal an emphasis on “pluck.” ava o)k-\el.colunrm ay hfe faunbalep MNVe-lom-yalceaercrel and civilians took refuge na Obael<1ae sce lunalemcin-lnleyars during heavy raids.
In 1917 they were integrated into the United States Army » Air Service.
Seeking an alternative to the stalemate on the Western POT eseilee Front, British First Lord of the Admiralty Winston Churchill Constantinople.
Instead of an easy victory, eer landings at Gallipoli on April 25, 1915 proved to be a costly minefield.
Three military disaster and a brutal initiation for troops from eT taile F Australia and New Zealand.
It was there that troops embarked to be carried to the Gallipoli peninsula.
Hamilton had decided to carry out landings at several places where he believed |» ol ey"" ke 7.
They suffered heavy casualties from Turkish fire during the landings and were then slow to advance inland.
This gave the Turks time to form an impregnable defensive line across the peninsula to the north of the landing site. be weakest.
Winston TURKISH GRENADE Churchill, the British politician At Gallipoli, troops who had most actively often fought at promoted the operation, close quarters, was forced out of the hurling grenades, government.
Troops were trapped in filthy trenches in the heat of summer, suffering heavy losses to disease as well as in combat.
Supplies were inadequate, and soldiers made improvised bombs out of empty jam cans.
In August Australian troops won control of Turkish trenches at Lone Pine after heroic fighting, earning seven Australians the Victoria Cross medal.
Many Turkish soldiers were taken prisoner, but the Allies were still unable to achieve a decisive breakthrough.
British General of World War I, and al Sir Ian Hamilton was men flocked to volunteer f appointed to command for overseas service. i , a the invasion, planning Combined as Anzac ic “me | simultaneous landings (Australian and New ut # aul at several points.
The Anzac troops were unable to break out of their previous beachhead and were pinned down with their backs to the sea.
ADMIRAL LORD JOHN FISHER, IN A LETTER TO CHURCHILL, APRIL 5, 1915 01/09/1916 DEFIANT HERO Heading the resolute Turkish defense at Gallipoli was Mustafa Kemal.
Carried out without significant losses, the withdrawal was the best executed part of the entire operation. x 47 1910-1919 The Somme 1916 f fessi The first day of the Battle of the Somme brought per oe "" carnage on an unprecedented scale.
Tens of ae sees) o! ate Ior VVar, put OUT a thousands of soldiers, many of them entering combat Maleerece e’country for the first time, were cut down by machine guns as for Mae e a “4 they assaulted German trenches.
The battle continued cond iom for five months at a staggering cost in lives, a brutal Britain's first mass introduction to the horrors of mechanized warfare. — 05/30/1916 | 08/04/1914 KITCHENER’S ARMIES At the outbreak of World War I, Britain’s army was relatively small, and 06/23/1916 | ARTILLERY BARRAGE Haig ordered a massive Pec laniil-yara eloyanley-haenaal-yalmreks) a prelude to the infantry assault.
More than 2,000 (obhatsmolelunatel-romnatsy §) German line for eight ® days.
Hague believed ® that the German defences would be SOLDIERS AT THE FRONT The war in France had Mleiabtaiclorvale mahtcmcre)leht-yas reached stalemate, with both sides dug into fortified would simply walk into trenches.
He to use the new army to punch through the deadlock. was tragically mistaken.
WOUNDED MEN FIGHTING I\V/Koyqem aks heMectom Ol0OM si quntcpal CONTINUES reuAL@ Mm @xoyaahaaleyahvlistol inal The British and their French allies continued the offensive over the io) Ko)/Vahalomanteyaaatce Both sides employed JoleyEsfoyalmef-komnamAatcyie attempts to breach the enemy fortifications, adding to the terror of life on the Western Front. | soldiers were wounded on the first day of the Somme.
Many lay _ stranded for days in no man’s land, hiding in oJ alo) lm ako) Kotowme) am alele).qcvel oyaMAaloMer-ymant-hamel-haelcre| _ wire.
But their small territorial gains had come at the j i cost of half a million FIRST USE OF TANKS It was during the Battle of the casualties.
The Germans, | JaksXo ms e\olo1aly O)g@)Ro(eincle mageyaal Th eC nati O n Mm U St els | artillery fire by deep dugouts and emerged to man ete ecleste to See heavy their machine-guns.
They ' mowed down the advancing casualty | ISts , troops in their thousands.
At Easter 1916, a minority -__ themselved with of Irish Republicans staged an armed uprising in Dublin.
Germany, eager to disrupt the British war effort, sent the rebels a s\V{sre hole) atomcdanyehaatcvanmme)ys sea, but the British intercepted it.
The army brought in artillery to shell | the General Post Office in rebel positions that were resistant to infantry assault. flames, the rebels surrendered.
Fifteen leaders of the uprising, naXeLbKo halo mm acre ac{-mhalo m@xe)avare)Ihya were executed by firing squad after trial by a military court.
Eamon de Valera (who would later become the first head of ) the Irish Free State following | | DUBLIN AFTER THE BATTLE Much of central , independence) was spared.
IRELAND’S EASTER RISING 08/04/1914 | 09/01/1914 WAR WITH GERMANY _ LEAVING FOR FRANCE The outbreak of war in The Protestant Ulster August 1914 averted a Volunteers were joyce) ey-e)(-m-haantslo mere yansicoln incorporated directly between Catholic and into the British Army Protestant Irish.
Men of as the 36th Ulster ole) Malmeksvare)aannar-lAleyarcmriicct ac) Division.
Armed rebels i but about 1,600 rebels manned barricades and fortified buildings as British troops were sent in to retake Dublin.
PATRICK PEARSE, PROCLAMATION OF THE PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT, APRIL 24, 1916 IRISH MARTYRS The rebels executed after the Easter Rising were remembered as martyrs for the Irish cause, their graves ldalomolo)in-hanalery| ceremonies of commemoration.
By the time this wreath was laid on Pearse’s grave in June 1922, southern Ireland was on its way to becoming independent as the Hy Irish Free State.
Most were released in 1916, returning to lead the fonge)iVanatem-lopir-lnteyamieya ihaksJammuatelsyorcyalelsvalercn By December 1918, the Republican Sinn Fein party was able to win most of the southern Irish seats in a UK general election, , and set up its own parliament in Dublin.
LAWRENCE them independence after the war—a promise A member of the Hashemite A British intelligence officer, i Clan, traditional leaders of the Lawrence joined Faisal in 1916 that was only partially kept.
Arabian Hejaz, Prince Faisal and became his closest ally in was the leader of the revolt. the war against the Turks.
The brown by Lawrence in guerrilla jacket and black wartare, Faisal’s Arab leather belt were fighters carried out a similar in style to campaign of sabotage German uniforms, and hit-and-run attack. i but the brown Running between | eee Kalabash hat Damascus and Medina, il i gave them the Hejaz Railway was a , » a distinctive tempting target.
The port allowed the Arabs to receive supplies of money and weapons shipped in from Britishcontrolled Egypt.
Faisal shifted his headquarters to Aqaba and it became his base of operations for the remainder of the war.
TURKS IN SYRIA wee defeated in a major ig He battle against British ~ and Commonwealth | forces at Gaza in November 1917, but the Turks were determined to hold on to Palestine and ) Syria.
The following year, Faisal set up an independent Arab government in Damascus, proclaiming himself King of Syria.
He provided Prince Faisal with military advice and liaised between the Arabs and the British.
After the war, Britain and France took control of large areas of the region, under the mandate of the newly formed League of Nations, despite Arab protests.
PEACE CONFERENCE Faisal attended a peace conference in Paris, hoping to confirm his independent Arab state.
Instead, the British and French split the Middle East between them, Britain taking Palestine and Jordan, and France Syria and Lebanon.
Almost 700,000 men helavecinibad weather a —_ THE FRENCH FIGHT BACK to hold on at all costs.
The German advance was lost their lives in the battle of attrition that followed. the German offensive opened on February 21.
O0G/03/1916 | STUBBORN FRENCH 07/06/1916 DEFENSE From March — onward, the French DEFENSES FORTIFIED —, endured repeated France increased its output Sees attacks.
In July the northeast, Fort Vaux, the British launched an offensive f which had survived for at the Somme, and Germany fs months under heavy was forced to transfer troops Peas bombardment, was from Verdun.
The Germans finally taken by German no longer had the strength to troops on June 7. achieve a decisive breakthrough.
FRENCH RECOVER TERRITORY In the last stage of the Battle of Verdun, the initiative passed to the French.
Commanded by the newly appointed General Robert Nivelle, French troops carried out a series of dogged attacks that regained most of the fm ground they had lost.
THE BATTLE OF VERDUN wi o2/24/1916 INITIAL GERMAN SUCCESS The Germans hammered French trenches with a massive artillery bombardment, after which German infantry swept unstoppably forward.
To maintain morale, Petain ~ connected the battlefield to instituted a system of troop rotation, so that usually no soldier the rear areas.
French trucks plied the road incessantly, one passing on average every 14 seconds.
Although his attack had caused the French heavy casualties, it had been at a high cost to his own troops.
Field Marshal Paul von iy Hindenburg replaced 2, ~ le Falkenhayn and quickly ty leh cancelled all further “™. attempts to take Verdun.
In addition to those killed, more than 400,000 men were wounded, many hideously injured by poison gas or high explosives.
The ""| following year, there 4” were widespread i* mutinies in the French army to protest the | unbearable losses.
FRENCH MACHINE GUN The gas-operated French Hotchkiss MLE 1914 machine gun was typical of weapons used by both sides at Verdun.
Its rapid rate of fire caused heavy casualties among troops advancing over open ground.
For centuries the czars had ruled as wealth remained in the ha of t Pitisecdassun absolute monarchs of the Russian elite.
The Bolsheviks were blamed for the disturbances and Lenin fled the country once again to avoid arrest.
WAVE Essig sy Alem alcyalcre mya ancy al BOLSHEVIK S$ Kerensky, fearing a coup by the Russian army, allowed them to take up arms.
The coup was averted, but the newly formed Red Guard were now a military force.
With Lenin fled to Finland, his ally Leon Trotsky Kole) aero) ange) meymnn als) socialist movement.
He quickly set about fo) ce f-nanvAlelemAalom-haaacrol overthrow of Kerensky’s ace)vatssloyatelmerenicoimanaatsyale 08/01/1919 FOREIGN TROOPS IN RUSSIA From summer 1918 foreign powers mnatelielenbalemawaalcyaler-nal forces intervened in Russia, supporting the czarist White forces in the Civil War.
The Ko)q-dle palma cele)esomenlomalnAle and could not prevent the eventual defeat of the Whites by the Bolshevik Red Army. ae\-)¢-1-Yh > Vane (04/16/1917 LENIN RETURNS The socialist Bolshevik aateyigcvantc)almmars (om leyare| advocated revolution in Russia.
The Russian jexchd hk haatcyalem o)aelelr-nnaalsremrel Provisional Government to replace the Czar, but Icyahuamerc Hi nannale| short of full socialist | revolution.
November 7 soldiers, sailors, and Red Guards ; loyal to the Petrograd PS MESteyralcies{-1h4-16 meceyalnce)| | of St.
The met in Petrograd, only ensuing civil war a minority of whom between the Bolshevik were Bolsheviks.
In 1917 he renewed Russia’s involvement in World AAV Evan ae s{ovaloh hale mageyeyeys to Galicia.
The military offensive failed and exhausted soldiers mutinied, forming elected committees, or soviets.
CZAR AND HIS FAMILY MURDERED By summer 1918, former Czar Nicholas II sT\Vfckowre lm ©) asfo als) ao lmmnalc) Bolsheviks.
On July 16, ATVASIR SIS) ALO) ARO LovoKO MRAM als Ekaterinburg, central Russia.
The victorious powers redrew the map of Europe at the Paris Peace Conference of 1919, but failed to establish a durable peace.
Using tanks and aircraft, as well as improved infantry and artillery tactics, they broke through the defenses of the German Hindenburg Line.
Quentin Canal, one of a series of holes punched in the German defenses. — 11/08/1918 SAILORS’ MUTINY In a series of incidents, German sailors mutinied, refusing orders to sail on a final death-or-glory mission against the British fleet.
The mutiny at the port of Kiel triggered uprisings in cities across the country.
By the war’s | end there were 1. million United States combat troops in Europe.
USA JOINS THE WAR Provoked by German U-boat attacks on American merchant ships, the USA declared war on Germany on April 6, 1917.
The first troops of the American Expeditionary Force, nicknamed the “doughboys,” were dispatched to France that summer, but they did not enter combat until 1918.
The signing took place in a railroad car in the Forest of Compiegne in eastern France.
Germans massed their _ forces on the Western _ Front for a major ~ onslaught, which was their last hope to win the war.
A major — breakthrough, it drove the Allies back toward Paris but failed to achieve final victory.
THE PASSCHENDAELE STALEMATE British and Commonwealth troops launched a series of offensives in Flanders, culminating in the notorious Battle of Passchendaele.
Fighting in atrocious conditions, with the battlefield a sea of mud, they gained only a few miles of ground at a fearful cost in dead and wounded.
GEORGES CLEMENCEAU, FRENCH PRIME MINISTER, NOVEMBER 11, 1918 HAUNTING MEMORIAL This pressed Flanders poppy was sent by British Private Jack Mudd to his wife before he died at Passchendaele.
The Flanders poppy | became a symbol | of remembrance for those killed in the war.
Most ) Germans resented the ‘4 terms imposed on their i country, especially the demand for reparations payments and the “war guilt” clause blaming the conflict | on German aggression. boisterous celebrations all across the victorious Allied nations.
Soldiers on leave took the lead, relieved that | they would not now be sent to die at the front.
The war is thought to , have cost 10 million lives, and the total of * dead and wounded is estimated at 37 million.
Within a week, hundreds more had fallen ill with Spanish Flu, in what would become the most deadly natural disaster of the 20th century.
Across the world, vast numbers of troops were returning from the battlefields maatalcts transit spread the disease with terrible swiftness.
Victims experienced extreme fatigue and fever, as well as a wracking cough that caused bleeding inside the lungs.
Mortality rates were staggering as warshattered economies struggled to cope, and to families devastated by years of bitter fighting this new loss of life was heart-rending.
However, the movement grew as an “noble experiment,” as it came to be known, was a Mle cessive drinking. huge failure.
The law was widely violated and alcohol One of the more extreme remained readily available through new clubs frequented by gangsters and bootleggers.
Speakeasies, or illegal drinking dens, sprang up in most communities and did a roaring trade.
Many were not even that secret, because bribing the police was commonplace.
The speakeasies needed music to play to their patrons, and most of the jazz players of the age found ready employment.
The nightclub scene exploded, gender roles shifted, and jazz music became intoxicating. a, 64 # substitutes.
Alcoholism was on the effort to combat the socia advocates was preacher Billy Sunday, whose spicy sermons attracted both support and ridicule.
But corrupt cops often warned speakeasy operators of coming raids, and as one joint was closed down, another would soon spring up in its place.
BREWED AT HOME As the ban came into effect, suppliers of illicit DISGUISED ARM OF alcohol came up with THE LAW Enforcing the law became almost wood scraps and Moe smith relied on plants.
Corn whisky and disguises during their “bathtub” gin led to a raids, once posing as tise in alcohol-related man and wife.
The authorities record of 4,392 arrests struggled to contain the and 5 million bottles of spread of home brewing, liquor confiscated attests with little success. to their dedication.
Alphonse “Scarface Al” Capone of Chicago was the most notorious gangster.
The Act prohibited the manufacture, trade, and supply of any drink with an alcohol content greater than 0. percent.
The battle for booze had begun. 01/26/1926 | CONCEALING LIQUOR Many flouted the law by carrying illegal liquor flasks, inventing ingenious methods of smuggling booze.
The term “bootlegging” referred to the practice of hiding bottles of liquor inside boots.
Women could hide flasks strapped to their legs, hidden under skirts or overcoats.
People looked for relief and came to resent the ill-advised Prohibition.
Several large cities staged “We Want Beer” marches, pushing for repeal.
PROHIBITION | 02/01/1921 DOWN THE DRAIN Initially law agents pursued enforcement ~* with zeal, leaving no stone unturned in banishing booze from homes and bars.
IJ s, INFAMOUSGANGSTER [a fm GANGSTER AL CAPONE BOOZING IN SECRET During Prohibition, hard liquor gained favor because it packed more alcohol into a small quantity of liquid.
This set of bottle and shot m glasses is cleverly hidden in a kettlebell.
Considered a failed social experiment, it was difficult to enforce and provided gangsters with revenue.
Franklin D Roosevelt campaigned for the Presidency promising to legalize alcohol.
He was swept into the White House, along with several cases of legal beer.
This radical style of painting ignored all previous traditions of perspective by showing the subject from several viewpoints at the same time.
Cubism would inspire many other movements, uh-h felANTI-ART MOVEMENT In 1917, Marcel Duchamp submitted a porcelain urinal entitled “Fountain” to an <a exhibition as an example , of “ready-made” art.
It was a Slap in the face to traditional art. his grandiose behavior. formalism.
Their work was seen as revolutionary, but it was only the first in a series of sea changes in the theory and practice of art.
By the end of the century, art was no longer restricted to traditional forms, creating startling new modes of expression.
It also led the way to the pure abstraction of Kazimir Malevich and Pieter Mondrian, whose works depicted feelings rather than objects.
Color, they believed, should express the artist’s feelings about a subject, rather than simply describe it.
Their work had a major influence on the Expressionists in Germany, such as Wassily Kandinsky and Paul Klee. sho 74 Ter“WOODEN CENTAUR” Pablo Picasso's Cubist works made him one of the most influential artists of the 20th century.
Their anti-art, consisting of collages, montages, and kinetic sculptures, would prove highly influential later in the century.
Surrealism, which emerged in the 1920s, was in parta rejection of Dadaism’s negativity.
PABLO PICASSO, 1934 7, 7, 1950s FIGURATIVE SCULPTURE The elongated bronze figures produced by Swiss surrealist Alberto Giacometti in the 1950s expressed the loneliness and alienation of human experience.
Art works incorporating animal corpses, excrement, or blood were designed to provoke a visceral reaction from the viewer.
At the same time, artists such as Francis Bacon and Lucian Freud continued to work in paint and canvas.
By the end of the 20th century the notion of art had expanded to include everything from digital experiments to street graffiti, producing an unprecedented variety of forms and messages. through the action of painting.
In the late 1950s, a counter movement developed in the form of Pop Art, which played with iconic images from mass media, such as film stars and advertisement logos, to blur the boundaries between high art and popular culture.
This emotionally intense, anarchic style aimed to capture emotional processes 1960From the 1960s, conceptual art came to the fore.
Artists considered themselves free to work in whatever form or material they wished—the concept of their work taking “SURROUNDED ISLANDS” For this installation, artists Christo and Jeanne-Claude surrounded 11 islands off Florida with floating pink fabric. | 1960s skel POP ART Andy Warhol’s screenprinted works | became icons of Pop Art, which used images from popular culture and advertising (such as soup cans and comic books) as the basis for works of art.
However, haksJaMmOhabtoyentsjAcmuavanale) in the six largely In 1919, Sinn Fein, the Irish nationalist party, declared an Irish Republic independent from British rule.
War 4 dT ” 9 British ili f Th dedi , broke out between the Sea July 1921, but within months, Irishmen would be fighting SeeeeeE 20 their supporters, Irishmen in a bloody civil war that tore Ireland apart.
Sinn Féin leaders Arthur Caahaninatsm-nakem\/blelaraKeyl htatsm (<emnalombansial negotiators.
Crowds gathered in Dublin as Eamon de Valera, supporters responded with brutality.
The Black and Tans became President of the Irish Republic, and Sinn Féin leader Arthur Griffith infamous for their reprisal attacks on civilians. | arrived to sign a truce with the British government. i oa/tast o22 | FOUR COURTS OCCUPIED Anti-treaty Republicans began to threaten a return to violence.
Collins was killed by ~~ anti-treaty Republican ; forces in an ambush in a County Cork.
Arthur _ Griffiths had died of a \ JoyechhamaX-vaateradat-ler-m [UE1F '. 10 days before.
Eamon de Valera was arrested, along with Wale) URst-NaXe ome )lime)nalaya anti-treaty campaigners.
By the mid-1920s His economic policies led to widespread famine, he had risen to become one of the most powerful and his paranoid political whims saw millions men in the world, the leader of the Soviet Union. killed, imprisoned, and exiled.
Nonetheless, his His rapid rise to power was based on masterful clever manipulation of public opinion left him a propaganda and a ruthless will to silence his hero in the popular imagination, and his cult of political rivals by any means necessary.
In the power struggles that followed, Stalin suppressed the Last Testament and began to gather allies in his quest for power.
His family were killed or imprisoned, and he was eventually assassinated in Mexico City by a Soviet agent.
The land was taken from ) Ideas are eo ~ Lemore powerful 5 million of whom were deported. or Pd 2 than guns. jsent to labor camps. a"" & JOSEPH STALIN 1942 PARTY MAN Stalin’s revolutionary activities saw him exiled four times to Siberia by the czarist government.
Grain grown on the collectives went to fill government quotas, leaving none to feed the peasant workforce.
Productivity declined, and Ukraine, the main grain-growing region of the USSR, was hit by a devastating famine that led to millions of deaths.
Those who failed to reach the required output were publicly criticized and humiliated.
Some of the victims were forced to proclaim their guilt at _ show trials in Moscow.
THE RISE OF STALIN | STALIN AND LENIN During Lenin's last illness Stalin was a frequent visitor to his country dacha.
Lenin began to fear Stalin was using his position as General Secretary to build up a personal power base.
He became a hero, and fellow workers were urged to imitate his efforts.
OUT OF THE PICTURE Those who fell out of favor were not only killed but removed from history.
Nikolai Yezhov was a head of the secret police renowned for his brutal interrogation methods.
THE SITE Once the press got wind of the discovery, tourists flocked to the site, keen to catch a glimpse of what had been found.
With Carnarvon at his side, Carter started to lo)qcr-l.qunange)elelamaanns second door.
However, 1 ahkswy @)q@valelole manle}acMaURAlOlce enabling Carter to put together a formidable team of museum specialists and set up a field laboratory in the empty tomb of Seti II nearby.
A time capsule of ancient Egyptian art, it contained golden shrines, jewelry, statues, and clothing.
This fueled rumors of an old “mummy’s curse” — anyone disturbing a je)atchacle)alecmnovanlemyitce)eilel be punished.
DISCOVERY OF TUTANKHAMUN’S TOMB | | 11/04/1922 oi | EXCAVATION WORK After seven _ unproductive years in the Valley of the Kings, Carter’s benefactor Lord Carnarvon was threatening _ to pull out.
Excavation ) | revealed a flight of 16 steps | leading to a walled-up doorway.
Carnarvon, accompanied by state officials, opened the {ered MNVe>hiar-halemce)enalemmars sarcophagus of Tutankhamun.
When he finally opened the third coffin, he found the mummy of Tutankhamun, covered with amulets and jewels.
The mummy was pried loose, measured, and photographed, then rewrapped and laid to rest in its outer coffin.
Dominated by Turks, its population also included Arabs, Greeks, Armenians, Kurds, Jews, and other ethnic minorities.
However, this once powerful empire—an Islamic caliphate ruled by an autocratic Sultan—was in decline.
At its head was the Committee of Union and Progress , a group of well-educated military officers known as the Young Turks.
Following a pro-Russian uprising in the city of Van, the government ordered the deportation of the entire Armenian population in eastern Anatolia.
One million people were driven from their homes and up to 800,000 perished.
IN THE THICK OF WAR As the war progressed, the Ottomans fought on several fronts—against Russia in the Caucasus, on the Balkan and Eastern Fronts in Europe, at Gallipoli, and in Sinai and Mesopotamia.
They proved harder to defeat than the Allies had expected. a 01/18/1919 WAR OF | INDEPENDENCE PARTITIONING | The hero of Gallipoli, THE EMPIRE At peace Mustafa Kemal (on the talks in Paris, the Allies discussed the division of the Ottoman Empire.
The Middle East would be divided between France and Britain, Greece would have the Aegean coastline, and Armenians their own right, talking to an advisor) was determined to retain an independent Turkish state.
In May 1919 his forces landed at Samsun on the Black Sea and began organizing } national resistance.
Following the Ottoman surrender, a British fleet sailed into Istanbul and state.
The Turks, they thought, were too parliament at Ankara that called upon Turks to occupied the city, dealing a severe blow to Turkish pride.
After striking deep into Anatolia, the invaders were defeated by Kemal’s army and forced to flee to the coast. 74 broken to resist. reject the Allies’ treaty.
Greeks and Armenians trying to flee were trapped on the waterfront, as Allied ships stood by observing strict neutrality.
He was deposed ~ 07/03/1908 YOUNG TURKS REVOLT The revolt, led by two Young Turk officers, Enver Pasha and Niyazi a, Bey, began when an army and replaced by his regiment stationed in brother Mehmet V Macedonia rebelled and The Young Turks of the | fled to the hills.
Niyazi CUP took charge of the aoe ae rx a Bey headed a march to empire and introduced — — a Istanbul to demand fundamental changes BALKAN WARS The people of the Balkans constitutional change. to reduce the power saw the rebellion as their chance for Protests spread and Sultan of the Sultan. independence.
The war in the Middle East ended four days later with the signing of an armistice at Mudros.
Their empire was in ruins. employing irregular troops such as these Albanians, but lost almost all of their Balkan territory.
MUSTAFA KEMAL ATATURK, IN AN ORDER TO THE TURKISH ARMY, AUGUST 26, 1921 } i 07/24/1923 |"", TURKS CELEBRATE “as The unexpected ferocity of the Turkish defense forced the Greeks into retreat.
Signed on July 24, 1923, the Treaty of Lausanne established the frontiers of the modern Turkish state—a republic, with Kemal as president. —— FAREWELL TO THE FEZ Mustafa Kemal outlawed the traditional Ottoman fez as part of his modernizing reforms.
He introduced Latin script and traveled the country teaching the new alphabet.
The victorious Allied powers demanded reparations in cash and material, and Germany was also burdened with a vast war debt.
International confidence in the German currency, the mark, collapsed in 1922, causing runaway hyperinflation.
Banknotes became worthless just weeks after they were printed, good only for notepaper, kindling, or children’s kites.
The government paid off its debt with worthless notes, and in late 1923 a new currency was launched.
Germans who had bank accounts or cash assets were ruined, but production and employment soon reached new heights.
The iz rereyaXoyentlom-hatomm olehinter-VmnunaaateylmAatclmmce)ilennii-vel would provide a platform for the rise of Hitler.
Frustrated workers organized regular protest marches, in London and other major cities.
This led to a decade of severe economic depression, which was felt across the world.
People lost their jobs and savings, which culminated in a housing crisis because many could no longer afford their mortgages.
Successive years of drought exposed the light soils of the region to , damaging wind erosion.
The storms removed large amounts of fertile topsoil and buried fields and houses ina sea of dust. 04/1 7/1 ieee HOOVERVILLES Large shantytowns emerged across the USA to house the homeless, numbering more than 2 million by 1932.
They were mockingly named “Hoovervilles” after President Hoover, who was widely blamed for his failure to solve the crisis.
He later introduced informal radio chats + to build his rapport *, with the nation.
HEADING WEST Thousands of farmers migrated from the devastation of the dust bowl to find seasonal work in California.
Whole families traveled the roads, carrying only what possessions they could fit into their cars. aN%s WARTIME RECOVERY The Depression ended earlier in some parts of the world than others.
Entry into World War II following Pearl Harbor turned around the United States economy, as industry expanded rapidly to supply the war effort.
Factories supplying vehicles and munitions created thousands of jobs across the ® industrialized world.
His policy of nonviolent resistance Peo Condi NOneGn Daan attracted millions of followers, making him a hero not just to the Indian indigo plantations, gaining the people but to civil rights campaigners across the world.
HOON Utes CSIC (CCC MTSPEA ei ILLL™ 04/06/1930 _ SALT LAW BROKEN Gandhi's act of defiance encouraged thousands of others to break the law.
Women joined in the protests by boiling bowls of seawater on the streets to make illicit salt.
A number of protests took place outside the Bombay headquarters of the Indian National Congress , a party at the forefront of the independence movement.
GANDHI IS ARRESTED As he set out on another salt march, Gandhi was arrested and imprisoned.
News of his arrest sparked protests, and a long procession made its way through the streets in Bombay to demonstrate against the British rulers.
The mass renewal of satyagraha led to the arrests of tens of thousands of his followers.
GANDHI RESISTS BRITISH RULE BOYCOTTING IMPORTED TEXTILES Cheap imports were destroying traditional Indian industries.
Ina bid to emphasize the idea of self-reliance, Gandhi set a pile of foreign cloth on fire.
This symbolic protest against imports was widely imitated by his followers.
MAN OF FEW POSSESSIONS Gandhi modeled his life on ascetic principles, owning very few possessions.
His white robe, simple sandals, and round glasses became icons of the Indian independence struggle.
The Government of India | Act granted Indian provinces the right to run _ their own affairs.
The largely Hindu INC dominated the | first elections in 1937, leaving Muslim groups | fearful of being sidelined.
Gandhi, who had left the INC, pleaded with Muslim and Congress leaders to reconcile their differences.
The tournament was a rousing success, with 18 matches played in 18 days.
An estimated 93,000 people crammed into the stands to watch the hosts, Uruguay, face off against their neighbors, Argentina.
It was the visitors who had the better first half, leading 2—1 at half time, but a rousing speech from the Uruguayan captain inspired the hosts to fight back.
A last-minute goal from one-armed striker Hector Castro brought Uruguay a 4—2 victory.
The World Cup was firmly established as one of the world’s most popular sporting events.
An inspired speaker relate maida) el-1e-1 Ke) mm al-Mae-lal-yce)anal-ve idaliom-yaatc lim eylana lal com dat-m mCr-1aenl-la) akeLuceyar-lit-japmw-\ tar-ma-x-lallale m-rere)alelaalie CTiMUE Lire) aM mi idemcere) @ ole)'' ar-lalem-\-1r-1e] | yal-te prs) single-party dictatorship in 1933.
At the time, they were a small party, attracting less than 3 percent of the vote in national elections.
Mass unemployment, feoyandeynalcremyiainalmelalcyag | effective campaign to stir up popular fear of communism, rapidly increased their following.
WAViatere\Wievmerclamexe)ile (t-te the street will one day conquer the state.
JOSEPH GOEBBELS, NAZI PARTY PROPAGANDA CHIEF, 1931 s1s) | 06) 06/29/1934 NIGHT OF THE LONG KNIVES The SA, led by Ernst Rohm, were loathed by the German army, who regarded them as rivals.
Hitler, by then one of Germany’s most joke) eel than ele)hinteir-harce ran against him.
Despite a spectacular campaign that was organized by his jeyqejercler-never-melantcyi Joseph Goebbels, Hitler was defeated.
E ail ™ RISE OF THE NAZIS 02/21/1924 | HITLER IN PRISON Arrested after the Munich putsch, Hitler was tried for treason.
He exploited his trial to make _ widely reported speeches, publicizing his political ideas.
Found guilty, he was sentenced to five years in prison, of which he served less than nine months.
Mein Kampf . me r i STREET-FIGHTING IN BERLIN Although THE REICHSTAG » DESTROYED BY FIRE In February 1933, a fire broke out in the Reichstag—the German parliament.
Hitler used this as a pretext for assuming exceptional emergency powers.
In WW Rehdol an atc eyoh@atchaalcyane in effect voted its own abolition, and by the summer the Nazis were inalomovalhvaslcverlm ele)ninterey| party in Germany.
HITLER BECOMES GERMAN CHANCELLOR By 1930, the Nazis larcKemer-bualc\omrmale)Alecr-le) I presence in the German parliament.
Following a backstairs political deal, i hincyam olocer-hankomalcr\el anat-hamerey-Hulnceyel government in January SIR ee lopaleyanare ments coalition partners, he placed his followers in key positions of power.
Hitler took part in elections, he despised democracy and believed in the triumph of force. iDivhahalemAalomcy-lahyay Rekl0 sop _ his Nazi paramilitaries, the Stormtroopers , intimidated opponents and fought battles with aahaauOnanecincme am nate) streets of German cities.
The officers of the German army swore a solemn oath to serve him with unconditional loyalty.
Japan sought Nanking shanghal OOEAN , and the Japanese pushed China into bloody civil strife, and into the larger conflict of World War Il.
The Kuomintang won control of the country, and Chinese who were caught fighting for the wrong side could expect no mercy.
They were j responding to alleged Chinese attacks on Japaneseoa controlled areas of the city.
A peace deal brokered in March allowed Japanese troops to remain in the city.
Kuomintang moe forces massacred communist activists in Shanghai and brutally suppressed a communist uprising in Canton.
Driven from the cities, the communists took } refuge in remote | rural areas.
CHINA'S CIVIL WAR Meanwhile, Chiang Kai-shek continued to campaign against the communists.
In fall 1934 communist forces in Jiangxi province, led by Mao Zedong, embarked on a Long March northward to evade capture.
LONG MARCH STAMP This stamp honors the Long March as a heroic achievement.
RAPE OF NANJING In December 1937 Japanese forces captured ) the Kuomintang capital, | Nanjing.
CHIANG KAI-SHEK Leader of the Kuomintang from 1925, Chiang Kai-shek was a ruthless + province of Manchuria. # accusing the Chinese of ' attacking the railroad at 07/23/1921 | RISE OF COMMUNISM In 1919 Chinese students protested the transfer of the Shandong province in China to Japan, following World War I This caused an upsurge of political radicalism, known as the May Fourth Movement.
JAPANESE INVADE MANCHURIA Japan controlled a railroad in the Chinese In September 1931, falsely Mukden, Japanese troops invaded and occupied Manchuria.
Japan turned the province into the state ® of Manchukuo, and installed f Puyi as its puppet ruler.
From here the Japanese sought control of the whole of northern China. 4 fi.
The Kuomintang and the communists suspended their civil war to fight the invaders from bases deep in the Chinese interior. oe if oP i Jat ai Li KUOMINTANG POSTER This 1927 propaganda poster acclaims Chiang Kai-shek’s Northern Expedition, a campaign in which the Kuomintang army won control of Beijing.
The slaughter of civilians Is appalling... rape and brutality... beyond belief.
United States SURGEON ROBERT O WILSON DECEMBER 1937 | SINO-JAPANESE WAR A full-scale war started ™ between China and | Japan in 1937.
After _ Clashes near Beijing in July, sustained fighting broke out in Shanghai, and Japanese aircraft bombed the city.
Kuomintang troops fought street by | street until a Japanese invasion force, landed by sea, threatened them with encirclement.
Chiang Kai-shek was recognized as one of the Allied leaders when the USA went to war with Japan in December 1941.
Changing societies demanded new types of buildings, such as apartment and office buildings, cinemas, and 1900-1910 At the turn of the century, the predominant architectural style was Art Nouveau, which took its inspiration from nature.
It was characterized by plantlike curves and ornamentation in glass and iron.
Buildings ranged in style from the organic forms pk-) [elCASA MILA Begun in 1906 and completed four years later, Antoni Gaudi’s townhouse does not contain a single straight line.
The undulating balconies look like a series of waves. of Antoni Gaudi’s villas in Barcelona to Charles Rennie Mackintosh’s towerlike Glasgow School of Art.
Modern industrial techniques were used to bring art and beauty to the urban environment, with decoration given a new importance.
Prominent modernist architects included Frank Lloyd Wright, Mies van der Rohe, and Walter Gropius.
At the same time, new building materials allowed innovative architectural styles.
By the 1950s, modernism was the prevailing style, but the last two decades of the century saw startling innovations.
Modernist buildings were typically flat-roofed, supported on metal or concrete pillars, with horizontal rows of windows.
An eclectic blend of influences, from Cubism to 1930s FALLINGWATER Frank Lloyd Wright’s modernist masterpiece of 1934 embodied his belief that architecture should be in harmony with nature.
Construction workers could be seen poised high above the streets of Manhattan.
Ancient Egypt, it embodied the aspirations of the machine age, combining glamour with functionality.
Many architects adopted the brutalist style of French modernist Le Corbusier, which was characterized by walls and staircases of gray poured concrete.
Brazilian Oscar Niemeyer was given the opportunity to design an entire capital city—Brasilia.
By the 1960s, functional steel and glass corporate skyscrapers had come to dominate the skylines of downtown business centers around the globe, from Toronto to Hong Kong.
Buildings were turned inside-out, with the inner structure and service systems placed on the outside.
A famous example was the INFLUENTIAL ARCHITECT Le Corbusier proposed that high-rise residential blocks, seen most prominently in his Unite d’Habitation in Marseilles, were the architecture of the future. 4970s | SYDNEY OPERA HOUSE | The concrete shells on the roof of | Jorn Utzon’s iconic building mimic the shape of sails on Sydney Harbor.
In the 1980s, an influential group of American architects abandoned the modernist concept of functionalism, bringing decoration and individuality back into the built environment.
The Sun Dial building in Dezhou, China, is the world’s largest solar-powered building. brought an explosion of innovation to architecture.
In the 21st century, architecture seems to defy gravity, with soaring curves and fragilelooking structures that dominate futuristic skylines.
Space and light and order. [hose are the things that men need just as much as they need bread or a place to sleep.
FRENCH ARCHITECT LE CORBUSIER, 1923 ,, 5 1980s LLOYD’S BUILDING The water pipes, elevators, and electrical conduits are on the outside of Richard Rogers’ high-tech building in London.
ETt-yrer PETRONAS TOWERS At 1,483 ft , this building in Malaysia was the world’s _ tallest from | 1998 to 2004.
ELE ry bidkiey fon aa 1930-1939 Mussolini Invades Ethiopia 1922-1936 Benito Mussolini formed the Fascist movement in Italy after World War I Muscling his way to power, he embarked on a quest for military glory and empire.
In 1935-1936 his forces conquered the independent African state of Ethiopia, driving out that country’s ruler, Haile Selassie.
EMPEROR RISES In Ethiopia—the only fully independent African country at the time—Ras Tafari was crowned emperor.
He adopted the name Haile Selassie and embarked on political reforms, giving Ethiopia its first written constitution.
Most were tribal warriors, carrying spears and shields, yet they successfully resisted the Italian advance.
MASSING FOR THE ATTACK Mussolini sent thousands of troops and aircraft to Eritrea and Somaliland in East Africa.
These colonies shared borders with Ethiopia, and provided a military base for the Italian invasion.
Italy ruled Ethiopia until 1941, when British troops defeated the ltalians in East Africa and returned Haile Selassie to his throne.
Se Ye STRESA FRONT Threatened by the rise of the Nazis, Britain and France were eager to preserve good relations with Italy.
At Stresa in Italy, British and French leaders made a pact with Mussolini to oppose Nazi ambitions in Europe.
Mussolini assumed that in return they would accept his takeover of Ethiopia.
ITALIAN VICTORY In early 1936, under a new commander, Marshal Pietro Badoglio, the Italians imposed a series of defeats upon the Ethiopians.
By May, the Italian forces had captured the Ethiopian capital Addis Ababa.
Haile Selassie went into exile, while Mussolini celebrated his victory in Rome. 04/26/1936 06/30/1936 BRUTE FORCE AN EMOTIONAL PLEA Haile Selassie addressed the League of Nations in an emotional plea for help.
Instituted to preserve peace by collective action against aggression, the League responded to the Italian invasion with economic sanctions that had little impact.
The Italian victory depended on superior weaponry, including chemical agents.
Poison gas was dropped from aircraft, inflicting terrible injuries on unprepared Ethiopians.
The brutality of the war helped turn public opinion in Britain and France against the Italian leader.
Intimidated, Italy’s King Victor Emmanuel appointed Mussolini the prime minister.
He wanted to make Italy “great, respected, and feared,” and declared his goal to build an empire in Africa and around the Mediterranean. opinion forced the British and French governments to oppose Italy’s invasion of Ethiopia.
Offended, Mussolini abandoned the Stresa Front and sought an alliance with Nazi Germany.
However, their motorized forces made slow progress across mountainous terrain with few usable roads. lt is international morality that is at stake.
Hitler used these mass rallies to strengthen Jahtsmhaatcle Meme -)mnst-Hehvamelciiclaronnelemants people from an international conspiracy of Jews and »* communists.
The Fihrer could be an inspired public speaker, and his frenzied rhetoric whipped his supporters into fury against the enemies of the Reich.
The rallies were used as the basis of propaganda films to spread Hitler’s message as widely as possible.
Lee) yt Fi bid i pi dda Tatil +a"" 1s a + 1930-1939 Abdication Crisis 1936-1937 When Edward VIII ascended the British throne, he seemed to have everything—good looks, an easy charm, and popularity.
The nation eagerly awaited news of his marriage, but his love affair with a divorced woman plunged Britain and its empire into a constitutional crisis, which ended in his abdication.
While visiting South Wales, he assured a group of unemployed miners, “I am going to help you.
MOUNTING CRISIS Both the Church and the Prime Minister opposed the King’s affair.
The Archbishop of Canterbury made it clear that, as Supreme Head of the Church of England, Edward could not marry a divorced woman.
Simpson; marry her against the advice of his ministers, who would immediately | resign; or abdicate.
ABDICATION CRISIS DEATH OF A KING Thousands attended the Sees funeral procession of mm George V His reign was known for its moral conservatism.
Wallis Simpson, a twice-married American socialite, had begun a few years before.
THE NOT-SO-SECRET AFFAIR The couple F were snapped together on a holiday in the Mediterranean.
The pictures were splashed across the American and European press but kept out of the British newspapers.
The papers printed daily accounts of the frenzied discussions and juicy titbits.
Facing mounting pressure, Edward was forced to make a decision. signing the Instrument of Abdication, Edward announced to the nation his decision to step down.
It was the first time in history that a British monarch had voluntarily given up the throne.
Shy, diffident, and loyal , a” to his brother, he was hampered by a stammer.
After his coronation, he greeted the crowd from the balcony of Buckingham Palace with his mother, his wife, and his daughters—the future Elizabeth II and Princess Margaret.
PLAYGROUND VERSION OF A CHRISTMAS CAROL, DECEMBER 1936 EDWARD MARRIES WALLIS Made Duke of Windsor on his abdication, Edward went into exile.
He and Wallis were married at the Chateau de Candé in France in June 1937.
LOVE TOKEN This emerald, ruby, and diamond brooch was commissioned by the Duke for the couple’s 20th wedding anniversary.
Right-wing Nationalist army generals launched a military uprising in response.
They were resisted by left-wing Republican groups and Catalan and Basque nationalists, setting the scene for a bloody civil war that would scar Spain for decades.
FOREIGN AIR SUPPORT The Italian air force and the German Condor Legion provided vital air support | joes to the Nationalists.
The Republican airforce was inferior, giving the Nationalists control of the skies.
Political discord between democrats, communists, Er-valor-hat-WcelantsiR-warve)uite| ee) alMuALUK>mnomar-haahe\-)annale) Republican war effort over coming years.
REPUBLICANS RETREAT Through 1937 and 1938, grueling ' alo painualemolcrer-VaMmnomi-hice)s the Nationalist side, and the areas of Spain under _ Republican control onqclenureNUavarcdale-haleum Male Republicans were defeated at the battle of Teruel, and after a final desperate offensive on the Ebro ended in defeat in November J 1938, the Republic AYiVesksime Loleyaats\en SPANISH NATIONALIST 15454 LO) \\ Koen yVanaley the election of a left-wing government in 1936, the Nationalists mounted a coup.
Franco was a career army officer who, like many of his colleagues, believed rebellion against the Republican government was justified as the only alternative to a left-wing revolution.
SOCIALIST UPRISING On the other side of the political spectrum, Spanish anarchists and socialists launched failed left-wing revolts.
Their anti-Catholic revolutionary ideas frightened sl eens conservatives.
Both press, and the Nationalists were FATHER ALBERTO ONAINDIA, DESCRIBING i, J quick to exploit the propaganda GUERNICA, APRIL 26, 1937 value of this unlikely victory.
SIEGE OF MADRID helm \Ko)igcvanlelcyambesole _, Franco's troops fought G R] their way into the a the aiternoon of April 26, 1937 outskirts of Madrid.
The town volunteers, the Was crowded for market International Brigades, day and the population to aid the Republic. had no defense or qr _ Repulsed after houseshelter.
The destruction Roms alolursiomalesaianale man ane) and heavy loss of life iNFelatoyarcletsincmetcyrclelitcyalciemmn SOOcKed the world. a siege of the city that "" lasted until 1939.
NATIONALIST VICTORY PARADES The broken Republicans gave up the fight and the Nationalists staged military parades in major cities s) MEKeme(-\(-loyecin-melat-vimnraleinoyata "" »), Franco took power as dictator, remaining ruler until his death » in 1975.
Hindenburg Disaster The Hindenburg was the largest airship ever built, Nas yale pnaXc\-yanevemmagivneaye/eme)min-mer-h\awaUntolOLO Rim @Z-sonee)) long, and held aloft by 7. million cubic ft carry 72 passengers across the Atlantic in conditions of luxury.
On May 6, 1937, while attempting a routine docking procedure at the Lakehurst Air Station in New Jersey, it burst into flames.
Thirty-five of the 97 people on board were killed, along with one member of the ground crew.
The tragedy was recorded by cameras, newsreel, and a live eyewitness 1-KOhlo Mn a>) Ole) dream heme LONKe].@hyam@lc(or-Naalom alcr-LOlnnalomalcwn\scomeyal Jol) Aalesslels1ome) ma MalowaVel-halAlommant-l.¢halemimelelcoMO)MmnatcMmalacir disasters of the broadcast age.
In April, for the first time in its history, Britain introduced conscription ohUhabalemelcr-Veroinnaaon NAZIS SIGN A PACT WITH STALIN In April 1939 Britain and France pledged to go to war in defense of Poland, if it was attacked.
Despite their dislike of Soviet dictator Joseph Stalin, the British and French explored the possibility of an alliance with the Soviet Union.
Instead, on August 23, the Soviets signed a surprise pact with Nazi Germany, secretly agreeing to divide Poland between them.
The Treaty of Versailles JarcKomephiccleMmAalowaWlitcys control over major centers ° of German industry in the Rhineland.
Hitler was oKsKcyaaannalclo mney iVahemnarcyany back to supply his war machine.
He was also keen to bring Austria and the Czech-controlled Sudetenland, both German-speaking areas, into his Reich.
ADOLF HITLER, AUGUST 22, 1939 y, y, oO9s/ 01/1939 GERMANY INVADES POLAND On September 1, 1939 German forces launched a full-scale invasion of Poland.
Britain and France made frantic preparations to support the Poles and, on September 3, 1939, seeing no alternative, they declared war on Germany.
The Dutch were forced to surrender and the port city of Rotterdam _ was devastated by German bombers SS — HITLER STRIKES NORTH The Germans occupied Denmark in a lightning campaign lasting six hours, and soon afterward invaded Norway.
British and French forces were sent to help the Norwegians, NAZI EXPANSION Hitler’s ambitious expansion plan began with a swift invasion of Scandinavia.
While / the Belgian army surrendered, the British and French fell back to the port of Dunkirk in northern France.
The operation was carried out by Royal Navy warships, aided by a flotilla of civilian vessels, under almost constant air attack.
In July 1940 Britain set up the Special Operations Executive to promote espionage, 08/30/1944 FRENCH RESISTANCE About 200,000 people were active in the French resistance.
They provided military intelligence to the Allies, aided the escape of prisoners of wal, and carried out guerrilla warfare.
While the Vichy regime collaborated with the sabotage, and subversion in German-occupied countries.
Bombers speed and OUr brutal ity. provided close air support ADOLF HITLER, AUGUST 22, 1939 for advancing tanks, disrupted communications by destroying roads and bridges, and shattering enemy airfields and military supplies.
This combination caused maximum destruction when dropped on urban areas.
Many Londoners throughout the Blitz and sought safety by sleeping by visiting bombed-out in Underground subway areas after raids.
The stations, as well as in -) warm reception given specially built shelters.
KOM alow Guale mn AlOMne) Every man, woman, and Prime Minister Winston child had to be prepared (@jalbhgelandlmeyamci0loleMratcyhncy to seek cover when the was a Sign of popular warning sirens sounded. support for the war.
The Houses of Parliament were wrecked, stations put out of action, and >» | al 2 3,000 people killed or WARTIME POSTER oS see) |) injured.
But this was the | This poster encouraged | ale i last major raid of the Blitz.
In August and September | | ' 1940, the Luftwaffe sought to drive the RAF ' from the skies “in the shortest possible time” as a prelude to a land invasion of Britain.
But in the aerial war of attrition, the RAF shot down more aircraft than it | | a | ; — lost.
Never in the field of human ie conflict was so much owed by so many io so few.
BRITISH PRIME MINISTER CHURCHILL, REFERRING TO PILOTS OF FIGHTER i | AIR RAID ALARM | CHILD’S PLAY This World War II version of the card game Happy Families was adapted to reflect life during the Blitz.
Traveling faster than the speed of sound, these missiles struck without warning.
Both Britain and the Soviet Union received essential food, fuel, and war material by sea, and trade U-BOAT BASE IN OCCUPIED FRANCE After the Germans defeated the French in June 1940 they moved their submarines to ports along France’s western coast, much closer to Atlantic sea lanes.
Submarine commander Admiral Karl Donitz established his headquarters at Lorient in Brittany.
DEPTH CHARGES German U-boats inflicted heavy losses in 1940 and 1941, sinking more than 1,000 ships.
British and Canadian vessels struck back, locating U-boats with sonar and attacking them with depth charges.
Convoys could sail no Germans could successfully disrupt faster than their slowest ship, and at first there was a Shortage of both escort vessels and trained crew. at all costs.
Depth charges—explosives dropped into the sea—were used to attack German U-boats.
BRITAIN FACES RATIONING As German submarines took their toll on imported supplies, the British people suffered shortages of essential goods.
Gasoline was not | available for private driving and food sales were Strictly controlled using ration coupons to ensure that no one was undernourished.
U-BOAT ATTACKS on | INCREASE After The enemy Knows all OUr secrets America's entry into and we know none of his. the war, losses of merchant ships KARL DONITZ, GERMAN NAVAL COMMANDER, 1943 increased sharply.
However United States shipyards were mass-producing 20 cargo ships a week to replace the vessels lost.
THE SINKING OF GRAF SPEE The German battleship Admiral Graf Spee preyed on merchant ships in the South Atlantic.
After clashing with British warships at the Battle of the Plate River, it was forced into port at Montevideo, Uruguay.
BISMARCK IS DESTROYED The British Royal Navy’s first attempt to intercept Germany’s prized battleship Bismarck ended in disaster when HMS Hood was sunk by Bismarck’'s guns.
After a frantic search, the Bismarck was located, and sunk with air-launched torpedoes and gunfire.
ARCTIC CONVOYS The most arduous escort duty was protecting convoys carrying military equipment to the Soviet Union’s Arctic ports.
Losses were sometimes heavy, as in the case of the ill-fated Convoy PO-17, which lost 24 of its 35 merchant ships.
The Allies cracked German codes, allowing them to predict U-boat attacks.
By 1943 the long-range Liberator bombers of the United States Navy allowed air patrols to cover the whole Atlantic for the first time.
U-BOATS TAMED In Spring 1943 Allied shipping losses peaked, but so did the sinking of U-boats.
Using improved technology and tactics, escort ships and aircraft imposed heavy losses.
U-boats were temporarily withdrawn for repairs, and would never again seriously threaten the Allied war effort. ne in the absence of enemy WAR IN THE ATLANTIC ‘@ FUNNY FOOD British people became used to unfamiliar foods.
Dried eggs came in a tin, bread was a standardized gray National Loaf, beer was diluted, and precooked Spam _ replaced much of the | fresh meat supply.
Hitler ae al WHIRLWIND ATTACK About 4 million soldiers took part in the German invasion, which started on June 22, 1941.
His forces overran large tracts of territory, but failed to crush the Soviet Red Army.
Instead, Hitler’s armies were destroyed as Stalin’s forces fought back.
Cy key dhl) a les ME sovier TROOPS RUT) ee) ee CAPTURED Trapped i ee ee ee in large encirclements, ) vast numbers of Soviet © soldiers were captured by the Germans.
Carried off to camps, more than 2 million had died in Captivity by early 1942 due to maltreatment | and systematic ' massacre.
In August German forces advancing deeper into Russia launched an attack on Stalingrad, on ENDURING THE COLD As the advancing Germans reached the outskirts of Moscow in December 1941, the harsh Russian winter F . set in.
Soviet LENINGRAD UNDER SIEGE Inhabitants of Leningrad A counteroffensive General Georgii Zhukov endured bombardment and drove the Germans back prepared a rescue starvation after the Germans laid siege to the city.
They disrupted German supply routes and communications. m™ The German response | was brutal; they not ‘\ only publicly executed * captured guerrillas but also massacred m, thousands of peasants ae. in collective reprisals.
The Germans gained huge tracts of land before the Soviets could respond.
KEY German /Axis advances Front line June 21, 1941 ~ Front line Sept 1, 1941 Front line Nov 15, 1941 Front line Dec 5, 1941 01/31/1943 FIELD MARSHAL SURRENDERS Trapped | inside Stalingrad, with supply lines cut off, German soldiers began 4. to starve and freeze to | death.
USSR we Q Vloscow Smolensk EAST PRUSSIA Be insk Warsaw i BYELORUSSIA POLAND UKRAINE HUNGARY Sea of ROMANIA ee, Black CRIMEA Sea Sevastopol ta ile om DEFENDING THE CITY The Germans entered Stalingrad in August 1942.
Determined Soviet troops defended the city building by building, until Zhukov’s trap cut off the Germans from the rear.
VICTORY AT KURSK 06/22/1944 TECHNICAL ADVANTAGE The Soviet At Kursk in western Russia, the Soviets and Germans fought the largest armor battle in history, with around 8,000 tanks deployed.
Despite sustaining heavy losses, the Soviets were victorious, and their drive westward became unstoppable.
By summer 1944 the Red Army had entered Poland and was approaching the German frontier in East Prussia. victory depended on their ability to massproduce effective armaments.
Weapons such as the truck-mounted Katyusha rocket launchers were cheap, easy to manufacture, and devastating in battle.
UNITED IN BATTLE A Russian poster depicts Britain, the Soviet Union, and the USA united in the fight against Hitler.
The British and Americans supplied their Soviet allies with large quantities of supplies vital to the war effort.
Japan's Japan’s war of conquest On December 7, 1941, Japan launched a surprise attack eee ; 42 . alliance linked the on the American base at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii.
The raid eee ienn Mm the brought the United States into war not only against Pacific and Asia to the Japan, but also against Germany and Italy. ee rope.
Torpedoes and bombs sank or wrecked 18 American warships, including five battleships.
Japan had succeeded in temporarily putting the United States Pacific Fleet out of action, opening the way for conquests in the Pacific and Southeast Asia.
The USA formally declared war on Japan, and Germany in turn declared war on America.
Thousands British base at Singapore. died of maltreatment, Captured British and hunger, and exhaustion.
Commonwealth soldiers The death march further and civilians were treated embittered Americans harshly by the Japanese. toward the Japanese.
ATTACK ON PEARL HARBOR “ARSENAL OF 10/18/1941 DEMOCRACY” In December 1940, TOJO COMES TO United States President Franklin POWER In July the United States D Roosevelt declared imposed an oil embargo that America must on Japan, in response | become an “arsenal to its takeover of French of democracy” and Indochina.
American without oil, Japan had factories increased to either abandon its output of arms and imperial ambitions or munitions, supplied to fight America.
In October, the British without General Hideki Tojo was payment—but the USA appointed prime minister stayed out of the war. to prepare for war. 42/07/1941 | AIRFIELDS BOMBED The aircraft that P — should have defended Pearl Harbor were caught on the ground, as the Japanese bombed and strafed the airfields.
This contrasted DEFIANT RESPONSE American citizens _ starkly with the treatment were urged to remember the “sneak | of Americans of German attack” on Pearl Harbor to encourage or Italian origin. them in the war effort.
However, from mid-1942 an American-led fight back first halted Japanese expansion and then reversed it.
His vow was fulfilled on October 20, 1944, during the landings on Leyte a Island.
Their victory at Milne Bay is credited as the first land defeat of Japan in the war. —— CAPTURING ISLANDS 1Uhalek-jqyavenaauhaola\\phaanhnya United States forces began an effective campaign to capture the Pacific island by island, driving ever closer to Japan. dWalcwawealsyalercn ars repeatedly overcame ferocious Japanese resistance.
Few prisoners were taken as many Japanese soldiers preferred suicide to surrender.
WARTIME PROPAGANDA A poster boasts of American courage following the attacks on Pearl Harbor.
KAMIKAZE ATTACKS Pe D)vhanelemmarcmar-hys-lmey-une(e of Leyte Gulf, Japanese _ soldiers adopted suicide tactics.
Using their Pec lhcelechim-tsmaaranave| Be oloyanloysmmnlelcyvar-hancianlelneve| to crash into the decks of United States warships.
FAVA aolelesamaakcwaWaalc)aler-haks lost USS Yorktown, overall the battle was a triumph for the United States Navy, and a disaster for the Japanese—a turning point in the war. fs | 01/12/194 United States INDUSTRY By 1943 American factories and shipyards were fully geared up for war.
A ' Res BATTLE OF THE PHILIPPINE SEA In June the Americans [EehaleKclomoyalernhersiamiamnars Mariana Islands.
Japan sent a fleet of carriers to attack United States warships 10g oj ole) annale ma atomr-halonnalercp It was a disaster for the Japanese—600 of their aircraft were shot /iVaatmaaWnr’darsinm el-yer-haals) known as the Marianas Turkey Shoot.
The American fleet suffered aavhannaatelmer-haat-le(o 02/23/1945 | BATTLE OF IWO JIMA Nimitz’s island-hopping strategy culminated in the first attack on Japanese home soil, at the island of Iwo Jima.
United States Marines suffered 26,000 casualties in the battle, before raising | the American flag in victory.
WAR IN THE PACIFIC 06/28/1942 CAMPAIGN IN BURMA The Japanese army VO igchakercle maiko ms jengeat-e threatening BritishSee aualsiem halons fam mals s) of the British Army of ; India, were sent into the Burmese jungle to carry out guerrilla warfare loXsJannakomvr-her-Nalsrsiomanalcicp dW alcuraVialctomonce male) reoccupy Burma until the summer of 1945.
In Axis and Allies fought for control of the Mediterranean and ee ee ‘ 1 _ a advanced across the the Suez Canal.
TOBRUK UNDER SIEGE Rommel’s advance left Australian troops besieged at the Libyan port of Tobruk.
Ley Val-y VICTORY AT EL ALAMEIN The offensive at El Alamein was a hard-fought battle against well-prepared Axis defenses.
After 12 days’ struggle through lines of anti-tank guns and minefields, the Eighth Army drove Rommel’s forces in headlong retreat westward.
The battle cost Montgomery more than 13,000 casualties, but Axis losses were much higher.
Under Rommel’s inspired leadership, the @Teyaeatchakcmhakemanclarsnats reversed the tide of war in the desert.
NRTA TS SUFFER DEFEAT IBY GUAKSI AMALO O@xolaanaalOlenylccteHinal forces counterattacked.
By January 1941 the Italians were retreating across Libya and thousands were taken prisoner.
FREE FRENCH FIGHTERS The battle of Gazala, fought in the Libyan desert in May—June 1942, was a decisive victory for @ @ Rommel’s tanks, which outfought their British s«@ Opponents.
During the . battle the Free French MONTGOMERY TAKES COMMAND In August 1942 General Bernard IV Koy ale feyaatsya\mnele). imcnlesannal Army, which had been driven back to El Alamein, deep inside Egypt.
The f ae BL Americans wereledby | ~o Major General George S ""™, 7 __ in | ot Patton, known to his men | as “Old Blood and Guts.” dd atom (chalenhalefcmoygejelesaur 1U FS nicole) olomnaine mero enl oyoln with German and Italian forces for the first time. _| defensive campaign.
DEFENSIVE LINE The German forces were protected by an extensive system of trenches, barbed wire, and bunkers.
Later in the morning, the first of a vast array of supply ships, protected from air attack by barrage balloons, began pouring vital reinforcements ashore.
Sword and Gold for the British; Juno for the Canadians; and Omaha and Utah 4 for United States forces.
Allied landing/advance Allied parachute landing Allied front line June 7, 1944 GENERAL MONTGOMERY British General Bernard Montgomery commanded the ground troops in the largest amphibious invasion in history.
GENERAL EISENHOWER United States General Dwight D Eisenhower was in overall command of the Allied forces in Europe.
Pointe du Hoc Vierville Lion-sur-Mer Bayeux if m Caen FRANCE The free men of the world are marching together to victory.
After treatment on the beaches, most of the wounded were soon on ships back to hospitals in southern England.
The Germans * had lost about 9,000 men in their frantic F defense of the coastline.
AIR ATTACK The D-Day operations began early on June 6 when three Allied airborne divisions landed by parachute and glider behind enemy lines.
Their job was to destroy German artillery batteries that | threatened the mission, as Well as capture and hold key bridges until | the main forces arrived.
THE BREAKOUT By the wy end of D-Day, a total of 150,000 Allied troops ™® had disembarked onto the Normandy beaches.
Over coming days they would move to capture surrounding territory, linking the separate _ beachheads to create _ a platform for further advance.
ADVANCING INLAND As reinforcements arrived, the five Allied divisions moved inland to meet up with the paratroopers that had landed earlier.
While British forces moved to reinforce the Allied eastern flank against counterattacks from elite German tank units, United States forces spread out to the west.
CROSSING THE CHANNEL The largest armada in history, a fleet of about 7,000 ships, left ports in southern England to ferry the main Allied army to France.
By dawn on June 6, off the Normandy coast, thousands of troops clambered into landing craft, ready to launch their attack.
D-DAY THE STRUGGLE BEGINS After naval bombardment further weakened the defenses, Allied land forces advanced.
United States forces at Utah also achieved a swift victory, but those landing at Omaha suffered as strong winds battered the landing craft and beach defenses took their toll.
FIERCE FIGHTING At Omaha, United States forces were met by a storm of fire from defenders on the cliffs.
Optimism for an | early end to the war / grew with the capture | of Paris in August.
The bombs created a firestorm, a self-sustaining furnace in which hot air rushing upward sucked in cold air from the surrounding area.
Eyewitnesses recall victims fainting from lack of oxygen, or being dragged into the flames by the force of the storm.
At its top a sandstone sculpture representing the figure of kindness looked down on the ashes.
The attack on Dresden was controversial even at the time, with critics accusing the Allies of seeking revenge for the Blitz over British cities.
Dresden today is a bustling modern city, but the scars of 1945 will never completely disappear.
Invaded from east and west, Germany suffered massive destruction before surrendering.
CIVILIANS FLEE As the Soviets advanced, vast numbers of civilians fled toward the west using any means of transportation they could find.
To avoid capture, Hitler killed himself inside his Berlin bunker on the same day.
American and Soviet troops met and posed for photographs on the Elbe River in April. vil The Soviets were then es, | left to overcome the final resistance of the Nazi regime in Berlin.
GERMANY SURRENDERS Admiral Hans-Georg von Friedeburg signed the surrender of German forces in northern Germany on May 4, 1945.
The unconditional surrender of all German forces was completed at ceremonies in the city of Reims in France, on May 7, and in Berlin on May 8.
FALLEN NAZI EMBLEM This Nazi emblem was found in the rubble of the Reich Chancellory.
All symbols of Hitler’s regime were removed by the victorious Allies during their “de-Nazification” of Germany.
END OF THE WAR IN EUROPE 02/13/1945 DRESDEN DESTROYED In one of the most controversial acts of the war, Allied bombers pounded Dresden for two days and nights.
The resulting firestorm killed an estimated 25,000 civilians, and reduced the historic city center to rubble.
Refusing to admit defeat, Hitler mobilized the elderly and children for the defense of his crumbling Reich.
His body was hung upsidedown in the forecourt of a Milan gasoline station, alongside his mistress Clara Petacci and other executed Fascists.
Thousands of Fascists around Italy were purged, and political unrest reached boiling point.
United States PRESIDENT TRUMAN, VE DAY SPEECH, MAY 8, 1945 1940-1949 Nuclear Bombs Dropped on Japan 1945 Scientists knew it was possible to create a massive explosion through nuclear fission.
In 1942 the USA initiated the top secret Manhattan Project to build an atom bomb.
De ee Oe cry | Metienas on August, SRC Ro Mm Olalhianalcvamenromnals 07/27/1945 | + 1.
URRY ry-yer-y il 7 roa ~ heen Ses CLUELESS CREW The crew of the B-29 Z gan aur) PRESIDENT TRUMAN’S DIARY ENTRY, sels JULY 16.
NUCLEAR BOMBS DROPPED ON JAPAN 07/16/1945 | TESTING THE BOMB In July the first atomic Wy 77--yat-) ae POTSDAM CONFERENCE The war had ended in Europe, RAIDS OVER JAPAN From March 1945, the USA S]RCNARCLOMNAIRCYARSHAYom Ole)aavoynale) raids against Japanese cities, UEsshalomablosabr-llninvreKoMsiyAy) device was tested at but Japan refused to surrender.
Unaware of the atom bombh’s existence, the Japanese failed to agree terms of surrender. many as 100,000 people in | the Manhattan Project, a firestorm started by led the examination incendiary bombs.
It detonated over _ the center of Hiroshima in a ve) bheonhevemir-t-Jame)imilefeim-halemalcr-iF that vaporized everything on _, the ground below.
The blast, equivalent to about 14,000 tons | of TNT, threw up a swirling mushroom cloud that towered ay Over the city. —— SECOND BOMB Codenamed “Fat Man,” the plutonium Joxe)aal oe hae) e)el-1e me) am \ile r-kst-l.@ manic lcm aalolacmeleniic-)aivlmmnatatal “Little Boy,” which contained uranium.
JAPANESE SURRENDER Despite the bombings the Japanese government _ remained split on whether or not to surrender, but Emperor Hirohito pressured them to give in.
The a MRO McIUNGRSIALO LS) MMNIVECES made on August 14 and announced to the people the following day.
It was dubbed “Kristallnacht” (Crystal Night) because of the number of smashed windows, and marked an escalation in mistreatment of the Jews.
Some 10,000 Jewish children escaped to Britain, leaving their parents behind, in a program known as KGatolsvang-hatcy ole) arm helemre! — F | Ee—E— ee SE Jewish prisoners were taken to concentration camps, where they were forced to work without pay.
Farben, for instance, established a factory at PANUE<{e) AAYVAN ARKO M@r-} O}LR-NNPAS) on prisoner labor.
AViVfoyacahalemr-halomunranere) conditions were harsh, | food supplies inadequate, and punishments savage.
MASSACRES IN EASTERN EUROPE In June 1941, Germany invaded the Soviet Union.
Death squads were sent into occupied territory ikem colenalemogom-halem quit political dissidents.
In September 1941, 33,000 Jews were killed in two days at Babi Yar in Ukraine.
La jstomm Ung) e\> a were horrendous, and many died packed into ‘4 ( cattle trucks.
Perhaps the most infamous extermination _ camp was at Auschwitz-Birkenau in southern Poland, a” where 1. million people are thought to have been killed and cremated.
Victims were stripped of their belongings, and rooms full of discarded shoes, pairs of glasses, and even human hair stood as testament to the staggering number of dead.
G 1940-1949 The Iron Gurtain Descends 1939-1950 Stalin used the outbreak of World War II to seize control of Eastern Poland.
Following Hitler’s invasion of Russia in 1941, the USSR joined the fight against Germany, and as the Red Army drove the German invaders back, Stalin tightened his grip on Eastern Europe.
FOREST MASSACRE Stalin was quick to eliminate potential WAR IN THE SNOW Stalin’s forces marched on to Finland, but the tiny Finnish army resisted bravely.
Although forced to sue for peace, Finland retained independence with minimal loss of territory.
The following year, Hitler’s armies turned on the Soviet Union, and Stalin turned to the Allies. police carried out a mass execution of 22,000 Poles, including 8,000 prisoners of war.
Mass graves were discovered in Katyn Forest, Belarus, by the Nazis in 1943, but the USSR denied the atrocity until 1990.
YALTA CONFERENCE As the Red Army marched on Berlin, Stalin met with Churchill and United States President Franklin D Roosevelt at Yalta, Ukraine.
As negotiations continued over coming months, the lines were drawn for an ideological division between communist east and democratic west.
YUGOSLAVIA GOES RED As the Nazis were driven back, partisan fighters in eastern Europe and the Balkans welcomed Soviet troops as liberators.
Many of them were supporters of communism, such as Marshal Tito, the Yugoslavian leader, who became head of a federal communist state in 1945.
The pact was signed by Soviet foreign minister Vyacheslav Molotov and Hitler’s negotiator Joachim von Ribbentrop. vy at And ibi ' POLAND DEFEATED Following the Nazi invasion, the Soviet Red Army moved into Eastern Poland on september 17.
Wa ease NATO strana Ue cedar | LA aaa ers O behind a wall of communist states, & adau a , In 1949, it became the forming an east-west divide that en German Democratic Independent Churchill labeled the Iron Curtain.
A eee C ERANCE 4 ' "" parties were subject to Monuments such as the ee . persecution.
Japanese occupation during World War II, he and his allies “hat ae saw an opportunity to free their country from colonial rule. bitterly resented by the local population.
Sree ~~ Indochina Sea FRENCH RETURN The first French troops arrived in Saigon in 1945 to reimpose French colonial rule.
The SS Ile-de-France, an ocean liner, was used to convey later reinforcements.
Negotiations over France's recognition _ of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam broke down when a French cruiser shelled the port of Hai Phong in November 1946.
In an attempt to undermine Ho Chi Minh’s and weapons, enabling was to lure the Viet Minh authority, the French persuaded Bao Dai, the last emperor of Vietnam, them to renew attacks to attack, and destroy to return as head of a puppet state with limited independence. against the French. them in the crossfire.
The Viet Minh IS fi Nn ished IN Asia . captured one strongpoint after another, forcing the HO CHI MINH, MARCH 1946 y, 5 French to surrender in May.
Bicycle troops, used extensively by # the Japanese in their jungle , campaigns, were among the first to enter.
More troops came ' ashore at Hai Phong on the Gulf of Tonkin and began to advance » on Hanoi.
The French took possession of Hanoi and other major cities, but their forces were continually harassed by Viet Minh guerrillas, who moved freely at night.
Or, | FRENCH LEAVE This humiliating defeat forced the French out of Indochina.
However, the VICTORY West remained fearful POSTER of communist rule and This Viet Minh stepped in to support Vietnamese opposition to | Ho Chi Minh.
At a peace deal signed in Geneva, Vietnam was divided into communist North and pro-Western South. poster celebrating § the victory of Dien Bien Phu, depicts a soldier with a dove of peace sitting on his shoulder.
Mahatma Gandhi’s policy of nonviolent in Britain decided to push ahead with Indian resistance had amassed a huge following, and the British Indian Armed Forces threatened strikes 03/23/1940 | LAHORE RESOLUTION Unlike the Congress, the Muslim League supported the British war effort.
Meeting at Lahore in Punjab, it adopted Muhammad Ali Jinnah’s resolution that Muslims should have separate states in the northwest and the northeast of India, where they formed the majority population.
This decision widened the split with Congress leaders. 08/08/1942 a Va Ee QUIT INDIA In August 1942 Gandhi and Nehru launched the Quit India Movement, calling for civil disobedience to upset the British war effort.
The movement gained massive popularity, and Indians across the country ; abandoned their jobs to join the protest.
Congress leaders were immediately imprisoned and held without trial §) for two years. independence.
FIRST INDIAN PRIME MINISTER JAWAHARLAL NEHRU, AUGUST 14, 1947 Liaquat Ali Khan had become the Prime Minister of Pakistan after a similar ceremony in Karachi, its capital city, the previous day.
More than 2. million Indian soldiers fought with the British Army in many parts of the world.
The country would be new country came into partitioned into separate being on August 14, states for Hindus and 1947, a day before India Muslims.
One roe at ri E 2 ae this plan amid growing The name Pakistan violence between derives from two Urdu the religious groups. words, pak meaning Independence was to be pure, and stan established in August. meaning country.
Sikhs were caught in the middle of fierce religious rioting and suffered a large number of casualties.
His killer was Nathuram Godse, a Hindu extremist who believed that Gandhi had betrayed his people.
Unfortunately, even as they increased mobility, cars were also using 1900-1910 At the start of the century, automobiles were toys for the wealthy.
They provided fun outings for rich families and excitement for amateur sportsmen in perilous road races.
The authorities, regarding cars aS a dangerous nuisance, tried to impose impossibly strict safety regulations.
EARLY CARS As seen on this French poster, early in the century cars were expected to be driven by a uniformed chauffeur and left their wealthy passengers exposed to the elements.
By 1910 the gasolinedriven internal combustion engine, offering better performance and a compact design, had established its Superiority over electric and steam engines.
Cars took ona standard layout that would last for decades, with the engine at the front and rear-wheel drive.
TRAFFIC JAMS By the 1930s dense traffic was already posing problems in major cities such as London, requiring innovations including traffic lights and pedestrian crossings. 1910s FORD MODEL T Henry Ford’s Model T was the first automobile to be manufactured on a moving assembly line.
Built in 93 minutes, it was cheap enough to be affordable to the wider public; 15 million were sold by 1927. up finite resources of petroleum and contributing to the degradation of the natural environment.
Developing cars that would provide a satisfactory performance without guzzling gas and causing excessive pollution posed a critical challenge.
Using mass production, car maker Henry Ford cut the cost of his Model T from more than $800 in 1910 to $290 by the 1920s.
By 1929 the USA had almost 30 million cars, five times as many as the rest of the world.
But driving was still ph-)-4eTRILEY BROOKLANDS Racing cars continued to capture the popular imagination.
British manufacturer Riley had a series of successes in the 1920s with models such as the Brooklands, which was driven by both men and women racers. largely unregulated, and 29,000 people were killed on American roads in 1930.
Building roads specifically designed for cars, such as interstate highways in the USA and German autobahns, increased speed and reduced accidents.
Meanwhile, motor 1940s WARTIME WILLYS JEEP The United States Army entered World War II with the Willys Jeep as its new four-wheel drive, general-purpose vehicle.
In the course of the war, more than 600,000 Jeeps were manufactured by Willys, and also by Ford.
HEAD TURNER The 1959 Cadillac Series 62 was the epitome of design excess, with tall tailfins designed to attract maximum attention. racing flourished with the creation of annual classics, such as the Le Mans 24-hour race.
Relatively cash-strapped, Europe became the leader in cheap, economical cars, from the Volkswagen Beetle to the British Mini.
European car makers pushed innovative design features, including rear engines and front-wheel drive.
Well made and suited to crowded CITROEN DS A masterpiece of automotive design, the Citroén DS caused a sensation with its streamlined body shape and innovative hydropneumatic suspension, which provided a smoother ride than any previously experienced. cities, these cars began to sell in the USA, as did the Toyotas and Datsuns of a rapidly expanding Japanese car industry.
It went on to become one of the longest lasting production sports cars.
Safety features such as seatbelts and airbags, as well as tighter speed limits, were introduced, reducing road deaths.
Oil crises and growing environmental awareness forced car makers to address issues of fuel economy and pollution.
Alternatives to the internal combustion engine began to be seriously explored, especially electric cars.
Ownership of cars continued to expand worldwide and Asian countries, such as South Korea and India, became 1980s JEEP CHEROKEE The launch of the Jeep Cherokee marked the advent of the sports utility vehicle , a car with fourwheel drive and the chassis of a light truck.
It became the vehicle of choice for suburban dwellers with large families. |e Na major car producers.
Many people still loved automobiles for speed and style, paying high prices for supercars by manufacturers such as Ferrari and Lamborghini.
By the end of the 20th century, even the standard family car was a marvel of modern technology.
HYBRID POWERPLANT The Toyota Prius hybrid car combines an internal combustion engine with electric motors.
This reduces fuel consumption and harmful emissions. “2000s LAMBORGHINI MURCIELAGO The new millennium brought a surge in supercars—high-speed, glamorous models sold at a price only the super-rich could afford.
Deep within the Soviet zone, the capital, Berlin, was also divided four ways.
The Soviet response was to try to squeeze the Allies out, bringing the city to its knees.
On June 26, the first C—47 Dakotas carrying supplies landed at | Berlin’s Tempelhof and Gatow airports. i ii 1 iat ESSENTIAL SUPPLIES ARE DELIVERED As each plane landed in Berlin people rushed to unload it.
Despite shortages and hardship, Berliners remained in We nad no g Ul Ns, good spirits.
On ly fi ou iF candy to children who cheered as the planes flew overhead.
UNKNOWN AIRLIFT PILOT y, 5 ¢ 02/22/1949 07/12/19 48 12/20/1948 OPERATION SANTA CLAUS The airlift, initially planned to last a few weeks, was now in its sixth month.
In the lead up to Christmas the Allies carried out Operation Santa Claus, bringing presents to the children of West Berlin.
HY) THE MILLIONTH TON In February 1949 the millionth ton of supplies arrived in Berlin.
To commemorate this occasion a symbolic sack of grain was handed to the West Berliners.
Efforts to boost morale culminated in the Easter Parade, when 13,000 tons of coal were flown into the city in one day.
OF NEW RUNWAY When the airlift began there were only two | airfields in Berlin.
By July 1,000 tons of # supplies were being | delivered every day, | and the runways | struggled to cope.
Men and women from across F the blockade zone joined in the construction of » anew runway at » Tempelhof to facilitate oe the relief effort.
BERLIN BLOCKADE . «oa THE BLOCKADE BEGINS fe. lhe soviet plan was simple, swift, and effective.
In one night, troops blocked road, river, and rail links, sealing off all access to West Berlin.
Electricity, food, and fuel supplies were abruptly severed, leaving the inhabitants facing starvation.
The landings were achieved despite rain, fog, high winds, and constant harassment from Soviet fighter planes.
The airlift was now supplying the city with enough fuel as well as food.
Despite all their efforts, the Soviet forces had to back down and the blockade was finally lifted.
After 11 months of canned food Berliners were ecstatic, and thousands gathered in the streets to celebrate and thank the Western forces.
PARTITION OF PALESTINE The UN General Assembly decided that Palestine would be divided into Jewish and Arab states, with Jerusalem as an international city.
Within months the Arab , forces were crushed, both militarily and jeysavse) ato)lelenterNaya | 05/01/1946 BRITISH CIVILIANS EVACUATED After the plans for Palestine were revealed, terrorist attacks intensified.
In response, Britain evacuated all of its nonessential citizens, including | many who had lived in Palestine for their whole lives. j JEWISH REFUGEES 07/22/1946 Boatloads of Jewish refugees arrived in KING DAVID Palestine after the HOTEL BOMBING war.
A Jewish Jewish demands for underground army, + their own land and Haganah, accused the Arab nationalists who British of bias toward resented the newcomers. the Arabs.
Rerrorist attacks i ‘Arale were met with increasing violence from Jews.
In January, Haganah terrorists killed 26 Palestinians in a car bomb attack in Jaffa, and residents were forced to flee after a huge explosion rocked the Semiramis Hotel in Jerusalem.
United Nations ideal | the international community, sending a Jewish ideal. a strong message that the new state would manage its own affairs.
DAVID BEN-GURION, ISRAELI LEADER, TIME MAGAZINE, AUGUST 16, 1948 06/20/1948 Fe _ ALTALENA SINKS Wey-yrcyatcy 3 ISRAEL DECLARES STATEHOOD i Crowds gathered to Fs watch the wreckage of the cargo ship Altalena ~ near Tel Aviv in June CEASEFIRE In 1949 Israel concluded peace | treaties with all of the 1948.
Israel had Ben-Gurion, fearful made substantial of a violent uprising gains but thousands of against the new Israeli Palestinians had become state, had ordered the refugees and terrorist Jali OMROMOloMOKst-1NG@)\{-16B attacks continued.
The reluctant cooperation between Nationalists and Communists to fight the Japanese invasion of 1937 evaporated overnight, as both sides scrambled for territory.
The communist People’s Liberation Army, led by Mao Zedong, saw a chance to seize power.
Outnumbered by the ‘ KMT, Mao adopted a policy of avoiding Nationalist-held cities so as not to lose men in engagements that they could not win.
Instead, he concentrated his forces in rural areas to drum up additional support.
United States President Truman withdrew all aid to Chiang Kai-shek, and Nationalists fled as the PLA entered the capital, Nanjing.
YANGTZE INCIDENT On its way up the Yangtze River to rescue embassy staff in Nanjing, British naval vessel HMS Amethyst was fired upon by Communists from the shore, killing 22 crew members.
River an CHINA DIVIDED By 1946 the Communists were in control of north and central China, while the Nationalists commanded the south of the country.
FALL OF YAN’AN Ever since the Long March of 1936, Yan’an had been the center of Communist power in China, and soldiers of the PLA used it as a training base.
Chiang ' Kai-shek went on the run, joining 2 million Nationalist refugees on the island of Taiwan.
There he established the Republic of China and continued to claim sovereignty over mainland China.
The Nationalist Kuomintang army outnumbered the PLA by more than three to one.
Communists had taken control of the most populous country in the world.
The Nationalist regime was riddled with corruption and relied on massive loans from the United States to fight the war.
They welcomed defectors from the KMT and won control of the countryside by promising land to the peasants.
Anti-Nationalist protests, such as the burning of KMT banners and symbols, became increasingly common.
By 1951, the system, known as rN Ole NAM ALV.qh-1AlOlexisting powers and privileges of the white minority of largely Afrikaaners.
The new regime officially segregated residential areas, education, transportation, and health provision, with blacks and others now classified as nonwhite, isolated in the worst land with no political representation and poor public services.
The regime provoked massive resistance from black South Africans, with numerous uprisings and protests, such as this occupation of white-only railroad cars, but as opposition became more violent it was met with extreme state repression and a further diminution of rights.
It was not until 1994 that the apartheid system was finally overthrown.
His recorded in 1954, it became famous when it featured as the @ energetic, theatrical style Opening number in Blackboard Jungle, a social commentary ) , % gel fet i, film about life in a tough city school.
They targeted a newly emerging teenage market that had more money and independence than ever before.
THE ROCK AND ROLL EXPLOSION NEW TECHNOLOGY In 1949, the first _ 45rpm single was produced.
Light and durable, the new records could ' be stacked more efficiently into jukeboxes.
This marked the they Can dance to, after all those beginning of the split between youth and the Years of Crooness.
Rock and roll had gone from a musical experiment, largely confined to the south of the country, to a national craze in just a few short years.
The number of fans continued to expand quickly in the USA and across the world.
HERE’S LITTLE RICHARD In March, Little Richard released his debut album, featuring some of his biggest hits.
An innovative and charismatic performer, Little Richard brought white and black audiences together in concert venues that had previously been segregated.
Elvis for his pioneering song had returned from a spell in the army, “Georgia on My Mind,” but chose to focus on acting over the latest in a series of music.
With the deaths of superstars hits in a new “soul” Buddy Holly and Eddie Cochran, and genre that followed on Little Richard’s retirement to become from Chuck Berry’s use a preacher, the pioneers began to be of gospel musical replaced.
They had inspired a new stylings with secular, wave of artists, including female often suggestive lyrics. singers such as the Supremes and Ray Charles would go Aretha Franklin.
Rock and roll had on to inspire a new created a new form of expression, and generation of musicians. music would never be the same again.
Hiss was later found guilty of perjury, but was never proven to have spied.
MCCARTHY’S LIST Nfelom\/KolOr-hanahiamnalsyel a relatively unknown senator from Wisconsin, NAVEcRSMOKSINs1@ARNNALcIO MMA ATS NE AOYANOmbahtccrcinler-lmleyars; should go further.
McCarthy’s critics accused him of bullying and trying to suppress freedom of speech.
They were Humphrey Bogart led blacklisted and never a parade of stars to worked again.
PES NO) ae 12/02/1954 PANS MN Kel@r-hanehyas investigation of the Army continued, the lakcyoh@bale fomrVccacdes) alevvaal in full on live television.
Until this moment, ere were -_ — 3 | | senator, | think | never eta ae cement Jf — UE. q really gauged your cruelty.
The broadcasts UhAKOKs\aaainelsroM\VKClOrlanahiacmm | + < ARMY COUNSEL JOSEPH WELCH, IN A a Barat eee ra FALL FROM GRACE The Senate voted TELEVISED CLASH WITH McCARTHY, under attack in the KoMercvalsabhccw\V (oOr-banehtmiovarslolulsx-Meym ely ici JUNE 9, 1954 media, his popularity I KSMATVects Ke) cercle MRO M-lor-naloloyamantcmer-haaler-nlenen a i declined sharply. ees and died less than three years later. 1952 | v Thermonuclear Dawn On November 1, 1952, the USA detonated the first hydrogen bomb over Enewetak Atoll in the Pacific Ocean.
The new weapon was vastly more powerful than anything seen before, dwarfing even the atomic bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 1945.
As tensions mounted in the Cold War between the USA and the USSR, both sides entered an arms race, constructing vast arsenals of weapons of mass destruction.
By the 1980s, both sides possessed stockpiles sufficient to kill the entire population of the Earth several times over.
Some historians argue that the destructive power of the bomb was so great that neither side dared to uSe it.
The Cold War stayed cold, because the consequences of open conflict had become unthinkable.
Lumumba was MILITARY INTERVENTION A UN force was deployed eventually captured by to keep the peace, but became embroiled in a succession Tshombe’s soldiers, and of battles and ceasefires.
Unhappy with the UN’s failure dragged on to a plane to use direct force, Lumumba accepted military aid from | where he was beaten Russia and sent troops into Katanga. and executed.
Rich in natural resources, and with an abundant supply of cheap labor, the land was prized by its colonial rulers.
Indigenous Africans were generally excluded from government posts, oe aH 2 A NEW GHANA The African struggle for self-rule began in the British Gold Coast.
In 1951, activist Kwame Nkrumah won the country’s first election, despite being in jail.
R II Regiments from some African education, and training colonies fought for their European rulers during World War II. the new Ghana—the first and eS feeling Fighting an unknown enemy in the service of colonial powers, sub-Saharan colony to grew rapidly. many returned home determined to seek independence. gain independence. bi RAISING THE FLAG 03/06/1957 CELEBRATION OF On March 6 the church INDEPENDENCE Celebrations erupted across Ghana.
Workers were given the day off, and many—dressed in traditional costume— daubed themselves with the colors of the new flag and danced in street parades.
Pioneers of a revolution, their joy inspired other African nations to seek widespread change. bells rang out across the ih Ghanaian capital, Accra.
Lumumba saw this as an attempt _ by Belgium to hold on | to the richest part of the ' country, and sought UN backing to expel Belgian forces.
He a> Africanized his name to Mobutu Sese Seko, renamed the country Zaire, and proceeded to rule with an iron fist for 30 years.
All political opposition was banned, and he amassed a huge personal fortune, spawning a system of * corruption that left his people y impoverished.
Its army of 90,000 soldiers was equipped In 1948 communist leader Kim Il-sung, Waith soviet-made tanks supported by the Soviet Union, established and artillery.
South Korea J . had no tanks and very the People’s Democratic Republic of Korea eal wveapons. in North Korea.
MacArthur’s ‘ ft taal . — fee ON Wake Island in the troops broke the North ee ee —_ SG"" Pacific to discuss the Qohasy-hamecoyententenaner-lntoyal 7 a || oe . ""%) progress of the war. lines.
However, despite some successes during campaign on North Korea, flattening 18 ofits22 _— « * il , ha. which Chinese and North Korean troops were major cities.
UN COMES TO THE AID ei OF SOUTH KOREA -1) Fifteen nations, including ‘. ) the USA, Britain, and Australia, responded to the UN's call to send 1ngole) OSMROMOLs1iclalemeyelvinal Korea.
On INKohtcovanlelcyam Mi nalom @lannaletcrs) army inflicted a major (oleiicrelmelamauantcialerial _ troops at the Battle as the line of Pyongyang demarcation in 1953.
By May the UN front line had moved just north of the 38th parallel and the war entered a prolonged stalemate.
A demilitarized zone was established at the 38th parallel and a UN commission was set up to monitor the peace.
Mount Everest, the world’s highest peak, was successfully climbed for the first time by New Zealander Edmund Hillary and Nepalese Sherpa Tenzing Norgay.
For more than 30 years a succession of expeditions, principally British, had attempted to conquer mountaineering’s ultimate challenge, but while some came agonizingly close, none was known to have reached the peak and safely returned to base camp.
By May 27, 1953, two members of an expedition led by Colonel John Hunt, the ninth British team to take on Everest, had turned back just short of the summit as they ran out of time and oxygen supplies.
Two days later, Hillary and Norgay made their team’s final ascent from the South Col route.
They briefly paused to take photographs that soon after their descent were seen around the world.
As the sign of widespread Soviets sought to tighten their grip on Eastern Europe, liberals in anti-Soviet feeling.
They marched to Radio Budapest, calling for the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Hungary.
Insurgents took to the streets, hurling Molotov cocktails at the tanks.
Nagy SOVIETS BACK DOWN The USSR agreed to tolerate Nagy’s || appealed to the UN new government, and the fighting petered out.
Soviet tanks for assistance against withdrew fron Hungary, watched by anxious crowds.
When the LUhStolntanalccrincialcremnomurst>) troops against militant strikers.
The rebels reacted angrily and members of the old Hungarian national flag. secret police were rounded up and imprisoned or executed. ... tis possible that | shall only be able to stay at my r iar ' + 10/27/1956 . ' | post for one or two hours.
He pledged that Soviet tanks would | _ be withdrawn, prisoners released, and the | secret jekolilercmentsjor-nalekslem 11/04/1956 11/11/1956 THE TANKS COME _ BACK About 1,000 Soviet tanks rolled into Budapest just before dawn, this time using brute force to olaUEsJamelelcM shvnalercharcval | a , — yawanehvar have meshvalarnal — | . — _ resistance.
Nagy m a broadcast his THE REVOLUTION ENDS Up to 200,000 refugees fled final appeal for help across the border to Austria as the Soviet-backed regime , at 5:15m.
An Anglo-French company owned the Suez Canal—a vital international waterway linking Europe and Asia.
On July 23, 1952 a group of nationalist army officers, led by General Neguib, overthrew the corrupt, pro-British regime of King Farouk.
Egyptian troops swiftly took position, in London to discuss the cutting off British and French control.
However, after a threat from the USA to withhold financial loans, Britain backed down.
Muhammad Neguib, soon to become the country’s first president, drove through the streets of Cairo.
MAN AT THE TOP Nasser’s popularity grew after he had negotiated the withdrawal of British troops from Egypt.
Under the agreement, all British forces would leave the country by June 1956.
United States President Dwight D Eisenhower cancelled a $56 million grant to help build the dam.
The canal was the main supply route for Gulf oil to Europe, and this action led to emergency gasoline rationing. desert and raced toward the canal.
Britain and France carried out bombing raids against ae Egyptian air force bases. ve just never seen great powers make such a complete mess and botch of things.
They created stars, and found their way produced in the 11 decades since cinema began. around the world.
Cinema has been both an art A novelty at the turn of the century, the first form and a pioneer of new technology.
From 30 years saw an unprecedented period of growth. _ the first flickering images, it has grown into a Films went from silent to talkies, short to feature multi-billion dollar entertainment industry. it revolutionized the industry.
By World War II, motion-capture and 3-D techniques. cinema-going was a wellestablished pastime.
By 1930 the silent Hollywood's monopoly of the soldiers and Pathe model, film was finished. movie industry. the people mounted on back home. a tripod.
British studios won hearts and minds with Went the Day Well and Henry V In the USA, hard-boiled crime fiction gave rise to film noir, which explored the dark side of the American dream.
GOING FOR GOLD The first Oscars were handed out in 1929 at a ceremony hosted by actor Douglas Fairbanks. while Mary Poppins and The Sound of Music appealed to family values.
Small, independent films reflected a decade of social change, and European film-makers such as Federico Fellini and Ingmar Bergman swapped Hollywood glamour for gritty realism.
Epics such as Ben Hur set out to show that movies were bigger and better, This film cost $314 million.
ACTOR AND DIRECTOR CLINT EASTWOOD ON GRAN TORINO, 2008 1950s 1960s DRIVE-IN MOVIES Drive-in movies were a huge attraction for the new teenage market.
They showed low-budget films and sci-fi “quickies” that would appeal to young people.
CINEMASCOPE EPICS Television had an adverse effect on cinema attendance.
Hollywood responded with cinemascope, which showed films such as Ben Hur in a wide-screen format.
Leone redefined the Western, turning clean-cut cowboys into brooding anti-heroes.
Hollywood still dominated, but had to compete with European cinema, independent films, movies made for the internet, and the massive presence of Bollywood in India.
General Charles Telmex. ielit-Manetomievantesl' _ leader of the Free French, POLICE TACKLE PROTESTERS was seen to be the only spread to France, where jee) hKeromcelbnalelcre mene) thousands of people for identity checks because they were inaloleles aimmnem ele) of “Algerian” appearance.
Right-wing one who could guide the by the FLN led to extremists marched to demand that Algeria _ country.
Dozens were arrestedasthe | nation that he was at on the streets of Paris. oLernnKoyatsunectntoyslmnbnants\ombleshia their disposal. accepted Coty’s offer and became Prime Minister elect, but he ai, drove a hard bargain.
He asked for unrestricted — powers for a period of Sipqu ano laumatcme nace malate) authority to draft a new constitution for the French Republic.
On » June 2, 1958 the National _ Assembly accepted » television journalists waited to capture every moment as ' developments rapidly luhaNce)lolc\omnamnalcmnacyarelal 4 parliament.
ALGERIAN a 7 INDEPENDENCE , i | In a referendum, France voted to grant Algeria its ripe lalelcyorcyalei-1aler-mr-nare mnel | 1962 France and the FLN signed a treaty ending colonial rule.
They were furious with the French fofoyi{ciaahantcyalemie)analelamrlcqnere) more positive action to S| stop the FLN and their nationalist revolt.
DE GAULLE IN ALGERIA Shortly after becoming Prime Minister, De Gaulle visited Algiers, the capital of Algeria, where he was greeted by cheering crowds.
Che Guevara, an Argentine revolutionary, believed that only armed struggle could solve the problems of poverty and inequality in the region.
They pe At allie | landed on the coast of Oriente Province on December 2, 1956, but most of the revolutionaries were either captured or killed.
Castro and his men retreated to the Sierra , Maestra Mountains | to the south.
Castro became Prime Minister and his regime was recognized by the United States government. als 10/08/1967 i ia) CAPTURED IN | BOLIVIA Intending to spark a new revolution, Che traveled to Bolivia with 50 volunteers in 1966.
Largely spurned by the local population, he was captured by government forces on October 7, 1967 and executed the next day on the orders of Bolivia’s military ruler General Reneé Barrientos.
AFRICAN OUTING In 1965 Che traveled to Congo to foment a rebellion against the authoritarian regime of President Mobutu Sese seko.
Che was initially impressed by rebel leader Laurent Kabila, but rebel forces were divided by internal rivalries, and Che lost faith in the revolt.
They harassed the government with guerrilla attacks and , gained widespread attention and support.
Che fled to Mexico during the coup, angry at seeing Guatemala’s populist dream ' crushed by outside forces.
Batista’s troops crushed The revolution is not an apple that falls when It is ripe.
CHE GUEVARA, QUOTED IN INTERCONTINENTAL PRESS, 1965 SPREADING THE SOCIALIST MESSAGE Following the Cuban revolution, Castro declared his willingness to support revolutionaries around the globe.
He travelled widely, attending UN summits and meeting world leaders, advocating armed struggle for socialism.
Che became a hero of left-wing intellectuals and radical youth around the world.
In Mexico City, students campaigning against the one-party rule of the government carried HONORED MEMORY In Cuba, Che remains banners bearing his image. a national hero and is still widely revered.
His body is interred in a grand mausoleum in the Cuban city of Santa Clara.
Here as well as in protests across the globe, Che was held up as a heroic example of revolutionary reform.
CHE SPREADS THE REVOLUTION MEETING WITH CASTRO In Mexico City, Che met Cuban revolutionary Fidel Castro.
Castro was in self| imposed exile, having been released from prison after attempting to overthrow Cuban dictator Fulgencio Batista’s regime in 1953.
He formed the 26th of July Revolutionary Movement, supported by his brother Raul and Che, who | had become a committed Marxist.
Two days later the brigade of exiles landed at the Bay of Pigs, on the south coast of Cuba, and were decisively defeated by Castro’s forces.
In a television address seen around the world, he announced the presence of missiles and ordered a naval blockade to prevent Soviet ships from reaching | Cuba.
ATLANTIC mDallas OCEAN United States naval blockade of Cuba Range of Soviet missiles ® Route of ships carrying missiles from USSR j j i Gulf of Mica Mexico Hawenoue CUBA 04/21/1961 lll UNDER ARREST Nearly 1,200 of the invaders were captured by Castro’s troops in s Cuba.
The Bay of Pigs fiasco propelled Castro closer to the ' USSR, and was a huge embarrassment to United States President John F Kennedy, who had ordered the attack. a] HARD EVIDENCE Bad weather delayed the surveillance flight until October 14.
Flying low over western Cuba, the U-2 spy plane obtained clear photographic evidence of medium-range missile sites within striking distance of major United States Cities.
La | oy DAYS OF CRISIS The tension mounted as, in the middle of urgent negotiations between Washington and Moscow, an American U-2 spy plane was shot down over Cuba, killing the pilot.
He had taken power in Cuba by ousting the pro-American Batista dictatorship in 1955, and openly mocked CIA plans to kill him.
All Cuban workers, including women, were armed and | organized into defense groups.
The CIA, meanwhile, recruited anti-Castro exiles, who were secretly ™ trained in camps in Guatemala in preparation for the invasion of Cuba.
WEAPONS AGREEMENT ARMS TO CUBA In 1962 the USA placed United States intelligence medium-range Jupiter discovered that the missiles, armed with Soviet ship Kasimov, nuclear warheads, in photographed off Cuba, Turkey, threatening was carrying IL-28 Soviet interests.
In Beagle bombers capable response, Soviet leader of bearing nuclear Nikita Khrushchev warheads.
Fearing a persuaded Castro to soviet arms buildup, allow Soviet strategic Kennedy ordered a U-2 nuclear weapons to spy plane to fly over and be based on Cuba. observe activity in Cuba.
United States SECRETARY OF STATE DEAN RUSK ON HEARING THAT THE SOVIET SHIPS HAD TURNED BACK, OCTOBER 1962 ' WEAPONS LEAVE CUBA Faced with the threat of nuclear war, the two sides reached a | compromise.
In return for Kennedy’s promise not } to invade Cuba, Khrushchev agreed to remove | the missiles.
Observed by American naval ships, Soviet freighters, carrying missile systems, sailed away from Cuba. 1960-1969 1962 | ixties S&S The Swinging S$ 1960-1969 The 1960s were an era of enormous change.
Europe emerged from the shadow of World War II, and economic growth was widespread.
At the same time, the Cold War was beginning to take hold, with proxy conflicts in Korea and Vietnam.
A fresh optimism, and increasing affluence, saw the emergence of new music, politics, and fashion.
BRITISH INVASION If American rock and roll had dominated REBELS WITHOUT the music scene of the 1950s, the Sixties belonged to British A CAUSE Teenagers in performers.
First The Beatles, then bands such as The Who Britain rebelled against and The Rolling Stones conquered the American airwaves the post-war austerity and crossed the Atlantic to perform to hysterical crowds. of their parents.
London became the center of the Mod subculture, which was all about clothes, clubs, Jamaican music, and mopeds.
Their bitter rivals were the Rockers, who rode motorcycles and listened to rock and roll.
His sensational, jazzinfluenced style made him one of the most innovative and influential musicians of his day.
UNDERGROUND PRESS New publications defied censorship laws and traditional notions of propriety.
Its London offices were often raided and its staff prosecuted for obscenity. far ny Ac Ne, i ¢ THE BEATLES EMERGE | 9 A young band from Liverpool made a name for themselves playing gigs at The Cavern Club.
Not long after this early appearance, drummer Pete Best was replaced by Ringo Starr, completing the iconic lineup.
SECOND WAVE FEMINISM Activist Betty Friedan published The Feminine Mystique, renewing the campaign for gender equality.
The new movement did much to give women control of their own social and sexual lives, fighting the assumption that a woman should be dependent on her husband.
Established artist Andy Warhol put himself at the forefront of the movement.
He was fascinated by celebrity culture and his studio, the Factory, became famous for its starstudded parties. lo.
Performers such as Bob Dylan advocated a new left-wing politics that empowered the individual, rejecting both the conservatism of the USA and the authoritarian socialism of the USSR. -—_ THE SWINGING SIXTIES vila eM eee MINISKIRT IN FASHION British designer Mary Ouant shocked the Establishment by launching the miniskirt, which left the wearer’s legs exposed up to the mid-thigh.
Despite, or perhaps because of, the initial scandal, the “Quant look” was soon seen throughout the world.
Twiggy, one of Quant’s early models, became a star, popularizing a new, more androgynous look for women.
An estimated 400,000 people listened to the greatest musicians of the day perform live.
The festival came to epitomize the Sixties, even as they gave way to a new, more cynical decade.
But his career was cut tragically short on vis November 22, 1963 when, during a campaign visit to Texas, he was assassinated in full view of watching cameras.
Oswald had been charged with the murder of President Kennedy just before midnight.
Sitting just in front, Governor of Texas John Connally was also struck.
Lee Harvey Oswald’s palm print was later RUSH TO HOSPITAL Immediately Secret Agent Clint Hill leapt into the car to shield the President.
They arrived in just a few minutes, but there was little the medics could do.
ARRIVAL IN DALLAS Kennedy was planning to run for re-election in 1964, and his visit to Dallas was designed to gather support.
He and his wife Jacqueline disembarked from Air Force One at Love Field airfield, just outside the city.
The pink outfit and pillbox hat Jackie Kennedy was wearing would become fixed in people’s recollections of the day’s tragic events.
DEATH ANNOUNCED Fighting back emotion, CBS anchorman Walter Cronkite removed his glasses to inform the nation that President Kennedy had died of his wounds at 13:00 Central Standard Time.
The killing was one of the first national news stories to be broken on television.
OSWALD ARRESTED Less than an hour after Kennedy’s death, police arrested Lee Harvey Oswald, who was hiding in a theater.
DALLAS POL IC 54016 2) 63 J r yj THE KILLER KILLED 11/25/1963 As Oswald was being transferred to the A NATION MOURNS county jail, a Dallas More than 800,000 ® nightclub owner named people lined the streets | Jack Ruby ran forward of Washington for and shot him in the Kennedy’s funeral and stomach.
Kennedy’s Ruby’s motives for body was interred in killing Oswald remain Arlington National unclear.
The arrested, but died of ceremony was attended pneumonia in 1966, by 19 heads of state, and before his case could the President's widow ~ come to trial. and children.
ASSASSINATION OF JFK MOTORCADE SETS OFF Kennedy’s visit was due to start with a grand procession by motorcade through the city, ending at the Dallas Trade Mart.
The journey was expected to take 45 minutes, and the route had been widely advertised in Dallas newspapers to allow crowds to gather by the roadside to greet the President.
JOHNSON SWORN IN Vice President Lyndon B Johnson was sworn in as the 36th President of the United States on board Air Force One.
At his side stood Jackie Kennedy, still wearing her bloodstained pink outfit.
The plane took off for Washington, carrying ' the casket containing Kennedy’s body back to the White House.
Reporting 10 months later, Warren concluded that Oswald acted alone in killing Kennedy, and Ruby acted alone in killing Oswald.
A further inquiry suggested that at least two gunmen fired at the President, but could not identify any definitive evidence of conspiracy.
Many Americans still believe that the investigations were seriously flawed.
Wg dD alomalolomar-lomavnmer-(on When three civil rights workers were murdered in Mississippi, federal investigators brought 18 people, including the local sheriff, to trial.
In the worst cases, black people could be summarily hanged for an alleged crime, sometimes with the collaboration of local police.
INTEGRATED SCHOOLS, ) When a landmark ruling by the United States Supreme Court banned segregation in » public schools, nine black SIAULOKSVANACMMGLC(O MROMIARI AlORre} white school at Little Rock, Arkansas.
Riots erupted _ as Governor Orval Faubus ordered the National Guard to stop the students.
The Governer’s orders were , overturned by President ) Eisenhower, who sent paratroopers to ensure that local forces complied.
President Kennedy KGhato mum olcrer-Naalom eynvce)ry| ™ to the campaign.
Police used tear gas, . fire hoses, dogs, and baton charges to 4 suppress the protests.
A group calling seamstress named Rosa itself the Montgomery Parks boarded a bus in Improvement Association Montgomery, Alabama. | was established.
Its She was a member of the charismatic president, National Association for the | Reverend Martin Luther PANO Aicchaersiaals)al mel @ze)lelacyel King, was instrumental People and when in leading the boycott. the bus filled up, refused to Their campaign drew give up her seat for a white attention and support person.
She was arrested. from across the nation. | tt é FREEDOM RIDES OLAULOLSIANASMRoroIRoLOmALSN INE ieee Joychahannate| | PBSi<leidclef-lnlovame)ambelnciacirc-lncMelelc{crsmovair-l.ahale mmumagsl-rele)an| rides” through the South.
RESTAURANT SIT-IN Four black gents nel \Koyanel Carolina defied racial segregation in restaurants by sitting at a white-only counter.
Their action triggered a wave of “sit-ins” in restaurants across the South.
Martin Luther King inspired the crowd with a speech setting out his vision of a country without racial prejudice.
Five years later, King was assassinated. ry r ue NN | have a dream that my four itt 3 children will one day live in’a natior where they will not be judged, the color of their skin, fut | e) th content of their character.
They were herded onto reserves and denied ownership of their ancestral lands.
As many as one in ten Aboriginal children were removed from their families and put into white homes.
They became known as In 1963 Aborigines presented rights, social injustice, the Stolen Generation. the government with a petition education, and health. calling for land rights.
They traveled ——— sa pe c a around the country F —_ . _ , i towns of New South REFERENDUM ON ABORIGINE RIGHTS A referendum + Wales to campaign was held to give Aborigines citizenship rights.
Their supporters swelled to 2,000, and the site became known as the Aboriginal to them.
In 1949 the » Commonwealth Electoral Act was amended to give _ the vote to Aborigines who had served in the war.
KEVIN RUDD, AUSTRALIAN PRIME MINISTER, FEBRUARY 13, 2008 08/26/1999 MOTION OF RECONCILIATION Between 1997 and 1999, state governments apologized to the Stolen Generation.
The USA was determined to prevent the spread of communism across the border.
Vietnamese government, the scene was set for what would leader of China, in his campaign to become one of the defining struggles of the Cold War.
S104 0) Ol) GK16 macovaeMl\Coyanal lexcrerovantomeolaanaanenanicianna ieler-vuetsjar-Meroysstentenantsye Vietnam by Ho Chi Minh.
The USA was not crisis as a crucial test of id _ they nervously awaited Sieeimelenico)hi{clomnamalesainielen United States resolve in the Cold an invasion by the pill but sent a large number War, he promised aid _ North Vietnamese . of military advisers. to South Vietnam.
Their charm and talent had even won over the older generation, and seemingly the Establishment, too, determined to be associated with their youthful brilliance and global success.
Their visit to Buckingham Palace, London, where they received their decorations from Queen Elizabeth II, was a major news event and desperate policemen struggled to hold back the crowds of hysterical fans that had gathered outside.
DEATH OF MAO Chairman Mao died on September 9 at the A proletarian party Peer end crina must get rid of the stale Senoa of mourning, He had named a loyal and take IN the fresh al ir follower, Hua Guofeng, as his successor, but many believed that Jiang Oing, Mao’s wife and the architect of the Cultural Revolution, would take power.
MAO ZEDONG, AUGUST 1968 PERSONALITY CULT At the age of 72, Mao was eager to dispel any / notion that he was unfit to rule.
This athletic display was the start of a campaign to turn popular support into a cult of personality.
The wider world remained largely NIXON IN CHINA unaware of events . in China.
Printing presses were pushed to the limit, churning out millions of copies.
Lin Biao, head of the Chinese People’s Liberation Army and Mao’s greatest ally, insisted that every soldier should read it.
THE LOST GENERATION Millions of young people from the cities were sent to work side by side with peasants in the countryside.
The wealthy “ and well-connected could ©"" usually find ways to stay at home.
THE LITTLE RED BOOK This collection of quotations from Mao’s speeches and writings was the foundation of his personality cult.
Every Red Guard carried a copy, and extracts were displayed on vast posters.
However, behind the scenes Mao’s health was failing, and the political elite were preparing to battle to succeed him.
THE TABLES ARE TURNED Against all expectations, Hua ordered the arrest of Jiang Oing and her followers, a radical faction known as the Gang of Four.
Their downfall was enthusiastically welcomed in Beijing, and marked the end of the excesses of the Cultural Revolution.
RADICALS ON TRIAL The Gang of Four were tried and convicted of anti-party activities.
The four became scapegoats, leaving Mao’s reputation officially unblemished, but the scars of his last years in power would take decades to fade.
Palestinian guerrilla groups began carrying out attacks against nee in Sinai a the Gaza strip since ; Israel.
However, when Arab forces prepared to mount an assault, the the aftermath oo ame ferocity of Israel’s response would take them completely by surprise.
Just infantry, and paratrooper 19 Israeli planes were lost in the onslaught. brigades moved swiftly “a into Sinai.
The Israeli attack concentrated all its efforts on breaking through the heavily fortified Egyptian positions in Sinai and the Gaza Strip.
ISRAELI PRIME MINISTER LEVI ESHKOL, y, y i ON THE CLOSURE OF THE STRAITS OF TIRAN, MAY 19, 1967 10/06/1967 | GOLAN HEIGHTS CAPTURED Syrian shelling from Golan Heights, the high rocky plateau overlooking northern Israel, was intense.
Once the war in Sinai ended, » Israel diverted resources to the northern battle zone.
UZI SUBMACHINE GUN ey Named in honor of its | designer, Major Uziel Gal, the Uzi submachine gun had a high rate of fire and was standard issue for frontline Israeli soldiers in the Six-Day Wat.
Nasser closed the Straits of Tiran to Israeli shipping, thereby blockading the port of Kilat, Israel's only access to the Red Sea, and stopping the flow of oil from its main supplier, Iran.
SIX-DAY WAR | 05/25/1967 ARAB ALLIANCE Nasser’s calls for a pan-Arab alliance against Israel began to bear fruit.
King Hussein of Jordan signed a mutual defense pact with Egypt, and Jordanian tanks moved toward the West Bank.The buildup of Arab forces on Israel’s borders continued as Iraq joined the military alliance.
Israel’s frantic quest for an international diplomatic solution failed.
War now seemed inevitable. a 06/05/1967 BATTLE FOR JERUSALEM Ignoring Israeli pleas that Jordan should remain neutral, King Hussein ordered the § Jordanian army toshell | targets in Israeli-held West Jerusalem and the suburbs of Tel Aviv.
Israel launched a fierce counterattack and two days later, Israeli paratroopers took the Old City of Jerusalem.
EGYPTIAN ROUT Egypt's military chief Field Marshal Mohamed Abdel Hakim Amer ordered all units to retreat.
Thousands were killed, others surrendered as the Egyptian army raced back, pursued by Israeli forces.
Claiming to have acted in selfdefense, Israel had doubled its territory at the expense of its Arab neighbors.
More than 600,000 Palestinians living in the West Bank came under Israeli administration.
Israel 1949 Area occupied by Israel after 1967 war Disputed frontier WEST BANK SEIZED Although capturing the West Bank was not part of Israel’s original strategy, Israeli forces continued to advance ® after taking the Old City ' of Jerusalem.
Jordanian forces retreated across the Jordan River and by the end of June 7 the entire West Bank was in Israeli hands.
Social diverse range of music, from pure beauty to pure _—_ and political identity became tied to musical taste. noise.
It was an era of contrasts, with some artists By the end of the century, as new technology made sticking to their roots and others overturning distribution easier, music stars were some of the tradition.
As musical influences from all over the world’s richest and most influential people.
This was A ballet score composed by Igor helped by the rise of popular Stravinsky, it was anew musical music such as blues and jazz. idiom.
Its debut, with its Jazz emerged from New crashing discordant notes, Orleans, but Chicago in caused a riot.
Nothing, it particular became its home, where stars such as Billie Holiday, Ella Fitzgerald, and Nat King Cole rose to prominence.
Frank Sinatra. synonymous with to people’s Te rock and roll, , homes. hi be Lous "" il re ail ""idee ian the ‘ new 45 rpm records. blues directly in a, NEW SOUND Electric guitars redefined music for the 20th century.
Les Paul created many of the earliest models, including this 1940 prototype.
But while parents swayed to the sound of Julie Andrews (The Sound of Music, 1959), their kids were dancing to a different tune.
Charlie Parker experimented with bebop, James Brown mixed gospel with blues, Elvis Presley played rock and roll, and Johnny Cash established himself as king of country.
America dominated the music scene into the early 1960s until The Beatles crossed the Atlantic and stormed the United States charts.
Nirvana captured the plight of disillusioned youth, and Smells like Teen Spirit became an anthem for the loser generation.
In the 21st century, digital music ELECTRONIC MUSIC Will.i.am from the Black Eyed Peas hosts a club night in 2010 where electro is the new disco. 1970s GLAM ROCK Led by singers such as David Bowie, glam rock was camp, over the top, and sardonic.
A CENTURY OF MUSIC If | hadn’t heard rock and roll on the radio, | would have had no idea there was Ife on this planet.
At the same time, the internet and indie labels offer even amateur musicians an audience, and a shot at the big time. offers an incredible range of musical choice at the touch of a button.
POP ICONS Pop stars such as Madonna took the world by storm, helped enormously by the video revolution.
The war was deeply unpopular, lakchvahalemedrbnaatcio mal MNAvMR-)stoM@)mmAalelUrcr-Nalelsme)mrcelunale| / Americans.
The demonstrators attempted to enterthe ~~ » Pentagon, which was surrounded by the National CTU hcommm handivn-vever-\om eyyaeshial male salncmlcy-lel-vas) such as Martin Luther King and Gandhi, in a spirit X protesters faced the guns and bayonets with flowers.
Nevertheless, the demonstrations played their part Ppp letmebavel-yacauhavialem-s0ye) ole) qnmiejadelmulccnem-usle me slomneatlel-meyi a girl clutching a flower in the face of armed soldiers lolcrer-haslom-NaMsyaehunm@halemonrannl ole) me) im el-t-\e-1a0 lm e)c@)Koto1m 1960-1969 The Year of Protests 1968 In the spring of 1968, a single demonstration in against authoritarian regimes and rigid systems Paris reverberated around the world.
The largest of the demonstrations students took to the streets in cities from Rome, began with a small group of activists in the London, and Paris to Prague and Mexico City.
Paris, the situation became violent. over Paris, inspired by rs Students returning from the the actions of students ‘eB disciplinary hearing clashed with at the Sorbonne.
A number of protestors first time workers and | were left unconscious and the students united ina ‘ at streets were filled with smoke massive protest forcing and tear gas. the closure of airports and rail stations.
Around 800,000 marched through | the streets, demanding de Gaulle’s resignation.
GRAFFIT'IN 2 IN PARIS, MAY 1968 a 03/16/1968 | PROTESTS IN ITALY Demonstrations against police paatality took place in several universities across Italy in the winter of 1967.
The message reached those outside Paris, and within a few days 8 million workers joined the strike in car plants and factories.
DANNY THE RED The movement soon had a leader in Daniel |} Cohn-Bendit, a young German studying sociology at Nanterre.
It swiftly descended into chaos when mounted police charged at the demonstrators.
Marchers gathered at the Arc de Triomph in Paris and were cheered by spectators who lined the streets.
STOCK EXCHANGE SET ON FIRE Ina televised address to demanded that citizens back his program of reform. brink of civil war.
Armed with Molotov cocktails, the demonstrators in Paris set fire to the French stock exchange.
THE YEAR OF PROTESTS ) RING LEADERS ARRESTED The protest shifted to the heart of Paris when Cohn-Bendit was told to attend a disciplinary board in the center of the city.
An embarrassed President Charles de Gaulle ordered the arrest of the ring leaders.
THE REVOLUTION DIES Fearing the worst, the government announced an early election.
Crowds gathered in support of the French president, and the movement lost steam.
In the following months, student protests took place in Spain, Poland, Czechoslovakia, the USA, and Mexico, as the spirit of revolution a crossed the globe.
As the people sought new freedoms, they posed a challenge that the neighboring Soviet Union could not tolerate.
Anti-Soviet opinion escalated and people took to the streets to show their discontent.
Such graffiti was common as Czechoslovakians sent messages in Russian to the invaders.
Hastily produced pamphlets and posters spread information about the occupation, imploring citizens to stay loyal to Dubcek and resist the occupation peacefully. of desperate people standing defenseless against the tanks drew worldwide sympathy for the rebellion.
These reforms were later known as the “Prague Spring,” and made Dubcek a national hero. gee PRAGUE IS OCCUPIED Se Around 500,000 troops, mostly from the Soviet Union, poured into Czechoslovakia.
They quickly surrounded all | key party, government, army, and media i | buildings in Prague.
After signing the Moscow Protocols that reversed his reforms, he was allowed eon | to remain in office until April 1969, when he was replaced, expelled from the Communist party, and given a job as a forestry official. 08/27/1968 baal 7 PROTESTS CONTINUE Anti-Soviet protests continued.
Riots erupted in 1969 when student Jan Palach burned himself to death in protest at the occupation.
Nonetheless, 4 Czechoslovakia remained | a soviet satellite state until 1989.
Despite attempts by Dubcek to assure the Soviets that he was still loyal, Russia moved tanks up to the Czechoslovakian frontier and in July crossed the border.
In protest, the Czechoslovakians staged a one-hour strike. y yf # ff PRAGUE SPRING | REFUGEES FLEE After Dubcek’s exit, officials e of the communist party took over.
Czechoslovakia witnessed a mass exodus, as thousands escaped to refugee camps in Austria and attempted to enter Western Europe.
It was taken as the unmanned Lunar Orbiter 1 was about to Hehe ey-)aihelemnal-miuKereyal _| during its 16th orbit.
Ground control waited anxiously while the crew of Frank Borman, James Lovell, and William Anders were out of contact as they made the maneuver.
LIAS ELARSALIES WV KOTO)\ i 510] Oy . on i United States scientists faced the (ol ate NiKcyale(omeyimelbnllonhalemr-mqelel coir powerful enough to reach the Moon and a spacecraft that could safely travel there and back.
The Saturn V was the most powerful rocket ever 1aarsXelowmrohaxe mm rchOnalelala\omr-hal unmanned spacecraft into Earth’s orbit.
It then provided an extra boost to send Apollo on a trajectory for the Moon. yd oT @) 10/04/1957 | | 04/09/195 THE RACE BEGINS The Space Age began with the USSR’s Sputnik 1, the world’s first artificial satellite. | reno uaod aCslomm eh’ anqolel.<olmagelaamnals) [S¥ehl.Covanvnan @xel-janlelence ants mmnal Kazakhstan, the simple satellite took 98 minutes to orbit the Earth.
It sent back valuable data on conditions in space and the upper atmosphere.
Its success came as a surprise to the Americans, who were unaware of Soviet advances.
USA CLOSES THE GAP Valery Bykovsky in Vostok 5 Project Gemini saw the USA set the record for the longest complete 10 piloted missions solo space flight of five days, into space in 20 months. and Valentina Tereshkova in 1X6 MAYAVAabimem olcYor-haslommalMunacin Vostok 6 became the first American to walk in space woman in space.
The two when he exited his Gemini 4 cosmonauts were branded spacecraft for 21 minutes.
Russia’s “Romeo and Juliet” leKomcounalemnalom-y-40\-1als)acers) space team.
In June 1970 Baader, Meinhof, and some of their associates trained at a Palestinian guerrilla base outside Amman, Jordan.
On their return to Berlin, they mounted a series of bomb attacks against police, publishers, and United States military bases. shootout, along with fellow RAF members Jan-Carl Raspe and Holger Meins.
Despite this setback, a new generation of activists joined the RAF and their acts of terrorism continued.
Brainwashed by her kidnappers, she began participating in ' their activities.
By 1972, when she was finally arrested, the RAF was linked to dozens of bombings, along with the murders of several policemen.
They demanded the release of six terrorists and RAF members, who were duly freed and flown to Aden, Yemen.
STORES BOMBED Baader began his crusade by targeting places that he + i perceived as symbols of consumer capitalism.
One infamous activist a demanded the release was Venezuelan-born Ilich fe C revol uti on of all Baader—Meinhof Ramirez Sanchez, better known defendants, but this as Carlos the Jackal.
Two of Israeli businesses and individuals | WHI I t be AQ dl NM. # the hostages were shot in Europe.
All of the terrorists two French counterintelligence LAST STATEMENT OF THE RAF, were captured without agents sent to question him, a fight when explosives but his most notorious exploits APRIL Ai Nos / accidentally detonated. were still to come.
Baader and Meinhof became heroes for many young West Germans, and the RAF activities did not end until 1998, when it disbanded.
MORO KIDNAPPING In Italy, the terrorist organization Brigate Rossi sought to bring about armed revolution.
Shortly weapons, took to the afterward, a Bengali army streets of the capital, officer, Ziaur Rahman, Dhaka, amid scenes of seized the radio station violence.
Meanwhile, Pakistan to take control Mujib was flown to a of the situation. prison in West Pakistan.
Prime Minister Indira Gandhi appealed for international help and planned a military intervention to solve the crisis. aay SHEIKH MUJIBUR RAHMAN Popularly known as Sheikh Mujib, Rahman headed the Awami League that led the Bengali opposition to West Pakistan’s ruling elite.
Blaming the central government for failing to help the victims, the Awami League won nearly all the seats in East Pakistan in the national elections held the following month.
The result gave Sheikh Mujib a clear majority in the regional assembly.
In response, Mujib appealed to Bengalis to resist the government, stopping just short of calling for independence. order degenerated » into a rampage of / terror and bloodshed.
Dhaka’s Hindu minority was singled out for the worst of the violence. i 12/20/1971 Fee CELEBRATING FREEDOM Cheering cro the interim Bangladesh government on its return to Dhaka.
His successor, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, immediately ordered Mujib’s release. ds saluted WAR BREAKS OUT As Indian troops massed on the East Pakistan border, Yahya Khan launched a preemptive airstrike into northwest India on December 3, but inflicted little damage.
Eight days later, Indira Gandhi ordered nine army divisions to cross the border into East Pakistan. wa the Pakistan army to Mm. join the Mukti Bahini, | an underground | army of Bangladesh aa freedom fighters, in training camps | along the Indian | border.
Leaders of the Awami League | established an interim government in Calcutta, India.
AWAMI LEAGUE LEADER SHEIKH y, y, MUJIB, SPEECH AT DHAKA RACECOURSE, MARCH 1, 1971 12/16/1971 PAKISTAN SURRENDERS With air links to West Pakistan cut off and Dhaka blockaded from the sea, the Pakistan army surrendered, with 90,000 troops handing themselves over to Indian forces.
MUJIB RETURNS On his release, Sheikh Mujib traveled to London, where he addressed the world’s media. returned to Dhaka, to be greeted by STAMP OF euphoric crowds.
VICTORY On January 12, he « This stamp, formally took office as ~.» eaturing a Prime Minister of the Mukti Bahini fighter, was issued in 1981 to commemorate the 10th anniversary of Bangladesh’s independence. independent sovereign state of Bangladesh.
A former officer in the British colonial army in Africa, he took great pleasure in taunting Uganda’s former colonial rulers, giving himself the titles of Conqueror of the British Empire 09/07/1972 EXPULSION OF ASIANS In a sudden and unexpected move, Amin announced that all Asians who were not Ugandan citizens must leave the country within 90 days.
Around 60,000 secondand third-generation immigrants from India—holders of British passports—were affected.
Forced to abandon their businesses and property, most fled to Britain, where they faced an uncertain future.
SUPPRESSING ALL 07/10/1975 of dissent that rose a death sentence on Denis Hills, a British on his behalf.
F 10/30/1978 ER 2 INVASION FORCE In October 1978 Amin launched an attack on neighboring Tanzania.
The Tanzanian army, backed by the Uganda National Liberation Army , ©. captured the capital, rh ) Kampala, and Amin fled oa the country.
He imposed subject living in Uganda, for describing him as a “village tyrant” in a book he was writing.
Amin released Hills only when British Foreign Minister James Callaghan flew to Uganda to intercede and the uncrowned King of Scotland.
However, the rule of this erratic and cruel leader was far from a joke; his regime was noted for gross human rights violations, ethnic violence, and political repression, and he was responsible for the deaths of more than 100,000 people.
Amin turned away from the West, seeking ties with the USSR, Fast Germany, and Libyan dictator Muammar Gaddafi.
Amin offered the terrorists supplies and the support of his armed forces.
But despite his efforts, Israeli commandos freed the hostages in a daring rescue operation. bo ce 04/13/1979 I , Th Ee i ee NEW REGIME After Amin fled Uganda, leaving its economy in ruins, Yusufu Lule was sworn in as interim president amid much celebration.
President Milton Obote fa dy was out of the country when PUBLIC EXECUTION Amin unleashed a wave of General Idi Amin, fearing that killings as he purged the army of Obote loyalists.
Obote was about to put him More than 6,000 people are thought to have died , on trial for misuse of army during his first year in power.
Ugandans initially welcomed his leadership after years of corrupt misgovernment under Obote.
He was capable of brutal sadism toward his enemies, using torture and massacre to further his political whims.
At the same time, he was also known as an eccentric, granting himself a series of extravagant titles, and on one occasion, forcing four British businessmen to carry him on a throne to an Official reception.
He kept all opposition at bay, ordering the killings of the Anglican Archbishop of Uganda, Janani Luwum, and two cabinet ministers, who dared to denounce his acts of violence. lam the hero of Africa.
An official tribunal said the soldiers had been shot at first, a finding that was overturned by a new inquiry in 2010. | _ of the Troubles.
They were furious that the Catholic Republic would have a say in Northern Irish affairs.
Irish nationalists responded with outrage, sparking three days of riots. es 03/24/1972 BRITISH DIRECT RULE In the aftermath of Bloody Sunday, support for the IRA increased, and protesters olteTsJalclommantoyacm-halemaale)as frequently with British troops.
In response British Prime Minister Edward Heath suspended the Northern ingslechalemor-N@atcnaalsiaumrnavel introduced direct rule from | royaleloyamm Mat-meKsr-1nemne)lmnal 1972 was 496—the highest IRA HUNGER STRIKES by locking up suspected militants at the infamous Maze Prison just outside Belfast.
Several of the inmates, led by Bobby Sands, went on a jakohalege) Kem 04/10/1998 PEACE DEAL REACHED 1Dyhe)Koyank-inlem-vaKelance encouraged by the USA, finally bore fruit.
The Good Friday Agreement was signed by Northern Irish political parties, as well as the British and Irish governments.
It received resounding joke) e)bNk-harsj0he)ele)arm-nalel paved the way for an end to violence over the following years.
British troops NO-GO AREA The Catholic Bogside were often accused of were called in as the area declared itself Free Derry, and being as brutal as the fofenis-vaauaal-VelMmelaneveayeln-vel Hioyceal o)armmeneenic-velncre malate Wele)ifer-W-ratel terrorists, and secretly Rome gbl-)l melal-mrale)i-saler-e British forces from entering. aiding the Unionists.
In 1973, hundreds were RALLY AGAINST injured as a car bomb INTERNMENT exploded outside the A poster by the Old Bailey law courts in INCoyaratsiealshasdk-nare| |oyalo loyal hau GoW Lsure hale)Hatcys Civil Rights bomb killed 21 people in Association calls for an end to inaahela@rsreyanaarsyale without trial. a Birmingham pub, and in 1984 Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher was targeted in an explosion at a Brighton hotel.
Eager to emphasize the peaceful face of modern Germany, the organizers chose Die Heiteren Spiele as their 09/05/1972 TERRORISTS BREAK IN At 4:30 am eight men wearing sweatsuits and carrying automatic rifles scaled the fence and headed for the Israeli quarters.
The men belonged to Black September, a Palestinian paramilitary organization.
Two team members had been shot dead in the apartment and nine were taken hostage—five coaches, two wrestlers, and two weightlifters.
But happiness turned to tragedy when a group of Palestinian terrorists broke into the Olympic village and took 11 hostages from the Israeli team.
The fate of the attackers and their hostages would scar the memory of the Games and horrify the world.
They've now said that there were 11 hostages. [wo were killed in their rooms yesterday morning, nine were killed at the airport tonight.
TRANSPORT OF TERRORISTS i, s 09/05/1972 Palestinians demanded transportation to Cairo.
The German police pretended to agree, but in reality they were preparing a trap.
The a nearby airport, where they were told two helicopters would take As negotiation failed, the terrorists were driven to 09/06/1972 DEAD REMEMBERED The Games were suspended for the following morning as 80,000 spectators and 3,000 athletes attended a memorial service in the Olympic stadium.
Many criticized the Olympic committee’s pe decision to let the Games -iaaurm, continue the previous ' day despite the tragedy unfolding in the village. them to their plane. r ay] 08/26/1972 r & UNDER SIEGE German _ armed police responded swiftly by surrounding the building, even as the hostage-takers spelled out their demands.
LIGHT SECURITY After an evening at the theater, the Israeli team returned to their apartment building in a relatively isolated part of the Olympic village.
The organizers had purposely kept security light to ensure a relaxed atmosphere, and only a chainlink fence surrounded the village.
NEGOTIATIONS DRAG ON German officials kept up continuous communication with the terrorists in an attempt to negotiate the hostages’ release.
As police snipers opened fire, the Palestinians threw a grenade | into one helicopter, killing ~ four hostages, and shot dead all five hostages in the other ™ helicopter.
FUNERAL IN ISRAEL The bodies of the Airport in Israel, where a State funeral was held.
They were released after Black september hijacked . 4s] A MURDERED ATHLETES Photographs of the murdered athletes were circulated around the world.
The violence of their final hours contrasted sharply with the Olympic message of peace and cooperation. threatened to blow it on board.
In 1973 he was overthrown in a right-wing coup led by General Hien dice i Augosto Pinochet, who installed himself as leader of a repressive en eet am military dictatorship that lasted almost two decades. right-wing parties.
At noon, jet fighters attacked the palace with bombs and rockets. seeing their chance, a group of army officers attempted a coup.
Tanks opened fire on official buildings, but loyalist troops defeated the uprising.
After being sworn in as the head of a four-man junta | , Pinochet declared that . the coup had been necessary to save Chile from the yoke of Marxism.
He ordered an immediate purge of Allende’s supporters and other left-wingers. ‘oe Democratic rule was — indefinitely suspended.
Officials ALLENDE’S FINAL SPEECH, claimed that two-thirds SEPTEMBER 11, 1973 of Chileans were in favour, but the vote was widely seen as rigged.
GUEST The controversy ; | F deepened when Allende arranged a state visit from Fidel Castro, communist leader of Cuba.
With Allende beside him, Castro visited copper mines and addressed vast rallies of workers.
In Santiago, a group of right-wing women marched through the streets banging pots and pans in protest.
Other detention centers sprang up around the country. i Suspected dissidents _ were rounded up, and ' many were tortured and executed.
This time, however, popular Opposition was too strong, and he was defeated.
He lost the subsequent presidential election but remained in command of the army, ensuring that the abuses committed by his regime were not investigated.
PINOCHET ARRESTED It was 10 years before an attempt was made to call Pinochet to account.
During a visit toa London hospital, he was arrested at the request of a Spanish judge who sought his extradition on charges of human rights abuse.
The day chosen for the attack was Yom Kippur , the holiest day of the | Jewish year.
This bec ause of oil American action involved airlifting replacement tanks, artillery, and ammunition supplies in United States military transport planes to Israel.
Mediterranean SYRIA Egyptian territory, and the Golan Heights, bordering Syria.
Sadat and | his allies planned a surprise attack aay to retake the disputed territories. ou They were supported with funds and material from at least nine of the region’s Arab states.
Aqaba 10/20/1973 | OIL EMBARGO IMPOSED Arab members of OPEC (Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries) imposed an embargo on oil shipments to Europe and the USA in retaliation for the American military airlift.
The embargo, which lasted until March 1974, sparked an economic recession.
FUEL RATION CARD As oil supplies began to run out, Britain became one of many countries that imposed fuel rationing on car drivers.
United States Secretary of State Henry Kissinger arranged for an exchange of Syrian and Israeli prisoners of war as part of & a disengagement agreement.
Israel agreed to withdraw to the Purple Line and a UN buffer zone was set up in the Golan Heights.
YOM KIPPUR WAR CROSSING THE CANAL The Egyptian attack began with an intense aerial assault on Israeli positions in Sinai, on the east of the Suez Canal.
By dusk advance troops had established five bridgeheads across the ; canal.
One division crossed the Suez Canal south of Ismailia, where it advanced along the Suez—Cairo road to within 65 miles of the Egyptian capital.
UN MEDIATES CEASEFIRE A UN-brokered ceasefire came into effect as Israeli forces were on the point of destroying the Egyptian Third Army, cut off in Sinai.
Israeli troops remained on the west side of the Suez Canal until the following January.
Israel agreed to return Sinai to Egypt in return for Egypt’s recognition of Israel as a nation.
SOVIET GRENADE An RKG-3 antitank grenade of the type supplied to the Egyptian army by the USSR during the Yom Kippur War.
It led to the trial and conviction of a number of top White House officials, and the downfall of President Richard Nixon—the only American President ever to resign from office.
He celebrated the win with Vice President Spiro Agnew, who would be forced to resign for income tax evasion in October 1973.
The hearings went on for a year, and were broadcast live on television from start to finish.
In a key conversation recorded on June 23, 1972 he had asked _ confronted by furious crowds calling for the FBI’s investigation into the break-in to be stopped.
Two days later The Washington Post revealed that the “burglers” had been planting bugs, and that one of them was James McCord, who worked for the committee to re-elect Richard Nixon.
PRESIDENT NIXON, TAPED CONVERSATION, JUNE 23, 1972 WATERGATE 06/19/1972 ON THE CASE Washington Post reporters Carl Bernstein and Bob Woodward received a tip-off that senior White House staff had known about, and approved of, the break-in.
He was later revealed to be high08/29/1972 WHITE HOUSE DENIAL Faced with such serious allegations, President Nixon announced that White House counsel John Dean had carried out a thorough investigation, and that no one in the White House or Nixon’s Administration had been involved in the break-in.
He electrified proceedings by stating that Nixon was involved in the cover-up and knew about payments used to buy the silence of the Watergate conspirators. the hearings it emerged that he had recorded meetings at the White House during which the cover-up was planned.
The President fought hard, agreeing only to hand over edited transcripts of the tapes, numbering 1,200 pages.
The Republic of Cyprus was established under a set of A former British colony, Cyprus gained independence in complicated treaties, which failed 1960 following years of resistance to colonial rule.
When tensions between the island’s Greek Cypriot majority and Brocident Atenbichon Makancettn Turkish Cypriot minority continued to simmer.
When the a Greek Cypriot, proposed constitutional changes that were armed forces of mainland Greece and Turkey became Meee sent ble to the Turks. they involved, the island was threatened with war. withdrew from the government and set up a rival administration.
Many crowded into the Turkish quarter of Nicosia in tents and shacks, creating slumlike conditions.
As some 20,000—about a fifth of their number—fled the worst areas of violence, Turkish settlements were looted and destroyed. to intervene in Cyprus.
As the situation worsened, British soldiers, backed by | UN peacekeeping troops, ~« stepped in and monitored activity along the Green Line.
In June 1964, they once again threatened an invasion, launching air strikes on Cypriot ships.
Only a warning from United States President Lyndon B Johnson to Turkish leader Ismet Inonu pursuaded them to withdraw. The Greek Cypriots will march on to complete the final victory.
CYPRIOT PRESIDENT ARCHBISHOP MAKARIOS, AUGUST 16, 1974 EOKA PISTOL This homemade weapon was used by the Greek Cypriot guerrilla group EOKA, first against British rule, then against Turkish Cypriots.
NATIONAL GUARD FORMED The House of Representatives, functioning now with only Greek Cypniot members, passed a bill forming a National Guard, and made all male Cypriots between 18 and 59 years eligible for military service.
Relations between the junta and President Makarios became increasingly strained after the latter decided enosis was no longer possible in the short term.
Greece organized more pro-enosis Cypriot groups to subvert his government.
The Greeks termed it an invasion, | while the Turks claimed it was a peacekeeping operation.
By the time | a ceasefire was put in place three days later, Turkish troops had J occupied the northern third , J of the island and 5,000 a | Greek Cypriots had fled a their homes.
Pt kn gs” -™ ‘ National Guard absorbed DIVISION OF CYPRUS 12/21/1963 UNREST IN NICOSIA Communal violence erupted in Nicosia, Cyprus’s capital, when a Greek Cypriot patrol killed two Turkish Cypriots on the edge of the Turkish quarter.
As the news spread, fighting broke out along the line separating the Greek and Turkish quarters, known as the Green Line.
On July 15, a bloody coup, supported by Greece’s military regime, replaced Makarios with enosis activist and militia leader Nicos Sampson.
Fierce fighting § broke out between the supporters of Makarios and his detractors, but Makarios evaded capture and fled to Britain.
Sampson proclaimed , the establishment of The Hellenic Republic of Cyprus.
When a bloodless army coup ended nearly 50 years of dictatorial rule in Portugal, rejoicing crowds threw carnations at the soldiers, who thrust them into the barrels of their guns.
Euphoria soon gave way to months of political confusion and failed governments.
CARNATIONS, NOT BULLETS Civilian crowds flooded the streets in support of the rebels.
They passed red carnations to the soldiers as a symbol of peaceful revolution.
ARMY COUP Just after midnight on April 25, 1974, a Lisbon radio station broadcast a banned political song.
Tanks rolled into Lisbon and by dawn the army had taken control of government offices.
The only shots exchanged were outside PIDE (Portuguese security police) headquarters, where four people died.
SPINOLA RESIGNS By September Portugal was engulfed in a wave of strikes.
A major section of the army remained under the control of radical left-wing officers.
However, things played out differently in the ighalomuaVilecj elo) alnmaaloceleme)mrlalcmalesalmeamealcmce)elcrcme-lieynvalale) ee Ko) a~)ant-VaMcmcolmaailor-le)alcromromr-Nalemoamalice-laattcw-vatel sides in a tactic he later termed the “Rope-a-Dope.” si alo) Koa Mme)mmanr-V.@hale me alc mecoalnbalorelmalcr-hyavmelonatelalcscmneye).¢ its toll on Foreman.
By the seventh round, Ali began to dominate, and floored Foreman in the eighth.
Against rel loo leksyanaarolaMmarsarcomm-halemcyo(ei0ha-le mm alls status as a true sporting icon.
They were When the Palestine Liberation Army was expelled from Jordan seeking revenge for an in 1970, it established a new base in Lebanon.
It was welcomed by a a Muslims who believed the PLO would help in their struggle against Gemayel.
The smoldering hatred militia responded between these groups exploded into a civil war that included amen invasions, assassinations, and many atrocities on both sides.
ISRAEL INVOLVED The Syrian presence failed to stop PLO guerrilla attacks on Israel and, after two years of uneasy peace, Israeli troops assaulted PLO positions in southern Lebanon.
Palestinians had been any foreign armed persuaded to leave by United States diplomat Philip Habib.
Sire EGGERS presence on our land. guerrillas, led by Yasser Arafat, left Beirut and BASHIR GEMAYEL, LEBANESE headed for Tunisia.
PRESIDENT-ELECT, SEPTEMBER 1982 09/24/1982 | 10/23/1983 & TERRORIST ATTACKS International sympathy for Lebanese Muslims evaporated when Islamic militants detonated two bombs at the barracks of the peacekeepers.
The USA responded with outrage, and the entire peacekeeping force was withdrawn.
The UN responded by sending a task force to help restore government control.
Israel grudgingly pulled out, handing the area over to its Christian allies.
When the Israeli ambassador to the United Kingdom, Shlomo Argov, was shot and seriously wounded in London, Israel blamed the PLO for the attack.
Three days later they attacked Lebanon once again, laying seige to the capital, Beirut. hbdard —_ ‘rr rr , > meses 09/16/1982 PALESTINIANS —_ MASSACRED Once iL. again peace was shortlived.
Phalangist militiamen, seeking revenge, turned on Palestinians in the Sabra and Shatila refugee camps.
CIVIL WAR IS OVER Fighting continued for several years, until Syria launched a major assault on the Lebanese government, destroying the Presidential Palace and army headquarters.
Many blamed his death on Syrian agents and, in the popular protests that followed, Syrian forces left Lebanon.
Protests against the war and for global peace became part of the counter-culture movement.
Although Vietnamese soldiers on both sides continued fighting, United States forces finally withdrew from the region and ended their eightyear bombing campaign.
This limited offensive defeated the main force of the South Vietnamese Army.
The South’s forces began a hasty retreat, which quickly became a rout across the country. on Saigon, the South Vietnamese capital, and soon surrounded the city.
Three days later, on April 30, they took Saigon with little resistance.
With the south Vietnamese government declared dissolved, the Vietnam War was finally over.
Survivors appeared on television, and the massacre prompted outrage around the world.
BATTLE OF HUE Hue, in South Vietnam, was leveled in intense street-to-street fighting.
Many soldiers | | intensified, and in one air were conscripts, } strike napalm was plunged into conflict dropped on Trang Bang, against their will. i on | in South Vietnam.
MARSHALL MCLUHAN, MAY 16, 1975 y, y, of the remaining United States citizens.
About 7,000 were taken by helicopter from the United States 4 Embassy roof.
A Portuguese colony, it became independent in 1975 after long years of violent struggle, raising the hopes of its people.
However, within days, fighting broke out again, plunging the country into Africa’s longest-running conflict.
As statues of Portuguese leaders tumbled, it represented a victory for the Angolan independence movement.
On Independence Day, the Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola declared itself the ruling party, and Dr.
Dos Santos _ signed a peace accord with the leader of » UNITA, Jonas Savimbi, to end the fighting.
However, when the MPLA won the longawaited election in 1992, Savimbi dragged Angola back into war.
DISSENTERS CONTINUE FIGHTING The election was intended to end the war, but the violence grew worse.
UNITA seized control of Huambo, Angola’s second largest city, in a battle that cost 12,000 lives.
By 1993 1,000 people were dying each day from deplorable living conditions and indiscriminate bombing.
Their presence was dependent upon a public handshake between dos Santos and Savimbi.
The UN forces hoped to oversee disarmament and the withdrawal of troops.
PROSTHETIC LEG FOR LANDMINE VICTIM The civil war led to the proliferation of landmines across Angola.
More than 4. million people were internally displaced and 500,000 killed.
BRS s—<“—i‘“C:st a oe le ECONOMY IN SHAMBLES ) Although rich in natural resources, including oil, diamonds, agriculture, ' and fisheries, the Angolan economy was left in tatters by the prolonged war.
Agriculture was hit by the proliferation of ® landmines throughout the | country.
Trade activities ceased, education was ignored, and corruption and greed fed the ruling elite.
The flags of the victorious MPLA party and the new independent Angola are held aloft.
Only elections... can provide a final solution... in the end, the ballot must decide, not bullets.
UNITA LEADER JONAS SAVIMBI, IN AN INTERVIEW, DECEMBER 1975 1970-1979 Khmer Rouge 1970-1979 The Khmer Rouge was a communist guerrilla force formed to resist French colonial rule in Cambodia.
Destabilized by war in neighboring Vietnam, Cambodia was in the throes of civil war in the 1970s.
The Khmer Rouge, led by Pol Pot, seized control in 1975 and renamed the country Democratic Kampuchea.
Their brief rule would become infamous as one of the most brutal regimes of the 20th century.
The war was marked by extreme brutality on both sides and casualties were high. 04/17/1975 _ wee a all i oe.
The people, mostly refugees from the civil war, joyously welcomed Pol Pot’s troops as liberators, tragically unaware of the horrors that the new regime would unleash.
RUTHLESS REPRESSION Thousands of Buddhist monks were stripped of their robes and forced into labor brigades.
Anyone ' suspected of being middle class or an | intellectual (which could mean simply wearing glasses) faced execution.
As 7 their tanks entered Phnom |* Penh, the Khmer Rouge fled to mountains on the border with Thailand.
KHMER ROUGE United States INTERVENES Cambodia's ruler Prince Sihanouk allowed North Vietnamese soldiers to operate from within Cambodia during the Vietnam War.
Shortly after, a joint US—South Vietnamese operation invaded Cambodia in an attempt to flush out Vietnamese communists.
A KHMER ROUGE SAYING REFERRING TO “SUBVERSIVE” ELEMENTS, 1975 05/17/1975 YEAR ZERO The start of a new era—Year Zero—was proclaimed, and an eight-point program was announced o “purify” Cambodia from capitalism and foreign influences and to transform it into a rural, classless society as rapidly as possible.
Phnom Penh’s entire population of 2 million people was marched into the countryside at gunpoint and forced to work as rice farmers.
ANGKOR WAT CAPTURED Khmer Rouge soldiers occupied TORTURE PRISON Tuol Sleng, a school in Phnom Penh, was the iconic temple city of Angkor Wat, dating back to the early 12th century, halting restoration work.
Many feared that these historical symbols would be destroyed, in converted into a prison.
At any one time it held 1,000 prisoners, who were brutally tortured and murdered.
Out of an estimated 17,000 prisoners incarcerated there, only 20 survived. a manner similar to the Cultural Revolution in s China.
Approximately | new Vietnam-backed one-fifth of the population | government.
He avoided died and tens of capture but was never thousands were orphaned j; Today, Tuol Sleng is a genocide museum.
Photos of its victims, including many children, hang on its walls. able to regain power. in the Pol Pot years.
Greater understanding led to breakthroughs in diagnosing and treating disease.
Technology accounted for some of the greatest changes, with the emergence of robotic 1900-1915 The turn of the century was an exciting time for medicine.
A, B, and O Transfusion—donation of blood from one person to another— became much safer, because donor and recipient blood types could be matched.
New vaccines greatly reduced the incidence of 1910s BLOOD TRANSFUSION KIT Transfusion practice was greatly improved by the classification of blood types in 1901.
BLOOD TYPE Karl Landsteiner’s discovery of distinct blood types paved the way for safer blood transfusions, blood banks, and organ transplants. formerly lethal diseases such as diphtheria, tetanus, and pertusis.
At the same time, advances in the understanding of body chemistry made it possible to identify and treat diseases caused by vitamin deficiency and hormone imbalance. 1920s | INSULIN SAMPLES Dr.
Frederick Banting discovered a means to manufacture the hormone insulin, revolutionizing the treatment of diabetes.
The condition would be widely treatable by the end of the century. surgery, and the new field of genetic engineering had far-reaching implications for human health.
By the end of the century, diseases that had killed millions throughout history were not only curable, but in some cases eradicated altogether.
In 1935, Gerhard Domagk proved that the sulfomide dye Protonsil stopped the multiplication of bacteria, allowing the body’s own 1915-1950 Developing safe and reliable drugs was an ongoing challenge.
German scientist Paul Ehrlich believed that a drug-borne “magic bullet” could kill the bacteria responsible for a disease without causing harm to the patient.
He discovered Salvarsan, the first curative treatment for syphilis, but the drug had mixed VACCINATION PROGRAM Polio affected thousands of children, but in 1952 Jonas Salk and Albert Sabin developed a preventative vaccine. 1930s 1950s _DNA DOUBLE HELIX DNA, the genetic material that defines every living thing, was discovered by Crick and Watson, opening ~ a whole new understanding _ of the mechanism of life.
However, the real breakthrough came when Alexander Fleming discovered the first antibiotic, penicillin.
By 1940, the drug had been isolated, and its bacteriakilling properties began to revolutionize the treatment of infection.
His pioneering work paved the way for the transplant of lungs, kidneys, and liver in the following decades.
When British scientists Frances Crick and James Watson published their discovery of the double-helix DNA structure in 1953, it led to the the development of gene therapy, instrumental in treating genetic illness.
Diagnostics took a leap forward in 1975 with the introduction of the computerized axial tomography scan, which produced images of the brain.
Meanwhile, the development of increasingly sophisticated instruments in the saved vastly more lives than have been lost in all the wars in history.
Smallpox was officially beaten in 1979. later part of the century enabled less-invasive robotic and keyhole surgery to replace traditional methods.
The red ribbon campaign has helped raise awareness and promote safer sex.
In 2010, doctors were able to sequence a patient’s complete genome to reveal the genetic source of some diseases, a landmark in the advance of personalized medicine.
Their aim was to rescue a communist-backed overthrow of President 2 Daoud’s nationalist government under threat by the growing number of segtave tm @ arannsmnSt , | Islamic rebels.
They covertly imported Prime Minister Amin weapons in what proved to be one of the CIA’s deposed and killed longest and most expensive operations.
The Soviets sent in a detachment of tanks to assist the government in fighting the growing insurgency. ah-{-{0R 2.
Jl United States President Jimmy Carter _ denounced the invasion as an act of Soviet imperialism.
He announced that American athletes would boycott the 1980 Olympics in Moscow in protest, and persuaded 64 other nations to join the boycott.
An estimated 6 million, more than a fifth of the population, left their homes between 1979 and 7 1992.
Although they agreed to share power, President Mohammed Tureki, loyal to the Khalq party, began purging Parchamis.
After seizing key positions in Kabul, hundreds of KGB agents dressed as Afghan soldiers attacked the presidential palace and a assassinated Amin, installing deputy Babrak Kamal as President.
The USA supplied them with advanced weaponry such as the shouldermounted Stinger Missile, | which shot down dozens of Soviet helicopters.
In May 1988, Pakistan, Afghanistan, the USA, and the USSR signed . an agreement to withdraw vr. troops.
It left Afghanistan in chaos, paving the way for the radical Islamic Taliban movement to take power in the 1990s.
His key opponent, Ayatollah Khomeini, had been exiled but continued to call for an end to the Shah’s reign.
Street battles raged between the pro-Khomeini faction and supporters of the imperial regime, as the _ two sides vied for authority.
J 41/02/197 * REVOLUTION SUCCEEDS On February 11, 1979 the jubilant revolutionaries celebrated their historic victory.
Khomeini was SAAVAc) ©) Nn ANROM OO) VCs) ret ANG | appointed Iran’s political and religious leader for life.
Shah’s supporters were tried and executed, while others fled the country.
Many organized a massive protest, but it was crushed by the regime. — ANTI-SHAH PROTESTS /hgchantcvatsmnele).quromnals) streets in a wave of angry protests against iWalcwe)ar-lalmmnyivaavem atave| lexcrereyaatom baler qer-toynere phys _ dictatorial.
When security forces opened fire on demonstrators, it ended all dialogue between the protestors and the imperial regime.
The Jake lalmnashole\s(ove maat-Ranrl| —— IW Varckomnalomerolenalnays YATOLLAH K (oKetsxersyalekslemnalne virtual civil war.
Fresh demonstrations broke o)UhAmalctohamh-)aleohamer-nalel unwilling to massacre fellow Iranians, army officers abandoned Bakhtiar’s regime.
KHOMEINI RETURNS In February Khomeini made a dramatic return to Iran, welcomed by millions of ecstatic supporters.
They hanhe)arsfe)aKeleme)e)eleyarsialns MALO MROVAMORGSLOMMAcVARMmnAl a regime as ruthless as that of the Shah.
He introduced Sharia and urged his followers to turn against the West, especially the USA, which had supported the deposed Shah’s regime.
When United States President Jimmy Carter agreed to let the Shah enter the USA for cancer treatment, Iranian anger at the Americans reached fever pitch.
Khomeini supported their act, seen Freeing the hostages November hopes were as an attack on American imperialism. became a top priority raised when Khomeini for United States President Jimmy ordered the release of Carter.
However, it little he could do except did little to alleviate the halt Iranian oil imports, situation.
However, the mission were taken it turned to disaster when a United States helicopter and a military plane from the wreckage and collided in the Iranian desert, killing eight American servicemen. broadcast to the world.
He had already by the Shah's death, been moved to a hospital the crisis finally ended. in Tehran because of an Carter had worked illness, later diagnosed tirelessly to bring the as multiple sclerosis. captives home, but lost While Queen received a his re-election campaign. ' hero’s welcome at home, As a final snub to Carter, 52 hostages were still the Iranians waited until deprived of their freedom, after Ronald Reagan’s despite the Shah's death inauguration as President on July 27, 1980. to free the hostages.
In a defiant gesture, the students paraded the blindfolded hostages ) in front of television cameras.
They demanded the Shah be expelled from the USA and stand _ trial in Iran.
When the _ USA offered medical treatment to the Shah, * a group of outraged Iranian students stormed the United States Embassy in Tehran, taking dozens of hostages.
In return for their release, the USA agreed to unfreeze Iranian assets worth $8 billion, and give the hostage-takers immunity.
The return of the hostages gave a huge boost to Reagan's presidency, but the incident strained the relationship between the USA and Iran.
The Sandinista Liberation Front —named after revolutionary hero Augusto Sandino, 12/27/1974 07/19/1979 SANDINISTAS ENTER MANAGUA Crowds cheered the victorious Sandinista fighters as they took possession of Managua on July 19, 1979.
The five-member Junta for National Reconstruction took power the next day.
Nicaraguan Revolution who was assassinated on Somoza’s orders in 1933—was founded by a group of Marxist students in 1961 to fight oppression.
Although small in size, the FSLN was a thorn in the side of the Somoza regime, and its members were regularly arrested and imprisoned.
Rebels stormed a L party and kidnapped several guests, including members of the Somoza family.
They secured a $1 million ransom and the release of 14 political prisoners.
To make matters worse, the money had been earned from illegal sales of weapons to Iran.
NICARAGUAN REVOLUTION EARTHQUAKE FUNDS EMBEZZLED More than 10,000 people died when a massive earthquake struck Managua, capital of Nicaragua, destroying most of the city and leaving thousands homeless.
Millions of dollars of international aid flowed in—but most of it never reached the victims, going instead into government coffers.
Somoza’s blatant misuse of the funds drove up support for the Sandinista rebels.
Heavy fighting broke out all over the country, and by the beginning of July 1979, Sandinista guerrillas controlled most of Nicaragua.
A group of prominent intellectuals, priests, and businessmen publicly stated their support for the rebels, and the USA broke off military aid to somoza’s regime.
Illiteracy rates were said to have fallen from more than 50 percent to 13 percent in the first two years.
CONTRA REBELLION The new government faced opposition from the Contras, a guerrilla army who opposed the Junta’s left-wing politics.
Fearful of communist influence in the region, United States President Ronald Reagan authorized the CIA, the American intelligence agency, to covertly support the Contras.
PROPAGANDA These leaflets were recovered by Contras during the Wal against the Junta | and put on display %, as evidence of the i Sandinista party’s communist and pro-Cuban sympathies.
END OF THE WAR Under intense international pressure to find an end to the conflict, which had destroyed Nicaragua's economy, the Contras and FSLN agreed to negotiate.
Once a member | of the Junta, she m® had resigned in ; Protest against Ortega’s policies.
In May 1982, | * bitter enemies and had fought repeatedly over an Iranian counterattack [a le 2 restored the pre-war ee ‘ their shared border for many years.
Iran declared its coastal waters to be war zones and launched attacks against two Iraqi air bases.
TANKER WAR Iraq began attacking Iranian ships to undermine Iran’s ability to fight at sea.
Chemical ¥. weapons were unleashed against the civilian | ‘Bb eleyelbukcintoyatsmoya Gunqentcyal towns.
He justified it on the basis of a territorial dispute over the Shatt al-Arab waterway that lies between the two states.
Their forces were faced with relentless attacks by mass waves of Iranian troops.
Their | CEASEFIRE AGREED After eight bloody years, the UN negotiated a ceasefire in Geneva, which both sides accepted.
Half a million people had died and neither side had achieved its aims. funerals were marked by anti-US protests.
The scene was set for popular rebellion against LECH WALESA Soviet rule.
The touchpaper was lit when shipyard workers in the Polish city of Gdansk went on strike.
Gdansk Agreement, he led workers’ representatives to form a national labour union.
Solidarity was born and more than 10 million workers, intellectuals, and students hopeful for change bravely joined the union.
SOLIDARITY POSTER After martial law was imposed, posters such as this were printed in secret.
He encouraged dialogue and urged Solidarity members to avoid inciting civil war.
The Polish Catholic Church did a great deal to keep the flame of Solidarity alive.
Even as people took to the streets to celebrate, there was a political a stalemate.
Solidarity | * he "" could not threaten | the communist regime, but the communist government had failed to destroy Solidarity or fix the economy.
Lech Watesa galvanized the workers to stay at the yard and work with the wider populace to engineer a general strike in | Poland.
They drew up alist of demands | Including freedom of the press and the right to form independent trade unions.
The communist government capitulated, signing an agreement ratifying many of the workers’ demands.
Troops poured onto Poland's streets, the country’s borders were sealed, and thousands of Solidarity members, including Watesa, were arrested.
He who puts out his hand to stop the wheel of history will have his fingers crushed.
LECH WAELESA, CBS INTERVIEW, NOVEMBER 15, 1989 y, y, | FIRST FREE ELECTION IN EASTERN EUROPE ' Polish Prime Minister | General Wojciech | Jaruzelski acceded to | pressure from the West, from Solidarity, and the failing economy, and held democratic elections.
Solidarity triumphed, and in 1990 Walesa became Poland's first postcommunist president.
On March 30, 1981, as the President was leaving the Hilton Hotel in Washington, John Hinckley, Jr. opened fire.
Reagan was swiftly bundled into his Waiting car by a secret service agent.
The shooting left police officer Thomas Delahanty (seen here in the foreground) and Press Secretary James Brady wounded.
At first it seemed that Reagan had not been Jahiem o)ULMm atom elc\orhale mere) aa}e)mre) AXot>1m OyNAAESE-N ALO MANIVE~ Fs} taken to the hospital.
His would-be assassin, John Hinckley, was found mentally unstable at trial.
With Argentina’s economy in ruins, the increasingly unpopular military regime staged an audacious invasion of the British-held territory in an attempt to unite their country.
Where the Argentines could rely on mainland airfields, British aircraft would have to be launched from carriers.
The fierce battle lasted for EXOCET MISSILE The Falklands conflict introduced the modern guided missile to warfare, when the Argentines used Exocets to sink HMS Sheffield.
Although and hit large warships vastly outnumbered, 4 with incredible force. the British troops took more than a thousand prisoners of wat. retaliated by attacking HMS Sheffield, killing 20 men and injuring _ British warship to be attacked.
This put an » end to any hopes of a diplomatic solution i 04/02/1982 ee STAKING A CLAIM The Argentine invasion took the British entirely by surprise.
Images of survivors being rescued shocked the British public and strengthened the cause of antiwar campaigners. oy Far Val) ye —— of the first British attack was stanley Airport in the Falkland Islands.
Following this raid, Sea Harrier jets dropped cluster bombs on the airstrip to prevent Argentine jets from using it. +e ce aor , ae BRITISH TROOPS LAND Westland Sea Helicopters airlifted thousands of British troops from the aircraft carriers Hermes and Invincible.
FALKLANDS CONFLICT INITIAL BRITISH 04/05/1982 BRITAIN LAUNCHES SURRENDER The small } OFFENSIVE In Britain, contingent of Royal the invasion created a Marines based on the political crisis because . islands put up some the government was ' resistance but were accused of neglecting hopelessly outnumbered. the islands.
The British © The Argentine Special government immediately ms, Forces made the cut off diplomatic ties » prisoners lie on their with Argentina.
It stomachs in the dirt— began to assemble a a humiliating image large naval taskforce that was published of 30 warships, 6,000 all around the world troops, and auxiliary within hours.
On June 14, Argentine Commander Mario Menendez signed . a Surrender document and his troops laid down their arms.
Increasing leisure time brought a demand for different kinds of sportswear.
Radical changes in women’s lives, and especially their move into the workplace, saw 1900-1920 Paris set the tone for style in the 1900s as French designers dominated the world of haute couture, creating exclusive hand-tailored outfits for wealthy and titled clients.
Dresses were ornately decorated, and to achieve the fashionable S-bend silhouette of the day, women forced themselves into tightly laced corsets.
He introduced narrow, straighter shapes that allowed greater freedom of movement, though paradoxically the tight “hobble skirt,” one of his innovations, reduced women to taking mincing, tiny steps.
Another innovator was Venetian designer Mariano Fortuny, famous for his flowing shifts of finely pleated silk that clung to the body.
At the beginning of the century, the aristocracy led the way in fashion.
The number had fallen to 18 by the year 2000. couturier Christian Dior launched the “New Look” dress, with a tiny waist and full skirt, his extravagant use of fabric Hollywood stars such as Louise Brooks became fashion icons.
French tennis star Suzanne Lenglen shocked the staid English public by appearing in an above-the-calf tennis dress at Wimbledon.
Clothing was subject to strict rationing during World War II—Parisian designers were limited to 13 ft of cloth for a coat and 3ft for a blouse.
ELSA SCHIAPARELLI rT Famous for sportswear, Schiaparelli introduced. knitwear, such as this woolen suit, to fashion and designed the first wraparound dress.
SPACE CHIC The futuristic white and metallic outfits of French designer Andre Courreges, launched in 1964, immediately earned the name Space Age.
The 1980s saw a return to designer clothing with an emphasis on power dressing, epitomized by padded shoulders.
Designers such as Ralph Lauren, Calvin Klein, and Versace dominated fashion.
Manolo Blahnik reintroduced A CENTURY OF FASHION stiletto heels but sneakers were also widely worn.
Women chose clothes for casual smartness and comfort, with jeans the most ubiquitous item of all.
FASHION ROCKS British designer Vivienne Westwood created the punk fashions associated with the Sex Pistols rock band in the 1970s. a yg The fashion world can truly be a jungle...|t’s a flercely competitive business.
Both Mary Quant and Andre Courreges were credited with inventing the mini skirt, the decade's iconic garment.
Quant’s 1 innovative clothes a hi, appealed to the | young generation of Swinging London. seen everywhere, although they were not always welcomed.
By the end of the decade, the hippy look, with floor-length skirts, colorful psychedelic prints, and sheepskin coats, was becoming popular.
In marked contrast to this were the studded leather jackets and spiked hair of punk fashion.
Thousands died within hours of the leak, and thousands more fell ill in the following months and years.
As the awful tragedy unfolded, the Bhopal disaster became infamous as one of the worst industrial accidents in history.
The hospital was overwhelmed. told what to do in the A week later victims were still arriving at a rate of one a minute. event of a gas leak.
Farmers lost JOURNALIST, DECEMBER 4, 1984 their entire livelihoods as crops died, and soiland | _ water were polluted.
At the Hindu ame nae lonalersmant-nanv of the victims were burned on mass pyres.
Mourners at the Muslim Joluhar-limencelenalemae-tamelenme)i space for new burials, and were forced to dig up old graves to bury victims of the gas.
Water leaked into a tank containing 40 tons of methyl isocyanate , and the in Bhopal in 1970 in reaction produced large amounts of toxic gas.
The poisonous cloud floated across the sleeping city, where many lived in slums close to the plant.
Panic spread iAaicelulesamnal-manlolalmur-ialem oy’ maale)aauialemAalcMcindc\ol Romy i\ic) Rom el ale) .¢o10 MiValA am ele)isVe)eMe [<tc response to India’s increased demand for agricultural supplies.
In 1979 the factory started ims 0) cole hb Losbalomr-Ne(om-hestelunauns of methyl isocyanate, an ingredient of pesticides.
He was urged by the Indian government to leave the country within 24 hours | for his own safety.
Lawyers immediately filed claims for $3. billion against 1Uhableyam@r-hde)le (sam Mats legal battle would go on for years, while victims of the disaster Sinabrereitq\omnemaclelvalle their shattered lives.
DEATH TOLL RISES At least 3,000 died in the first few days, and thousands more suffered terrible injuries.
It took until 1989 for a legal settlement to be agreed, and several more years for compensation to reach the victims.
Their images of BB raahtsjatelo Melani (ohasyaMmacvenvnersve| almost to skeletons, shocked _ the world and galvanized a Fe ahvlearlm qcts] ele aksion * Injust a few days, millions of ~; dollars were donated in aid. 03/25/1985 rs i 05/14/1985 FUNDS DIVERTED TO FUEL THE WAR The Marxist i — ' THOUSANDS DISPLACED The government response to the regime had diverted almost half of its national | —"" famine was to uproot large numbers of peasants who lived in the budget to military spending in its war with the affected areas in the north and resettle them in the south.
The international community condemned the led Ethiopian government and accused it of spending | | . to refugee camps in neighboring Sudan. aid money on weapons and supplies for the troops. | ell 7.
Cattle suffered as they grew lAaiievatclarcvalomelonelenaloig and eventually died.
Getting aid to war-torn northern Ethiopia was ats} Q\AwaWicengeleje)nalemoaene)e)ilctcmire rs _ challenging as turbulence kicked up the desert sand.
Thousands swarmed to meet the first planes, sometimes fighting over food. \ ff 04/23/1984 HELP DELAYED Ethiopia ra 0) Oley NKslO Mm ROM MAXSMANCotoih for aid, but there were concerns that the money would be squandered.
The West criticized Ethiopia for its socialist policies, suggesting the famine could have been averted.
THE WAR RAGES ON As Ethiopian feeding centers swelled with people desperate for food, their plight was (efeyaaherelenalencVomvvdalsiamnars government stepped up its war with rebel movements in | Eritrea and Tigray.
LIVE AID FOR AFRICA hatsjalpaaivnci(oit-talls{olemec-yleleyi led a fund-raising crusade, culminating in the massive Live Aid concert.
The world’s most famous stars played at Wembley Stadium, London, and John F Kennedy Stadium in Philadelphia.
Two billion people watched, and money poured in, but the (orchanyeyble pal are Vom binAlomloyaler term effect, and provoked debate about the best way to help the African people.
Perestroika, or restructuring, promised to allow Glasnost Transforms the USSR greater economic efficiency.
Glasnost, or openness, permitted unprecedented freedom of the press and political expression.
However, his proposals faced opposition from both diehard communists and pro-democracy campaigners, and implementing them would prove a huge challenge.
Gorbachev confirmed his commitment to transforming foreign relations, aS economic strain forced the USSR to seek peace.
In April i 1988 Afghanistan and Pakistan signed an a accord, with the USA dt ~ and Soviet Union as guarantors.
On May 15 the last _ troops began to leave. iy hse ram t-}-le) PRO-DEMOCRACY PROTESTS Glasnost had made it possible for people to criticize the government.
However, a mass demonstration in Moscow’s Red Square during October Revolution celebrations embarrassed Gorbachev.
Protestors demanded an end to communist rule, calling for multiparty elections, and denounced Vladimir Lenin, the architect and first head of the Soviet Union.
He pledged to bring a new dynamism, particularly to the stagnant economy. months later he announced Perestroika, a radical restructuring to allow greater economic freedoms.
Calls for independence 3 from the Soviet Union | were increasing in the Baltic States.
VIOLENCE IN AZERBAIJAN INTERNATIONAL ACCLAIM Civil unrest in Azerbaijan led to a soviet crackdown, in which dozens were killed.
Armenians had interpreted Glasnost as an opportunity to unite with Nagorno-Karabakh, a region within Azerbaijan demanding independence.
Despite problems at home, Gorbachev's increasing openness with the wider world led to international plaudits.
He won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1990 and was feted by international leaders as a champion of democracy.
However, in Moscow, which was hit by shortages of food and basic consumer goods, his celebrity status was regarded with more reserve.
His greatest critic was Boris Yeltsin, chairman a | i % of the Russian government, who a — ‘i insisted that communists We n eed ‘al emocra cy should no longer dominate the government.
MIKHAIL GORBACHEV, democratic elections in June PACITY eR eee eee 1991.
The nuclear power complex at Chernobyl in the Soviet republic of Ukraine appeared to fulfill that promise—until an experimental safety procedure went badly wrong, resulting in the worst nuclear accident the world had ever seen. in Reactor 4.
The test caused a power 04/26/1986 For the first time ever we have encountered In reality the sinister power of nuclear energy that has escaped control SOVIET LEADER MIKHAIL GORBACHEV, IN A TELEVISION ADDRESS, MAY 15, 1986 11/30/1986 SARCOPHAGUS IS COMPLETED Thousands of workers were employed in the construction project, which was hampered by the continuing danger of radiation poisoning.
The sarcophagus was completed before the end of the year, but the vast cost put significant strain | on the already struggling soviet economy.
CONTAINMENT MEASURES Firefighters had succeeded in putting out the smaller blazes, but were unable to reach the fire in the reactor core.
Army helicopters were called in to dump sand, clay, , lead, and boron into the | reactor to smother the flames.
They dropped more than 5,000 tons of CIVILIAN DANGER As dangerously high levels of _ 04/27/1986 | material before the fire radiation were detected in the nearby city of Pripyat, was extinguished, two some 53,000 residents were evacuated.
They were weeks later. told to pack for three days; most never returned.
EUROPE TAKES 06/24/1986 PRECAUTIONS As the fallout spread, CLEAN-UP OPERATION European governments As the immediate effects | took action to prevent of the disaster came contaminated material under control, the USSR F from entering human faced a daunting task in food.
Farmers were dealing with the remains _ ordered to destroy crops of Reactor 4.
More than 130,000 people were permanently evacuated, and all land within a 19-mile radius was declared off-limits.
Controversy still rages today over the long-term health effects of the disaster, with claims that cancer rates in the region have risen significantly.
The explosion had burst open the reactor vessel, exposing the radioactive elements inside to the air.
Graphite control rods @. inside the reactor were *, Still burning, and the + smoke carried particles of radioactive dust into the atmosphere. eke a i i , y DOOMED HEROES The explosion started a fire in the center of the reactor.
The worst affected disaster to the USSR and contaminated area ——— Twere those who had attended the initial blazes, receiving lethal the wider world.
As the years passed, a few of the city’s former residents returned illegally to their homes, but | much of the city remains empty, . a4 a stark reminder of the disaster.
In 1986 he held a crooked election, and in just a few days was ousted by a people-power revolution which was marked, not by violence, but by sheer force of will.
Amid The day after the election, |, ivalel ke wr accusations of fraud, Marcos declared himself the winner.
Thirty computer workers also walked out from an election tabulation center, protesting the tampering of election results. i J 02/25/1986 PEOPLE CHEER SPOILS OF THE REGIME | MARCOS’ EXIT Hundreds of Filipinos On February 25 both stormed into Malacanang | Palace, home to the Marcos family, to view the opulence enjoyed by their former leader.
One room housed the 3,400 pairs of shoes that belonged to First Lady Imelda Marcos.
The President had reportedly stolen billions of dollars from his people.
Aquino and Marcos defiantly staged separate inaugurations, but Marcos had lost all credibility.
Realizing the futility of his stand, he fled with his family and supporters to Hawaii.
He suspended freedom of the press, suppressed popular protests, and ordered the arrest of opposition leaders.
At a general election held in 1981, he was reelected as President, but opposition parties claimed that the election was fraudulent and boycotted the vote.
REVOLUTION IN THE PHILIPPINES SEIISHM [1986 OPPOSITION STRENGTHENS Many believed that Marcos had ordered Ninoy’s assassination.
In 1983 the @ deteriorating election, Ninoy’s widow, economic situation ' Cory Aquino, challenged in the Philippines the Marcos government.
Dismissed as a mere housewife by her critics, she became a potent symbol of opposition to the corrupt Marcos family. © persuaded him to * return home.
Led by Cardinal Jaime Sin, it condemned the elections as fraudulent and urged a non-violent struggle for justice.
Even the most conservative elements of the Church eventually joined the anti-Marcos campaign.
On February 22, Juan Enrile, former Minister of Defense, and General Fidel Ramos, commander of the Philippine Paramilitary Constabulary, defected from the Marcos administration.
Cardinal Sin made an appeal on the Catholicf run Radio Veritas for | citizens to support the rebels.
FEBRUARY 23, 1986 § O2/25/1986 A KICK IN THE FACE The revolution was largely peaceful.
The few shots fired were mainly in the air, and there were minimal reports of casualties or looting.
The people demonstrated their contempt for the former leader by breaking into the presidential palace and destroying portraits and furniture.
Space Shuttle Tragedy Olamel-heher-lavayAsta Rclolome-halr-1UKeNlJaleroMelmaanilhteyatsmlele).¢o\el ace)ar-tomnalcml-hUnale] Ame)meyor-le.sme) Onno mOdar-lICcialeloys went tragically wrong.
A mere 73 seconds after liftoff from the Kennedy Space Center, Florida, the shuttle was torn into pieces, killing all seven astronauts on board.
It soon became clear that something was wrong as smoke puffed from one of the booster rockets.
Less than a minute into the flight, flames burst from the rocket, causing a fuel tank to explode.
President Ronald Reagan addressed the akc lolalam Oye hyanale maleyaat-le(-mnemAalomle\-imeiaoh Vamauanleyalemnalc astronauts was Christa McAuliffe, a teacher selected to give lessons from space.
Mela@iAlerlm @liabalem-r-r1 had failed, allowing an escape of hot gas that caused 1 alomsy.¢ 0) ssLo}A mm \ Paton Wari ce)ON lem ake)rm-honelelem-halelnal-iarcsalvanacs for nearly three years.
On one momentous night it was breached, uniting people who had been kept apart for a generation.
Bush met Soviet thousands to celebrate leader Mikhail Gorbachev the momentous event. for a historic summit on On October 3 the board a Soviet ship at process of reunification Malta’s Marsaxlokk between East and West Harbor.
The conflict had Germany had been spanned four decades, formally concluded, and at times had marking the birth of threatened to engulf the a new Europe. world in violence.
By nightfall, hundreds of thousands of Berliners, East and West, had begun converging on the wall.
In the face of the swelling crowd, East German border guards let them pass.
DISMANTLING THE IRON CURTAIN In May 1989 Hungarian Prime Minister Miklos Nemeth ordered guards to start dismantling the barbed wire fences along its border with Austria.
Fast Germans began traveling to Hungary in order to get to the West via Austria.
This tide of popular rebellion was the culmination of years of opposition to the division of Berlin.
Communist rule in Fast Germany was already tottering as the USSR faced economic ruin.
West Berliners on the other side welcomed them with joyful hugs and bottles of champagne.
Friends and family members who had been separated for decades were finally reunited.
PEOPLE ATTACK WALL Ecstatic crowds joined in _ the demolition work, hacking large chunks out of the 28-mile barrier.
The protests began among university students in Beijing, but soon spread across the nation.
They ended on June 4, with a dramatic crackdown by soldiers from the People’s Liberation Army. 04/26/1989 /13/1989 ‘ha.
Q a | — ao DENG DENOUNCES PROTEST Officials of the Beijing People’s Government were outraged at the students’ conduct.
Deeply alarmed at the growing unrest, communist leader Deng Xiaoping ordered a crackdown on the demonstrators.
Troops were brought into Beijing and ordered to suppress the protests. _ the protesters launched a It was a tense time.
Sympathetic citizens first Sino-Soviet summit in » and the movement gained movement threatened further m team to provide medical cancel a greeting ceremony | assistance to the students. in Tiananmen Square.
It was an opportunity not just to mourn but also to express dissatisfaction with the slow pace of reform.
The embarrassed society, including Buddhist government found itself monks and important constantly rearranging intellectuals.
JUNE 1989 06/05/1989 | OPEN DEFIANCE In the midst of the violence, one man became an icon of peaceful resistance, blocking a column of tanks by standing in their path.
The photograph became a defining image of the protests, but such acts were powerless to prevent the army’s advance.
Thousands of students traveled to Tiananmen Square despite being warned that they risked severe punishment.
MARTIAL LAW 06/04/1989 © IMPOSED Deng decided that martial law was the PROTESTERS AND POLICE only way to disperse CLASH In June the troops the students.
He sent received orders to reclaim _ troops into the city Tiananmen Square at any cost. / center, but citizens Heavily armed tanks moved rushed from their homes toward the center of the city from to block their way.
Many several directions, and soldiers lay down on the street in opened fire on people who tried to | front of the tanks, and prevent their advance.
Roadblocks | thousands of protesters were set up in the surrounding paraded through the city. suburbs and pitched street battles The troops pulled back to took place between civilians and the outskirts of Beijing the army.
The army claimed a great victory against the unarmed student protesters.
Deng appeared in public and made a speech praising the heroic efforts of the military officers.
It was an act of political desperation, and he gambled that the West would not intervene.
His actions, however, unleashed a massive military response by the international community.
Five-year-old Stuart Lockwood was made to pose with Saddam during a televised propaganda stunt.
By drawing Israel into the conflict, Saddam hoped | to split the coalition and ws win the backing of Arab | countries who would come to Iraq’s aid.
However, positioned to the south of Iraq and east of Saudi Arabia, its location Warbah Abdali i ‘\ IRAN Bubiyan Qasr as Sabiyah ersten made it vulnerable to Bae KUWAIT ou attack.
There had been Al dehratite BKuwait City repeated spats with Iraq Ash Shuwaykn_/* over oil production and | | tnedebt owed by Iraq Tere ‘ea Aion for financial assistance given during its war SAUDI with Iran in the 1980s.
Wafrah asr | 06/12/1990 | FLEEING REFUGEES As the tension mounted, saddam released the captive foreign nationals but refused to withdraw his troops.
Kuwaitis fled in the thousands across the desert to Jordan, in dusty cars and trucks stuffed with belongings.
The refugees reported food shortages and brutal treatment by Iraqi soldiers.
It was a grim reminder to the West of their reliance on oil from the Middle East.
SADDAM HUSSEIN, HIGHWAY OF DEATH The Iraqi army was crushed, and its troops began a headlong retreat.
The main highway out of Kuwait was packed with fleeing vehicles laden with plunder from Kuwait City.
Thousands of Iraqi soldiers were killed and wounded as the road was attacked from the air.
After repeated threats, Irag invaded its oil-rich neighbor with an army of 10,000 troops and hundreds of tanks.
After two days of combat, most of Kuwait was Overrun. 08/08/1990 ry OPERATION DESERT SHIELD The United Nations immediately demanded the withdrawal of Iraqi troops and issued a trade embargo.
The USA formed a coalition of 34 nations, and a huge logistical operation began as allied forces massed in Saudi Arabia.
When Iraq ignored the deadline, the coalition began Operation Desert Storm with a massive air offensive against Iraqi strategic positions.
Baghdad's skyline lit up with anti-aircraft tracer fire during the attack, but the city suffered heavy damage.
They were issued gas masks, anticipating the use of chemical incident, there were relatively weapons by Iraq.
Saddam's brutal aggression had been defeated by concerted global action.
Botha Tutu was awarded F W. de Klerk became . tae became Prime Minister. the Nobel Peace Prize President of South Africa re He told white colleagues in 1984 for speaking he called for a new, The to adapt and proposed out against the nonracist society, | that “coloreds and regime.
It senta without apartheid Indians” should have powerful message to divisions.
He lifted the representatives in Botha’s government ban on protest marches, parliament.
South cultural boycott Africa had been subject to economic, cultural, and academic boycotts, and banned from of South Africa. participating in sporting events.
DE KLERK AND 04/27/1994 MANDELA MEET De Klerk and Mandela, now leader of the ANC, began negotiations to dismantle the apartheid regime.
On May 4, 1990, they agreed a plan to tackle violence and all | —— establish stability.
Their FIRST MULTIRACIAL ELECTIONS On April 27, 1994, famous handshake millions of South Africans, both black and white, waited marked a new beginning patiently to vote in the first multiracial elections held in for South African politics.
END OF APARTHEID RIOTING INSOWETO [m®)-JAr—Jhlvag ' On June 16, 1976, ""aaa a march by 10,000 — JP 7 Pr students, protesting ee oe . against the use of ) Afrikaans as the main teaching language in schools, ended in bloodshed.
It was the STEPHEN BIKO KILLED The death of anti-apartheid activist Stephen worst violence seen in Biko in police custody caused immediate controversy and international , the country for 16 years. outrage.
He urged a policy of truth and reconciliation to heal the old divisions and unite white and black South Africans.
Its leader, Mikhail Gorbachev, fought to implement reform, but was resisted by both hard-line communists who wanted to EET ocl ve the old ay and radical reformists As leader of the Communist Boris Yeltsin, President of calling for faster changes.
Mikhail Gorbachev attempted critic of Gorbachev, saying his MIKHAIL GORBACHEV BORIS YELTSIN 08/19/1991 4 7 GATHERING MOMENTUM Ordinary citizens, some still clutching their shopping, rushed to the Russian Parliament to protect the building from attack.
Years of liberal reform had lessened the menace of the old regime and people felt more confident in protesting.
TV crews broadcast the rebellion, encouraging others to join in. to radically reform the USSR. 7) « “08/19/1991 reforms did not go far enough.
DEFINING MOMENT Boris Yeltsin chose this moment to clamber on board a tank and deliver a rousing speech urging the troops not to fire on their own people.
Despite repeated warnings that more tanks were on their way, thousands of people worked through the night to build defenses, constructing barricades and forming human chains.
El 08/19/1991 he F me THE COUP IS DEFEATED Faced with massive popular resistance, and with the eyes of the world upon them, the hardliners backed down.
Without the support of the military, the plotters could not take power.
While their outlets claimed that Gorbachev was unwell and that the rebels represented the official government, the truth started to emerge.
MILITARY MIGHT Soviet citizens woke up to news reports that Gorbachev had been taken ill.
They tried to coordinate policy on a range of economic issues, including trade and energy supplies, but the CIS failed to fulfill the hopes for greater post-Soviet collaboration. coup.
Tanks rolled through END OF THE USSR | decided, whatever order was given, | wouldn’t shoot.
MAJOR SERGEY YEVDOKIMOV, TANK COMMANDER, AUGUST 19, 1991 GORBACHEV HUMILIATED Gorbachev had been politically destroyed by the revolt.
When he returned to parliament in Moscow, Yeltsin | insisted he read out the names of those who had plotted against him.
Kara Sea \ \ ESTONIA LITHUANIA_-~ ATVIA BELARUS RUS SIAN UKRAINE F ED ERATION MOLDOVA Black Sea oe GEORGIA_/ g KAZAKHSTAN & ae ea ARMENIA _/ Ye.
The old state was formed of an uneasy alliance of ethnic and religious groups, which now sought independence.
As his vei via Baia (Heres supporters cracked down on independence movements, WifiKoxsX-\Vilommsel0imelolanllarclarerthe scene was set for bloody civil war as the old socialist republic fragmented.
Croats and Muslims in the region, laying siege to the capital, Sarajevo.
The USA issued an ultimatum through INPaW MO ehetsstcjnnatemoyalmnarcy withdrawal of Serb forces.
A ceasefire was declared, enforced by iN PAW OR rebal.esp MILLIONS DISPLACED Radovan Karadzic, political leader of the Serbs in Bosnia, endorsed the expulsion of more than a million Croats and Muslims from Bosnia.
Co Roy 34154 alee Mohe-haat-lnlom o)leinoM-velelmnal-mrate) war, and the Croatian ie forces.
Several Serbian i 4 army was accused of a | launched a series of airstrikes against the Serbian military in leaders, including MiloSevi¢, | IARSMODVAeMmerNeal ey-Hleneme)i Ter Ga ¥ , Bosnia.
WAR IN THE BALKANS 08/25/1991 | SIEGE OF VUKOVAR When Croatia proclaimed independence in July 1991, the largely Serbian Yugoslav Army, assisted by Serbian paramilitary groups, overwhelmed the city of Vukovar in eastern Croatia.
UN GENERAL SECRETARY KOFI ANNAN, y y 09/18/1997 emai “© MASS GRAVES | NEW STATES As the / eck 3 Ljubljana before the storm.
Serbian military and paramilitary groups, determined to rid the country of Muslims and Croats, herded captives into concentration camps.
Women were raped repeatedly, in an attempt to ensure that they produced Serbian offspring.
In the town of Srebrenica, more than 8,000 people, mostly men and boys, were murdered and their bodies buried in mass graves.
This picture shows some of the VAUROLOLOMSIUhavAhico) asco) qer-(e nom ant-Nae]AmMalcelorelaMmalescinals _ territory in a desperate search for safety.
It was a Shameful moment for the UN, and paved the way for more aggressive military interventions by the international community in following years.
As drought and famine added to the misery, the United Nations intervened to help end the crisis.
Their presence, however, escalated into one of the most ill-considered humanitarian missions ever carried out.
Bush proposed that United States troops lead an international UN force to end the crisis.
He remained defiant, speaking out against UN intervention and presenting himself as a victim of aggression.
The search for Aidid was abandoned; instead, the UN sought negotiations with the warlord.
Bitter clan rivalries led to civil war and fighting spread across the country, destroying agriculture and inflicting famine. en An estimated 300,000 ; people died of starvation that year. ia — , 12/12/1992 FOOD DISTRIBUTION United States forces, leading a United Task Force, faced a tense and rapidly changing situation.
Their principal aim was to secure the distribution of food and protect supplies from bandits.
Within months food supplies flowed, gangs were suppressed, and seeds and livestock were distributed.
He m deployed Task Force Ranger, an assault force which / included a helicopter unit, to the capital Mogadishu.
United States PRESIDENT BILL CLINTON QUOTED IN THE ECONOMIST, JUNE 2003 BATTLE OF MOGADISHU Task Force Ranger’s attack on the Olympic Hotel in Mogadishu, in search of Aidid, resulted in a drawn-out battle in which two Black Hawk helicopters were shot down.
UN IN SOMALIA 12/03/1992 UN RELIEF EFFORT A ceasefire agreement in 1992 allowed a UN monitoring mission into Somalia to oversee the provision of humanitarian aid.
However, the UN | convoys were hijacked, food was looted and exchanged for weapons, and aid workers were attacked.
UN BERET The bright blue beret is the distinctive symbol of UN peacekeeping forces, marking them out as protectors and mediators rather than combatants.
In Somalia, however, they became increasingly embroiled in the local conflict.
On June 5, scale down the American 1993, 24 UN soldiers military presence in » from Pakistan were somalia.
As American killed while inspecting troops began to pull a somali weapons out, the UN opted for storage site.
But the Russians had other ideas, and their oa a Se peed, determination to maintain control in the province at any cost ener 86© sparked a bitter campaign of war and terrorism. the region Chechnya independent.
Their Basayev entered the Russian region of Stavropol Kray and took 1,500 people hostage in a hospital in Budennovsk.
More than a hundred were killed in a botched assault by Russian troops trying to free the hostages, but the Chechens escaped. campaign had been brutal, and an estimated 60,000—100,000 people were thought to have died in the war.
Aslan Maskhadov, a Chechen military leader, was elected as the President, but Chechnya was in chaos and he struggled to control deep unrest.
Boris Yeltsin, the Russian President, called a state of emergency, and ordered the military to prepare for action.
In December Russian troops entered Chechnya, under orders to end its bid for independence and arrest Dudayev.
MARTIAL LAW IMPOSED Chechnya once again descended into lawlessness when violence broke out between proand anti-Maskhadov factions.
On May 1, 1998 Russia's presidential representative in Chechnya, Valentin Vlasov, was kidnapped, spurring Maskhadov to impose martial law.
RUSSIA-BACKED ELECTIONS Amid tight security, Chechnya held parliamentary elections in a bid to show that it was becoming more stable.
United Russia, the party favored by Russia, took the majority vote and Ramzan Kadyrov became Prime Minister.
Russia blamed the Chechens, but the Chechens believed it was a pretext for starting another war.
Russia declared that the Chechen rebels were terrorists and threatened to eliminate them.
In 2004 they attacked a school in the city of Beslan in the Russian province of North OssetiaAlania, taking more than 1,200 hostages—many of them children.
Her death ON CALLS TO NEGOTIATE WITH CHECHEN symbolized Russia's tightening SEPARATISTS, SEPTEMBER 2004 of press freedom, and the continuing struggle for an end to violence in Chechnya.
With the economy in tatters, Rwandan President Juvenal ee ees Hutus ae 2 Habyarimana, a Hutu, lost popularity, and opposition to the aes the ee rebels ae ”"" f, ; ° ° of the Rwandan Patriotic re ie regime escalated.
Members of the militia the UN cut its force in ae ® roamed the countryside, killing as they went.
Despite reports from 4 /— the International Red * ni ik Cross that more than 2 i 100,000 Rwandans / had been killed, the * FOREIGNERS EVACUATED The situation deteriorated remaining peacekeeping | Waa as the RPF mobilized a response to the Hutu aggression, troops were not Lam hs i iy prompting an evacuation of foreign nationals.
UN personnel authorized to intervene, helped Americans and Europeans leave Rwanda. and watched helplessly.
It quickly overran government forces in Kigali and the southern town of Butare.
The RPF leadership announced its intention of forming a new government, forcing more Hutus to flee.
The civil war was declared over on July 18, and a government of national unity was formed.
For thousands who had fled the country, the news of peace came too late.
CHILD SOLDIERS Children, some as young as nine, were used as soldiers and became a common feature of the war.
The » machete was the weapon of choice, inflicting horrific wounds on the victims.
The were Hutus rather suffering was unrelenting, ~ than Tutsis, trying to as poor sanitation spread ) escape from the RPF, disease.
The Red Cross and which made rapid other aid agencies worked progress against the tirelessly to provide food and Rwandan army. medical assistance, but with _ Thousands faced as many as 300,000 people in humanitarian crisis in a single camp, the situation vast refugee camps. rapidly deteriorated.
In the aftermath of the conflict, memorial sites sprang up at the scenes of the worst atrocities.
Skulls of victims lie on shelves at a genocide memorial in Ntarama Church, near Kigali, where 5,000 lost their lives in a horrific attack.
In fact, it is estimated that more inventions have been devised since 1900 than in the rest of human history.
A whirlwind of new advances brought humanity from a largely rural existence to a “global village” of mass connectivity.
As the 21st century took shape, there seemed no limit to what technology could achieve—for those who could afford it.
Electric heat and light replaced gas and candles, and devices such the vacuum cleaner, designed in 1902, transformed housework.
In the kitchen, the problem of preserving food was solved by the invention of the refrigerator.
WASHING MACHINE This device, from 1929, uses an electric motor to churn clothes in a drum.
Television created whole new genres of entertainment and spread them to millions of viewers. 1910s INCANDESCENT LIGHT Although lightbulbs had been available since the late 19th century, they only entered widespread use in the 1910s as new models became more reliable and longer lasting.
The first commercial public radio station was established in the USA in the 1920s.
FIRST COMPUTER Numerous technicians worked on the ENIAC, the world’s first fully electronic computer.
The power of the | 1930s TELEVISION The first television images in the 1920s were fuzzy and dim.
The rocket weapons used by Germany during the war became the basis of the Space Age, and in 1957 the Ssoviet’s Sputnik I became the first artificial satellite.
Computers finally came into their own as valves were superseded by transistors—tiny sandwiches of silicon crystal that could be used to build microchips.
PERSONAL COMPUTERS In the 1980s and 1990s computers became more accessible, moving into schools and homes.
In 1981 IBM presented the first personal computer , and Apple launched the Macintosh in 1984.
The rapid advance of computers transformed almost every aspect of human life, from work and learning to shopping and socializing.
Satellites provided communication links that could span the Earth, and played a pivotal role in the development of global telecommunications.
Pictures from space also offered new insight into humanity’s impact on our planet, prompting campaigns to prevent damage to the ozone layer and slow the cutting of rain forests. 1990-present In 1991, the launch of the World Wide Web, a global system of interconnected computer networks, brought the DESERT WINDMILLS The first wind farm was built in the USA in the 1980s, part of the search for new sources of energy less damaging to the environment. 4960s | POLAROID CAMERA By the mid 1960s Polaroid’s instant camera was cheap and accessible.
The new color film inside the camera could be developed in under a minute. digital revolution.
It became possible to share ideas and information around the world at the touch of a button.
Mobile phones kept the world connected even on the move, and the invention of smart ... sufficiently advanced technology is Indistinguishable from magic.
SCIENCE-FICTION AUTHOR ARTHUR C CLARKE, PROFILES OF THE FUTURE, 1961 1980s CORDLESS PHONE Greater frequency range meant that cordless phones became a | must-have accessory.
Over the next 18 months, Lewinsky shared details of the affair with a coworker, Linda Tripp, who secretly recorded the conversations.
Clinton was at the time being sued for sexual harassment by a former employee in Arkansas, Paula Jones.
United States President Bill Clinton had been dogged for years by rumors of sexual indiscretion.
When reports emerged of an affair with a White House intern—and that he had lied about the affair under oath—he faced political ruin.
With his wife Kenneth Starr, who Hillary by his side, had been sent the Clinton called a press taped conversations conference where he | between Lewinsky angrily denied having an 3 and Tripp, wanted to affair.
In response, arguments to justify their . pursuit of the President political vendetta.
During the trial, perjured himself during ‘ of the stain was, she was labeled the most the Paula Jones case. indeed, Clinton. hated woman in America He lashed out at Starr _ The news caused for betraying her friend’s and insisted that he was a sensation. trust and confidence. entitled to a private life.
A 10/23/1996 AFFAIR COMES TO LIGHT When photographers caught Lewinsky and Clinton hugging each other at a fundraiser, it seemed to strengthen the rumor of an affair between the two.
It was published in full by the press and posted on the internet, where millions read the explicit details.
On the charge of obstruction of justice, the Senate was split fifty-fifty.
Clinton was acquitted. a a oe Se 12/19/1998 oo a | IMPEACHED Democrats staged a walkout to protest the impeachment, but they failed to stop proceedings.
EI 19909/11 and the War on Terror 2001-2011 In 2001, terrorist attacks on the United States of America by Islamic fundamentalists stunned the entire world.
The USA and its allies invaded Afghanistan in an attempt to bring the perpetrators to justice.
Ve-teyP-tele) | BUSH DECLARES WAR 0) \\ it 9545 | a Maromitoyacel was in shock.
Intelligence services had lthal.¢stem Malou lnaeleiinlctomyivalnal al-Oaeda, and Bush told the United States to prepare for war.
Controversially held without trial, they were interrogated about their suspected involvement in terrorist networks.
The Taliban, a powerful Islamic militant regime, refused to hand over Bin Laden.
His arrest was regarded as the most significant SJhale(omaakomolcrennanannare| of the War on Terror.
As the President and his team waited, news came in that Bin Laden was dead.
Unconventional mortgage products and a steep rise in consumer credit had increased debt around the world. ae oa When bad news from a French investment bank, BNP Paribas, HOUSE CRISIS Banks had for years triggered a sharp rise in the cost of credit, the financial world Sn STOO morigages ) Saas aes customers who could not afford to began to realize how serious the situation was. repay them.
Depositors lined The giant United States mortgage to withdraw money lenders Fannie Mae and in a run on the bank Freddie Mac were bailed that only ended when out by the government the government on the advice of the ~ ee guaranteed that United States Treasury Secretary — savings were safe.
Its collapse stunned the world, prompting Western governments to inject billions into their own banks in an attempt to stop the crisis from spreading.
In Lithuania, the economy sank into a deep recession, sparking anger among its citizens.
In early 2009, about 7,000 protesters gathered in front of Lithuania’s Parliament, in Vilnius, and violent clashes with police ensued.
G-20 GROUP SUMMIT The leaders of the G-20 group of the world’s major economies met for the first time in the USA to head off a global financial meltdown.
Hosted by President George W Bush, they presented a united front in finding a solution that would calm the jittery markets and boost business confidence.
CONTROVERSIAL BAILOUT The German Chancellor, Angela Merkel, initiated a $50-billion economic rescue package for financial institutions in Europe, in the hope of jump-starting economic growth.
The move angered many who felt the money would have been better used for education and childcare.
Reality dawned that bankers had gambled on trillions of dollars worth of risky investments that had substantially dropped in value.
Three major banks collapsed in Iceland, sinking the country into severe recession.
The government resigned and crowds protested in front of the Parliament in Reykjavik.
The crisis had begun to bring down not just banks, but whole countries.
S|} 05/05/2010 | RIOTING SPREADS Unemployment soared in countries across the Western world.
As governments struggled with debt, protesters marched against cuts to public services.
One of the worst affected countries was Greece, where debt had left the economy in ruins.
ALISTAIR DARLING, UK CHANCELLOR OF THE EXCHEQUER, AUGUST 30, 2008 07/21/2011 EURO DEBT CRISIS Greece, Portugal, Spain, Ireland, and Italy came under pressure to lower enormous sovereign debts and cut budget deficits.
After weeks of negotiations, Greece was offered a bailout by both its European partners and the International Monetary Fund to help it avoid a default.
Amid concerns about the survival of the Euro, a rescue plan was devised as Ireland and Portugal also sought a bailout.
Hundreds of billions were given out in a series of deals, but the Eurozone remained fragile.
An extraordinary series of uprisings spread from country to country, as popular resistance overturned a series of THE COUNTRIES OF THE ARAB SPRING The protests decades-old authoritarian regimes. began in Tunisia and quickly spread throughout the Middle East and North Africa, affecting 17 countries. 01/28/2011 __ 02/14/2011 \ ay 9 02/15/2011 ACTIVISM IN EGYPT In Egypt, thousands of protesters took to the CIVIL WAR IN LIBYA streets despite the use of lethal violence by government forces.
Libyan dictator Colonel After 18 days of protests, President Hosni Mubarak was forced to Muammar Gaddafi resign, and was arrested for ordering the killing of demonstrators. attempted to repress dissidents with a similar program of violence, sparking a civil war.
His opponents, the National Transitional Council, declared themselves the legal government PROTESTS IN BAHRAIN Anti-government protesters of Libya and requested in Bahrain attempted their own rebellion, but were international aid in suppressed with brutal force by the police and army. overthrowing Gaddafi.
The National Transitional Council took control ™ of major cities, and Gaddafi was captured and killed in his home town of Sirte.
Thousands of Libyans waving the new flag of Libya filled Tripoli’s Martyrs’ Square to celebrate the liberation of the nation.
His story spread, and as he lay dying in a hospital, he was visited by President Zine el Abidine.
Protesters throughout Tunisia demanded democracy, clashing violently with police.
In the capital, Algiers, thousands of citizens defied government warnings not to rally, and called for democratic reforms and the removal of President Abdelaziz Bouteflika.
Bank employees and hospital staff led strikes, demanding better pay and benefits.
OTHER UPRISINGS Further uprisings took place in Yemen, Jordan, Morocco, Lebanon, Oman and Saudi Arabia, but were met with brutal violence by state security forces.
Some regimes were forced to implement modest constitutional reforms, and the Yemeni government of Ali Saleh collapsed in 2012.
SYRIANS RISE UP Some of the worst violence against civilians was seen in Syria.
As protests escalated, the Syrian army began a crackdown, killing thousands of civilians by shelling rebel towns and cities.
The winners were Ennahda, a moderate Islamic party, who vowed to prove that Islam and democracy were compatible, promising to be a model for a new Arab world.
Governments in Tunisia and Libya had fallen, but Egypt remained under army rule despite the departure of Mubarak.
The leaders of Iraq, Sudan, and Yemen promised democratic reform, but dissent rumbled on.
In Syria, Assad’s regime continued its brutal suppression of protesters.
As religious and sectarian divisions began to widen, the outcome for the region remained uncertain.
The UN passed a resolution enabling member states to take measures to prevent attacks on civilians.
A multinational coalition provided logistical assistance to the rebels, and enforced a no-fly zone and naval blockade.
The international community recognized the National Transitional Council as the legal representative of Libya but Gaddafi , ria refused to relinquish power.
Hostilities continued into at Sal ~ October, when he was captured and killed by rebels. aaa . . ca a 4 an The end of the war was declared on October 23, 2011.
Ly a @ There was much celebration, but tensions between tribes loyal to Gaddafi and local militias continued. ; im — Pe oe 2 [es | TIMELINE Timeline 1900-1909 46 Unthinking respect for authority is the greatest enemy of truth.
Francis Wong for visualization and design development; Dharini, Shaila Brown, Damilare Olugbode, and Alka Thakur for editorial assistance; Daniela Boraschi, Johnny Pau, and Alison Gardner for design assistance; Phil Fitzgerald for colour work on images; Sean Hunter for assistance with picture research; Angela Baynham for proofreading; Laurence Errington for indexing.
Smithsonian Enterprises Carol Le Blanc, Vice President Brigid Ferraro, Director of Licensing Ellen Nanney, Licensing Manager Kealy Wilson, Product Development Coordinator.
Chris Hellier / © DACS 2012, © FLC/ ADAGP, Paris and DACS, London 2012.
