Evolving Historical Perspectives William J Medland Saint Mary's College of Minnesota MANY AMERICANS STILL RETAIN VIVID IMPRESSIONS of what appeared to some to be a nuclear poker game between the United States and the Soviet Union in October of 1962.
For more than a quarter century, the Cuban missile crisis has been studied, analyzed, and reflected upon by hundreds of people ranging from historians to journalists, from participants to observers, from experts to amateurs.
In the brief space of this article, it is not possible to review all of the principal interpretations.
What is presented here is a synthesis of the views of the participants and a synthesis of some of the counterviews of scholars.
The article will conclude with a review of three recent works on the crisis.
Furth international law influenced the choice of a quarantine; legal con tions restrained the United States because Article Two of the United Nations Charter ruled out the use of land aggression and surprise atta The United States wanted the United Nations to endorse its response to the missiles in Cuba and, therefore, did not want to respond in a way th violated the United Nations Charter.
The participants view positively t results which followed in the aftermath of the crisis.
However, scholar writing on this subject tend to take a contrary perspective, a perspectiv that represents a revision of traditional views held by the participants.
According to an early revisionist account by Leslie Dewart the Soviet objective was to force a settlement of the Cuban issue within the broad context of the Cold War.
That is, the Soviet Union sought to det an attack on Cuba while simultaneously compelling the United States negotiate a settlement of the Berlin problem in favor of the communists.
Yet Ronald Steel claims that the President's concern about the Berlin issue led him to misread the Soviet motives.
According to Thomas Paterson, President Kennedy personalized issues and converted them into tests of will.
He left little room for bargaining but instead issued a public ultimatum and seemed willing to destroy, in Strangelovian fashion, millions in the process.
While the participants view the successful resolution of the crisis and its subsequent consequences as very positive, many scholars take exception to this perspective; many view the ultimate results of the AmericanSoviet confrontation as negative in both the short and long term.
While the crisis initiated d6tente between America and Russia, it primarily served as an impetus for a new nuclear arms race, a new stage in the competition for massive nuclear weapons .28 Thus, the world became a much more difficult place to disarm.
As a result of the crisis America gained a renewed confidence in its military power and in its politics of escalation which soon turned to arrogance; this arrogance in turn led the United States to escalate its action in Vietnam (Miroff, Paterson).29 Having enshrined force as an instrument of policy, the United States began to seek military solutions to purely international political problems.
The essential revisionist perspective was formed within a decade and a half following the 1962 crisis.
The composite perspective of the revisionists is one of a president rejecting diplomacy via private negotiations for a policy of public confrontation.
These critics claim Kennedy rejected a political solution to a political problem and instead instituted a military response.
The aftermath of the crisis brought not victory, but arrogance; it brought forth a new nuclear arms race.
The twenty-fifth anniversary of the Cuban missile crisis has sparked renewed interest in this crucial episode of the Cold War.
A number of scholarly books and articles have been published in recent years on this topic.
They were were not there to d conclusion of the missile crisis led the Soviet Union to increase immediately its military power; there was no ""crash"" program to accelerate military power.
While the Soviet Union did later develop rough parity with the United States, it was not a direct result of the missile crisis.
Garthoff maintains that the short term consequences were positive in that the crisis did lead to d6tente and to arms control; it ended any new flare up about Berlin; and it ended the threat of an American invasion of Cuba.
While American foreign policy remained hostile to Cuba, the missile crisis initiated a belief in Washington that the United States had to accept the fact that Castro and communism would remain in Cuba.
Garthoff concludes his reflections with an analysis of what he believes is the long-term legacy for the Soviets.
Crisis avoidance is better than crisis management; political accommodation is possible and preferable to crisis management.
Since no crisis of the magnitude of October 1962 has occurred between the United States and the Soviet Union, Garthoff concludes that both sides had learned this lesson.
McGeorge Bundy, former Special Assistant to President Kennedy for National Security Affairs, analyzes the Cuban missile crisis within the context of the first fifty years of the nuclear bomb.
Danger and Survival traces the history of the bomb from the discovery of fission in 1938 to the American-Soviet summit meeting of 1988.
Detailing the political choices about the bomb in this period, Bundy concludes that this fifty year tradition of ""no use"" provides the basis for reducing the nuclear danger.
Bundy claims that President Kennedy had no other option than to act forcibly in the Cuban missile crisis.
Given the attitudes of the American people, the Congress, and the administration in 1962, thermonuclear missiles in Cuba were unacceptable.
Kennedy promised effective action and, therefore, could not accept ineffective diplomacy.
Bundy takes exception to Ted Sorensen's 1987 statement at a conference at Hawk's Cay that President Kennedy in his 1962 September statements drew the line precisely where he thought the Soviets were not and would not be.
Bundy, however, the American public would not have permitted such a choice.
The national conviction was that missiles in Cuba were totally unaccep Furthermore, he now concedes that Khrushchev was induced missiles in Cuba so as to protect Cuba and to change the highly un able strategic nuclear balance of power.
Herein Bundy states that the decisive military element successfully resolving the missile crisis was American superiority conventional weapons in this hemisphere.
Furthermore, Bundy contend that the result of the confrontation would have been the same even if the United States and the Soviet Union had strategic parity.
In effect, Bundy alleges that the nine to one American nuclear superiority was inconsequential in effecting a resolution of the crisis.
On the Brink by James Blight and David Welch is a critical oral history of the Cuban missile crisis.
The book contains an edited version of the Hawk's Cay Conference held in Florida on March 5-7, 1987 where several members of Kennedy's Executive Committee met with scholars to review and discuss the crisis.
The letter refers to the issue of the removal of American Jupiter missiles emplaced in Turkey.
Barton Bernstein and others have questioned whether President Kennedy was sufficiently brave to accept the political consequences of a public pledge to remove the Jupiter missiles in Turkey in order to get the Russian missiles out of Cuba without the use of force.
According to the Rusk letter, Kennedy was prepared to use the necessary diplomatic machinery for a public trade.
Mr Thant only after furt statement I furnished as I know, President K knew of this particula Rusk's statement in crisis indeed was pr a trade of the Jupit crisis.
While the Cuban m of the post World event have been fo Cambridge Conferen ing as participants Fy and Political Adviso Mikoyan, son of a f Georgi Shaknazarov bachev.
The Soviets truly believed that the United States would repeat the attack on Cuba after the Bay of Pigs .45 2.
The missiles were emplaced in Cuba for defense of the Castro regime but also as a first step toward strategic parity .46 3.
Khrushchev first raised the question of deploying missiles in Cuba six months before the crisis with a small group of six Soviets .47 4.
The missile crisis was the result of adventurism on the part of the Soviets, especially Nikita Khrushchev .48 5.
Anatoly Dobrynin, Soviet Ambassador to the United States in 1962, was not informed of the decision to deploy missiles to Cuba (Shaknazarov).49 6.
Contrary to United States intelligence estimates that there may have been as many as 22,000 Soviet military personnel in Cuba at the time, Mikoyan claimed there were 42,000 troops in Cuba to defend it against an American invasion.
Following the conference in a private conversation with Ser Mikoyan, Blight and Welch were informed that the decision shoot down Major Rudolf Anderson's U-2 spy plane over Cuba on Saturday, October 27 was made by a Soviet one star general the scene, Igor Statsenko, then a senior Soviet officer in Cuba.
Now is the time to develop an internatio perspective relative to this crucial episode in the nuclear age.
Sorensen, ibid., 833; Schlesinger, Robert Kennedy, 530; Hilsman, ibid., 581.
There are a number of interesting studies on Soviet decision-making and on Soviet motives.
Early right-wing critics were equally critical of Kennedy for underreacting, that is, for being soft on the communism.
A Critical Look at JFK's Foreign Policy,"" The Virginia Quarterly Review 54 : 204.
Written in a journalistic style by a former NBC news correspondent, this book follows the hour by hour, day by day development of the crisis from October 14, through October 28.
Litt Professor Allison of scholarly text for un Administration during frames of reference fo classical model, 2) the politics different explanations of quite different occu understanding of decisi political theory to the Brune, Lester H Th and References.
The book is the prod management; this par liberated Soviet membe and revealing insights for Khrushchev; Mikoya and Shaknazarow curr Dinerstein, Herbe Baltimore: Johns Dinerstein's text is one explore the assumption the crisis: the United S that the crisis erupted politics, the Russian Dinerstein, the roots of 1954.
Divine's opening chapter is a well written 50-page description of the crisis.
The text is particularly adaptable to college courses on the Cuban missile crisis.
Here is a unique account by the President's brother which provides an insider's perspective of the behind-the-scenes maneuvering during those tension-filled days of the crisis.
Despite the fact that RFK initially sought a military response, one senses that the author truly had an anti-military bias; perhaps he alone influenced the President to respond with restraint in the crisis.
The text is supplemented by a documentary appendix that contains letters, proclamations, and statements from the crisis.
The combination of short text, documents, and photographs makes this book an ideal selection for use as supplementary reading in American history survey courses.
This is a study of selected historiographical perspectives on the missile crisis incorporating primary sources.
The initial two chapters describe the national clandestine and the international confrontation phases of the crisis.
Each chapter contains a summary composite of the various interpretations analyzed in that chapter.
This is an excellent source of historiographical information for those who do not have the time to read the original interpretive books and articles on the crisis.
This is one of the first articles to present a traditional interpretation of the Cuban missile crisis.
It also is the first to praise Robert Kennedy for his advocacy of the quarantine and for his suggestion to use the ""Trollop Ploy"" in responding to the two contradictory letters of Nikita Khrushchev.
Hagan initiated the first significant pacifist interpretation of the United StatesSoviet nuclear showdown of 1962 with this scholarly critique.
Lowenthal, a political scientist now at Boston College, initiated the conservative interpretation of the crisis with this essay.
The author chastises the president for his inadequate and soft response to the Soviet missiles in Cuba.
The president missed the opportunity to eliminate communism in Cuba; by his non-invasion pledge the president guaranteed the presence of communism in the Western Hemisphere.
Paterson claims that Kennedy rejected diplomacy for a policy of confrontation so that he could demonstrate his toughness and manliness.
Paterson concludes his assessment with an analysis of what he perceives to be the negative repercussions of the missile crisis.
This article represents the most thorough analysis to date on the issues of the of party politics in the deliberations of the Kennedy Administration during the c and the role of the crisis in the outcome of the 1962 elections.
In the final anal Kennedy's selection of a quarantine was not dictated by politics; the effects of crisis on the congressional elections were indiscriminate.
According to the auth one cannot find a single congressional election decided by voter reaction to missile crisis.
The tense confrontation between Kennedy and Khrushchev is explored via television tapes from the period.
Interviews with both Russian and American participants in the crisis provide the documentary with an exceptionally balanced perspective from the hindsight of more than a quarter century.
The American panelists include McGeorge Bundy, National Security Adviser to John Kennedy, Barton Bernstein, Abram Chayes, Ray Cline, Peter Winn, and Adam Yarmolinsky; the Soviet panelists include Fyodar Burlatsky, speech writer for Nikita Khrushchev, Igor Malashenko, and Viktor Kremenyuk, scholars at the Institute of USA and Canada.
This made-for-television film recreates the events of October 1962 when the United States stood on the brink of a nuclear war over Russian missile bases in Cuba.
The film is both informative and gripping; it is well scripted and intellectually stimulating.
William Devane is excellent as President Kennedy and Howard DeSilva is memorable as Chairman Khrushchev.
