Kennedy's Global Challenges Cuba became a hot spot for the Kennedy administration for two reasons during the early 1960s.
The failed Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961 was an attempt to incite a popular uprising against Fidel Castro.
President Kennedy faced a confident Soviet Union and a sleeping giant in the People's Republic of China.
Fears of communist expansion plagued American foreign policy in places as distant as Vietnam and as close as Cuba.
Like his predecessors, Kennedy made containment his chief foreign policy goal.
Abandoning Dwight Eisenhower's heavy reliance on nuclear deterrence, Kennedy expanded defense spending.
To Kennedy, this meant a variety of military options depending upon the specific conditions.
Included in this program was the establishment of special forces units similar to the Green Berets.
Despite the expense, Kennedy believed communism was a menace that required maximal preparation.
One of Kennedy's most popular foreign policy initiatives was the Peace Corps.
Led by Sargent Shriver, this program allowed Americans to volunteer two years of service to a developing nation.
English teachers would be placed where the learning of the language was needed.
Countries that received Peace Corps volunteers might be less likely to submit to a communist revolution.
American participants obtained experiences that shaped well-rounded, worldly citizens.
John F Kennedy's stirring address to the people of West Berlin in 1963 illustrated that the United States was committed to working for freedom throughout the region and the world.
Relations with Latin America had gone sour since Franklin Roosevelt's Good Neighbor Policy.
Latin American nations complained bitterly about United States support of dictatorial military regimes.
They pointed out that no large Marshall Plan was designed for Latin America.
Development funds were granted to nations of the Western Hemisphere who were dedicated to fighting communism.
After Kennedy's death, funds for the Alliance for Progress were largely diverted to Vietnam, however.
In 1961, the citizens of West Berlin felt completely isolated when the Soviet Union built the Berlin Wall around the city.
Kennedy visited West Berlin in the summer of 1963 to allay their fears.
The visit and the speech endeared him to the people of West Berlin and all of Western Europe.
Kennedy's greatest foreign policy failure and greatest foreign policy success both involved one nation — Cuba.
In 1961, CIA-trained Cuban exiles landed in Cuba at the Bay of Pigs, hoping to ignite a popular uprising that would oust Fidel Castro from power.
The exiles believed air support would come from the United States, but Kennedy refused.
The incident was an embarrassment to the United States and a great victory for Fidel Castro.
Finally, Khrushchev acceded to Kennedy's demands, and the world remained safe from global confrontation.
Visit the ""Introduction"" to learn how declassified information changed the understanding of the crisis, and learn the frightening reasons why we were on the brink of nuclear war.
The ""Chronology"" is replete with links and provides comprehensive context to the crisis.
Don't miss the ""Photographs"" that show aerial photos of Soviet missile bases in Cuba, and images of key people and events.
Report broken link Alliance For ProgressAfter the socialist revolution in Cuba in 1959, the United States worried that the fate of other Latin American countries would follow suit.
This page has President Kennedy's ""Alliance for Progress"" address of 1961, an agreement by the United States to offer aid to enhance the quality of life and security in Latin America, in exchange for social and political reforms.
It's another great speech by Kennedy, but the implementation of the policy is another story.
Report broken link Nuclear Test Ban TreatyTexas A&M provides the text of President Kennedy's address concerning the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty of 1963.
This first international nuclear treaty, enabled by improved verification abilities, banned nuclear testing in the atmosphere, in space, and under water.
