The nine hours of tapes, taken from conversations in the Oval Office, are the latest in a series that have been released periodically by the John F Kennedy Library and Museum in the last 17 years.
The conversations took place between Nov. and Nov., 1962, after the Soviet Union publicly agreed to remove missiles from Cuba.
Sheldon Stern, a former library historian who reviewed portions of the tapes, including the excerpts released to the media, said the new tapes, while not as dramatic as tapes made when the crisis was at its grim height, shed light on how the crisis wound down.
It's perfectly clear from these tapes and all the others that these decisions were made by the president,"" he said.
In a 20-minute segment of tape on the Cuban missile crisis, Kennedy and his advisers discuss whether the prospect of an American pledge not to invade Cuba would encourage the Soviet Union to pull out its bombers.
But we're ready to give that in a more formal way when they meet their commitments,"" Kennedy said.
Ultimately, Mr Stern said, the Soviets agreed to pull out the bombers and to pull back the tarpaulins when the missiles were loaded onto ships so they could be counted from the air.
Ninety tapes made in 1962 and 1963 have been opened to the public or partially opened, while 34 still need to be reviewed to see if they contain classified material, said Maura Porter, foreign policy archivist for the library.
The official said the Kennedy letters might contain some clarifications of the agreements that Moscow and Washington reached in late October 1962, when the crisis was resolved.
No other conflict during the post-World War II era brought the two superpowers closer to nuclear war than did the crisis that grew out of the Soviet decision to deploy offensive nuclear weapons in Cuba.
A week of unprecedented international tension ended when Khrushchev agreed to dismantle Soviet missiles in Cuba in return for a promise by Kennedy not to invade Cuba.
Kennedy also agreed to call off a United States blockade of the island.
One official said that some of letters have remained classified because they contained references to Berlin, a major point of U.S.-Soviet contention during that period.
Officials said the government's decision to release the Kennedy letters was linked to a long-planned conference on the missile crisis that Cuba is holding in Havana starting next Thursday.
American, Soviet and Cuban officials who participated in the crisis are scheduled to attend.
Among the expected participants is President Fidel Castro, who was outraged by Khrushchev's decision to withdraw the missiles without consulting him first.
He was one of the numerous editors and reporters for that newspaper who reported on the conflict on the Communist Caribbean island of Cuba in October 1962.
Frankel's conclusion about the crisis is that Khrushchev and President Kennedy wanted to avoid nuclear war at all costs but were almost driven to it by political and military hacks, working for both men, who were blinded by personal and domestic viewpoints.
Cuban President Fidel Castro comes off as a bit of a spoiled son of Papa Nikita who almost brought about nuclear war because of a slip-up.
Anderson's mission was to take clearer, more detailed photographs of the missile sites in Cuba.
This goes against the notion documented in numerous sources that Khrushchev ordered Russian military forces on Cuba to shoot down Anderson's airplane with a Soviet SA-2 missile.
However, if Frankel's claim is true, then Castro's order for his military personnel to fire on any American military airplane flying over Cuba was in direct contradiction to Khrushchev's wishes.
In fairness to the Cuban president, he was pretty much kept in the dark by Khrushchev for most of the conflict.
Thus Castro's order to shoot may have been influenced by the Soviet leader's manhandling of him.
Kennedy had his own hawk (the terms ""dove"" and ""hawk"" came into the popular lexicon due to this Cold War event) to deal with United States Air Force Gen.
Actually, he was a well-respected and decorated veteran of World War II and a hero of the Berlin Airlift and Kennedy listened to LeMay's opinions with interest.
Furthermore, it is often forgotten (but Frankel reminds us) that in the opening hours of the crisis the United States president favored some sort of military retaliation against the Russians.
When the Soviets began moving atomic missiles and weapons to Cuba, they were doing nothing illegal under international law.
Rather, Kennedy saw this maneuver as a sort of threat to his manhood and persona.
On this point, it's a bit alarming to learn from High Noon in the Cold War that war almost immediately happened because of a rush of adrenalin and testosterone in the body of John F Kennedy.
Fortunately for the world, he cooled down quickly and used his common sense and intelligence to think his way out of this Cold War political Pandora's Box.
MEET THE AUTHOR Max Frankel will be among the featured speakers at the Times Festival of Reading, Nov. and 7 on the campus of Eckerd College in St.
At the White House, Bobby and John Kennedy brooded about what was to come.
The brothers agreed that John Kennedy probably would have been impeached if he hadn't acted.
At 10m., the brothers joined the convening of the toplevel ExComm group to await developments.
If the ship still didn't stop, a shot was to be fired into the rudder to cripple the vessel.
United States spotter planes had found two Soviet ships, the Gagarin and Komiles, steaming toward the quarantine line, only a few miles away.
It was possible, within the next few minutes, that there would be an armed confrontation at sea that would lead to nuclear war.
Sixteen Soviet ships, including several with large hatches that could accommodate missiles and warheads, had turned around and seemed to be returning to the Soviet Union.
Captains of Soviet ships, he announced, had been instructed ""not to retreat one step"" in international waters.
Later in the day, the Soviet leader held an odd three-hour meeting with William Knox, an American executive with Westinghouse International who happened to be in Moscow.
In a rambling conversation, Khrushchev warned that he might eventually have to order a United States blockade ship sunk.
Construction at the missile sites was going on at even a faster pace than before.
No Need to Fret, Florida Assured, announced a frontpage headline in The Miami Herald.
Anti-aircraft missile batteries were being installed in Key Largo and at a North Dade dump.
Hundreds of tanks of napalm arrived -fire bombs to be used if Cuba was invaded.
Some units of the division were then sent southward, ending up at Gulfstream Park in Hallandale, with motor pools in the parking lots and cots under the grandstands.
Along the city's shoreline, Cubans were boarding up the plateglass windows of stores.
The seawall in front of the Hotel Riviera was sand-bagged, and anti-aircraft artillery was placed along the broad Malecon boulevard, facing the sea.
Meanwhile, the Soviet tanker Bucharest kept steaming directly for the blockade line.
Plus a look at Operation Mongoose and an examination of how the crisis affected the outlook of an entire generation of children.
It was the first time these remarks, originally made during a closed-door academic conference on the Cuban missile crisis held in Havana in January, were broadcast in public.
The 65-year-old Cuban leader indicated he has no intention of resigning at the moment, despite a rash of problems resulting from the disappearance of the Soviet Union, Cuba's main ally and economic supplier for three decades.
Castro revealed new, sometimes suprising details of Cuba's relationship with the Soviet Union, saying that on many occasions the Cuban government suffered contradictions and criticisms from Moscow for its actions.
He rejected views widely held by many Western analysts that Cuba followed directions from the Soviet Union in supporting revolutionary movements and left-wing governments.
He added that the Soviet Union also had misgivings about Cuba sending troops to support the left-wing government in Angola in 1975.
Castro appeared to rule out any future Cuban large-scale military interventions abroad of the kind seen in Angola and Ethiopia.
Fernandez said most studies of that period concentrated on the two superpowers, the United States and the Soviet Union, and with Cuba's role lesser known.
Conference participants on Sunday will travel to sites related to the crisis, including a missile silo in Pinar del Rio.
The 11 classified letters exchanged in 1962 following the Cuban confrontation remain ""extremely sensitive ... from the national security point of view,"" said Pratt Byrd of the department's freedom of information office.
Scholars had hoped for the release of the letters in time for a conference in Moscow next weekend featuring for the first time and most likely the last missile crisis participants from the United States, Cuba and the Soviet Union.
The missile crisis flared in October 1962 when an American U-2 spy plane spotted construction of Soviet medium-range ballistic missile sites in Cuba.
Many believe the confrontation brought the superpowers to the brink of war.
It ended when Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles in exchange for United States guarantees that Cuba would not be invaded.
Blight, who recently published a book on the missile crisis and helped set up the Moscow conference, said Soviet leaders were enthusiastic about the idea of releasing the letters.
In October 1962, Stevenson, who was United Nations ambassador at the time, displayed 26 photos taken from U2 spy planes to prove that the Soviets were installing missiles.
History will decide whether Powell's presentation will have the same effect that Stevenson's did.
While Powell's evidence was compelling, experts said the presentation did not have the same irrefutable visual evidence that Stevenson's had.
But it may have been enough to build a clear case showing Iraq's attempts to fool United Nations weapons inspectors and may be enough to sway some people who were on the fence about supporting the U.S. position.
I am also prepared to present the evidence in this room,"" Stevenson told him.
If it condenses and/or fabricates events, turning Kennedy into an unadulterated hero, it captures the slightly sour flavor of an era when the atomic bomb hung over the globe like the sword of Damocles.
Jack and brother Bobby consult him on every decision but one, and that one turns out to be their lone mistake in this war of nerves with the Kremlin.
There really was an O'Donnell, though I can't believe the siblings treated him like a third Kennedy.
But Costner's too old and famous to play Jack or Bobby, and he wanted to be at the center of the film.
His performance, more intense than usual, holds up well, despite a New England accent wobblier than a dayold calf.
Strangelove"" ends, with shots of rockets glaring redly and mushroom clouds abloom.
The events of October 1962 took place in the omnipresent shadow of nuclear war, with the Soviet Union establishing a mini-base of missiles close enough to wipe out any city in a 1,000-mile radius.
The United States had been humiliated the year before in the Bay of Pigs incident, an abortive attempt to unseat Fidel Castro.
The failure left Castro and his U.S.S.R. backers convinced that the United States was too weak to object to a Communist nuclear presence near our shores or maybe too incompetent to find out about one.
American planes did locate the missiles, leaving Kennedy with three options.
He could blockade Cuba, turning aside Soviet ships carrying war materials and subduing them with force if they resisted; he could bomb the sites, risking casualties and reprisals; he could launch a full-scale invasion, knowing the U.S.S.R. would consider that an intolerable act of aggression.
All routes might lead to war, but one had to be chosen before Soviets in Cuba could get their missiles ready to launch.
David Self's script, directed by Roger Donaldson with somewhat more testosterone than necessary, makes all these options and their political ramifications clear.
John Kennedy wants peace at almost any cost, though not through feeble appeasement.
Bobby worries that United Nations Ambassador Adlai Stevenson can't stand up to the U.S.S.R. before the court of world appeal.
O'Donnell bounces between the Oval Office and his family, giving the president sound advice and his own wife reassurances that he doesn't believe.
The producers used many look-alike actors; though Dylan Baker and Kevin Conway aren't dead ringers for Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara or General Curtis LeMay, they're the right types.
The commendable cast includes JFK's real nephew Christopher Lawford as a pilot under pressure, and Charlotte's own Madison Mason as an admiral who squares off with McNamara.
Greenwood, whose range has carried him from the lonely widower of ""The Sweet Hereafter"" to the creepy husband of ""Double Jeopardy,"" gives a star-making performance.
He's so appealing we could elect him president right now if he weren't Canadian.
