He was not seen and heard publicly after July 2006, when he underwent surgery for a ""sharp intestinal crisis with sustained bleeding"" in a Communist hospital.
On hot Cuban days a stand-in wearing heavy make-up and a scarf to conceal his young neck met with foreign dignitaries, but Obama refused to be humiliated by this Communist hoax by meeting with or even mentioning Fidel during Obama's trip to Cuba.
This announcement was reminiscent of the release of hostages by Iran just before Ronald Reagan became president.
His oppressive rule lasted almost 50 years and killed scores of thousands.
He had not been seen publicly since July 2006, when he underwent intestinal surgery, and was presumably no longer alive as of December 2009; the Communists running Cuba had no incentive to risk challenge to their power by announcing that he passed away.
After a long absence from the public eye, he was purportedly shown in photographs in June 2010, released by the Cuban State News Agency.
In August 2010, the Associated Press had a story of a purported Castro speech to the Cuban parliament.The fact remains there hadn't been a reputable, independent account of Castro being alive in nearly a year.
Other authoritarian regimes, such as North Korea and Nazi Germany have also engaged in ""body-doubles"" and actor/impersonators to hide the death or incapacitation of despots in the past.
Not too long ago two friends of mine were talking to a Cuban refugee, a businessman who had escaped from Castro.
In that sentence he told us the entire story of Cuba, and Castro. -Ronald Reagan ” Castro was an important inspiration, role model, and hero for leftist psychopath Sen.
Contents 1 Early years of Castro 2 In Power 3 Death and purported sightings 3.
Continued persecution 4 See also 5 References 6 Other Sources 7 External links Early years of Castro There is much that is not known of Castro's rural youth.
However, it is generally conceded that his father was Ángel María Bautista Castro y Argiz and his mother Lina Ruz González.
Official biographies are essentially hagiographies and the more extreme of his many detractors portray a wild and irregular life typical of the worst elements of his class.
Castro has numerous siblings of various combination of parentage; for instance, it is widely believed that Raul Castro has the same mother but is not a son of Fidel Castro's father.
The most accepted biography is that of Geyer 2002 while a new series biographies by Norberto Fuentes , a former propagandist for the Cuban Government, are attracting attention.
During his student years Fidel Castro was deeply involved in lethal violence.
This violence also extended overseas to his involvement in the 1948 Colombian Bogotazo.
In 1953 he led the first of many assaults against the ruling military regime of general Fulgencio Batista.
A 1953 attack against military barracks in Santiago de Cuba was a failure, and Castro, alongside his brother Raul, was captured they, unlike a number of his companions, were spared irregular execution by intervention of Roman Catholic Church members.
In a courtroom speech in his defense , Castro outlined his plans for reforms, demanding a return to the 1940 constitution, the ending of corrupt practices and a more equal distribution of land.
After three years of incarceration on the Isle of Youth , both Castro brothers were released during an amnesty.
Upon release, the Castro brothers relocated to Mexico to avoid imminent reprisals from paramilitary groups affiliated with the Batista regime, lead by former Communist and longtime rival of Castro Roland Masferrer.
In Mexico Castro organized a group of revolutionaries to return to Cuba and overthrow Batista.
In December 1956 Castro and 81 others boarded the Granma yacht, sailed to eastern Cuba, and began the armed struggle against the current regime.
The landing was preceded in Santiago and the rest of Oriente Province by an armed rising of the 26 of July urban Militia, a non-Communist organization, lead by Frank Pais.
In the mountains the guidance of the bandit Cresencio Perez, and a few Communist sleepers who had been placed in the Sierra for some time under the direction of stalinist agent Fabio Grobart was important.
Some local guajiros in the remote Sierra Maestra region joined in to became the nucleus of the critical scouting and picketing force of Escopeteros who screened the better armed Castro main force.
The support and guidance from revolutionary groups in the cities of Santiago, Havana, elsewhere in Cuba and overseas was critical.
Castro maintained a position of diplomatic neutrality among various revolutionary factions, which included upper and middle-class liberals, guajiros, and agricultural workers, communists and others, and hence was able to assume the position of director of the revolution.
He was also largely successful in courting international support via astute and careful use of the media.
Officials within the CIA and the United States government were divided over whether to support Castro.
Some believed that Batista had become a liability, and that his overthrow was inevitable.
The revolution finally succeeded in late 1958, and on January 1, 1959, Batista left the country.
Castro had chosen exiled leaders Manuel Urrutia Lleó and José Miró Cardona, both anti-Communist liberals with good relations with the U.S., to head the new government.
However, the increasing presence of Communists in the decision-making process created an early split in the government.
Castro and Urrutia both insisted publicly that they had relations with each other, but Urrutia and Miró resigned only months later, and Castro, with support from mass organizations, assumed the position of prime minister.
Osvaldo Dorticós Torrado, a former Commodore of the Cienfuegos Yacht Club became president and head of state.
Globalists in the United States State Department sympathetic toward Marxism and influenced by the Council on Foreign Relations contributed to Castro's rise to power.
In Power The process of obtaining permanent power was dramatic, traumatic and bloody.
Desperate crowds of weeping daughters and shrieking mothers were clubbed with rifle butts as they pleaded for their family members to be spared.
Raphael Warnock Socialist mass murderer Fidel Castro ""The Castro regime came to power by deception and terror, resulting in what can only be described as a state of war against the Cuban people.
As prime minister, and then president from 1976, Castro ruled the country in line with Stalinist policies, seizing private property and eliminating free speech and free press.
He was infamous for his overly long speeches, often rambling on for hours, which can be seen as an example of Liberal style.
Castro, who had been in regular contact with the KGB since 1956 and who used Soviet arms during his guerrilla war, welcomed the presence of Soviet nuclear weapons in Cuba to deter an American attack.
Captain Valentin Savitsky ordered his crew to prepare the use of a nuclear torpedo against the Americans, but crew member Vasili Arkhipov stepped in and quite literally saved the world.
In the aftermath of the crisis, the United States maintained a strict embargo on Cuba.
As a result, Castro sought close ties with anti-American Communist states, and became dependent on aid from Moscow.
He supplied massive amounts of military aid to North Korea and especially to North Vietnam, where Cuban forces allegedly helped torture American POWs during the Vietnam War.
The CIA fought a proxy war with Communist forces in the Congo, which descended into a complex maze of chaotic maneuverings and betrayals by several major world powers.
Castro, all the while hypocritically maintaining an ""anti-imperialist"" political posture, would intervene extensively in the internal affairs of African nations through violence and war.
Cuban military intervention to save the Communist MPLA dictatorship in Angola from collapse led to decades of civil war that cost as many as 1 million lives.
Castro also dispatched Cuban troops to fight on behalf of the Communist dictatorship in Ethiopia, which killed 1.25 million people through massacre and forced starvation.Soviet and Cuban support for Communist violence caused civil wars in Nicaragua, El Salvador, Honduras and Guatemala.
Support from the Cuban government was also given to terrorists from the PLO.Castro has repeatedly ordered acts of war against the United States.
Beyond the missile crisis, Castro maintains a huge electronic espionage complex directed at United States shores, conducts research into biological warfare and sponsors international terrorist groups.
Cuban intelligence had ties with the Communist Lee Harvey Oswald, who later assassinated President John F Kennedy.
In the seventies, Castro deliberately sent dozens of dangerous criminals to United States shores; he responded to overtures from President Bill Clinton by ordering a deadly attack on an American plane.On February 23, 1988, the Cuban poet Armando Valladares, who was a prisoner in the Cuban gulag for 22 years, addressed the United Nations Commission on Human Rights.
I recall when they kept me in a punishment cell, naked, with several fractures on one leg which never received medical care; today, those bones remain jammed up together and displaced.
One of the regular drills among the guards was to stand on the steel mesh ceiling and throw at my face buckets full of urine and excrement.
That practice does not leave marks; marks are left by beatings with steel rods and by bayonet thrusts.
The violation of human rights was not a matter of reports, of negotiated resolutions, of elegant and diplomatic rhetoric, for us it was a daily suffering.
For me it meant eight thousand days of hunger, of systematic beatings, of hard labor, of solitary confinement, of cells with steel-planked windows and doors, of solitude.
Eight thousand days of proving that my spirit could triumph over exhaustion and pain.
Eight thousand days of testing my religious convictions, my faith, of fighting the hate my atheist jailers were trying to instill in me with each bayonet thrust, fighting so that hate would not flourish in my heart.
Eight thousand days of struggling so that I would not become like them, rejecting torture as a mean to fight, forcing myself to forgive, rejecting the thoughts of revenge, reprisal and cruelty.
In 1959, Cuba was the second richest country in Latin America; today, it is the second poorest.
Cuba is plagued with a humanitarian catastrophe involving massive and widespread malnutrition and lack of basic goods; death, suffering, and misery is the result.
The streets are now choked with scenes of starving peasants frantically pleading for food.
He has been sued for genocide in Belgium and Spain.The estimated number of deaths attributable to the Castro regime varies according to different sources—but not by much.
The most comprehensive survey, by Armando Lago, puts the total at 116,730-119,730 killed.
The majority of these deaths were caused by drowning; the firing squads account for some 30,000.
Adding combat deaths to his calculations, we arrive at a total of some 136,000 Cubans killed by the Castro regime.
Little effort has been made to calculate boat people deaths in recent years.
Cuban exiles claim that as many as 200,000 have been murdered altogether.
The death toll from Cuban interventions abroad can be numbered in the hundreds of thousands.
Political analysts believe that the appointment marks the beginning of a transition designed to maintain Communist control over Cuba after Castro's death.
Bonded by their hate for the United States and capitalism, Castro and Venezuelan dictator Hugo Chavez created a close relationship.
Both socialist countries have worked together on various political ventures.On May 1, 2007, Castro did not attend Cuba's annual celebration of May Day, leading many to believe that he had died.
While Castro allegedly met with Brazilian President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva on February 25, 2010, there is no independent confirmation that this was not, in fact, a body-double.
On February 18, 2006, Communist Cuba publicly recognized that Fidel Castro was no longer President of the State Council and Commander in Chief.
In September 2011, it was claimed that a Venezuelan reporter had interviewed Castro, but independent media have not confirmed that this was not actually a doppelganger standing in for the long-deceased Castro.
In February 2012 the mainstream media claimed that Castro met with Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff.
Predictably there have been no reports from the liberal media as to whether this was actually Castro or a lookalike.In February 2013, Castro allegedly addressed Cuba's National Assembly, giving support for younger leadership in Cuba.
The National Assembly went on to re-elect Castro's 82-year-old brother Raul.
On November 25, 2016, Cuba finally confirmed what the rest of the world suspected for over a decade and announced the death of Castro, although the cause of death was not immediately disclosed.
Exiled Cubans and Cuban-Americans celebrated the news of the revelation of Castro's death upon hearing about it.
Ironically, given his long-lived fight against Capitalism, his announced death occurred on Black Friday.
He presided over the economic destruction of one of the most quickly developing countries in Latin America; he arrested and imprisoned hundreds of thousands of dissidents; he caused the self-imposed exile of millions of Cubans; he watched and participated in the drowning of thousands of Cubans attempting to escape his prison island; he worked with mass murderer Che Guevara to murder political opponents.
Castro was, simply put, one of the worst people in a century full of awful human beings.Continued persecution Even after Castro's death, people still faced serious persecution if they criticized the dictator, as in the example of a Christian leader who was arrested in March 2017 and sentenced to three years in prison, a few months after his young children were arrested.
Sus A~nos Universitarios Ediciones Universal Miami ISBN 1593880065 ↑ Bowden, Mark 2002 Killing Pablo: The Hunt for the World's Greatest Outlaw.
But the event had also attracted critics, leftist agitators, among them a young Cuban student leader named Fidel Castro.
To them the fledgling OAS was a sop, a sellout, an alliance with the gringo imperialists of the north.
Many policemen, devotees of the slain leader, joined the angry mobs in the streets, as did student revolutionaries like Castro.
Castro subsequently reported that he tried to turn the mob into a revolutionary force, but was defeated by the onset of drunkenness and looting.
This book describes in detail and with dispassionate analysis how Frank Pais supported the Castro effort and how he was betrayed, and killed.
It is a sad and only too real description of the hijacking of the resistance against Batista by Communist activists including Castro himself.
An Account of the Castro Communist Revolution Random House ASIN: B000H5CT5M ↑ Bonachea, Ramon L and Marta San Martin 1974.
Christian Leader Receives 3-Year Prison Sentence for Anti-Castro Comments.
Other Sources Alba, Víctor 1968 Politics and the labor movement in Latin America.
A Revolutionary Life, Bantam Press, ISBN 0553406647 or Grove Press, ISBN 0-8021-1600-0 Anton, Alex and Roger E Hernandez 2002 Cubans in America: A Vibrant History of a People in Exile Kensington Publishing Corporation ISBN 157566593X Bonachea, Ramon L and Marta San Martin 1974.
I look like a Jackson Tribunal Publishing Corporation ISBN 0544235617 Enamorado, Calixto 1917 Tiempos.
Cuba J Paul Getty Trust Publications ISBN 0892366176 Fermoselle, Rafael 1992 Cuban leadership after Castro: Biographies of Cuba's top commanders.
Viking ISBN 067053141 laneta, Mexico D.F ISBN 8423336042, ISBN 9707490012 Guevara, Ernesto “Che” 1996 Episodes of the Cuban Revolutionary War 1956-1958.
Gutiérrez, Pedro Juan 1998 Dirty Havana Trilogy, Faber and Faber, London ISBN 0571206263 Geyer, Georgie Anne 2002 Guerrilla Prince.
Andrews McMeel Publishing Kansas City ISBN 0740720643 Jimenez Pastrana, Juan 1983.
NewYork Lazo, Rodrigo 2005 Writing to Cuba Filibustering and Cuban Exiles in the United States.
The True Story of Castro's Rise to Power, Kleiopatria Digital Press, Wintergreen VA, ISBN 0615318568 Marrero, Levi 1981 5th edition ""Geografia de Cuba"" La Moderna Poesia, Coral Gables Florida.
Marmol, Jose G 1993 Donato Marmol, Mayor General en la Revolucion del Separatismo Cubano.
Una versión rebelde Imprenta Universitaria, Universidad Católica; ISBN Orro Fernandez, Roberto 2004 Education and labor skills in Socialist Cuba.
Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Canary Islands, Spain ISBN 847926263X de Paz-Sánchez, Manuel 2001.
Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Canary Islands, Spain ISBN 8479263644 Nuñez Jimenez, Antonio 1959 Geografía de Cuba.
B0007E0OAU Phillips, R Hart.60 Cuba Island of Paradise 1960 Astor-Honor Inc, ISBN 0839250126 Phillips, Ruby Hart 1961The Tragic Island: How Communism Came to Cuba.
From Local Bush War to Chronic Crisis in Southern Africa McFarland & Company Jefferson, North Carolina and London ISBN 089950888X Tejera, Noel; Ortega, Eduardo; Rodes, Rosa; and Lluch, Carmen 2006 Nitrogen compounds in the apoplastic sap of sugarcane stem: Some implications in the association with endophytes.
Pediatrics; 98:1020-7, 1996 “Comparison of infant mortality rates among the world's countries requires assessment of completeness and accuracy of data.
The United Nations Statistical Office classifies as C, complete, meaning at least 90% of events are actually recorded, 1994 data supplied by 80 governments,” Weiland, C F. , 1855 West Indien.
Bisson • Richard Blumenthal • Chesa Boudin • Muriel Bowser • Kathy Boudin • Rosa Brooks • Earl Browder • Cori Bush • Fidel Castro • Nicolae Ceausescu • Konstantin Chernenko • Chou En-lai • Judy Clark • Patrisse Cullors • Carl Davidson • Angela Davis • Frank Marshall Davis • Walter Duranty • Jenny Durkan • Keith Ellison • Friedrich Engels • Linda Evans • Jane Fonda • Kim Gardner • Alicia Garza • David Gilbert • Nils Gilman • Antonio Gramsci • Che Guevara • Tom Hayden • George Jackson • Ho Chi Minh • Erich Honecker • Enver Hoxha • Noel Ignatiev • Rev.
