If you are a returning customer please login at the top of the page.|placeholder|"":""For monthly donations it is necessary to create an account, please create a password below.
If you are a returning customer please login at the top of the page."",""woocommerce-subscriptions|My Subscriptions||"":""My Recurring Payments"",""woocommerce-subscriptions|Your subscription will be activated when payment clears.
Gift note or special notes for delivery."",""woocommerce|Order Notes||"":""Order Notes & Gift Notes"",""woocommerce-subscriptions|Related Subscriptions||"":""Related recurring payments"",""woocommerce-subscriptions|Subscription Totals||"":""Recurring Payment Totals"",""woocommerce-subscriptions|Resubscribe||"":""Start new payments"",""woocommerce-subscriptions|Your subscription has been %s.
Due to payment gateway restrictions, different subscription products can not be purchased at the same time.
If you are a new customer, please proceed to the Billing &amp; Shipping section.
Many Americans have the idea that a crazy Fidel Castro wanted to launch them at United States targets because he hated our country At that time, the United States was preparing an invasion of Cuba following a Kennedy-authorized terrorist war against the island, which included assassination plots.
As the debate evolves over what to do about the mere possibility that Iran might be developing a nuclear weapon, it appears that few have learned from the countless books and documents published about the frightening episode of October 1962.
In August 1961, four months after Kennedy suffered a humiliating defeat of CIA-sponsored Cuban exiles at the Bay of Pigs, and in the midst of daily raids by US-based CIA agents against Cuban people and property, Castro sent Che Guevara to Uruguay to meet Richard Goodwin, Kennedy’s Latin America adviser.
At this secret session, Che told Goodwin that he “must understand the Cuban Revolution.
They intend to build a socialist state, and the revolution which they have begun is irreversible.
In the Goodwin memo Che says Cuba “would like a Modus Vivendi” with the United States and is prepared to offer certain policies to please the United States administration.. “they could not give back the expropriated properties—the factories and banks…..but could pay for them in trade.
At the debriefing session, Kennedy lit a cigar saying, “You know Goodwin, I should have had you smoke the first one,” apparently referring to the CIA’s poison cigar plot aimed at killing Fidel.
So, following Cuba’s peace offering Kennedy ordered increased numbers of terrorist attacks against Cuba.
Fidel Castro, taking these actions as Kennedy’s response, accepted the Soviet offer to place nuclear missiles on the island.
Castro assumed the United States would know about this new weaponry in Cuba – including tactical nuclear missiles designed to deter an invasion of United States ground forces, and understand its deterrent effect.
Instead, the United States remained ignorant of the tactical missile placement and continued its terrorist war against the island while building up its terrorist war and expanding its regular a military force, which Cuba interpreted, logically, as an invasion threat.
From the Fall of 1961 through the end of summer 1962, Soviet missiles and then medium range bombers arrived on the island.
Finally, in September 1962, United States satellite photos identified the larger, not the tactical missiles and the Missile Crisis began.
The United States public, like most of the sane world trembled as Soviet ships approach a United States military fleet in the Atlantic that nuclear war could easily erupt.
Indeed, United States military chiefs advocated attacking, and even annihilating Cuba.
Kennedy, more thoughtfully, feared that a nuclear war would end badly for mankind and sought a diplomatic solution, which he achieved when Khrushchev agreed to withdraw the missiles in Cuba in return for the United States removal of missiles from Turkey and a pledge not to invade Cuba.
The two leaders played a dangerous game with the lives of millions of people, but it worked successfully.
Ther United States remained ignorant of the tactical missies and Khrushchev had to twist Castor’s arm and finally unilaterally withdraw them.
One thinks of Iran, which has done nothing to imperil United States national security.
Nevertheless, the national security mavens inside the government and major media pundits have decided that if Iran succeeds in building a nuclear weapon, United States security would be threatened.
Some want to bomb Iran to prevent – or at least delay – that process; others think that punishing Iran through sanctions will succeed in forcing Iran’s leaders to the table at which they will shuttle their nuclear ambitions.
All sectors of the discussion, however, should begin their reflections by returning to the lessons of the 1962 misssile crisis.
President Obama might well apply this advise to Cuba policy as well, and begin talking to Havana as well as to Teheran.
Saul Landau’s WILL THE REAL TERRORIST PLEASE STAND UP screens n Oct 24 at the Vermont International Film Festival.
SAUL LANDAU’s A BUSH AND BOTOX WORLD was published by CounterPunch / AK Press.
The Origins of America’s Vicious War on Its Own KidsSubscribe to get CP+ exclusive content Weekend EditionMay 06, 2022Friday SundayJoAnn WypijewskiThe Long Hand of Slave Breeding, ReduxRichard FalkToward a Peoples Ukraine Wars TribunalJeffrey St.
