Life is a comedy to those who think, a tragedy to those who feel, and an open book to those who read.
You are welcome to contact China Matters at the address chinamatters --a-prlee.org or follow me on twitter @chinahand.
Saturday, August 13, 2016 How Fidel Castro Almost Made Cuba the World's 5th Nuclear Power Fidel Castro's 90th birthday celebrations might have been a bit more extravagant if Cuba had emerged from the 1962 missile crisis as the world's fifth nuclear power.
Everybody loves to talk about the Cuban missile crisis of October 1962, when America’s Best and Brightest under Jack Kennedy stared down Nikita Khrushchev and his attempt to position strategic nuclear weapons in Cuba.
Revisionist historyk.a. facts have as usual removed some of the good evil gloss slathered on the United States by Kennedy hagiographers to reveal the political calculations underlying the confrontation.
Soviet strategists were appalled by the introduction of United States Jupiter nuclear-tipped missiles into Turkey and Italy and justifiably anxious about the prospect of a pre-emptive United States strike.Kennedy understood that standing up to the Soviets over Cuba was more a matter of United States (and his) credibility and a reflection of United States determination over Berlin than an issue of United States national security.
From the beginning of the crisis, his advisors are unambiguous in their analysis that the missiles in Cuba, when operational, would not effect the strategic balance.
In other words, the United States saw Khrushchev as way out on a limb that was ripe for sawing off, thanks to the premature exposure of the Soviet missile gambit on Cuba thanks to United States intelligence operations.
Missiles in Cuba were intended by Khrushchev as a) a stabilizing strategic riposte to the United States missiles in Italy and Turkey and b) a neat way to succor Cuba and bind it into a Soviet alliance by deterring a widely expected US “regime change” style invasion.
As for regime change, Soviet expectations were spot on; after the Bay of Pigs debacle the Pentagon was busy with Operation Mongoose planning for Castro’s overthrow.
We could blow up a United States ship in Guantanamo Bay and blame Cuba.
The key assumption underlying the United States strategy for facing down the Russians in Cuba was that the United States didn’t think that the Soviet Union had any operational nuclear weapons capability in Cuba when it decided to go public and issue the ultimatum to Khrushchev.
Marchetti, by the way, claims to have been intimately involved in the intelligence aspects of the Cuban crisis.
He alleges that President Kennedy was well aware that the missiles in Cuba were still lacking their warheads and therefore posed no threat to the United States.
Nevertheless, Kennedy and his hagiographers, perhaps in order to provide America’s youth with sufficient pretext for a frantic pre-apocalypse f*ckfest, have skated over this aspect of the crisis.
There were allegedly forty thousand Soviet troops in Cuba, not the few thousand estimated by Marchetti and the CIA, infiltrated together with shiploads of military equipment under the noses of the CIA and including infantry, anti-aircraft, and other defensive units to protect the core strategic nuclear force.
Soviet forces were commanded by officers whose concept of operational routine was the Great Patriotic War against Nazi Germany, had control over those tactical nuclear weapons, and had authority to use them if the United States invaded and communications with Moscow were severed.
Plenty of material, in other words, to turn Cuba into a major battlefield, starting with the United States base at Guantanamo as a focus of Soviet attentions.
Here’s a photo of the general in charge of Soviet forces in Cuba, Issa Pliyev, wearing the “volunteer” civilian garb he detested, standing with Castro, who is wearing the rarely-seen clunky glasses that, apparently, he detested)… …and here's General Pliyev in his full military fig as veteran of Stalingrad, two time Hero of the Soviet Union, seven time Order of Lenin, Hero of the Mongolian People’s Republic, Member, French Legion of Honor, etc. etc.
However, Marchetti is correct in terms of describing United States perceptions at the time of the crisis.The part about the strategic missiles not being operational was something of a lucky guess.
According to the record, even after a U2 flight yielded unambiguous photographic evidence that, indeed, the Soviets had established intermediate and medium-range missile launch facilities in Cuba (built under a crash program involving the labor of hundreds of thousands of Cubans), the CIA didn’t know for sure that the warheads had arrived in Cuba.
Indeed, the photos reveal something that looks more like construction sites than comfy bases of mass destruction (the Soviets apparently cloned their homeland missile facilities in Cuba, making photo analysis of the nature and progress of the projects a bit easier), supporting the inference that the warheads were not yet on site and integrated with the missiles.
The CIA conclusion appears to have been that the warheads weren’t in Cuba and if they were, they were off in some warehouse somewhere and the missiles were unarmed.
It turns out the the warheads for the strategic missiles were in Cuba but had not been deployed to the launch sites yet.
Another indication that the strategic missiles were not operational in October 1962 is that Khrushchev was not yet prepared to formally announce their existence.
Apparently, Khrushchev planned to announce the existence of the missiles during a visit to the United States in November 1962, bringing to mind this exchange from Kubrick’s 1964 film, Dr.
As for the tactical nuclear weapons, McNamara states that his knees wobbled when he was told about them at a thirtieth anniversary get-together in 1992 between the US, Russia, and Cuba.
However, it's more accurate to state that he had been informed of the possible presence of tactical nukes on Cuba at the time of the crisis, but had simply refused to believe it.
I'm guessing McNamara chose to assume the missiles were not nuclear tipped and this was the version presented to Kennedy.
US planners therefore set aside the worry that a nuke would get lit off in Cuba, and gamed the nuclear element as if it would play out only within the parameters of a potential direct nuclear exchange between the US and Russian homelands.
The assumption was, in other words, that any nukes would have to come out of Russia, and Khrushchev probably wouldn't escalate to global nuclear war if the United States dropped the hammer on Cuba.
Tactical Air Command, Walter Sweeney, who cautioned that maybe a nuclear-armed missile might survive the massive United States strike to hit the United States.
Which is why expert opinion has started to tilt away from “masterful statesmanship” toward the “lucky accident” interpretation of the crisis.
As it transpired, the most immediate nuclear risk during the crisis didn’t even involve the weapons on Cuba.
It was created by the United States Navy enthusiastically depth charging a Soviet sub nearing Cuba that was armed with a nuclear torpedo.
Unaware that the USN was dropping undercharged “we want you to surface and identify yourself” ashcans and not “we want to sink you” depth bombs and worried that his vessel was about to be destroyed, the Soviet captain decided to dish out his 10-kiloton nuclear torpedo and go down in a blaze of glory.
Fortunately, the launch was vetoed by his flotilla commander, who happened to be on the boat.
And that, of course, did not oblige Fidel Castro, who regards Khrushchev as an ass and a wimp.
This put the Soviet foreign policy establishment on the wrong foot in vigorously and credibly defending the initiative when it turned out in October that there were four dozen strategic missiles in the package capable of reaching most of the continental United States.
And wimp, because Khrushchev backed down in October 1962 and threw Cuba under the bus.
Cuba under Castro had irrevocably burned its bridges to the United States by hosting the missiles, and was ready to do that socialist shoulder-to-shoulder thing and risk United States annihilation in an attack if the USSR was ready to take out the United States in retaliation.
Khrushchev caved to the United States and removed all the nukes, not just the strategic weapons he had promised Kennedy to remove, but also the tactical nuclear weapons he had promised Castro in the initial agreement would eventually be delivered to Cuban control—and Washington didn’t even know about.
The US had extended the courtesy to a number of Soviet proxies with considerably less national legitimacy than Cuba- Cuba was left as a lonely piñata twisting in the wind while the United States took whacks at it for over 50 years.
President Obama marked the continuation, rather than conclusion, of the effort by going to Cuba for a triumphal visit that was interpreted, especially in the United States, as receiving the Castros’ surrender to the forces of United States democracy and capitalism, notwithstanding Raul Castro’s effort to literally spin Obama’s flaccid wrist into a display of equality and popular solidarity.
For the Soviet Union, a dismal botch that helped cost Khrushchev his job and, coming on the heels of the China debacle, pretty much put paid to Soviet overseas nuclear junketeering.
Looking at the cavalcade of instability in places like Chile, Argentina, Colombia, Honduras, and Guatemala engendered by the successful US rollback of socialism after Khrushchev bugged out, Latin America would certainly have been different if Cuba had nukes…and maybe not worse off.
But that’s a possibility the US, for obvious reasons, has no interest in exploring.
The legal recourse for the United States would have been to obtain a 2/3 vote from the Organization of American States authorizing a blockade against a member state, something that the United States wasn't willing to wait for.
Mikoyan determined that Khrushchev's serial mismanagement of the crisis had alienated Castro to the degree that effective co-management of the weapons was impossible.
Castro, in desperation, was prepared to inform the world through the UN that, despite the Soviet withdrawal, Cuba still had the nukes and an effective deterrent against United States invasion.
Purpose Of Loan………….7. country…………………8. phone…………………..9. occupation………………10.age/sex…………………11.
DreamHost is one of the best hosting company for any hosting plans you need.
QUANTUM BINARY SIGNALSProfessional trading signals sent to your mobile phone daily.Start following our signals NOW & profit up to 270% per day.
I feel happy about and learning more about this topic. keep sharing your information regularly for my future reference.
Thanks for sharing an article like this. the information which you have provided is better than another blog.
Usually I never comment on blogs but your article is so convincing that I never stop myself to say something about it.
