Collectively, these books will break down conventional lines of demarcation by incorporating historical perspectives into issues of current and ongoing concern, offering international and global perspectives on a variety of issues, and bridging the gap between historians and practicing scientists.
In this way they advance scholarly conversation within and across traditional disciplines but also to help define new areas of intellectual endeavor.
First published in 2010 by PALGRAVE MACMILLAN® in the United States—a division of St.
Palgrave Macmillan is the global academic imprint of the above companies and has companies and representatives throughout the world.
Palgrave® and Macmillan® are registered trademarks in the United States, the United Kingdom, Europe and other countries.
U5L64 2011 629.45'40973—dc22 2010025629 A catalogue record of the book is available from the British Library.
Thank you for listening, and then going on to make me proud of your accomplishments.
Understanding its evolution is important to an appreciation of its character and intent.
I actually signed a contract to publish the dissertation before I defended it.
But as the years passed, I became increasingly dissatisfied with the completeness of the study’s narrative elements.
The basic story stood the test of time, but because my research for the book was carried out even before Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin reached the Moon, only a very limited base of primary documents on which to base the study was available.
The John F Kennedy Presidential Library had not yet opened, and Lyndon B Johnson was still president.
That meant the narrative lacked the fullness made possible only by using the documentary record; also, many oral histories discussing the Kennedy presidency were not yet available.
The flip side of this situation was that the events and considerations that led to the decision to go to the Moon were still fresh in the minds of the key participants in that decision, and I was fortunate enough to be able to interview most of them.
Of those involved with the decision to go to the Moon, only Robert McNamara and President Johnson declined interview requests; of course, by that time both John and Robert Kennedy had been assassinated.
Early on, x PREFACE NASA chief historian Gene Emme and through him NASA administrator James Webb became convinced that I was trying to prepare an unbiased account of the decision process, and their support greatly facilitated my research.
Thus the 1970 book was based primarily on my interviews with participants in the decision process and the secondary literature, although I was able to gain access to a few key documents.
That meant that the story of JFK’s lunar landing decision was not complete.
I also came to realize that I had totally missed an important theme in President Kennedy’s thinking in the January—May 1961 period.
His first instinct on coming to the White House had been to seek cooperation in space with the Soviet Union, not competition.
Even after he announced his decision to send Americans to the Moon on May 25, 1961, Kennedy had suggested to Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev, as they met face-to-face for the only time ten days later in Vienna, that the United States and the Soviet Union should go to the Moon together.
Khrushchev responded negatively, and at least for the time being, the cooperative alternative was foreclosed.
I also came to realize that I had told only one part of the story of John F Kennedy and the lunar landing program.
Achieving large-scale objectives through government action has two requirements.
I believe that JFK’s lunar landing decision was indeed an example of choosing a course of action only after careful thought and examination of possible alternatives.
But turning a decision into action, and carrying that action through to completion, is also needed for success.
While there have been a number of studies of Project Apollo that examined its technical and management elements, surprisingly I found that there had been no focused attention paid to the actions and decisions of President Kennedy and his White House associates from May 1961 through November 1963 that generated the political will needed to mobilize the financial and human resources which made the lunar landing program possible.
This recognition led me in 1998 to propose to the NASA Headquarters History Office a comprehensive study of John F Kennedy and the United States space program.
Then NASA administrator Dan Goldin and his associate administrator for policy and plans Lori Garver (now NASA deputy administrator) gave top-level support to my request, and NASA’s chief historian Roger Launius approved a modest contract to help me get started.
Over the next several years, I carried out a first round of gathering primary documents and other material from the Kennedy Library and the NASA Historical Reference Collection at NASA’s headquarters, and drafted a few parts of the book.
As I prepared to leave GW’s active teaching faculty in June 2008, once again it was Roger PREFACE xi Launius, by now senior curator in the Space History Department at the Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum, who suggested that I apply for the museum’s most senior fellowship, the Charles A Lindbergh Chair in Aerospace History.
I was awarded that position, and from September 2008 through August 2009, I was in residence at the museum, finishing another round of research in the Kennedy Library and the NASA archives and getting most of the writing of a first draft completed.
As I finished a chapter draft, both Mike Neufeld, chair of the museum’s space history department and Wernher von Braun biographer, and Roger Launius provided very useful comments.
I returned to GW’s Space Policy Institute as professor emeritus in September 2009, and finished my research and drafting of the manuscript there.
The current study is thus much more than a warmed-over version of my 1970 book.
It adds a great deal of new material to the account of the initial decision-making process in that study, providing a fuller understanding of the factors at play as Kennedy made his choice.
In addition, the MIT Press graciously provided its permission to incorporate as much of the contents of the earlier book into the new manuscript as I wished, and I have drawn upon many text passages and used almost all of the earlier interview material in crafting this narrative.
In doing so, I have tried not lose any of the qualities that have made The Decision to Go to the Moon the standard account of that decision.
This new study carries the story until the tragic day in Dallas when Kennedy’s presidency was so abruptly terminated.
Even on November 22, 1963, John Kennedy was intending to speak in positive terms about the future of the United States space program.
I have attempted to maintain throughout this study a focus on the decisions and actions of President John F, Kennedy, his inner circle of advisers who made decisions and took actions on behalf of the president, the career executive office staff who supported the Kennedy presidency, and the agency heads with whom the president interacted.
Kennedy before he was inaugurated assigned a lead role in space policy to his vice president-elect, Lyndon B Johnson, and I have also characterized Johnson’s role with respect to space decisions during the Kennedy administration.
What I have not done, except when it was necessary to understand deliberations at the White House level, is give much attention to the technical and management aspects of Project Apollo itself.
This study is not a complete account of John F Kennedy and the American space program.
Providing such an account was my original aspiration, but the realities of time and page count led to a decision to focus only on Kennedy and the race to the Moon, since that is the singular space achievement with which Kennedy will forever be associated.
John Kennedy personally had only limited involvement in the steps taken during his administration to bring communication satellites into early use.
But he was deeply involved in making sure that there were no international restrictions placed on the ability xii PREFACE of the United States to operate photoreconnaissance satellites, in limiting the spread of military conflict into the new environment of outer space, and in banning tests of nuclear weapons beyond the atmosphere.
In his annual address to the General Assembly of the United Nations in 1961 and 1962, he laid out the principles that became the basis of the 1967 Outer Space Treaty.
Kennedy also became personally involved with all seven Mercury astronauts and particularly friendly with the first American to orbit the Earth, John Glenn.
The astronauts represented a personality type quite attractive to Kennedy and about which he had written about in his book Profiles in Courage—individuals who had responded successfully to challenging circumstances.
So there is more to be written about Kennedy and space than is contained in this study.
While this narrative draws on what is available in the documentary record and has the benefit of interviews and oral histories that took place close to the events being discussed, it can never be really complete.
One cannot know which of the many memoranda addressed to President Kennedy he actually read, and of those he read, to what issues and views he gave most attention.
Kennedy enjoyed discussing policy issues with his advisers and associates; few of those conversations can be re-created.
John Kennedy’s brother Robert was his closest confidant, but there is a very limited record of their discussions about the United States space program.
So inevitably this study is a reconstruction of history based on extensive, but still partial, evidence.
Given the more than a decade over which I have been working on this book, there are many people to thank, and I am bound to have forgotten to mention some who deserve recognition.
It is obvious that I owe multiple expressions of gratitude to Roger Launius, and it is only fitting that this book is part of the Palgrave Studies in the History of Science and Technology series of which Roger is co-editor.
At NASA, in addition to the original support provided by Lori Garver and Dan Goldin, I want to thank archivist Jane Odom and Colin Fries and Liz Suchow of the NASA History Office for their responsiveness in helping me locate key documents and other research material.
The research staff of the John F Kennedy Presidential Library has been supportive during my many visits to the library; Maryrose Grossman was particularly helpful in digging through the photo archives to locate several of the images included in this book.
I had a very productive visit to the Lyndon B Johnson Presidential Library in March 2010; the staff there was also very helpful.
PREFACE xiii I, of course, have to express thanks to the Smithsonian Institution for the offer of the Lindbergh Chair; without that year to focus on my writing, I might still be procrastinating.
Mike Neufeld and his colleagues in the Department of Space History at the National Air and Space Museum were welcoming; I felt quite comfortable working in their midst.
George Washington students Krystal Brun and Megan Ansdell and MIT student Teasel Muir-Harmony provided occasional but valuable research assistance.
My colleague Dwayne Day read the draft manuscript and provided useful comments while also catching my many typos.
My successor as director of the Space Policy Institute, Professor Scott Pace, welcomed me back to GW after my year at the museum.
At Palgrave Macmillan, Chris Chappell has been enthusiastic about this study, and I have appreciated his guidance in getting the manuscript into print.
Sarah Whalen and Heather Faulls have been very helpful in shepherding the manuscript through the production process.
I also welcomed the very useful comments by several anonymous reviewers of my book proposal.
It goes without saying that I am responsible for any errors in this account and for the interpretations of all the actions and decisions detailed herein.
Forty-one years later, she is still my wife and still a constant source of support and encouragement.
John Kennedy was a very unlikely candidate to decide to send Americans to the Moon.
He had shown little interest in space issues in his time as a senator or during his presidential campaign.
The answer came back less than three weeks later—sending astronauts to the surface of Earth’s nearest neighbor gave the best chance of besting the Soviet Union in a dramatic space achievement.
Kennedy not only decided to go to the Moon; over the remaining thirty months of his tragically shortened presidency, he stayed closely engaged in the effort and in making sure the benefits of Project Apollo would outweigh its burgeoning cost.
Convinced that this was indeed the case, he pushed hard to make sure that Apollo was carried out in a manner that best served both the country’s interests and his own as president.
Many presidents since John Kennedy have announced bold decisions, but few have followed those decisions with the budgetary and political commitments needed to ensure success.
Kennedy’s commitment to the race to the Moon initiated the largest peacetime government-directed engineering project in United States history.
Project Apollo by the time it was completed cost United States taxpayers $25. billion, which would be equal to some $151 billion in 2010 dollars.
Apollo is frequently “WE SHOULD GO TO THE MOON” 3 compared to the construction of the Panama Canal as an expensive, long-term, government-funded undertaking.
By the time the Canal was completed in 1914, the cost of its construction was $375 million, equivalent to $8. billion in 2010 dollars, much less than Apollo.
Another comparison might be with the multidecade construction of the Interstate Highway System, which began in the mid-1950s and for which the federal government paid $114 billion out ofa total cost of $128 billion.
By any measure available, Apollo required a historically massive commitment of public funds over a relatively brief period of time.
The book contains a detailed narrative of the decisions and actions of President Kennedy, his inner circle of advisers who made decisions and took actions on his behalf, the career White House staff who supported the Kennedy presidency, and the agency heads with whom Kennedy interacted.
Kennedy before he was inaugurated assigned his vice president, Lyndon B Johnson, a lead role in space policy; the study also characterizes Johnson’s role with respect to space decisions during the Kennedy administration.
Except when necessary to understand deliberations at the White House level, the book does not give much attention to the specific details of Project Apollo itself.
Yet most general accounts of JFK’s time as president give only passing attention to his involvement with the lunar landing program.
One goal of this study is to create as historically complete a record as possible of that involvement.
Doing so fills an empty niche in the record of the Kennedy administration.
It also provides a detailed case study of how Kennedy went about conducting his presidency, assessing what actions were needed in the national interest, continuously seeking information from multiple sources, but deferring to his agency heads to carry out the programs he set in motion.
Readers of this account can decide for themselves what insights Kennedy’s space-related efforts provide about his personality and the way he carried out his presidency.
The book’s concluding chapter, however, reflects on the character and quality of JFK’s space decisions, asks whether the way Apollo was conceived and carried out can serve as a model for other large-scale government efforts, and provides a perspective on the impact of Kennedy’s commitment to a lunar landing “before this decade is out” on both the evolution of the United States space program and the United States position in the world of the 1960s and later.
The image of John Kennedy that emerges from this study is at variance from how he is often regarded with respect to space.
Rather than a visionary who steered the United States space program toward a focus on exploring 4 JOHN F KENNEDY AND THE RACE TO THE MOON beyond Earth orbit, he emerges as a pragmatic political leader who soon after entering office came to see the United States civilian space program as an important tool to advance United States foreign policy and national security goals.
He was flexible in his approach to space activities, willing to compete if necessary but preferring to cooperate if possible.
John F Kennedy with his actions in the spring of 1961 and in the following months took the first steps toward the Moon.
Unfortunately, Kennedy did not live to see the first footprints on the lunar surface, but in the long sweep of history, it is one of the ways in which he will be most remembered.
Kennedy’s own inclination seems to have leaned in the direction of becoming a journalist, a writer of nonfiction books, or even an academic.
Kennedy’s father, Joseph, however, was determined that his sons not enter the business world; he had amassed sufficient wealth to allow his sons to choose a future that did not have to lead to significant additional income.
The reality was that if Kennedy had chosen a career other than politics, it would have meant going against the wishes of his strong-willed father.
Kennedy was easily elected to the United States House of Representatives in 1948 and to the Senate in 1952 and again in 1958.
But his time in Congress was not fulfilling for either his or his father’s ambitions.
Beginning in 1956, when he was almost selected as Adlai Stevenson’s vice presidential running mate, Kennedy set his eyes on being elected president of the United States in November 1960.
In his years as a senator, Kennedy said little about space issues except in the context of the linkage between space launch vehicles and strategic missile capabilities.
That changed once he became the Democratic nominee for president in July 1960.
Kennedy offered no specific views on future space activities during the campaign, however, and once he was declared the president-elect, he spent little time on space issues prior to his inauguration.
This meant that Kennedy’s personal views and interests with respect to space, as differentiated from his campaign rhetoric, remained largely unknown as he entered the White House.
Kennedy and Space before His Presidential Campaign Even though the significance of the Soviet launches of spacecraft beginning with Sputnik 1 in October 1957 and the dog-carrying Sputnik 2 the following month and the appropriate United States response to Soviet space achievements were major issues before the Congress between 1958 and 1960, Senator Kennedy said little about space issues during those years.
Kennedy also showed little personal interest in United States and Soviet space efforts.
He was a member of the Visiting Committee of the Harvard College Observatory, but any curiosity he may have had regarding astronomy apparently did not carry over into the space realm.
The head of the Instrumentation Laboratory at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Charles Stark Draper, recalled a discussion with John Kennedy and his brother Robert at a Boston restaurant during the post-Sputnik period.
Draper tried to get the Kennedy brothers excited about the promise of space flight.
Kennedy did vote in February 1958 to create a Senate Special Committee on Space and Aeronautics and voted in favor of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration funding bills in 1959 and 1960; other actions related to NASA during those years were approved by voice votes, without the positions of individual senators being recorded.
The growing disparity between United States and Soviet missile capability, Kennedy argued, would soon put the United States at a significant strategic disadvantage vis-a-vis the Soviet Union.
In a speech on the Senate floor on August 14, 1958, Kennedy expressed worry that the Soviet Union’s superiority in nuclear-tipped missiles would allow it to use “sputnik diplomacy” and other nonmilitary means to shift the balance of global power against the United States.
Kennedy did gain a seat on the prestigious Committee on Foreign Relations in the mid-1950s.
He was one of the first senators to recognize the significance for United States interests of the decolonization movement of the BEFORE THE WHITE HOUSE 7 late 1950s; he thought it essential that the United States be an appealing ally to Asians and Africans as they chose which social system to pursue as independent nations.
Kennedy attracted international attention by denouncing French suppression of Algeria’s move toward independence.
His interest in presenting a positive image of the United States to the countries of the third world was a factor in his later judgment that the United States could not by default cede space leadership to the Soviet Union.
This response suggests that Senator Kennedy had indeed given some thought to space issues before February 1960, and that in his judgment they had a lower priority in comparison to other threats to United States leadership; this may well be an accurate reflection of his views as opposed to the strident attitude toward space leadership that characterized much of his campaign rhetoric later in the year.
Notable is JFK’s interest at this early date in both increasing the lifting power of United States rockets and in internationalizing space activity.
The letter also suggests, as in the use of the expression “propulsion unit” rather than launch vehicle, that Kennedy or whoever composed the response was not very familiar with the specifics of the United States space effort.
Space and the 1960 Presidential Campaign Space issues did not play a major role in John Kennedy’s campaign for the Democratic nomination for president.
Foreshadowing the most famous line in his inaugural address, Kennedy said that the New Frontier of which he was speaking “is a set of challenges.
The Republican Administration has remained incredibly blind to the prospects of space exploration.
It has failed to pursue space programs with a sense of urgency at all close to their importance to the future of the world.
The new Democratic Administration will press forward with our national space program in full realization of the importance of space accomplishments to our national security and our international prestige.
We shall reorganize the program to achieve both efficiency and speedy execution.
Campaign Advice on Space To develop background material on the various issues he would have to address during his presidential campaign, Senator Kennedy in December 1958 established a “brain trust” drawn primarily from the faculties of Harvard and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Even before the presidential campaign began, Harvard law professor Archibald Cox began collecting research memoranda and reports from experts at both universities and from across the country.
While an impressive amount of material was BEFORE THE WHITE HOUSE 9 generated, little of it was read by Kennedy or used during the campaign.
Regarding the products of Cox’s efforts, Theodore Sorensen comments that “not all of their material was usable and even less was actually used.
Kennedy himself on September 2, 1960, asked Cox to contact Trevor Gardner, former assistant secretary of the United States Air Force for research and development, and a man to whom Kennedy looked for advice on space and missile issues.
Another source of largely unused but remarkably prescient input into Kennedy’s campaign was the Advisory Committee on Science and Technology of the Democratic Advisory Council, which in turn reported to the Democratic National Committee.
Leading the preparation of this paper was physicist Ralph Lapp, who, after working in the Manhattan Project to develop the atomic bomb, spent most of the rest of his career warning about the dangers of nuclear war.
The position paper pointed out that “the United States has failed to define its real objective in space.
If purely scientific, this should be so stated so that the American people and others understand our objective.
The paper noted that “Senator Kennedy must make the decision, essentially political in character,” between the two programs.
The costs of the politically driven second program were estimated to be $26 billion from 1960 to 1970, compared to the then planned expenditures during that period of $12 to 13 billion.
The scientifically oriented but faster-paced program was 10 JOHN F KENNEDY AND THE RACE TO THE MOON estimated to cost $19 billion.
Space Statements during the Campaign By 1960, it had become customary for specialized publications to ask presidential candidates to state their positions on issues of interest to their readers.
Kennedy’s response, which appeared in the October 10 issue of the magazine, was drafted by Dr.
The target dates for a manned space platform, United States citizen on the moon, nuclear power for space exploration, and a true manned spaceship should be elastic.
Many in the space community, however, took the statement at face value and anticipated that if elected Kennedy would favor an accelerated space effort and would put additional emphasis on the military dimensions of the United States space program.
The Symbolic Role of Space John Kennedy laid out his basic argument for his candidacy in one of his early campaign speeches.
An administration that moves rapidly to rebuild our defenses, until America is once again first in military power across the board; 2.
An administration that moves rapidly to revamp our goals in education and research, until American science and learning are once again preeminent; 3.
An administration that moves rapidly to reshape our image here at home, until it is clear to all the world that the revolution for equal rights is still the American revolution; 4.
An administration that moves rapidly to renew our leadership for peace, until we have brought to that universal pursuit the same concentration of resources and efforts that we have brought to the preparation of war; and 5.
Eventually that phrase or a variation of it appeared in every campaign speech.
It was in this context that Kennedy made frequent references to the space program in his campaign appearances.
Because we failed to recognize the impact that being first in outer space would have, the impression began to move around the world that the Soviet Union was on the march, that it had definite goals, that it knew how to accomplish them, that it was moving and we were standing still.
Kennedy’s campaign rhetoric with respect to the loss of United States prestige because of the Soviet space successes was reinforced by a classified United States Information Agency report that was leaked to The Washington Post.
The report was based on polls taken in Great Britain, France, West Germany, Italy, and Norway.
In late October 1960, in response to Richard Nixon’s defense of the space record of the Eisenhower administration, Johnson released a “white paper” prepared by the staff of the Senate space committee, which he chaired.
Johnson criticized the administration’s space policy but stressed that both Democrats and Republicans in Congress had recognized the need for a strong space effort.
On July 23, after the Democratic convention, candidate Kennedy had a highly classified briefing from the director of the Central Intelligence Agency , Allen Dulles.
The missions flown by the U-2 spy plane prior to the May 1, 1960, downing of a flight over Russia piloted by Francis Gary Powers had suggested that there had been very limited deployment of the initial Soviet ICBM, and thus that a prospective “missile gap” was not likely to emerge.
The first successful United States spy satellite mission was not launched until August 18, 1960, after Kennedy’s CIA briefing, and it took several additional missions later in 1960 and in early 1961 to confirm that the indications from the U-2 flights were correct.
Also, from Kennedy’s September 1960 question to Trevor Gardner about whether the United States or the Soviet Union would be first to have a reconnaissance satellite, it appears Kennedy was not briefed on the CORONA intelligence satellite program that Eisenhower had approved in February 1958; its existence was known to very few people within the Congress.
Even so, Eisenhower was “reportedly furious” that Kennedy continued to raise the missile gap issue throughout the campaign, while his opponent, Richard Nixon, could not provide information that would counter Kennedy’s claims because of its highly classified nature.
In the following ten weeks before he took the oath of office, president-elect Kennedy moved forward briskly on many of the issues that he had highlighted in the campaign.
However, he paid very limited attention to space topics during his transition activities.
While the perceived lack of urgency in the Eisenhower administration’s space efforts may have been a useful issue to stress in the campaign, the reality was that the president-elect and his advisers did not give high priority to addressing either immediate or longer-term space questions during the postelection transition period.
There was no contact made with the new National Aeronautics and Space Administration , which had begun operations two years earlier, on October 1, 1958.
Kennedy prior to his inauguration nominated no one to replace Eisenhower appointee T Keith Glennan as NASA administrator.
As John F Kennedy took the oath of office on January 20, 1961, there was thus significant uncertainty about the future of the United States space effort.
After the party conventions, the Brookings Institution, a Washington think tank, had urged both candidates to begin to prepare for the transition, should they be elected.
In September, Kennedy had asked high-powered Washington lawyer Clark Clifford, who had been a senior adviser to President Harry Truman and who had successfully represented Kennedy against allegations that he was not the author of the Pulitzer-prize winning Profiles in Courage, to be his primary transition adviser.
Jackson and Kennedy were similar in their strongly anticommunist views and on giving priority to military strength, and Kennedy had included Jackson on his short list as a running mate.
Jackson took Neustadt to meet Kennedy on September 18, and the candidate was immediately impressed by Neustadt’s memo.
Kennedy asked Neustadt to elaborate his arguments in additional memoranda, saying someone in the campaign would get back to him in due time.
As was typical of Kennedy’s style, he asked Clifford and Neustadt to work without consulting 16 JOHN F KENNEDY AND THE RACE TO THE MOON one another, ensuring that he would have two independent sources of transition advice.
On November 4, Neustadt joined Kennedy on his campaign airplane to hand the candidate several of the memorandums he had prepared.
What he may have found most interesting in Neustadt’s analysis was the recommendation that he adopt a staffing pattern in the White House that was much closer to that used by Franklin D Roosevelt than the military-like arrangements that had been set up by Dwight Eisenhower.
Clifford delivered his transition memorandum and back-up notebooks to Kennedy on November 9, the day on which Kennedy’s election victory was confirmed.
The president-elect then asked Clifford to serve as his liaison with the outgoing Eisenhower administration during the transition.
Both Neustadt, who stayed on as a consultant during the transition and in the early months of the Kennedy administration, and Clifford emphasized that Kennedy should organize the White House to serve his needs as president, with no chief of staff to control who had access to the president and thus whose advice he received.
Pierre Salinger as his press secretary, Kenneth O’Donnell as his special assistant and appointments secretary, and Theodore Sorensen as his principal adviser on domestic policy and programs, with the title of special counsel to the president.
Salinger was a former journalist who had served as Kennedy’s press secretary during the campaign.
O’Donnell had served as the organizer and scheduler of Kennedy’s senatorial and presidential campaigns, and was part of the protective Massachusetts “Irish mafia” that had emerged around Kennedy during his political career.
Sorensen was from Nebraska, the son of a Unitarian minister, and very different in style from Kennedy’s Massachusetts associates.
He had joined JFK’s Senate staff in 1953 and had MAKING THE TRANSITION 17 become his chief speechwriter and domestic policy adviser and in many ways his alter ego on policy matters.
Salinger reports that during the 1960 campaign, O’Donnell “was constantly at JEK’s side.
Once Kennedy was in the White House, O’Donnell as appointments secretary controlled most access to the President; he also acted as Kennedy’s chief “enforcer” within the executive branch, making sure that senior agency officials acted in accordance with White House priorities.
However, it appears that O’Donnell had relatively limited involvement in space-related issues other than those associated with the political ramifications of NASA’s facility location and contract award decisions.
Sorensen also notes that he and Kennedy were “close in a peculiarly impersonal way”; there was little social contact between him and Kennedy either as senator or president.
There was no love lost between O’Donnell and his staff and Sorenson and his deputies during the time they served President Kennedy.
Although O’Donnell’s hostility toward Sorensen and his staff was well known to most in the White House, Sorensen professes to have been unaware of the antagonism until years later.
Sorensen, in fact, appears to have been something of a latent space enthusiast.
Sorensen later suggested that this “was just freewheeling speculation as to whether I would have a post and what would be the most suitable post for me.
Once he did become fully engaged, Kennedy first focused on selecting the ten members of his Cabinet; his first nominee was announced on December 1 and the final one on December 17.
On that latter date, sixty additional key policy posts and several hundred more other key positions remained to be filled.
One of the December groups, discussed in more detail below, was on outer space; it worked under Sorensen’s guidance.
Twenty-four of the twenty-nine teams, including the outer space group, turned in their reports before the January 20 inauguration.
Dealing with these issues was to occupy president-elect Kennedy’s attention only briefly during the postelection transition period.
They included the relationship between civilian and military space efforts; a proposal to abolish the National Aeronautics and Space Council, the White House body for developing national space policy and strategy; the pace at which larger rocket boosters ought to be developed in order to close the weight-lifting gap with the Soviet Union; and NASA’s plans for a human space flight program to follow the initial United States effort to send an astronaut into orbit, Project Mercury.
Civil-Military Relations The most fundamental policy question to be addressed in the months following the 1957 launches of Sputniks 1 and 2 was whether a new organization for space was needed, or whether all United States government space activities, including those with primarily civilian objectives, should be managed by MAKING THE TRANSITION 19 the Department of Defense.
In the weeks following the Sputnik launches, both the Army and the Air Force put forward ambitious space plans, and campaigned vigorously for primacy in the United States space effort.
The Army claim was based in large part on the fact that German émigré Wernher von Braun and his rocket team worked at the Army Ballistic Missile Agency and that they constituted the country’s top reservoir of launch vehicle— related technical talent; in addition, the Army’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory had managed the development of the first United States satellite, Explorer 1, and could serve as the organization developing future satellites.
AMBA in its struggle to gain an important space role developed ambitious plans in 1957 and 1958, beginning with a suborbital launch of a human and extending to establishing outposts on the Moon.
The Army campaign was not successful, and by mid-1960, both the Jet Propulsion Laboratory and von Braun’s rocket team had been transferred to the new civilian space agency NASA.18 The Air Force claim took a different approach.
Its chief of staff, General Thomas White, argued that “there is no division, per se, between air and space.
The implication was that the service was the natural choice for the space role.
DARPA, rather than one of the armed services, was to manage all United States space efforts, civilian and military, but it was not successful in establishing itself as the lead United States space agency.
He was an engineer by training and had had a wide-ranging career, including a stint as a member of the Atomic Energy Commission.
But he knew little about space science or technology, and had not followed the post-Sputnik debates leading to the creation of NASA; in his own words, “I didn’t have any idea what astronomy or geodesy or any of those things would mean in this strange world.
Glennan agreed to take the position, but only on the condition that Hugh Dryden, the executive director of NACA, would be nominated as deputy administrator.
Many in Washington had expected Dryden to get the top NASA job; trained in aerodynamics, he had been the top official handling day-to-day affairs at NACA since 1949, and was a widely known and respected individual in the United States and international aeronautical research communities.
This outcome was deeply disappointing for Dryden, but he overcame that disappointment to serve as NASA’s deputy administrator until his death in 1965.
Dryden stayed on in his position during the Kennedy administration and played a key role in the deliberations leading to the decision to go to the Moon.
NASA inherited three programs from the Department of Defense that would later play important roles in the space efforts of the Kennedy administration.
In August 1958, DARPA transferred its human space flight project to NASA; the effort was soon named Project Mercury.
Even so, Eisenhower decided that the first United States people to fly in space, to be known as “astronauts,” should be drawn from the ranks of military test pilots.
Another DOD program inherited by NASA was a much more powerful launch vehicle than any rocket available to NASA in its early years.
Known as Saturn C-1 and conceived and managed by the von Braun team, the lift-off thrust of the Saturn C-1 vehicle was to be 1. million pounds, four times more powerful than the 360,000 pounds thrust of the Atlas ICBM that NASA was planning to use for orbital flights in Project Mercury.
The von Braun team also proposed developing a second version of the Saturn launch MAKING THE TRANSITION 21 vehicle, known as the Saturn C-2.
The third inherited DOD project was the very powerful F-1 rocket motor, designed to provide 1. million pounds of thrust, equivalent to the eight engines that were to power the first stage of the Saturn C-1.
By the end of 1959, just over a year after it began operation, NASA had developed a ten-year plan that identified various mission milestones and estimated the costs of achieving them.
Air Force leaders and supporters were encouraged by the tone of candidate Kennedy’s public statements on space, especially his strident October 1960 response to Missiles and Rockets.
The service by 1960 had gained the lead role for space within the Department of Defense from DARPA; then it turned its ambitions to recapturing from NASA the primary role overall in United States space activities.
As noted in the previous chapter, Gardner had been one of Kennedy’s advisers on missile and space issues during the presidential campaign.
In December 1960 Gardner also became a member of the group President-elect Kennedy chartered to advise him on space matters 22 JOHN F KENNEDY AND THE RACE TO THE MOON during the postelection transition; this was interpreted as another suggestion that Kennedy favored a larger role for the military in space.
The Future of the Space Council A contentious issue in developing the United States organizational approach to space during 1958 had been how best to coordinate the activities of the new space civilian space agency NASA, the Department of Defense and the military services, the Atomic Energy Commission, and other government agencies that might become involved in space activities.
The Senate as it considered space legislation hoped to create a single integrated national space program, with civilian and military elements, rather than separate programs carried out by different agencies, and thought that some kind of formal policymaking and coordinating body was needed to achieve this objective.
The White House did not want to interpose such a body between the operating space agencies and the president, and thus was resistant to the Senate proposal.
After a July 7, 1958, one-on-one meeting at the White House between Dwight Eisenhower and Senate majority leader Lyndon Johnson, a primary advocate of the integrated approach to space, an agreement was reached on creating a policy-level body, to be chaired by the president.
According to some accounts, at their meeting Johnson convinced President Eisenhower to chair the board.
Other members would include the secretaries of state and defense, the NASA administrator, the chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission, one additional government member, and three individuals from outside the government.
Although Eisenhower had accepted the creation of such a Space Council, he made it clear to his associates at the White House that he had no intention of convening this body regularly, nor of acting as its presiding officer.
He refused to use his discretionary power to appoint an executive secretary or create a separate staff for the Space Council, and he asked [his science adviser James] Killian to preside at its infrequent meetings.
The Space Council indeed met infrequently and had little influence on space issues in the months following its creation.
He recommended that the president propose amendments to the 1958 Space Act to abolish the Council.
However, when Glennan met with Eisenhower on January 8, 1960, he found that the president “seemed to have forgotten our earlier discussion,” even though in the interim the proposed changes in the Act had been drafted and were ready to be sent to the Congress.
But the Senate refused to act, primarily because Lyndon Johnson, majority leader and, at the time, still candidate for the Democratic presidential nomination, opposed the changes, despite what he had told Eisenhower in January.
Glennan met again with Johnson on June 23, but was unsuccessful in convincing him to bring the proposed changes before the Senate for approval.
Glennan reports Johnson as saying “I don’t see any reason for giving you a new law at the present time.
A new President will take office on January 20, 1961—less than five months from now.
The next President could well have different views as to the organization and function of the military and civilian space programs.
It is unlikely that at this point Johnson envisioned a scenario in which John Kennedy, if elected president, would decide to revitalize the Space Council and turn over its chairmanship to his vice president,e., Lyndon Johnson.
Increasing United States Rocket Lifting Power Linking Soviet space achievements to the Russian ballistic missile program, as John Kennedy had done during the presidential campaign, was a reason24 JOHN F KENNEDY AND THE RACE TO THE MOON able thing to do, since even in the 1957-1960 period it was well known in United States intelligence and technical circles that the Soviet Union had used its initial R-7 Intercontinental Ballistic Missile as its space launch vehicle.
Soviet engineers had been developing this missile since the early 1950s, giving them a several-year head start on the United States.
The launch of Sputnik 1 on October 4, 1957, was thus not only a propaganda loss for the United States; it was also a very visible demonstration that the Soviet Union possessed the capability to launch a nuclear warhead across intercontinental distances, and that the United States could be vulnerable to a Soviet nuclear attack.
Among their other impacts, the launches of Sputnik 1 and Sputnik 2 demonstrated that the Soviet Union possessed the capability to lift much heavier payloads into space than did the United States.
Moreover, the second stage of the R-7 booster also went into orbit on each launch, so in reality the Soviet Union had placed some 12,000-13,000 pounds into space; it was the rocket’s upper stage, not the satellite itself, which was visible to the naked eye of observers around the world.
By contrast, the first United States satellite, Explorer 1, which was launched by the Army team led by Wernher von Braun on January 31, 1958, weighed only 30. pounds, with half of that weight being the satellite’s last-stage booster rocket.
The three megaton nuclear warhead which was the payload for the R-7 ICBM weighed approximately 11,000 pounds, thus requiring the development of a powerful booster to send it on its intercontinental trajectory.
By contrast, the United States a few years later was able to develop a thermonuclear warhead weighing only around 1,600 pounds; this meant that United States Atlas and Titan ICBMs did not have to be nearly as powerful as the Soviet R-7 in order to accomplish their military mission.
This was acceptable in terms of strategic rocket relationships, but meant that the United States was at a severe disadvantage in sending heavy payloads into space.
The United States might be able to launch scientifically sophisticated satellites, but it would not be able to match the Soviet Union in publicly visible space achievements using a converted ICBM as a launch vehicle.
There were two approaches taken during the Eisenhower administration to closing the U.S.-USSR gap in rocket-lifting power.
One was to develop the Saturn C-1 launcher, with its first stage having 1. million pounds of lift-off thrust.
The other was to develop the large F-1 rocket engine, which at some future time could be used to power a much larger launch vehicle.
Four days later, the Saturn project received the highest national priority, DX, authorizing the use of overtime work and giving it precedence for scarce materials and other program requirements.
NASA had hoped to get a FY1962 budget of $1. billion approved; such a budget would have enabled NASA to accelerate its booster and rocket engine development efforts.
After tough negotiations with BOB, NASA was held to a $1. billion total.
It would be up to the new president to decide whether this was an acceptable situation.
The Future of Human Space Flight The initial United States human space flight effort, Project Mercury, was a very basic undertaking, intended primarily to investigate the human ability to survive being launched into space and returning to Earth and to perform various simple tasks in the weightless environment while in orbit.
Planning for a human space flight program to follow Mercury began within NASA in 1959.
To do this, NASA formed a Research Steering Committee on Manned Space Flight in April 1959.
The committee concluded its meeting without agreeing whether such a mission, or a less ambitious mission to fly around the Moon without landing, was the better choice of a longrange objective.
Operating without top-level political guidance and basing their choice on what constituted from a space program point of view a rational program of human space flight development, NASA planners thus chose the lunar landing objective almost two years before John F Kennedy made his decision to send Americans to the Moon.
In late July 1960, Administrator Glennan approved the suggestion of the NASA director of space flight programs, Abe Silverstein, that the post-Mercury program be named Project Apollo.
Silverstein had picked the name out of a Greek mythology book because he thought that the image of the god Apollo riding his chariot across the Sun gave the best representation of the grand scale of the proposed project.
President Eisenhower and many of his advisers were skeptical of the long-term value of human space flight, and were not inclined to approve an undertaking as ambitious as sending United States astronauts to the Moon.
As NASA and the BOB developed a space budget for fiscal year 1962, no funds were included for the Apollo spacecraft.
With respect to future missions, the panel noted that they depended on the availability of the Saturn launch vehicle, and that a circumlunar mission could only be attempted only when the Saturn C-2 with a hydrogen-fueled upper stage became available.
The panel estimated that this would be in 1968 or 1969, with an initial attempt at a circumlunar mission around 1970.
This was several years later than what NASA had indicated was possible.
The panel observed that “none of the boosters now planned for development are capable of landing on the moon with sufficient auxiliary equipment to return the crew safely to Earth.
The PSAC report suggested that “certainly among the major reasons for attempting the manned exploration of space are emotional compulsions and national aspirations.
The panel estimated the costs of the Mercury, Apollo circumlunar, and lunar landing programs.
It included in the costs of each program the expenses connected with robotic activities undertaken in its support, and used 1975 as the target date for the first lunar landing.
Project Mercury—$350 million Apollo circumlunar—$8 billion Manned lunar landing—an additional $26 to $38 billion.
The PSAC panel developed the cost estimate for the lunar landing mission on its own; its estimate was dramatically higher than any that NASA was developing at the time.
The panel’s report was presented to President Eisenhower at a National Security Council meeting on December 20, 1960.
There are various accounts of his reaction, none of them suggesting a positive response.
NASA’s associate administrator , Robert 28 JOHN F KENNEDY AND THE RACE TO THE MOON Seamans, who had joined the space agency in September 1960, said that Eisenhower asked for an explanation of the reasons for undertaking such an ambitious and expensive program, and that one response compared the lunar journey to the voyages of Columbus to America, which were financed by Spain’s Queen Isabella.
Eisenhower reacted by asserting that he was “not about to hock his jewels” to send men to the Moon.
Reflecting the president’s views as voiced at the December 20 meeting, the draft of Eisenhower’s last budget message said that there was no scientific or defense need for a man-in-space program beyond Mercury.
Glennan went to see science adviser Kistiakowsky on January 3, 1961, to argue that such a statement was “unwise,” and succeeded in getting the statement modified.
Despite the negative signals from the outgoing administration, NASA’s internal planning for Project Apollo and a lunar landing project to follow it had continued.
On October 17, 1960, George Low had told his boss, Abe Silverstein, “it has become increasingly apparent that a preliminary program for manned lunar landings should be formulated.
The Space Task Group at NASA’s Langley Research Center in Virginia, which was in charge of Project Mercury, and the von Braun team in Huntsville also were working on planning a lunar landing mission.
The groups presented a status report on their efforts at a January 5 meeting of NASA’s Space Exploration Council.
There was a “clear consensus” that such planning should continue under Low’s direction, but Administrator Glennan reminded his staff that there was no White House support for such an ambitious undertaking.
Space during the Transition In the period between the November 8 election and his inauguration, president-elect Kennedy dealt with only one of these pressing space policy issues, asking vice president-elect Lyndon B Johnson to assume the chairmanship of the National Aeronautics and Space Council.
This request was widely viewed at the time as an indication of the secondary priority that Kennedy was assigning to space.
Kennedy also was briefed on January 10 on the report of his task force on outer space, which was chaired by MIT engineer Jerome MAKING THE TRANSITION 29 Wiesner, who had served as a technical and arms control adviser during the presidential campaign and was the top candidate to be Kennedy’s White House science adviser.
Wiesner’s report was very critical of NASA’s organization and management and on the emphasis being placed on the Project Mercury human space flight effort; it also had harsh words for the national security space program.
The Weisner task force had prepared its report without any briefings or other input from NASA, and there was no other direct contact between the incoming administration and NASA’s managers during the transition period.
The position of NASA administrator was one of the few senior positions for which no one had been nominated as Kennedy became president.
Johnson to Chair Space Council During the transition, Ted Sorensen and David Bell, the Harvard economist whom Kennedy had chosen to be his budget director, met several times with BOB deputy director Elmer Staats.
Among the many issues discussed, they agreed that the Space Council was not needed and that legislation abolishing it should be reintroduced in the new Congress.
To signify this, Kennedy announced on December 20 that the vice president would replace the president as chair of the National Aeronautics and Space Council.
The precise sequence of events surrounding this announcement remains unclear.
Belieu also 30 JOHN F KENNEDY AND THE RACE TO THE MOON told Johnson that “at NASA there has been a continuing lack of leadership and competence” and that “the Air Force can be expected—and apparently already has started—to make a basic power play to grab the entire Space program.
Beginning soon after the launch of Sputnik 1, he had played a prominent role in shaping the Congressional response to the Soviet space achievements.
An October 17, 1957, memorandum from one of his top advisers, George Reedy, pointed out to Johnson that the Soviet achievement “could be one of the great dividing lines in American and world history, the whole history of humanity” and suggested that it offered the Democrats, and specifically Johnson, an opportunity to present themselves as being more in tune with such a development.
Following Reedy’s advice, Johnson chaired the twenty days of hearings on “satellite and missile programs” held by his Preparedness Subcommittee of the Senate Armed Services Committee between November 1957 and January 1958.
As the Senate organized itself to deal with space issues, Johnson named himself chairman of the new Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, even as he maintained his position as majority leader.
He told Johnson that the NASA-Air Force conflict was “why I have been so firmly convinced that the Space Council needs to be resurrected and reestablished,” since “only someone with your force and vigor and understanding can separate the men from the boys.
Neustadt in a cover letter said that his memorandum was a response to Kennedy for a suggestion, which seemingly must have come before December 20, “on something you could give him to work on and worry about”; he called the memorandum a “quickie,” one that “was worked up today in collaboration with the Budget staff, and no doubt could MAKING THE TRANSITION 31 be vastly improved.
There is, as the preceding paragraphs show, even suggestive evidence that the initiative may have come from Lyndon Johnson himself.
Johnson returned to Palm Beach to meet with Kennedy on December 26, this time accompanied by Oklahoma senator Robert Kerr, who was LBJ’s choice as his successor as chairman of the Senate space committee.
To make Robert Kerr the new chairman meant bypassing several senators on the committee more senior than Kerr.
Of them, only Senator Clinton Anderson of New Mexico was potentially interested in the chairmanship.
Anderson was persuaded not to stand in Kerr’s way and instead to accept the chairmanship of another committee during a phone call from Kerr as he met with Johnson and Kennedy on December 26; Kerr told Anderson on the telephone that the two men wanted Kerr to have the chairmanship, and that he hoped Anderson would agree.
In Kerr, Johnson knew he had a close and powerful ally who would help him push the new administration to propose a larger space program and who would be sympathetic to the political uses of that larger program.
It was not until four months later, in April 1961, that the Space Council was activated and Lyndon Johnson as its chairman given the task of proposing a way for the United States to enter and win the space race.
The task force was led by Jerome Wiesner, a professor of engineering at MIT who had been involved in weapons research during World War IJ and had had a decade of experience dealing with the national security policy aspects of scientific and engineering issues.
Wiesner had been a member of PSAC since its inception in 1957, but had not served on any of the PSAC subcommittees dealing with space issues.
He had, 32 JOHN F KENNEDY AND THE RACE TO THE MOON however, most likely heard many of the briefings on space issues given to the overall committee.
During the presidential campaign, Kennedy had sought his advice primarily on a possible nuclear test ban and other arms control issues.
By the time the task force began its work, Wiesner had emerged as Kennedy’s most likely choice to be the presidential science adviser.
One indication that the decision to make Lyndon Johnson chair of the Space Council had been taken prior to December 17 was a meeting on that day between Jerome Wiesner, Kenneth Belieu, and Max Leher, who was the Senate space committee’s assistant staff director.
At that meeting, Wiesner expressed support for reestablishing the Space Council, and invited Belieu and Leher to join his task force.
Most of the members of Wiesner’s group were deeply familiar with space issues because of their past involvements.
The twenty-four page report was admittedly a “hasty review” aimed at providing a “survey of the program” and identifying “personnel, technical, MAKING THE TRANSITION 33 or administrative problems” requiring prompt attention.
The report was critical of the management of both NASA and DOD space efforts.
With regard to NASA, it called for “vigorous, imaginative, and technically competent top management,” implying that NASA’s current top officials had not demonstrated these qualities.
The use of the word managing was particularly noted; some took this as a suggestion that the Space Council would have executive, not just coordinating, responsibilities in space.
Even so, the report noted that “too few of the country’s outstanding scientists and engineers” were working in the space field.
The Wiesner task force called Project Mercury “marginal,” as had the PSAC report a month earlier, and pointed out that it was “very unlikely” 34 JOHN F KENNEDY AND THE RACE TO THE MOON that the United States would be first to send an astronaut to orbit.
It recommended that “we should stop advertising Mercury as our major objective in space.
Of particular concern was the potential death of an astronaut in a Mercury mission, particularly if he were to be stranded in orbit.
Finally, the panel recommended “a vigorous program to exploit the potentialities of practical space systems” for communications, navigation, and meteorological observation.
There was even some question after the inauguration of whether Wiesner agreed with everything in the report of the task force he had chaired.
The day after he received the report of the panel, Kennedy named Jerome Wiesner as his new science and technology adviser.
Wiesner’s selection meant that Kennedy would hear both sides of the case for a high profile civilian space program focused on human space flight, one perspective from Lyndon Johnson and the other from Wiesner.
An Uncertain Future for NASA In his final weeks in office, NASA administrator Keith Glennan grew increasingly distressed by the lack of any contact from the incoming Kennedy MAKING THE TRANSITION 35 administration.
He tried to probe Wiesner regarding the schedule for naming the new NASA administrator, but Wiesner only asked whether Glennan was willing to stay on in the job, to which Glennan replied in the negative.
On January 9, the impatient Glennan called vice president-elect Lyndon Johnson.
On January 17, with still no word from the incoming administration, Glennan called the White House to alert the staff there that no senior person at NASA had been asked to stay on, and that Hugh Dryden had expressed his willingness to serve as acting administrator during the change in administrations.
An hour later, he was told that Clark Clifford, who was handling personnel appointments for president-elect Kennedy, had indicated to the White House that the new administration did indeed want Dryden to stay on.
After sherry with a few of his staff, Glennan left NASA for the final time, intending to begin the drive back to his home in Cleveland that evening.
However, Washington was paralyzed by a blizzard, and it was not until 6:30m. on January 20, the day of the Kennedy’s inauguration, that he was able to leave.
This page intentionally left blank Chapter 3 Getting Started O, a frigid and snow-covered January 20, 1961, John F Kennedy was sworn in as the thirty-fifth President of the United States.
Let us never negotiate out of fear, but let us never fear to negotiate.
It was an approach that Kennedy was to use with respect to space in all his days in office—preferring to cooperate but being willing to compete if that was the better path to advancing United States interests.
The inaugural address, in addition to its soaring rhetoric, reflected Kennedy’s world view as he entered office.
He suggested that “nothing would help the new administration more than such a first impression of energy, direction, action, avd accomplishment.
Instead, the first one hundred days of the Kennedy administration were marked by slow movement of Kennedy’s domestic program through the Congress and immediate challenges from abroad.
After an initial victory in the House of Representatives, adding two more liberal members to the southern conservative-dominated House Rules Committee and thus making it more likely that the committee would not block Kennedy’s legislative proposals from reaching the House floor, the president found that moving his domestic policy proposals through the Congress was much slower going than he had hoped for.
In the foreign policy and national security fields, even more intractable issues confronted the new president.
Kennedy’s tough language in his inaugural address was an initial reaction to the Soviet challenge.
On February 23, Kennedy sent off a letter to Khrushchev, suggesting an early meeting between the two; it was Kennedy’s hope that he could convince the Soviet leader that the United States could not be bullied.
The White House interpreted this conflict as one of the “wars of national liberation” that Nikita Khrushchev had said in his January speech would be an important means for spreading Communist values around the world.
On March 20 and again on March 21, Kennedy met with his National Security Council to discuss whether immediate intervention was necessary or whether a diplomatic solution was still possible.
The joint chiefs of staff, fearing another Korealike engagement half a world away, urged decisive actions involving 60,000 GETTING STARTED 39 troops, air support, and possibly the use of tactical nuclear weapons in order to ensure quick success.
After these meetings, Kennedy decided not to intervene as yet, but to demonstrate his willingness to do so if the United States and the Soviet Union could not find grounds for compromise on the future of Laos.
Kennedy scheduled a press conference for March 23 in order to issue a public warning to the Soviets that the United States would intervene unless an immediate ceasefire could be arranged.
Compared to the other issues on his agenda, space remained a relatively low priority item, and Kennedy himself was only occasionally directly involved.
As the new administration took office, no one had been selected as the nominee for the job of NASA administrator, which thus became the most senior unfilled position as the Kennedy presidency began.
There are several versions of how many people were considered for the position.
In their December discussions on space issues, John Kennedy had given Lyndon Johnson the responsibility of identifying the person to be the next NASA administrator.
In turn, Johnson asked the staff director of the Senate space committee, Kenneth Belieu, to coordinate the search for the nominee.
Belieu had told Johnson on December 22 that “the Administrator of NASA doesn’t have to be a technician.
Belieu’s initial thoughts about people qualified for the NASA position included Karl Bendetsen, an industrialist who had served in the Truman administration; General Maxwell Taylor, retired Army Chief of Staff; and George Feldman, who had been the staff director of the House committee established in 1958 as proposals to create NASA were being considered.
He also noted that the current Air Force chief of staff, Thomas White, who was soon to retire, “might be interested,” and that he had gotten suggestions that Jet Propulsion Laboratory director William Pickering and Marshall Space Flight Center director Wernher von Braun might be good candidates.
On January 23, Belieu gave a list of possible picks to now—Vice President Johnson.
They were Laurence Hyland of Hughes Aircraft; Charles Thornton of Litton Industries; James Fisk of Bell Laboratories; James Doolittle, World War II hero and former chairman of the National Advisory Committee on Aeronautics; and William Foster of Olin Mathieson 40 JOHN F KENNEDY AND THE RACE TO THE MOON Chemicals.
The head of General Dynamics, Frank Pace, was also involved in the search process.
Kennedy, tired of the delay in identifying a candidate for the NASA job, reportedly told Johnson and new science adviser Wiesner soon after his inauguration that he would find someone himself if they did not act soon.
One underlying reason for the difficulty in finding a person to take over NASA was the pervasive uncertainty about the future of the agency and of the United States civilian space program.
John Kennedy had given little indication during the campaign of how he would approach space policy as president.
One view favored a person with administrative experience in a science and technology setting; this had been the background of Keith Glennan.
A third argued that political savvy in addition to administrative skill was a more necessary background than either a scientific or engineering GETTING STARTED 41 background.
Few senior people who had experienced the “Johnson treatment” were eager to undergo it on a continuing basis.
Wiesner later argued that his suggestion was the one that was decisive, although other accounts suggest that it was Lyndon Johnson who first brought Webb’s name to White House attention.
The new candidate was James E Webb, a businessman and lawyer with prior experience in high-level government posts.
During the Truman administration, Webb had been head of the Bureau of the Budget and then the number two person under Dean Acheson at the Department of State.
Webb also had experience in managing large organizations; he had worked in Oklahoma heading one of Robert Kerr’s companies from 1953 to 1958.
After leaving Kerr’s employ, Webb had been active on issues of science and engineering education, in the process becoming well known to many of the leaders of the scientific community, including Wiesner.
According to Wiesner, Kennedy asked him to check whether Johnson agreed that Webb would be a good choice.
Johnson did agree, and because he had had such little success with the people he had contacted, asked Wiesner to call Webb.
On Friday, January 27, after clearing the contact with the president, Wiesner telephoned Webb, who was at a luncheon in Oklahoma City, and asked him to be in Washington the following Monday to meet with the vice president to discuss the NASA position.
Webb left Oklahoma City on Friday and spent the weekend in Washington discussing the prospects for space under Kennedy with several former associates in the BOB and the Kennedy White House staff and with others whose views he valued.
One of them was Webb’s longtime friend Lloyd Berkner, who was the current chair of the Space Science Board of the National Academy of Sciences, NASA’s primary source of scientific advice; Berkner had himself been approached for the NASA job and had said that he was not interested.
Before meeting with Lyndon Johnson , Webb chatted with acting NASA administrator Hugh Dryden, who was there for the meeting, and Frank Pace, who had been Webb’s successor as director of the BOB in the Truman administration.
Both Pace and Dryden agreed with Webb that he was not the right man for the job, and Webb asked Pace to convey that view to Johnson.
Pace tried to do so, but Johnson was unwilling to listen and in essence threw Pace out of his office.
Webb then met with Johnson, who, Webb says, was “very anxious” for Webb to accept the NASA job.
Webb made it clear that he would only accept the position on the basis of a direct offer from the president.
Arrangements were quickly made for Webb to meet with Kennedy, whom Webb previously had met only once or twice on social occasions.
After lunch with Dryden, Webb met with Kennedy one-on-one in the Oval Office.
Kennedy told him that he did not want a technical person for the NASA job, saying that “there are great issues of national and international policy” related to NASA, and that Webb, with his previous government experience, was well qualified to address such issues.
Webb felt he could not refuse the president’s direct invitation, and so accepted the nomination.
GETTING STARTED 43 He asked Kennedy to keep Hugh Dryden as deputy administrator, and he also asked the president whether he was being hired to implement a predetermined policy.
Kennedy then escorted Webb from the Oval Office to the office of press secretary Pierre Salinger, who took Webb to the press room to announce his nomination.
The committee voted unanimously to support the nomination; the Senate followed suit on February 9.
It was thus clear from the start of his tenure that James Webb had a different, more ambitious, vision for the future of NASA than his predecessor.
He was happy to learn that Seamans was a Republican, since that would give a bipartisan appearance to the top NASA management team.
Webb told Dryden and Seamans that he wanted NASA to be managed jointly by the three of them as a “triad,” hammering out the major decisions together.
Webb would handle NASA’s external political and public relations, Dryden would be the primary link to the United States and international science communities, and Seamans would act as NASA’s general manager.
Wiesner remembers that Kennedy “understood that he had somebody with real ability in Webb” and adds that he never heard Kennedy say anything “snide or negative” about him.
While a number of other men had turned down the job because of NASA’s uncertain future, if they had “known that four months later NASA would become a custodian of the nation’s honor, most of them would have snapped up the job.
Webb Soon Challenged James Webb faced an almost immediate challenge to his freedom to manage NASA as he saw appropriate, especially in the context of the prevalent NASA-Air Force tensions.
The first attempt in July 1960 to launch a Mercury capsule atop an Atlas booster had ended in an explosion.
The cause of this failure had been localized to the area where the spacecraft and the capsule were joined.
Since the Air Force retained responsibility for booster performance and launching while NASA was responsible for the spacecraft and the overall mission, this meant that both organizations were intimately involved in attempting to correct whatever had caused the failure.
The NASA top management had agreed to this approach before Webb took office, but the Air Force remained extremely concerned about the possibility of another major accident.
There had been a highly visible Atlas failure on December 15, 1960 as NASA attempted to send a robotic spacecraft to the Moon, increasing the level of concern on the part of the Air Force.
Webb was briefed on the situation on February 18 by NASA’s Project Mercury managers, who wanted his approval for a launch of the improved Mercury—Atlas combination on February 21.
Webb approved the launch, but soon after got a call from the Air Force asking him to reverse that decision.
From the White House, Wiesner also expressed his opposition to going ahead.
After Webb checked again with knowledgeable people both within and outside NASA, he refused to reverse his decision, although the Air Force “protested vehemently” and made its concerns known to the White House, most likely through one of Kennedy’s military aides, Air Force General Godfrey McHugh.
Webb’s conduct with respect to the Mercury—Atlas test flight had demonstrated to the Air Force that he was not easily intimidated.
Bolstered by this success, Webb and other top NASA officials embarked on a conscious campaign to establish close working relationships with the new civilian leadership of the Department of Defense.
Webb did not know well Kennedy’s hard charging and intellectually brilliant secretary of defense, Robert McNamara (and the two apparently did not get along from the start of their relationship), but he knew McNamara’s number two person, deputy secretary of defense Roswell Gilpatric, from their time together in the Truman administration.
On February 24, Webb and Dryden met with McNamara, Gilpatric, and director of defense research and engineering Herbert York, an Eisenhower holdover.
The group agreed that Webb and Gilpatric would meet “from time to time for lunch and would bring others as needed” as a way to coordinate NASA and DOD space activities at the top level.
Shortly after taking office, McNamara had requested a review examining whether the Wiesner Task Force criticism of a “fractionated military space program” was valid.
Gardner Report Submitted The report of the committee headed by Trevor Gardner that had been intended to map an ambitious future for the Air Force in space was finally submitted on March 20; with its bullish recommendations, the report unintentionally reinforced Robert McNamara’s concern about the need to limit Air Force ambitions.
The report’s conclusions were alarmist; the United States, the report claimed, could not overtake the Soviet Union in space for at least another three to five years; there were “no accelerated and imaginative programs” to close that gap.
The report was critical of the separation between the civilian and military space programs, arguing that there should be one integrated national space program.
The report called for a “dramatically invigorated space program” and called upon the DOD to create, and then make available to NASA, a series of “building blocks” of a firm technological foundation for whatever the nation wanted to do in space.
The report devoted significant attention to future human spaceflight efforts, and recommended both that the United States send people to the Moon and develop large space stations in the 1967-1970 period.
Given the agreements already described and the events of the next two months, the Gardner report had limited impact on both Air Force space activities and national space policy.
Kennedy Takes a Position The publicity-seeking chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, Overton Brooks, was aware of and concerned by the Air Force campaign.
As he left office, Dwight Eisenhower had warned of the increasing power of the “military— industrial complex,” and a move in the early months of the administration to increase Air Force activity in a visible area such as space would have been politically very difficult.
Secretary of Defense McNamara was trying to get the management of defense activities under centralized control.
The top people in DOD were not particularly space conscious, and McNamara and Webb had reached an understanding of the respective roles of their agencies that the White House would have been unlikely to countermand.
NASA under Webb’s direction seemed to be shaping up in terms both of its organization and program success, and there were no compelling reasons to downgrade the importance of the agency.
One of presidential science adviser Wiesner’s major priorities was to control the spread of the arms race into new areas; he too was unlikely to have supported an expanded military space effort.
With that response, the controversy over the NASA-Air Force relationship became a secondary policy issue, although it never completely disappeared.
The NASA team was confident that Mercury was a sound program, and feared that without the positive assessment they believed would result from such an independent review, President Kennedy might decide that even the suborbital mission planned in the next few months was too risky, and would not allow NASA to carry it out.
A first step was to inform the White House that there was a rehearsal flight for the suborbital mission, with a chimpanzee named Ham as its passenger, scheduled for January 31.
Robert Gilruth, the head of the Space Task Group that was in charge of Project Mercury, suggested to George Low at NASA headquarters that NASA push for an early start on the review.
Dryden met with Wiesner and Hornig on February 11 to discuss the composition of the panel.
Originally the first suborbital flight with an astronaut in the spacecraft, Mercury-Redstone 3 , had been scheduled for late March.
Even after these problems, NASA managers at the Space Task Group and some at NASA headquarters were ready to commit an astronaut to the next flight.
However, “key members of von Braun’s team quickly decided that they wanted another booster test before a man could fly,” and von Braun did not overrule them.
The extra Redstone flight was launched on March 24 and went well; from NASA’s point of view, there now was no obstacle to launching the first United States astronaut on a brief ride through the lower reaches of space.
If this had happened, it is unlikely that the Soviet launch of Yuri Gagarin into orbit three weeks later would have had such a dramatic impact on United States space policy.
But of course this was not known in March, and with the review of the PSAC panel not completed and given von Braun’s judgment that Mercury was not yet ready to fly with an astronaut aboard, it would have been difficult if not impossible for NASA to get White House permission to go ahead with the mission on its original schedule.
The ten-person Hornig panel spent four days in early March visiting the facilities at the McDonnell Corporation factory in St.
Louis where the Mercury capsule was built; the launch facilities at Cape Canaveral, Florida; and the Space Task Group at NASA’s Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia.
Science adviser Wiesner on March 7 thanked Hugh Dryden for the “thorough and candid presentation of all elements of the program,” and suggested that “this complete cooperation is evidence of a continuation of the excellent relationship” between NASA and the White House.
The reason for the delay was continuing reservations by a biomedical subgroup of the panel.
The report reviewed the accomplishments and failures of the Mercury program and assessed the risks involved and the probability of success.
The panel rated all aspects of the Mercury system as being more than 85 percent reliable except the booster and telemetry, which were rated 70 to 85 percent reliable.
Even these items were “not per se a cause for alarm” for astronaut safety, just for mission success.
The panel noted that “it was too early” to estimate similar probabilities for an orbital flight.
The only serious reservations about the readiness of Mercury to launch an astronaut were expressed by the medical experts on the Hornig panel.
They were worried about the fact that the astronaut’s blood pressure would not GETTING STARTED 51 be monitored during flight and that high pulse rates such as those observed on Ham in the January flight, combined with the possibility of low blood pressure during the most stressful parts of the flight, could mean that the astronaut would be near collapse.
NASA met with members of the medical panel on March 17 and then again on April 11 together with science adviser Wiesner, who shared the panel’s concerns, but were unable to allay their reservations.
The experts suggested various additional tests prior to clearing MR-3 for launch, and particularly a high number of ground and flight tests with chimpanzees.
Hugh Dryden thought that such a step was “totally unrealistic” and Robert Gilruth facetiously suggested that if so many tests with chimpanzees were needed, the program ought to move to Africa.
Although no additional chimpanzee tests were added to the program, the three astronauts from whom the MR-3 pilot would be chosen did undergo additional runs at a Navy centrifuge in Johnstown, Pennsylvania, that simulated the stresses of reentry.
This feat made moot many of the concerns of the panel’s medical experts.
Planning for a Lunar Landing Mission Beginning in October 1960, NASA had begun to investigate in a preliminary fashion the technological and budgetary requirements for a lunar landing program.
After an interim report on this planning effort at a January 5, 1961, meeting of NASA’s Space Exploration Program Council, a small group led by NASA’s program chief for manned space flight George Low was chartered to continue further investigation into those requirements.
An initial mission to the Moon would be possible in the 19681970 period with an average cost of $700 million per year for ten years, or a total of $7 billion.
The report noted that the plan it presented “does not 52 JOHN F KENNEDY AND THE RACE TO THE MOON represent a ‘crash’ program, but rather it represents a vigorous development of technology.
Low’s report and the supporting work done by NASA and its contractors on preliminary design of the three-person Apollo spacecraft and the Saturn C-2 launcher (at this point in time, the Nova launcher was only in the early conceptual design phase) would be important to the confidence of the NASA leadership in the following weeks as they responded to President Kennedy’s request for a mission that would give the United States an opportunity to claim space leadership.
This position was counterbalanced in March 1961 by support for the scientific value of humans in space from the Space Science Board of the National Academy of Sciences.
The National Academy is a body designated by congressional charter as scientific adviser to the federal government.
It is also an honorary body; election to the National Academy is one of the highest scientific honors available to a United States scientist.
The board was composed of sixteen scientists, many of them National Academy members, and chaired from its inception by Lloyd Berkner, a geophysicist.
Berkner was a supporter of a strong space program and a decades-long friend of James Webb.
Members of the board in addition to Berkner included Bruno Rossi, Joshua Lederberg, Harrison Brown, John Simpson, Harold Urey, James van Allen, and Donald Hornig, all well known and highly respected members of the scientific community.
By doing GETTING STARTED 53 so, they almost guaranteed that the statement would support the human role in space exploration, given Berkner’s well-known views on the subject.
This ringing endorsement of the human role in exploring space coming from a prestigious group of scientists was controversial in later years.
But in 1961, the statement had a “profound influence” on PSAC members and other scientists, making it hard for them to criticize President Kennedy’s call two months later for a national effort to send Americans to the Moon.
One was the specific role with respect to space to be assigned to Vice President Lyndon Johnson.
Although president-elect Kennedy had indicated in December 1960 that Johnson would have an important space role in his administration, the character of that role and how it would relate to the existing structure for space governance, in which the National Aeronautics and Space Council had played a peripheral role during the Eisenhower administration, remained to be defined.
Second, by selecting James Webb as NASA administrator and asking him to recommend what he thought was the appropriate NASA program, President Kennedy virtually guaranteed that he would have to react to an early plea for an accelerated civilian space effort.
Webb was a policy activist, and he was unlikely to accept the relatively slow-paced space program that he had inherited from the Eisenhower administration.
Although Kennedy and his policy, technical, and budget advisers hoped to delay decisions with respect to the space program until a fall 1961 review, Webb insisted that the president hear his arguments for budget increases as soon as possible.
Revitalizing the Space Council After the December meetings in which a new space role for the vice president was discussed, it took several months to sort out just what Kennedy had in mind in this regard.
The Bureau of the Budget staff in early January drafted a white paper on options for implementing the presidentelect’s intent.
The staff paper suggested that there was no immediate need for statutory changes; rather, the president could simply assign responsibility for chairing the Space Council to the vice president, even though he was not by law a member of the Council.
Johnson Seeks a Major Policy Role Acquiring an expanded role with respect to space was just one element in Lyndon Johnson’s early push for influence within the Kennedy administration.
His ambition was apparently to serve as the president’s alter ego with respect to all areas of national security policy, not just the space program.
Many prior vice presidents who had served under Democratic presidents, such as John Nance Garner, Harry Truman, and Alben Barkley, were not informed about or involved in national security matters, and Johnson did not want to repeat that pattern.
To achieve this objective, a few days after the inauguration Bill Moyers of Johnson’s staff drafted an executive order for President Kennedy’s signature that would have given the vice president authority “at all times” for “continuing surveillance and review with respect to domestic, foreign and military policies relating to the national security” and would have allowed the vice president to chair the National Security Council in the president’s absence.
The reasons for such an expanded role, suggested Moyers, included that “the nature of our times requires that the Vice President be adequately informed on vital matters” and that “the possibility of immediate succession to the number one job, however remote and however distasteful to think about from the President’s viewpoint,” would require a fully informed vice president.
While the new president and his White House staff were indeed resistant to the kind of publicly visible executive order that Moyers had drafted, they did accept the suggestion of a nonpublic presidential directive.
In this letter, NASA was added to, and the BOB deleted from, the list of agencies subject to vice presidential review that had been in the draft executive order.
These attempts at the start of the Kennedy administration to give Lyndon Johnson an expanded policy role were not successful.
John Kennedy had needed Johnson to attract enough Southern voters to get elected, but Kennedy, and particularly his top aides, had no intention of making Johnson a major player in national security affairs.
One was the Eisenhower administration bill abolishing the council, on which there had been no action in the previous year; Sorensen and Bell had agreed during the transition to have this bill reintroduced, and apparently that decision had not been countermanded even though president-elect Kennedy had at least tentatively decided to retain the council.
It would have not only have authorized the president to make the vice president a member and the chairman of the Space Council, but also would have delegated to the vice president executive functions that were assigned by law to the president.
Moyers also worked with staff 58 JOHN F KENNEDY AND THE RACE TO THE MOON members of the Senate Committee on Aeronautics and Space Sciences to prepare the various documents needed to make the changes in the 1958 Space Act that were thought to be required.
He said that he was “much concerned” regarding “the Vice President’s position as a constitutional officer who cannot share, so should not be pressed to take on, operating responsibility” that was assigned to the president.
Ina memorandum on “Organizing the Space Council,” Neustadt noted that “where space programs are concerned, the President should have available the same sort of top-level, politicallyresponsible advice on policy that he can claim in other fields from a Cabinet secretary,” but that “the Vice President should not be asked to serve as ‘Secretary for Space’ except in the role of senior adviser.
Neustadt’s late February critique of an operational role for the vice president implies that at least some on LBJ’s staff, if not Johnson himself, were continuing to push for such responsibility.
Neustadt’s memorandum, which he characterized as “one man’s opinion,” was followed on March 1 by another BOB staff memorandum.
Vice President Johnson again got personally involved in early March, in particular asking budget director David Bell how best to finance the council’s staff.
Bell told him that since the Space Council was a statutory agency on its own, it was not legal to transfer funds from the NASA or DOD budget to fund its operations, a possibility that had been explored by Johnson’s staff.
However, Bell said, President Kennedy had agreed to provide funds from his “Special Projects” budget to fund the council’s executive secretary and two more staff positions, and that NASA had agreed to delegate three or four of FIRST DECISIONS 59 its employees to act as council staff.
Edward C Welsh to the Senate; Welsh had been actually chosen for the position several weeks earlier and had already been actively working on reorganizing the council.
He held a doctorate in economics and had been in charge of Symington’s hearings on air power in 1956, had helped staff LBJ’s Preparedness Subcommittee hearings after Sputnik, and had been the lead staff person for Symington’s hearings on government organization for space in 1959.
He had also been the executive director of the task force on reorganizing the Department of Defense set up by Kennedy during the presidential campaign.
Welsh had been the primary author of the strident October 1960 Kennedy campaign statement on space, which had argued that “control of space will be decided in the next decade.
In Welsh, Lyndon Johnson got a strong, if somewhat self-important, advocate for a vigorous United States space effort.
Welsh’s confirmation hearings before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences were held on March 23.
The Senate voted to confirm Welsh on the same day and he was sworn into office on March 24.
Welsh’s first assignment was to draft the changes in the Space Act that were needed to make the vice president its chair and to make other desired adjustments in the council’s membership and organizational location within the executive office of the president.
By March 30, Welsh had prepared a memorandum noting that there were three options available to change the provisions of the 1958 Space Act—a reorganization plan, an amendment to the then-pending NASA Authorization Bill, or a separate amendment to the Space Act.
The congressional perspective prevailed, and a decision was made to move forward with proposing an amendment to the Space Act.
Before the amendment could be approved by President Kennedy and his top advisers, there were two issues to be dealt with.
One was whether 60 JOHN F KENNEDY AND THE RACE TO THE MOON to propose a name change for the Space Council, a topic that had been discussed ever since December.
Apparently Welsh was concerned that the titles that Neustadt had suggested in his February 28 memorandum, which began with the word “President’s” rather than “National,” would not indicate the intended broad scope of the council’s activities.
The other issue was the wording of the proposed amendment to the Space Act.
Edward Welsh and James Webb had not been able to agree on how best to indicate in the amendment the separation of the functions of the Space Council and the functions of the president.
While Welsh wanted to put forward a simple amendment that retained the Space Act language that specified the functions of the council, Webb wanted to add a new section to the Act that specified the duties that would remain the president’s responsibility.
No change in the name of the National Aeronautics and Space Council was suggested.
The secretaries of defense and state, the administrator of NASA, and the chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission remained council members; the one additional government member and the three public members of the council were eliminated, and the council was made part of the executive office of the president.
Welsh told Vice President Johnson on April 6 that his version of the proposed amendment “had been cleared in the Executive Office of the President with Messrs.
He also noted that Representative Overton Brooks had agreed to schedule a hearing on the amendment and that there had been preliminary agreement to the amendment obtained from the staffs of Senators Kerr, Bridges, and Dirksen and with Speaker of the House Sam Rayburn, Majority Leader John McCormack, and Congressman Thornberry of the Rules Committee.
President Kennedy transmitted the amendment to the Congress on April 10; Welsh testified as the only witness before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics on April 12.
This was the day on which the Soviet Union orbited the first human in space, Yuri Gagarin, and that feat, rather than the changes in the Space Act, was the focus of the committee’s questions.
Welsh then testified before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences on April 19, again as the sole witness.
Committee approval quickly followed and the Senate approved the amendment on April 20.
President Kennedy’s Initial Space Budget Decisions In the weeks after his inauguration, President Kennedy spent very little time in formal consideration of space issues.
On February 13, he sent Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev a congratulatory note on the launch of a Russian mission to Venus on the preceding day.
The launch had raised security concerns because specialists at the Central Intelligence Agency had suggested that it could be “a step towards creating a capability for achieving a parking orbit with an ICBM warhead”; the spacecraft had in fact gone into orbit around the Earth before ejecting a large probe on a Venus-bound trajectory.
He noted that “one of the things we must realize is that in dramatizing the space race we are playing into the Soviet’s strongest suit.
Subsequent actions by President Kennedy demonstrated that he did not accept this advice.
NASA’s Budget Reviewed Budget director David Bell in February issued a government-wide call for a rapid agency review of the proposed Fiscal Year 1962 budget that had been submitted by the outgoing Eisenhower administration.
James Webb’s initial examination of the NASA budget convinced him that the Eisenhower proposal was not adequate to support the kind of space program he believed was appropriate for the Kennedy administration; he judged that there was a need to accelerate the pace of the milestones that had been set out in NASA’s then-current ten-year plan.
For example, he wanted to move the date of a potential lunar landing mission forward from 1973 to 1970; George Low’s report had indicated that it would be possible by that year, and perhaps even sooner.
On March 17, NASA submitted a request for an additional $308. million, a 30 percent increase over the $1,109. million budget in the Eisenhower request.
He later recalled that “most of us, when we came into office didn’t have any notion of what the space program was all about, what the issues were.
In response to the NASA request, BOB indicated that it would approve only a $50 million increase in the NASA budget, with any additional increases deferred until fall 1961, after a comprehensive review of the NASA program had been completed.
Before meeting with the president, Webb, Dryden, and Seamans briefed Vice President Johnson on their budget request.
Budget director Bell, his deputy Elmer Staats, and the top career BOB staff person for the NASA FIRST DECISIONS 63 budget, Willis Shapley, explained to the vice president why they had not approved most of the request.
In preparation for this meeting, Edward Welsh had prepared a briefing memorandum for Johnson that noted that the “major policy issue” involved in the budget was “does this country want to make an effort to catch up to the Soviet Union in space capability,” and particularly in weight-lifting capability.
He was a Yale-educated member of the Republican Eastern establishment who had become a Harvard professor of government with a widely acknowledged intellect, and then in 1953, at age 34, the youngest ever dean of the Harvard faculty.
Bundy during the Kennedy administration was to play an important role in the national security dimensions of the United States space effort, including the race to the Moon.
James Webb had stayed up late the day before the meeting preparing a six-page talking paper.
Webb noted that “in the preparation of the 1962 budget, President Eisenhower reduced the $1.35 billion requested by the Space Agency to the extent of $240 million and specifically eliminated funds to proceed with manned space flight projects beyond Mercury.
He added that “the Soviets have demonstrated how effective space exploration can be as a symbol of scientific progress and as an adjunct of foreign policy.
Robert Seamans followed Webb’s remarks with a concise summary of NASA’s budget request.
During those 90 minutes, John Kennedy, perhaps for the first time, had had the chance to get a clear picture of the space policy and budget issues requiring his decision.
FIRST DECISIONS 65 Webb then briefly went into the Oval Office with President Kennedy and Vice President Johnson.
He assured them, as the newcomer to the NASA leadership, that he believed “that we were moving right ahead with the things that needed to be done”; Kennedy in return told Webb that Dryden and Seamans had made a positive impression on him at this, their first meeting.
Other items in the NASA budget request were not discussed in Seamans’s memo.
If the requested increases were approved, said Seamans, the orbital laboratory could begin flights in 1965 rather than 1967; circumlunar flights would be possible in 1967 rather than 1969; an initial manned lunar landing might be possible in 1970 rather than 1973.77 66 JOHN F KENNEDY AND THE RACE TO THE MOON The president started the meeting by asking Vice President Johnson for his views on the NASA budget.
This was a refrain that President Kennedy had been hearing repeatedly, and he asked Wiesner if he concurred; Wiesner responded that he did.
McNamara’s response was that “he was personally unable to assess” the prestige payoffs from human space flight, and would suggest proceeding at “a normal rate of investigation,” which was considerably less than a maximum effort.
The final increase in the NASA FY1962 budget approved at the meeting was just under $126 million, almost all of it to accelerate the NASA booster effort.
No funds for the Apollo spacecraft and thus for human space flight beyond Project Mercury were approved.
This was an increase of a bit over 10 percent compared to President Eisenhower’s budget submission, but 20 percent less than NASA had hoped for.
In this initial engagement with space policy and program issues, President Kennedy had heard the full range of arguments with respect to the goals and pace of the United States civilian space program.
He decided that it was a matter of some urgency to begin the process of closing the weight-lifting gap that its powerful rocket had given the Soviet Union, but was not yet ready to commit himself to the use of those new boosters for a post-Mercury human spaceflight program.
The expectation as of the end of March 1961 was that this issue would be the focus of a comprehensive review of NASA’s future to be conducted by Lyndon Johnson as the new chairman of the Space Council, with a decision coming as the Fiscal Year 1963 budget was being prepared in the coming fall.
One reason for the hesitance at this point to approve any funds for a Mercury follow-on was likely the uncertainty about Mercury’s success.
The Hornig panel had not finished its work, and its medical experts were very worried about whether an astronaut could survive the stresses of space flight.
Jerome Wiesner shared their concern, and had communicated it to the President.
In addition, according to Seamans, although Kennedy was tending toward the approval of future human space flight efforts, he “wanted to know more about it.
Added to these factors were the immediate concerns over Laos, which were occupying most of Kennedy’s time.
As he attempted to resist NASA demands to meet with the president to appeal the original BOB decisions, David Bell had told Hugh Dryden that Kennedy was too busy for direct involvement in decisions on NASA’s future.
Dryden’s words proved prescient; within three weeks, Kennedy would be faced with a Soviet space challenge that led him to set dramatic new space goals for the United States.
This page intentionally left blank Chapter 5 “There’s Nothing More Important” O, Monday April 10, 1961, John F Kennedy threw out the opening day baseball pitch as the Washington Senators played the Chicago White Sox on a chilly and damp afternoon.
Sometime early in the game, Kennedy’s deputy press secretary Andrew Hatcher told him that the United Press International news service was about to report that the Soviet Union had successfully recovered the first human to orbit the Earth.
Kennedy asked Hatcher to check on the report; he had known for several weeks from intelligence briefings that such a launch was imminent.
The Soviet Union had successfully completed one-orbit missions of a spacecraft carrying a dog as a passenger on March 9 and March 25.
It was almost certain that the next step would be a mission with a human on board.
By the end of the next day, April 11, the CIA did report that the Soviet launch was likely within the next few hours.
Press Secretary Pierre Salinger prepared and Kennedy approved a statement for the president to issue once the Soviets had announced a successful mission.
The president also had an approach ready to take if the launch were unsuccessful and the cosmonaut died.
As he retired for the evening on April 11, Kennedy told his aides that he did not want to be woken if the Soviet announcement came while he was sleeping.
Within a few seconds of the launch of the first human in space at 1:07m. on April 12, Washington time , United States intelligence systems knew that it had taken place.
They monitored the in-orbit communications during the single-orbit flight and decoded the television transmissions from the spacecraft that showed the cosmonaut moving about.
We congratulate the Soviet scientists and engineers who made this feat possible.
Well, it is a most impressive scientific accomplishment, and also I think that we, all of us as members of the race, have the greatest admiration for the Russian who participated in this extraordinary feat.
I have already sent congratulations to Mr Khrushchev, and I send congratulations to the man who was involved.
I indicated that the task force which we set up on space way back last January, January 12th, indicated that because of the Soviet progress in the field of boosters, where they have been ahead of us, that we expected that they would be first in space, in orbiting a man in space.
And, of course, that “THERE’S NOTHING MORE IMPORTANT” 71 has taken place.
We are carrying out our program and we expect to—hope to make progress in this area this year ourselves.
Q; Mr President, a Member of Congress said today that he was tired of seeing the United States second to Russia in the space field.
Now, you have asked Congress for more money to speed up our space program.
Well, the Soviet Union gained an important advantage by securing these large boosters which were able to put up greater weights, and that advantage is going to be with them for some time.
However tired anybody may be, and no one is more tired than I am, it is a fact that it is going to take some time and I think we have to recognize it.
They secured large boosters which have led to their being first in sputnik and led to their first putting their man in space.
We are, I hope, going to be able to carry out our efforts with due regard to the problem of the life of the man involved this year.
But we are behind and I am sure that they are making a concentrated effort to stay ahead.
We have provided additional emphasis on Saturn; we have provided additional emphasis on Rover; we are attempting to improve other systems which will give us a stronger position—all of which are very expensive, and all of which involve billions of dollars.
So that in answer to your question, as I said in my State of the Union Message, the news will be worse before it is better, and it will be some time before we catch up.
We are, I hope, going to go in other areas where we can be first and which will bring perhaps more long-range benefits to mankind.
Earlier in the press conference, Kennedy had mentioned one of the areas “where we can be first” and which might bring “more long-range benefits to mankind”—desalinization of sea water.
Reactions to the Gagarin Flight Congressional and media reaction to the Soviet achievement on April 12 and the next several days resembled—indeed, in some ways exceeded—the rather 72 JOHN F KENNEDY AND THE RACE TO THE MOON hysterical reactions after the launch of Sputnik 1 in October 1957.
Clearly, this second Soviet space achievement was a major political setback for the new administration.
The Soviet Union was quick to capitalize on the propaganda significance of the successful flight.
The rest of the world was almost unanimous in its admiration of the Soviet achievement.
Romans snapped up the papers, emptying kiosks in a matter of minutes, then stood around discussing the event.
American reaction to the Gagarin flight was characterized by disappointment and chagrin.
No high official had prepared the general public to expect the Soviet flight, and thus for many it came almost as much of a shock as the 1957 Sputnik 1 launch.
The general excitement from Europe to Asia, Africa and the Americas will not be diminished by the recognition that no immediate military, commercial or other actual advantage accrues to the Soviet Union.
But none of these and other measures have had the effectiveness or the spectacular quality of Soviet efforts.
In fact, if the United States is to compete in space, we must decide to do so on a top-priority basis immediately, or we face a bleak future of more Soviet triumphs.
Even though the United States is still the strongest military power and leads in many aspects of the space race, the world—impressed by the spectacular Soviet firsts—believes that we lag militarily and technologically.
The dangers of such false images to our military power and diplomacy are obvious.
The neutral nations may come to believe the wave of the future is Russian; even our friends and allies could slough away.
The deterrent, which after all is only as strong as Premier Khrushchev thinks it is, could be weakened.
He very likely had criticisms such as these in mind as he considered how best to respond to this new Soviet challenge.
Congress Calls for a Crash Effort The most vocal demands for an immediate response to the Soviet flight came from the House of Representatives, and particularly its Committee on Science and Astronautics.
On April 12, the committee held a previously scheduled hearing on the proposal to revise the 1958 Space Act to make the vice president the chairman of the Space Council.
But the minds of the representatives were on the Gagarin flight, not the Space Council.
On April 13, James Webb and Hugh Dryden appeared before the committee to defend the NASA budget increases that the president had approved 74 JOHN F KENNEDY AND THE RACE TO THE MOON on March 23.
The focus of the hearings was not on those additions to the NASA budget to speed up the booster programs; rather, it was on the funds for human space flight on which the president had deferred approval.
Congressman Vincent Anfuso suggested that he was “ready to call for a full-scale congressional investigation.
Seamans in particular put himself in a vulnerable position with respect to administration policy, saying that although there were no plans at that time to ask Congress for funding for Project Apollo, the post-Mercury human space flight effort, it might indeed be possible with an accelerated effort to land on the Moon by 1967.
Seamans added that he would be “the first to review it wholeheartedly to see what it would take to do the job.
Seamans was, of course, well aware of the February report of George Low’s committee that had said that a lunar landing within the decade was technologically feasible; he was also aware of Kennedy’s decision in March not to approve additional funding for human space flight beyond Project Mercury, even as he provided additional funding for larger space boosters.
Seamans’s comments, coming just as the committee and the media were calling for an accelerated space effort, appeared to be adding NASA pressure on the president to the pressure coming from the House committee and the media; this was an uncomfortable position for Seamans to be in.
Indeed, President Kennedy was not at all happy to read in the next day’s newspapers that a NASA official had made public statements that seemed to preempt what would necessarily be a presidential decision.
For a few days, Seamans’ job was in real jeopardy, but Webb was able to calm the White House concern.
The situation was similar to the one after the October 1957 launch of Sputnik 1, when President Eisenhower and his advisers had found themselves unprepared to deal with the Soviet propaganda bonanza resulting from its space success.
To address this situation, President Kennedy on late Friday afternoon, April 14, convened a meeting of his advisers on space both to consider his alternatives for responding to the Gagarin flight and to present the image of a president deeply involved in a pressing issue.
Kennedy had agreed to an interview with Time/Life journalist Hugh Sidey on that day, and he allowed Sidey to attend his meeting with his advisers.
Having a journalist present at a presidential meeting was a very unusual occurrence, but Kennedy viewed Sidey as friendly and wanted to portray himself as actively engaged in considering how best to proceed.
Before meeting with the president, Webb and Dryden gathered with Sorensen, Bell from BOB, accompanied by budget staff member Willis Shapley, science adviser Wiesner, and Space Council executive secretary Welsh to review possible actions.
Sorensen pressed them on what the United States might accomplish in space before the Soviet Union.
The response was that “the Soviet lead in rocket thrust would continue to beat us to every milestone” being discussed.
In requesting the interview with the president, Sidey had prepared a memorandum for Press Secretary Pierre Salinger.
He noted that “a crucial decision is now needed as to what degree we are willing to commit our resources, both of talent and of money, to further manned missions.
Wiesner prepared a second memo for Kennedy, this time addressing the points raised by Hugh Sidey.
With respect to developing a large booster, “it has become perfectly clear to the Administration that making these decisions had to be faced, and it is our intention to do so.
Sidey had also suggested that the Kennedy administration had advanced the date for the first astronaut-carrying launch in Project Mercury in the hopes of beating the Soviets to a first human launch.
They talked for a few minutes, and then Sorensen invited Sidey to accompany him to the cabinet room, where the participants from the earlier meeting were waiting.
At almost the same time, President Kennedy joined the group after a congressional coffee hour.
He invited Sidey to sit at the head of the table and to ask the assembled group his questions about the space program.
Then Kennedy took over the meeting and went around the table, asking the key participants for their thoughts.
Dryden suggested that, even with that level of funding, it was only an even chance that the United States could beat the Soviet Union to the Moon.
Wiesner, “who was slumped down in his chair so far that his head seemed to be at table level,” was noncommittal, saying “now is not the time to make mistakes” and asking for three months to complete a review of the program.
Welsh reported that Vice President Johnson had long favored a greater effort in space and suggested that any thought that the United States could not catch up to the Soviet Union should be discarded.
If somebody can just tell 78 JOHN F KENNEDY AND THE RACE TO THE MOON me how to catch up.
Kennedy directed Sorensen to organize a review to answer questions about feasibility and cost.
Affirmative in the sense that the United States intended to maintain its position of world leadership, its position of eminence in commerce, in science, in foreign policy, and whatever else might develop from space exploration.
The United States had to take the lead in this area just as we had taken the lead in other areas.
The rest of the world had been led to believe by Soviet space accomplishments, and particularly by the United States reaction to them, that the scientifically most competent, the technologically most competent nation now was the Soviet Union, not the United States, because they could do this.
We were paying a price, all kinds of ways—internationally, politically—and that was the issue the President was dealing with, not was it time to go to the moon or not, but how to get yourself out of this.
If one objective of inviting Hugh Sidey to participate in the April 14 meeting was to give him the image of a president seriously concerned with the situation in space, the White House was successful.
Kennedy had inherited Eisenhower “THERE’S NOTHING MORE IMPORTANT” 79 administration planning for an invasion of Cuba, since 1960 under the control of Fidel Castro, by CIA-trained Cuban exiles.
Kennedy had reluctantly given the go-ahead to the plan a few days before April 14, and bombing of Cuban airfields by what were characterized as airplanes flown by the exiles but actually flown by United States pilots began on April 15.
One account of a top-level meeting in the aftermath of the failure reports that Robert Kennedy, just after the president stepped out of the room, “turned on everybody,” saying, “All you bright fellows.
The failure was never explicitly linked to the review of the space program that took place in the days following the Bay of Pigs; Edward Welsh maintains that the fiasco was “not a factor at all” in that review.
But Wiesner says of the Bay of Pigs, “I don’t think anyone can measure it, but I am sure it had an impact.
He adds that, although the failed invasion was never explicitly linked to space, “I discussed it with the President and saw his reactions.
Sorensen adds that Kennedy’s attitude toward the acceleration of the space program was influenced by “the fact that the Soviets had gained tremendous world-wide prestige from the Gagarin flight at the same time we had suffered a loss of prestige from the Bay of Pigs.
A mission failure, especially if it resulted in the death of the Mercury astronaut on live television, was a possibility that the president and his advisers viewed with great concern.
But the events of April 1961 drastically shortened the time allotted to that review.
Johnson did not attend the April 14 White House meetings on the space program.
He was returning from his first overseas trip as vice president, to the West African nation of Senegal, which was celebrating the first anniversary of its independence from France, with stops in Geneva and Paris on the way home.
But on April 19, after President Kennedy had in the early hours of the day walked disconsolately with Ted Sorensen and then alone on the south lawn of the White House in the aftermath of the Bay of Pigs failure, he met later in the day with Lyndon Johnson and James Webb to discuss the organization of the accelerated review he had decided was needed.
Ted Sorensen drafted a one-page memorandum, and President Kennedy signed it and sent it to Johnson the next day, April 20.
The memorandum stands as a historic document; it spelled out the requirements that led directly to the decision to go to the Moon as the centerpiece of an accelerated United States space effort.
In accordance with our conversation I would like for you as Chairman of the Space Council to be in charge of making an overall survey of where we stand in space.
Do we have a chance of beating the Soviets by putting a laboratory in space, or by a trip around the moon, or by a rocket to land on the moon, or by a rocket to go to the moon and back with a man.
Ifnot, will you make recommendations to me as to how work can be speeded up.
Wiesner, Secretary McNamara and other responsible officials to cooperate with you fully.
Ihave asked Jim Webb, Dr, Weisner, Secretary McNamara and other responsible officials to cooperate with you fully.
The Kennedy memorandum both contained a very clear statement of a requirement—“a space program which promises dramatic results in which we could win”—and a sense of urgency.
We are attempting to make a determination as to which program offers the best hope before we embark on it, because you may commit a relatively small sum of money now for a result in 1967, ‘68, or ‘69, which will cost you billions of dollars, and therefore the Congress passed yesterday the bill providing for a Space Council which will be chaired by the Vice President.
We are attempting to make a determination as to which of these various proposals offers the best hope.
When that determination is made we will then make a recommendation to the Congress.
In addition, we have to consider whether there is any program now, regardless of its cost, which offers us hope of being pioneers in a project.
It is possible to spend billions of dollars in this project in space to the detriment of other programs and still not be successful.
We have to make a determination whether there is any effort we could make in time or money which could put us first in any new area.
Now, I don’t want to start spending the kind of money that I am talking about without making a determination based on careful scientific judgment as to whether a real success can be achieved, or whether because we are so far behind now in this particular race we are going to be second in this decade.
So I would say to you that it’s a matter of great concern, but I think before we break through and begin a program which would not reach a completion, as you know, until the end of this decade—for example, trips to the moon, maybe 10 years off, maybe a little less, but are quite far away and involve, as I say, enormous sums—I don’t think we ought to rush into it and begin them until we really know where we are going to end up.
And that study is now being undertaken under the direction of the Vice President.
We couldn’t quit the space race, and we couldn’t condemn ourselves to be second.
Wiesner added that he and Kennedy talked a lot about do we have to do this.
We talked about a lot of things where we could make a dramatic demonstration—like nation building—and the answer was that there were so many military overtones as well as other things to the space program that you couldn’t make another choice.
If Kennedy could have opted out of a big space program without hurting the country in his judgment, he would have.
Maybe a different kind of man could have said to the country, “Look, we are going at our own pace.
But Kennedy said, “If we could afford to do something else, we would do it.
I think he became convinced that space was the symbol of the twentieth century.
Options Assessed Lyndon Johnson and his space assistant, Space Council executive secretary Edward Welsh, quickly set to work after receiving JFK’s April 20 memo.
The organization of the review reflected the “Johnson system” of obtaining informa84 JOHN F KENNEDY AND THE RACE TO THE MOON tion through personal contacts rather than formal organizational channels.
Johnson consulted many of individuals whom he thought would significantly contribute to examining the space program.
He met with officials from NASA, the Defense Department, the Atomic Energy Commission, and Wiesner’s office.
It is worth noting that even before he received the vice president’s report, Kennedy anticipated a positive recommendation justifying a “Presidential Message” to the Congress; it is not clear whether at this point he had also decided to deliver that message in person.
One indication that he was being pushed, if not already leaning, in that direction was an April 19 memorandum from Walt Rostow, who as a MIT professor had been a Kennedy campaign adviser and was in April 1961 on McGeorge Bundy’s national security staff.
Rostow identified an accelerated space effort as one of the potential topics in the speech.
A similar meeting with Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara was set up for later the same day; the two organizations were told not to coordinate their views in advance of meeting separately with the vice president.
He told Johnson “with a determined effort of the United States, there is a chance to beat the Russians in accomplishing a manned circumnavigation of the moon,” perhaps by 1966.
Other areas in which the United States might be first included “returning a sample of the material from the moon surface to the earth in 1964” and “developing communications satellites,” which, “although not as dramatic as manned flight,” would have benefits to people throughout the world.
NASA at this point in the review estimated the cost of an accelerated effort in all areas over the period through 1970 as $33. billion, an increase of $11. billion over its then-current ten-year plan.
Although others, especially Wernher von Braun, are often credited with being first to propose a lunar landing to the White House as the “space program which promises dramatic results in which we could win,” it seems that honor should go to Hugh Dryden, who had also raised the lunar landing possibility at the April 14 cabinet room meeting with President Kennedy.
Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara’s response to Vice President Johnson drew heavily on material provided by John Rubel, deputy director of Defense Research and Engineering, who was the top space official within the Office of the Secretary of Defense.
Rubel was an engineer who had worked for Hughes Aircraft before coming to Washington during the Eisenhower administration and who had strong views on how best to organize the national space effort.
Rather than provide responses to the questions in President Kennedy’s April 20 memorandum, McNamara articulated a particular philosophy with respect to space.
He remarked that “all large scale space programs require the mobilization of resources on a national scale.
They require the development and successful application of the most advanced technologies.
McNamara called for an orderly but accelerated program to close the booster gap.
Others Consulted As part of his review, Vice President Johnson reached out to a number of individuals whom he thought could provide informed advice.
For example, on April 24 he received a thirty-four-page report prepared over the weekend by George Feldman, a former staff member of the House space committee who had sought the job of NASA administrator, and Charles Sheldon of the Congressional Research Service.
He also asked Welsh to get the views of Cyrus Vance, in April 1961 the top lawyer at the Department of Defense but formerly a member of Johnson’s Senate preparedness subcommittee staff.
On Monday morning, April 24, Johnson held a “hearing” to solicit the views on what course of action he should recommend to President Kennedy.
Presenting their views were individuals representing the three military services.
To get a “keen sense of public reaction” to the kind of accelerated program that was emerging from his review, the vice president invited three prominent businessmen who were also close personal friends to listen to the presentations.
They were George Brown of the Houston, Texas construction firm of Brown and Root (who had been a major Johnson campaign contributor); Frank Stanton, president of the Columbia Broadcasting System; and Donald Cook, vice-president of the American Electric Power Corporation.
The three service representatives were Vice Admiral John T Hayward, deputy chief of naval operations for research and development; Lieutenant General Bernard Schriever, commander of the Air Force systems command and the recognized pioneer of the Air Force space program; and Wernher von Braun, who had been transferred in June 1960 from the Army Ballistic Missile Agency to work for NASA but from Johnson’s perspective still could represent the Army’s views.
Johnson had sent each of the three a copy of President Kennedy’s April 20 memorandum directly, not through their chain of command.
He said “The President wants the best hard-headed advice he can get—and he wants it now” and “this meeting, complemented by anything you want to send in later, is called to get your specific views on what we can do to get this country into the Space lead.
He believed that, from a national point of view, only the lunar landing mission made sense as a way of accelerating the space program.
The Navy was concerned, reported Hayward, that the practical applications of space technology that provided assistance to naval operations, such as the use of satellites for navigation, reconnaissance, communications, and weather forecasting, not be neglected in any accelerated program.
Schriever also urged that a program aimed at a lunar landing be adopted, primarily because “it would put a focus on our space program.
If we had this sort of an objective, there were so many other things that would be required that you couldn’t avoid having a major space program.
Although the Air Force in 1958 had proposed a very similar idea—a lunar landing effort as a central focus of a national space program—Schriever in 1961 did not suggest Air Force management of such an effort, noting, “that never came up.
This letter addressed directly the questions in President Kennedy’s April 20 memorandum.
Schriever suggested that our currently projected space effort is dangerously deficient.
It has been characterized by an attitude of defeatism and a seeming resignation to second place for the United States in the space competition with the Soviet Union.
This negative philosophy places at serious and unacceptable risk both our national prestige and our military security.
It fails to recognize the military potential of space and the fact that achievements in space have been the single most important influence in the world prestige equation.
A greatly expanded and accelerated space program can—and should—be undertaken.
There is clear evidence that we have the resources to more than double the magnitude of our present space effort.
All that is lacking is the decision to do so—a decision comparable to that made by the late President Franklin D Roosevelt shortly after the attack on Pearl Harbor when he called upon the nation to increase its annual airplane production from a few thousand 88 JOHN F KENNEDY AND THE RACE TO THE MOON to the seemingly impossible figure of 50,000 aircraft per year.
This was because “a performance jump by a factor 10 over their present rockets is necessary to accomplish this feat.
Given this likelihood, said von Braun, “we would not have to enter such a race towards this obvious next goal in space exploration against hopeless odds favoring the Soviets.
This estimate reflected von Braun’s confidence that with adequate resources his rocket team could develop the large launch vehicle needed more rapidly than could its Soviet competitors.
Echoing the call for a more centralized approach to the management of large-scale technological efforts that had been articulated by Robert McNamara on April 22, von Braun noted that “in the space race we are competing with a determined opponent whose peacetime economy is on a wartime footing.
Rather, it should be pushed as a basically important achievement of great technical and scientific importance.” e “The distinction between ‘peaceful uses’ and defense uses for space is a handicap.” e “We have to have a basic philosophy—make our objectives clear.
Johnson apparently did consult with Rusk by telephone to learn if the secretary of state foresaw any negative foreign policy impacts from an accelerated space program and if Rusk agreed that a program aimed at capturing leadership in space for the United States was politically desirable.
There were no dissenters among those consulted to the notion that the country should undertake a vigorous space program funded at a significantly higher level than had been the case under the Eisenhower administration.
There was little question, Johnson was told repeatedly, that such a program would have considerable political, strategic, technological, and economic payoffs for the United States.
For example, Donald Cook in a letter to Johnson a few weeks later argued that “actions in this field must, I believe, be based on the fundamental premise that achievements in space are equated by other nations of the world with technical proficiency and industrial strength.
This view of the world situation—as a bipolar struggle between the United States and the Soviet Union for global leadership at a time that Communist parties were strong in many Western European countries and as newly independent nations were deciding which form of social and political organization to adopt—was at the root of United States foreign policy in the early months of the Kennedy administration.
Cook’s views were commonly shared among the United States political and intellectual leadership, including President Kennedy himself.
Our objective must be, therefore, not merely to overtake, but substantially to outdistance Russia.
Any program with a lesser basic objective would be a second-rate program, worthy only of a second class power.
On April 28, the vice president sent the president a six-page memorandum summarizing his space review to date.
Wiesner, reflecting the conclusions of the PSAC report that had been presented to President Eisenhower in December 1960, viewed the decision to accelerate the space program with a lunar landing mission as SPACE PLANS REVIEWED 91 a central undertaking as “a political, not a technical issue.
It was not an issue of scientific versus non-scientific issues; it was a use of technological means for political ends.
Somewhat surprisingly, there was another key individual who was somewhat skeptical of the push for a major acceleration of the space program, with landing on the Moon before the Soviet Union as its central feature—NASA administrator James Webb.
By acting to emphasize his concern with the underlying validity of the accelerated program, Webb hoped both to maintain his good working relationship with Wiesner and, through Wiesner, the scientific community, and to influence the program recommendations so that if necessary he could later defend the program against charges that it was aimed only at prestige and was fundamentally distorted and unsound.
The original plan was to meet with the chairman, Overton Brooks, and ranking minority member, James Fulton, of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics on May 1, and the chairman, Robert Kerr, and ranking minority member, Styles Bridges, of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences on May 2.
However, the May 1 meeting had to be postponed so that Johnson could participate in a National Security Council discussion of policy toward Viet Nam.
Webb and Dryden from NASA, John Rubel from DOD, Edward Welsh, representatives from the Atomic Energy Commission, the Department of State, and the BOB, and George Brown, Frank Stanton, and Donald Cook were also present.
The two senators whom Johnson invited to the meeting, Kerr and Bridges, were present not only because of their committee positions but also because they were two of the small number of veteran legislators who, together with Johnson, had controlled the Senate during the Eisenhower years.
Johnson believed that their support would suffice to carry the rest of the Senate with them.
Johnson completed his canvas of Congressional support by telephoning Overton Brooks and James Fulton to inquire whether the House of Representatives would also support an accelerated space effort.
Given what these two men had been saying in their recent committee hearings about the need for a faster-paced program, their responses were not surprising.
He recommended an immediate acceleration of programs for communications, television, weather, and navigation satellites.
According to Webb, by the end of the May 3 meeting Lyndon Johnson “was close to demanding” from NASA a specific recommendation on a lunar landing program, not additional study of its requirements.
As Lyndon Johnson was gauging Congressional support for an accelerated space effort, Kennedy was also independently consulting key members of Congress with respect to what type of enhanced space program would be politically acceptable.
In particular, according to Webb, there was “little doubt in my mind” that Kennedy consulted Houston-area Congressman Albert Thomas, who chaired the House subcommittee controlling NASA’s appropriations.
Kennedy also needed support from Thomas in other areas of his legislative agenda, and it is likely that Thomas alerted Kennedy to his desire to have an accelerated space program benefit his Houston Congressional district.
In the end he was, I believe, as strongly influenced by Johnson and Thomas as by any other two people.
While James Webb might have wanted more time to have his staff carry out a fuller study of the requirements for sending Americans to the Moon, 94 JOHN F KENNEDY AND THE RACE TO THE MOON that was not to be.
On May 4, a Thursday, Lyndon Johnson was asked by President Kennedy to embark the following Monday on a tour of Southeast Asia to provide a first-hand assessment of the situation there with respect to Communist-supported insurgencies.
The vice president wanted to submit these papers to the president on the following Monday, before he left on his trip.
Success in that flight was a critical factor in any decision that might follow.
A Necessary Success From the start of Project Mercury in 1958, the project’s plan called for several brief suborbital flights with an astronaut aboard before committing a human to an orbital mission.
The first such flight could have come in March 1961 if it had not been for the combination of some relatively minor problems on the January 31 Mercury-Redstone-2 flight carrying the chimpanzee Ham and the biomedical concerns raised by PSAC about an astronaut’s ability to withstand the stresses of spaceflight.
An additional test flight without an astronaut aboard was inserted in the Mercury schedule, and the first crewed flight, Mercury/Redstone-3 , was slipped until the end of April or early May; to some, that flight seemed rather anticlimactic when Yuri Gagarin orbited the Earth on April 12.
Beginning with the Wiesner task group report in January and extending almost to the day of the flight, there were White House fears that the risks of the MR-3 mission outweighed its benefits.
These fears were only amplified by the failure at the Bay of Pigs in mid-April; the possibility that a United States astronaut might perish in the full light of the television and other media coverage of the mission so soon after the United States had looked so weak in its unwillingness to support the invasion force it had trained was very troubling to President Kennedy and his top advisers.
Wiesner’s hope for a historic first was definitively dashed by the Soviet orbital flight in April.
At the March 22 meeting on the NASA budget, President Kennedy had asked about the risks associated with the first Mercury flight.
In the preceding days, Ted Sorensen and the president’s brother Robert Kennedy discussed whether it was worse to postpone the flight after the press buildup had reached such a peak or to go ahead with the flight and run the risks of failure.
Present at the meeting were Wiesner, Sorensen, Bundy, and Welsh, among others.
Webb assured the president that all precautions had been taken and the flight should go forward as scheduled.
Kennedy asked his secretary to place a call to NASA’s public information officer in Florida, Paul Haney, to discuss plans for television coverage and to discuss the reliability of the Mercury capsule’s escape system.
Salinger talked to Haney from the Oval Office and, after Haney reviewed the history of the launch escape system, told Kennedy that he felt that JFK’s questions had been adequately answered.
A wave of national relief and pride over an American success swept the country, from the White House down to the person in the street.
At the White House, Kennedy’s secretary Evelyn Lincoln interrupted a National Security Council meeting to tell the president that Shepard was about to be launched.
Kennedy, joined by Lyndon Johnson, Robert Kennedy, Robert McNamara, Dean Rusk, Ted Sorensen, McGeorge Bundy, Arthur Schlesinger, and others crowded around a small black and white television set in Lincoln’s office to watch the takeoff.
Sorensen suggests that the group watching the flight in Lincoln’s office “heaved a sigh of relief, and cheered” as Shepard and his spacecraft were pulled from the Atlantic Ocean.
After Shepard was safely aboard the recovery ship, Kennedy called him, saying, “I want to congratulate you very much.
In contrast, “Soviet secrecy was deplored and even continued to SPACE PLANS REVIEWED 97 President Kennedy in his secretary’s office watching the May 5, 1961, launch of the first United States astronaut, Alan Shepard.
However, the unqualified success of the flight in both technical and political terms likely swept away any of Kennedy’s lingering reservations with respect to the benefits of an accelerated space effort with human space flights as its centerpiece.
But America still needs to work with the utmost speed and vigor in the further development of our 98 JOHN F KENNEDY AND THE RACE TO THE MOON space program.
Today’s flight should provide incentive to everyone in our nation concerned with this program to redouble their efforts in this vital field.
Vice President Johnson’s consultations over the prior two weeks had revealed almost unanimous support for such an initiative.
But before President Kennedy could announce his intent to enter and win the space race, the generalized support had to be turned into specific program recommendations with an accompanying political rationale and budget estimates.
With the vice president leaving Washington on May 8 for almost two weeks, that meant a busy weekend for those charged with putting the results of LBJ’s consultations into a form for Johnson to submit with his recommendation for presidential approval.
Recommendations Prepared On Saturday morning, May 6, the group charged with preparing the recommendations met at the Pentagon office of Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara.
Neither Jerome Wiesner nor Edward Welsh participated in the weekend sessions, and neither was briefed on their results before LBJ’s recommendations were submitted to President Kennedy on May 8.
During Vice President Johnson’s review over the preceding two weeks, NASA and DOD had never seen each other’s responses to President Kennedy’s April 20 memorandum, so most of the day was spent with NASA and DOD presenting those responses to the other agency.
NASA went first and outlined its proposed initiatives, including setting a manned lunar landing goal with a planning date of 1967 for the first landing attempt.
There had been enough analysis, dating back to the work of George Low’s task force, to satisfy the NASA leaders that a lunar landing was a technically achievable objective, given a strong commitment of resources and people.
That such a program would be recommended to the president was certain enough that NASA had established an internal task force four days earlier to provide a more detailed sense of what would be involved in such an undertaking, but that group’s findings were not due until early June.
Thus the specifics of the lunar landing plans discussed on May 6 were in a very preliminary state.
In choosing the lunar landing program as the central feature of its recommended program, the group had no firm intelligence regarding whether or not the Soviet Union was already embarked on a similar program.
Although there is no direct evidence that those preparing the space recommendations had read this intelligence estimate prior to the May 6-7 weekend, they were likely aware of its conclusions.
The only question about the wisdom of selecting the lunar landing goal as the key step toward space leadership came from Robert McNamara, who wondered, given the lack of specific knowledge about the Soviet space program and its record of achievements to date, whether such an effort was ambitious enough.
Might the Soviets already be so far along on a lunar landing program that they could do it in a year or two, he wondered.
Might it be better to focus on sending people to Mars, instead, he asked the group.
Such an initiative had been under study within the government and by a President’s Science Advisory Committee panel in the previous weeks.
McNamara, aware of the bullish recommendations contained in the Gardner Committee report, believed that the Air Force was “out of control,” and that, if NASA was carrying out a large program with heavy involvement of the aerospace industry, it would be more difficult for the Air Force to get political support from the same firms and from the Congress for its space ambitions.
The only new area suggested for the DOD was the development of large solidfueled rocket motors.
There was agreement that both liquid-fueled boosters, NASA’s preference, and solid propulsion boosters would be pursued in parallel, with the choice of which would be used for the lunar landing mission deferred to a future time.
The group also agreed that work on a nuclear upper stage for a large rocket should be pursued, but that such a stage was unlikely to be available in time for the initial lunar landing attempts.
The major role for nuclear propulsion would be later missions to the Moon and then future human missions to the planets.
On late Saturday afternoon, the meeting then turned to how to proceed in preparing a report containing the recommendations that had been agreed to.
The Department of Defense had prepared a draft report, written primarily by John Rubel.
NASA had no similar draft, just a listing of the projects it was proposing for acceleration.
Robert McNamara suggested using the DOD draft as the starting point and then folding in the NASA recommendations; James Webb agreed to this approach.
The meeting then adjourned, with Seamans, Rubel, and Shapley designated as a drafting group to prepare by Monday morning a report for McNamara’s and Webb’s signatures.
Webb, in fact, had agreed to use the DOD draft without first reading it.
What bothered Seamans was the approach the draft report took to competing with the Soviet Union in space.
The draft claimed that “the government had allowed industry to proliferate to too great an extent,” with the result being a diffuse and ineffective effort.
It suggested “winnowing” the existing aerospace firms so that only “two or three or four stalwarts” would be allowed to compete for DOD and NASA contracts.
He called Webb on Sunday morning, saying, “we’ve got a terrible problem with this report.
Webb was on Sunday immersed in making arrangements for what would turn out to be a triumphant visit to Washington the next day by astronaut Alan Shepard and his Mercury astronaut colleagues.
Seamans, Shapley, and Rubel and some of their staff worked into Saturday evening and all day Sunday on the report, adding the NASA material to the DOD draft, with Shapley providing budget figures.
Finally, Webb, Seamans, and Rubel agreed that the report was ready for signature and forwarding to the vice president.
Then Webb waited until the secretaries who had been typing the revisions finished their work; he insisted on driving the one secretary who did not have a car to her home during a pouring rainstorm, even waiting at the woman’s house for a few minutes until the rain let up.
Seamans was back at the Pentagon by 7:30m. to make sure the report was in shape for Webb and McNamara’s approval.
The two men signed a cover letter, and the report was delivered to Vice President Johnson that morning.
Alan Shepard Visits Washington On the morning of May 8, Alan Shepard and the six other Mercury astronauts were flown from Grand Bahama Island, where Shepard had been brought after his recovery from his suborbital mission, to Andrews Air Force Base outside Washington and then by helicopter to the White House lawn.
They were met in the Rose Garden by a gathering that included President Kennedy and his wife Jacqueline, members of Congress, NASA leaders, and others.
He noted that “this flight was made out in the open with all the possibilities of failure, which would have been damaging to our country’s prestige.
Robert Gilruth, the director of NASA’s Space Task Group that was managing Project Mercury, was present.
Gilruth added, “it’s got to be something that requires a great big rocket, like going to the moon.
Gilruth, himself only five years older than Kennedy, added that while Kennedy seemed to accept Gilruth’s view, “he was a young man; he didn’t have all the wisdom he would have had.
After leaving the White House, Shepard was taken by President Kennedy to a meeting of the National Association of Broadcasters; this was not on the planned schedule for the day, but Shepard’s surprise visit provoked a tumultuous welcome.
After his stopover at the broadcasters’ meeting, Shepard and the other astronauts, accompanied by the vice president, paraded up Pennsylvania Avenue to the Capitol as thousands, assembling with little advance notice, cheered.
As he left the luncheon to go first to the White House and then to the airport to catch the plane that would take him to Southeast Asia for two weeks, Lyndon Johnson carried a large manila envelope.
In it was the WebbMcNamara report recommending sending Americans to the Moon.
In particular, “to achieve the goal of landing a man on the moon and returning him to earth in the latter part of the current decade requires immediate initiation of an accelerated program of spacecraft development”; the report called for adding $210. million dollars for developing the Apollo spacecraft.
An additional $112. million was requested to allow NASA to accelerate development of the large F-1 liquid-fueled rocket engine and related facilities; $62 million was requested for DOD to develop a large solid propellant rocket motor in parallel to F-1 development.
Another $15 million was allocated to DOD for a back up to the Centaur upper rocket stage that NASA was developing.
Other increases included an additional $50 million to NASA for communication satellites; $75 million for meteorological satellites, $22 million of that amount for NASA and $53 million for the Weather Bureau; and $30 million for nuclear rocket development, $23 million for NASA and $7 million for the Atomic Energy Commission.
The specifics of what programs would receive additional funding was NASA’s primary input into the report; the second section was based on John Rubel’s draft material.
All large scale space projects require the mobilization of resources on a national scale.
They call for skillful management, centralized control and unflagging pursuit of long-range goals.
Dramatic achievements in space, therefore, symbolize the technological power and organizing capacity of a nation.
It is for reasons such as these that major achievements in space contribute to national prestige.
Major successes, such as orbiting a man as the Soviets have just done, lend national prestige even though the scientific, commercial or military value of the undertaking may by ordinary standards be marginal or economically unjustified.
The nation needs to make a positive decision to pursue space projects aimed at enhancing national prestige.
Our attainments are a major element in the international competition between the Soviet system and our own.
The nonmilitary, non-commercial, non-scientific but “civilian” projects such as lunar and planetary exploration are, in this sense, part of the battle along the fluid front of the Cold War.
The final section of the report spelled out the specific new space goals that were being recommended.
The orbiting of machines is not the same as the orbiting or landing of a man.
The Webb-McNamara report was necessarily vague with respect to whether the Soviet Union was already embarked on a lunar landing program.
Kennedy Accepts Recommendations The recommendations contained in the Webb-McNamara report did not stay secret for long.
By the time President Kennedy met on the morning of May 10 with his advisers, including Sorensen, Wiesner, and Bundy; budget officials Bell and Staats; Webb and Dryden from NASA; and Welsh from the Space Council, to review the Webb-McNamara report, his decision to accept the report’s recommendations was almost foreordained.
Kennedy did ask the BOB to carry out its normal assessment of the financial and policy implications of his decision before committing to the specific programs and budget recommendations contained in the report.
In parallel with Lyndon Johnson’s review of the space program, others within the Kennedy administration had been reviewing issues related to the defense budget, military assistance programs, foreign aid, civil defense, and overseas information programs.
There was this ample precedent for a second address to Congress less than four months after Kennedy had spoken on the State of the Union.
Their conclusion was that these expenditures were neither large enough nor properly designed to inject enough stimulus into the economy to by themselves mitigate the ongoing recession.
Walter Heller, chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers, and Secretary of Labor Arthur Goldberg proposed that Kennedy approve a substantial public works program rather than (or in addition to) new space spending.
The draft of the internal BOB review was completed on May 18, and BOB director Bell sent it to Secretary of Defense McNamara, NASA administrator Webb, and Atomic Energy Commission chairman Glenn Seaborg with a request for immediate comments.
Welsh of the Space Council also received a copy in the absence of Vice President Johnson, who was still touring in Asia.
The review was the kind of thorough “due diligence” assessment that was the BOB’s responsibility, pointing out the implications of the decisions being proposed and examining potential obstacles to their successful implementation.
With respect to the magnitude of resources that would be needed, the review pointed out that what was being proposed was an increase of over $2 billion per year—perhaps even $3 billion per year—over previously planned budgets.
What would be needed was “a commitment to a long term-effort and to provide the resources it requires.
The draft BOB report pointed out the need to consider “the implications of likely and possible outcomes other than complete success” of the lunar landing program; interestingly, this discussion was missing from the final version.
If they did read it, they would have had the benefit of a comprehensive and thoughtful analysis of the implications of the decisions that Kennedy was about to announce.
The BOB review did not attempt to assign a cost to the overall Apollo project through the planned first landing.
Robert Seamans reports that the NASA staff estimate for the additional cost of the lunar landing program above what had been previously planned was in the range of $10 to $12 billion; Hugh Dryden had used an $11. billion increment in his April 22 presentation to Vice President Johnson.
Lambright suggests that Webb’s administrative discount applied both to announcing a date for the first landing attempt and for a precise cost of the project.
With respect to the landing date, Webb wanted “a margin of flexibility weighted against what the technical experts thought was possible, just in case something went wrong.
With respect to the projected costs, the $10 to $12 billion estimate “looked much too low to Webb.
Webb’s objective was to maximize the benefits of an accelerated space program for Earth in terms of research, education, and regional economic development.
While the final review of the accelerated program was underway in the White House, Webb was consulting with his colleagues outside the government and those whose support he thought might be important to the public acceptance of the new effort.
Webb told Bush that he regretted that the two “find ourselves on somewhat different sides of the complex question of manned space flight”; they earlier in May had had a confrontation at a Washington social function over the value of humans in space.
Webb noted that “no one could have ridden down Pennsylvania Avenue with Commander Shepard without feeling the deep desire of those lining the Avenue for something to be proud of and a hero.
The most sweeping version of Webb’s vision can be found in a May 23 memorandum he prepared for the vice president as Johnson returned from his Asian trip.
On investigation, I find that we are going to have to establish some place where we can do the technology related to the Apollo program, and this should be on the water where the vehicle can ultimately be barged to the launching site.
Therefore we have looked carefully at the situation at Rice, and at the possible locations near the Houston Ship Canal or other accessible waterways in that general area.
In essence, Webb was preempting the decision on where to relocate the Space Task Group as it took on the lunar landing assignment, even though the process through which that decision would be formalized extended for four more months.
But Webb did not stop with Houston; he now broadened his horizon to the whole region.
No commitments have been made, but I believe it is going to be of great importance to develop the intellectual and other resources of the Southwest in connection with the new programs the Government is undertaking.
Texas offers an unusual opportunity at this time due to the fact that [long-time Webb friend and chairman of the National Academy Space Science Board] Dr.
Lloyd Berkner...is establishing a Graduate Research Center in Dallas with the backing of Eric Johnston, Cecil Green, and others in that area (estimated at about one hundred million dollars) and in view of the fact that Senator Kerr and those interested with him in the Arkansas, White, and Red River System have now pushed it to the point that it is opening up the whole area related to Arkansas, Oklahoma, and in many ways helping to provide a development potential for Mississippi.
He related his vision for Southwest regional development to the nation as a whole.
But the space program buildup over the next few years that resulted from Kennedy’s decision allowed Webb the room needed to put his agenda into practice, and Webb, a New Deal Democrat, had little hesitation in using his position at NASA to implement his vision of an improved America.
The overall theme of the speech was the need for United States citizens to make sacrifices to meet the challenges facing the country and to insure the United States position as the leading power in the world by addressing “urgent national needs,” the title given to the address.
Then the president turned to his specific proposals, which included measures to continue economic recovery from the recession the new administration had inherited; measures to help developing nations make economic and social progress; cooperation in terms of military alliances and military assistance to United States allies; an enhanced overseas information program; an additional build-up of United States military power beyond what Kennedy had requested just two months earlier; a strengthened civil defense program; and an increased emphasis on disarmament negotiations.
All of these initiatives, Kennedy said, would involve substantial costs.
After listing all of the other areas he was recommending for new action, the president turned last to space.
Kennedy’s words as they deviated from the prepared text are indicated in bold italics below.
Kennedy also skipped a few portions of the prepared text or deleted passages by hand.
With the advice of the Vice President, who is Chairman of the National Space Council, we have examined where we are strong and where we are not, where we may succeed and where we may not.
Now it is time to take longer strides—time for a great new American enterprise—time for this nation to take a clearly leading role in space achievement, which in many ways may hold the key to our future on earth.
But the facts of the matter are that we have never made the national decisions or marshaled the national resources required for such leadership.
We have never specified long-range goals on an urgent time schedule, or managed our resources and our time so as to insure their fulfillment.
Recognizing the head start obtained by the Soviets with their large rocket engines, which gives them many months of lead-time, and recognizing the likelihood that they will exploit this lead for some time to come in still more impressive successes, we nevertheless are required to make new efforts on our own.
For while we cannot guarantee that we shall one day be first, we can guarantee that any failure to make this effort will make us last.
We take an additional risk by making it in full view of the world—but as shown by the feat of astronaut Shepard, this very risk enhances our stature when we are successful.
Space is open to us now; and our eagerness to share its meaning is not governed by the efforts of others.
We go into space because whatever mankind must undertake, free men must fully share.
I believe that this nation should commit itself to achieving the goal, before this decade is out, of landing a man on the moon and returning him safely to earth.
No single space project in this period will be more impressive to mankind or more important for the long-range exploration of space; and none will be so difficult or expensive to accomplish.
We propose to accelerate the development of the appropriate lunar spacecraft.
We propose to develop alternate liquid and solid fueled boosters much larger than any now being developed, until certain which is superior.
But in a very real sense, it will not be one man going to the moon—it will be an entire nation.
Let it be clear—and this is a judgment which the Members of Congress must finally make.
Now this is a choice which this country must make, and I am confident that under the leadership of the Space Committees of the Congress, and the Appropriating Committees, that you will consider the matter carefully.
But all of you have lived through the last four years and have seen the significance of space and the adventures in space, and no one can predict with certainty what the ultimate meaning will be of the mastery of space.
But I think every citizen of this country as well as the Members of Congress should consider the matter carefully in making their judgment, to which we have given attention over many weeks and months, because it is a heavy burden, and there is no sense in agreeing or desiring that the United States take an affirmative position in outer space, unless we are prepared to do the work and bear the burdens to make it successful.
This decision demands a major national commitment of scientific and technical manpower, material and facilities, and the possibility of their diversion from other important activities where they are already thinly spread.
It means a degree of dedication, organization and discipline which have not always characterized our research and development efforts.
It means we cannot afford work stoppages, inflated costs of material or talent, wasteful interagency rivalries, or a high turnover of key personnel.
Kennedy apparently had sensed that some in the Congressional audience were “skeptical, if not hostile, and that his request was being received with stunned doubt and disbelief”; this likely led to his decision to deviate from his prepared text to try to convince the congressmen of the need for what he was proposing, and to skip a few passages toward the end of his address.
The editorial thought that “the majority of our people will agree” with the lunar landing goal.
Kennedy need not have worried about congressional, and particularly Senate, support of the accelerated space effort he had proposed.
Lyndon Johnson’s earlier consultations with congressional leaders had helped lay the foundation for strong bipartisan support of the initiative.
The Senate on June 28 took up a House authorization bill passed the day before the May 25 speech, and amended it to include the full $1.784 billion for NASA that White House had requested for Fiscal Year 1962; the bill passed without even the formality of a roll-call vote.
The appropriations bill containing NASA funds had a similarly easy ride through Congress; it passed both houses on August 7 and contained a $1,671,750,000 NASA appropriation for Fiscal 1962, only $113 million less than Kennedy had requested.
There is some uncertainty on how the decision was made to use this phrase, rather than the 1967 date for the first landing attempt that was being used in NASA’s internal planning.
The May 8 Webb-McNamara report had suggested an “end of the decade” target for the first lunar landing.
Robert Seamans reports that the first draft of Kennedy’s speech “called for a lunar landing by 1967” and that NASA was “aghast” at specifying a particular year.
A “within the next ten years” interpretation was never acknowledged; “before this decade is out” was universally seen as setting a target of the end of 1969 for the initial lunar landing.
Indeed, as the Apollo program gained momentum, John Kennedy pushed for a landing as soon as possible, in 1967 or even late 1966.
This shift was the end result of a process in which many factors were involved.
NASA planners convinced James Webb, who probably needed little convincing, that human space flight was key to the agency’s future, and Webb became an effective advocate of NASA’s interests.
The support of the Space Science Board helped allay some of the scientific criticism that the human space flight program had little scientific value.
The success of Alan Shepard’s flight demonstrated both human capability to survive and function in space and the great public enthusiasm for human space flight.
The ability of NASA to withstand an Air Force and industry challenge to its role as the nation’s primary space agency strengthened NASA’s claim that it could undertake new, ambitious missions.
Lyndon Johnson’s personal conviction about the strategic importance of space, coupled with his assignment as head of the Space Council, placed a forceful advocate of a larger space effort at the side of the president.
The consistent call from the Congress, particularly from the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, loosened one constraint on the president’s freedom to choose a bold course of action.
The flight of Yuri Gagarin and the world’s reaction to it provided a strong impetus to make space decisions quickly; the Bay of Pigs added to that pressure.
New men arrived and brought with them those ideas of the “seed time” of the 1950s.
Among those ideas were the notions that the Third World was the main theater of the Cold War and that in that contest prestige was as important as power.
Their ideas validated a far greater role for government in planning and executing social change.
The new men also cared more for imagery and felt increasing pressure to display their control over affairs in the wake of early setbacks in foreign policy.
They were technocratic, applying command technology to political problems. wk KK We will probably never know precisely what was in Kennedy’s mind when he decided that Americans should go to the moon.
Perhaps Apollo could not be justified, but, by God, we could not not do it.
In the weeks between the Gagarin flight and his May 25 speech, Kennedy had “fired off” to his advisers “a constant stream of written questions...on costs, risks, manpower, alternatives, and administrative responsibility.
Robert Kennedy commented that his brother thought that winning the space race was “very important.
Chapter 8 First Steps on the Way to the Moon il anticipation of President Kennedy’s decision to approve a lunar landing project as a top priority national undertaking, NASA on May 2, 1961, had begun in earnest to examine just what would be required to carry out the president’s mandate.
New facilities would be needed, new approaches to space flight would be required, and new hardware would have to be developed.
This was certainly not the perception of those directly involved with the mobilization of human and financial resources required to carry out the lunar landing project.
The second half of 1961 and most of 1962 were marked by a rapid series of decisions.
To many of those in the White House and NASA concerned with attempting to meet the late 1967 target date that NASA had set for the first attempt at a lunar landing, there was a sense of urgency in getting a fast start on the needed buildup of people, facilities, and hardware; to them, “nerve-racking deadlines” were a daily reality.
NASA in 1961 and 1962 chose the locations for the facilities that would be required for the lunar landing mission, selected and contracted for the launch vehicles and spacecraft to carry out the mission, and decided on the technical approach to landing on the Moon, this last decision resulting in an intense conflict with the White House science advisers.
NASA reorganized itself for the task of managing Project Apollo while carrying out Project Mercury and getting started on an intermediate human space flight effort, Project Gemini.
This was truly an unprecedented warlike, albeit peaceful, mobilization of national resources.
President Kennedy and his White House associates viewed this rapid buildup with mixed emotions.
On one hand, Kennedy made it very clear that getting to the Moon before the Soviet Union was one of his top policy priorities, and by the end of 1962 appeared willing to provide even more resources to NASA if doing so would increase the chances of achieving that objective.
While Kennedy focused his interest on the lunar landing program, NASA argued that across-the-board preeminence—a clearly leading position in all areas of space activity—was the fundamental goal, and the lunar landing only the most visible element of achieving it.
On the other hand, the budget projections that had accompanied Kennedy’s May 1961 decision to go to the Moon and to accelerate the other elements of the NASA program were admittedly highly uncertain, and the Bureau of the Budget had warned Kennedy that the decisions he was making would lead to a very expensive space effort in the coming years.
In his desire to get the country on the path to space leadership, Kennedy seemingly did not pay very much attention to that warning.
Kennedy soon became concerned about the space program’s rapidly growing costs, and this concern intensified during 1962 as the full scope of the lunar landing effort became clearer.
Kennedy pressed his staff to make sure that the related costs were fully justified.
Even so, at the end of 1962 Kennedy’s determination to win the race to the Moon remained firm; his desire to be first in space justified in his mind the high costs of achieving that position.
White House Oversight of NASA One impact of his decision to send Americans to the Moon “before this decade is out” was to make the progress of the space program of direct personal interest to President Kennedy.
As he planned for his presidency, Kennedy could not have anticipated making such a decision within four months of taking office, and thus he had been willing to delegate to Vice President Lyndon B Johnson the administration’s lead role in space policy, and to symbolize that role by making the vice president the chairman of a revitalized National Aeronautics and Space Council.
Johnson did indeed take charge of the review, but on a highly personal basis.
There were no formal meetings of the National Aeronautics and Space Council before Johnson forwarded the May 8 Webb-McNamara recommendations to Kennedy with his endorsement, and in the April-May 1961 time period, there was only one Space Council staff person, executive secretary Edward Welsh.
Kennedy made the final decision to approve the recommendations of the Webb-McNamara report and to announce them before a joint session of Congress while the vice president, at Kennedy’s request, was traveling in Asia.
The absence of Johnson during this critical period was symbolic of his declining role after May 1961 as the first among equals with respect to advising the president on NASA’s programs.
It is very likely that Johnson’s urging Kennedy to approve a major acceleration of the civilian space program was an important influence on JFK’s decision to go to the Moon.
However, once Kennedy had made the basic decision, he relied primarily on his White House policy, technical, national security, and budgetary staff and on the NASA leadership to provide him information on the implementation of that decision and to relay his concerns and decisions to the NASA workforce.
Kennedy soon realized that what he was likely to get from Johnson and the Space Council staff was unquestioning advocacy for a strong space effort, not the kind of dispassionate analysis that he most welcomed.
Science adviser Jerome Wiesner and his staff and David Bell and his BOB staff thought it was their role, whatever their personal views, to raise questions about the choices NASA was making with respect to various aspects of the space effort.
The predictability of the positions that Lyndon Johnson and the Space Council staff would take on most space issues limited their influence on Kennedy’s policy choices.
Thus—with one important exception, developing during 1961 the administration’s approach to bring communications satellites into early practical use—the Space Council as a body was not central to any of the civilian space decisions of the Kennedy administration.
Even so, by the end of 1962, the council staff had grown to twelve professional staff members, several consultants, and a large support staff; the total staff complement was twenty-eight.
This made the council a sizeable element of the executive office of the president, comparable in size to the Office of Science and Technology, which had been created in 1962 to give an organizational foundation for Kennedy’s science adviser Jerome Wiesner and which dealt with all other areas of science and technology.
The Space Council budget during the Kennedy administration grew to just over $500,000 per year.
When Welsh responded, suggesting a series of “Vice President’s Reports on Space,” Johnson’s reaction was “I sure like that.
There were fourteen formal meetings of the Space Council during the Kennedy administration, but most were devoted to discussion of already-decided activities, rather than to formulating recommendations for presidential decision or for settling disagreements.
During 1962 and early 1963, the council staff devoted a great deal of time and effort to drafting a statement of national space policy, but this initiative was abandoned when both NASA and the Department of Defense opposed issuing such a statement.
Johnson frequently gave speeches prepared by the Space Council staff on space issues and allowed staff-prepared articles to appear under his name in various publications.
Standing are Space Council member and chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission Glenn Seaborg and Space Council executive secretary Edward C Welsh . press conferences, Johnson came prepared with responses to potential press questions.
As Johnson biographer Merle Miller suggests, “the Space Council chairmanship was...only briefly satisfying for Lyndon.
As a veteran of Washington bureaucratic politics and as the head of an agency newly charged with an effort that was a top presidential priority, administrator Webb was insistent on having direct access to the president.
Webb was scrupulous in keeping Johnson informed, but he made it clear that he worked for the president, not the vice president.
This also left little room for the vice president and the Space Council staff to play a central role in most of the decisions on how best to move forward in sending Americans to the Moon.
Although most of those individuals have been mentioned previously, it may be useful to depict the structure of White House decision-making for space before discussing the specific actions taken during the June 1961 to December 1962 period.
Kennedy defined the lunar landing program primarily as a national security effort, and that meant that his special assistant for national security affairs, McGeorge Bundy, played an increasingly important role in space policy discussions between 196] and 1963.
Bundy’s deputy, Harvard economist Carl Kaysen, and National Security Council career staff member Charles E Johnson played key roles in supporting Bundy on space issues; Kaysen also had a direct personal relationship with the president, particularly on arms control issues, and on occasion reported directly to Kennedy rather than through Bundy.
From the start of 1962, Wiesner’s principal staff assistant on space matters was Nicholas Golovin, a physicist who had left NASA at the end of 1961 on less than harmonious terms.
Another of Wiesner’s staffers, Eugene Skolnikoff, dealt with the international aspects of the space effort.
He leaned heavily on his director of BOB, David Bell, for careful assessments of the budgetary implications of the fast-paced space program.
Bell’s deputy, Elmer Staats, and especially career BOB senior staffer Willis Shapley were deeply involved in space matters.
Shapley was central to framing policy and budget issues as he drafted various policy papers for presidential review and decision.
Kennedy’s top adviser on most domestic policy matters, in addition to his duties as Kennedy’s speechwriter, was special counsel Theodore C Sorensen.
Kennedy in April 1961 had asked Sorensen to organize the review of the space program that was carried out by Vice President Johnson.
Sorensen remained involved in space policy decisions as the president’s alter ego on most policy matters, but he seldom got directly involved with NASA oversight as the Moon program evolved.
On politically sensitive matters, such as the allocation of NASA contracts and the location of NASA’s facilities, Kennedy’s special assistant Kenneth O’Donnell became involved.
Although he was the president’s closest confidant on most policy and political matters, Kennedy’s brother Robert seemingly had only limited involvement on space issues, although it is impossible to know how frequently space matters were discussed between the two brothers.
It thus fell to Bundy, Wiesner, and Bell and their staff to be the primary points of contact between the White House and NASA as the United States space effort took its first steps toward a landing on the Moon.
Locating the Facilities It was clear to NASA managers that as part of the decision to start a rapid space buildup, NASA would have to quickly create several large new facilities.
The decision on what kind of facilities to build and, politically more important, where to locate them, was thus a high priority issue in the months immediately following President Kennedy’s May 1961 speech.
Although a formal announcement of facility decisions could not be made until August 1961, after the Congress had actually appropriated the increased FY 1962 budget that the president had proposed, planning for the facility buildup began in earnest even before the speech.
Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, the president, budget director David Bell, deputy secretary of defense Roswell Gilpatric, science adviser Jerome Wiesner, special counsel Theodore Sorensen, and national security adviser McGeorge Bundy . effort to Project Mercury, the Space Task Group, which was managing Mercury, needed to be moved from its location at the Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia.
This move was necessary because human space flight required engineering development, flight operations, and especially project management skills, not the engineering research-oriented approach that was characteristic of Langley.
Soon after NASA opened its doors for business on October 1, 1958, Administrator Glennan heard from Congressman Albert Thomas, whose district included Houston, Texas.
Thomas was chairman of the House of Representatives appropriations subcommittee that controlled NASA’s funding.
Thomas responded “somewhat peevishly” that the decision to locate the new facility in Maryland “had gone through without his sanction since he had been absent” from Washington.
In late April 1961, as it was becoming clear that President Kennedy was likely to approve a major acceleration of the NASA human space flight program, NASA administrator Webb recognized that a separate, new NASA center would indeed be needed to manage the effort, and instructed his staff to begin the site selection process.
He put $60 million in the NASA budget estimates being prepared for the White House as a down payment on constructing the new center.
The site selection team considered locations in Florida and California, but was also well aware of Representative Thomas’s long-standing interest in having a new NASA installation in Houston.
Thus NASA representatives visited Houston on May 16, even before the president’s announcement of the lunar landing goal.
As it became widely known in May that the president was going to propose a major acceleration of the NASA program, Representative Thomas made it clear to NASA administrator James Webb that the 1958 Houston offer, and the implied threat of problems for the NASA budget if it were not accepted, still stood.
Humble Oil, the Houston corporation that had donated the land to Rice now to be transferred to NASA, still owned most of the surrounding property, and realized that its value would increase substantially if a major new government facility were located on the university’s land.
George Brown’s construction company, Brown & Root, hoped to get the contract to build the new NASA installation.
Brown was chairman of the Rice Board of Trustees, had been a major contributor to Lyndon Johnson’s senatorial campaigns, and was also closely allied with Albert Thomas.
Pressing the case for California was Representative George Miller, who was the acting chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics after Overton Brooks fell ill.
Missouri directed its advocacy through powerful Senator Stuart Symington.
Making the case for Texas in addition to Thomas were Representative Olin “Tiger” Teague, chairman of the House Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight, and Representative Joe Kilgore; in addition, Speaker of the House Sam Rayburn and Vice President Lyndon Johnson advocated the Texas cause.
Of particular political concern to President Kennedy and his top political assistant Kenneth O’Donnell was continuing pressure from the governor of Massachusetts, John Volpe, to locate the new center at Hingham Air Force Base near Boston.
Volpe wrote Kennedy on July 19, before the site selection process had formally begun, saying that “as one Bay Stater to another,” he wanted to call the advantages of the Massachusetts location to the president’s attention.
The final criteria for site selection, including both eight “essential criteria” and four “desirable criteria,” were approved by top NASA managers in mid-August.
Before that approval, conscious of the Massachusetts interest, Administrator Webb had reviewed and specifically reiterated the “mild climate” requirement as being essential.
In a September 14 memorandum to the president discussing the site selection process, Webb provided five justifications for the climate requirement, concluding that “selection of a site in an area meeting the stated climate criterion will minimize both the cost and the time required for this project” and noting the many ways in which the Boston area failed to meet the requirement.
Upon an initial assessment by the NASA site selection team, nine potential sites, notably not including Houston, met all or most criteria, and arrangements were made by the team to visit those areas.
The site selection team “felt that locations north of the freezing line were unlikely to meet the requirements” and thus did not originally plan to visit any such site.
Delegations representing sites in Virginia and Rhode Island not being considered by the selection team pleaded their case in presentations directly to NASA’s James Webb and Hugh Dryden.
Also, on September 1, a Massachusetts delegation headed by Governor Volpe and Senator Benjamin Smith, John Kennedy’s former college roommate who had been appointed in December 1960 to fill JFK’s Senate seat, met with the two NASA leaders to argue for consideration of the Hingham site and to ask that the site selection team at least visit Massachusetts.
A large meeting of Boston business interests sponsored by the leading local newspaper, The Boston Globe, also called upon the president to select the Massachusetts site.
On September 8, Governor Volpe called James Webb, again asking whether the team would visit Massachusetts.
Volpe told Webb that “great political pressure was building up” for such a visit.
Webb responded that “it was most difficult to promise this without doing so in many other cases,” but told Volpe that he could make public his intervention with Webb in order to relieve some of the political pressure on the governor.
The only other site visited on the basis of political intervention was in St.
John F Kennedy followed this process closely, and Webb kept him informed and then on September 11 briefed him on the likely outcome.
Rather, the president wanted NASA to have full responsibility for the site selection decision.
Webb later revised this account of the selection process, saying that Kennedy had at some point called Albert Thomas to seek his support for several bills before the House of Representatives.
The team’s first choice, flying in the face of the political pressures from Texas interests, was MacDill Air Force Base near Tampa, Florida, which was scheduled for closure as a Strategic Air Command airfield.
It is interesting to speculate whether Webb and Dryden would have accepted this recommendation, given their broader perspective and the need to consider political factors.
Webb and Dryden met on the evening of September 13 and again on the morning of September 14 to review the site selection team report and hear the results of its last minute visit to Massachusetts.
The public announcement of the selection of the Houston location came on September 19.
With that announcement and the choice of sites in Florida, Louisiana, and Mississippi for launch-related facilities, the arc of new NASA installations along the Gulf of Mexico coast in the southeastern region of the United States that James Webb had advocated in his May 23 memorandum to Vice President Johnson had come into being.
A White House Status Check While the locations for new Apollo facilities were settled expeditiously, NASA was slower in selecting what approach to use in getting to the Moon and thus what spacecraft and launch vehicle would be needed for the lunar landing.
Wiesner noted that “six months have elapsed since the decision was announced to put man on the moon, yet none of these crucial hardware programs have progressed beyond the study phase.
He also noted that “it is hoped that there will be no further field stations beyond these already announced.
NASA had issued a contract on August 10 to the MIT Instrumentation Laboratory for the Apollo guidance system, and on November 20 was one week away from contracting for the Apollo command and service module, one element of the spacecraft needed for the lunar landing.
However, delays in selecting the design of launch vehicle for the lunar mission had meant that its procurement had had to wait.
There were two reasons for the delay in selecting the launch vehicle for the lunar mission.
One was that the “national space plan” called for in the May 8 Webb-McNamara memorandum had anticipated a collaborative NASA-DOD effort to define a family of launch vehicles that could meet both agencies’ requirements and advance the development of both liquid fuel and solid fuel propulsion systems.
The group started work in July 1961, and by the fall had become bogged down in very detailed studies and deadlocked over the relative roles of liquid-fueled and solid-fueled boosters in the lunar landing program.
Rather than come up with an integrated plan, the group had suggested a new Air Force-developed launch vehicle, called Titan HI, with lift capabilities closely resembling the Saturn 1] vehicle that NASA was developing.
Indeed, this uncertainty would continue well into 1962 and become a focus of NASA-White House controversy.
Beginning on May 2, even before a final decision on whether to approve a lunar landing effort had been made, there were a series of NASA studies examining alternatives for accomplishing the lunar mission.
The first of these studies took as its starting point a “direct ascent” approach, in which the spacecraft for the lunar mission would be launched by a giant booster with eight F-1 engines in its first stage.
The spacecraft would fly directly to the Moon and land intact on the lunar surface.
A portion of the spacecraft would then take off from the Moon after the astronauts had completed their exploration, and return directly to Earth.
This approach meant designing a seventy-five-ton spacecraft, almost forty times the weight of the Mercury capsule, that would “back down” to a lunar landing, using rocket firings to slow the craft to landing speed; during the landing, the astronauts would be on their backs at the other end of the craft, more than eighty feet above the surface and with no or very limited direct visibility of the landing site.
The direct ascent approach also required that the fuel for the return journey and the heat shield needed for reentry into the Earth’s atmosphere, both of which were heavy, would have to be carried to and then launched from the lunar surface.
All of this would require a large and heavy spacecraft, and thus a very powerful booster NASA called Nova to send it to the Moon in a single launch.
The more NASA, and especially von Braun and his team at Huntsville, thought about the technological leap required to develop the gigantic Nova vehicle, the more it looked for alternatives to making such a jump.
This approach would allow the lunar spacecraft and the rocket stage needed to send it toward the Moon to be divided into two or more pieces, each piece launched separately.
One or more rendezvous in Earth orbit would then be needed to assemble the pieces into a single spacecraft.
An alternative EOR approach was to send the complete spacecraft and its Earth departure stage fueled with light liquid hydrogen into Earth orbit with one launch.
Then a second launch would carry into orbit the comparatively heavy liquid oxygen used as the oxidizer for burning the hydrogen fuel; the oxygen would then be transferred to the lunarbound rocket stage.
Using an EOR approach meant that a launch vehicle significantly smaller than the Nova could be developed for the lunar mission.
However, it did not solve the problem of how to land a single large spacecraft on the lunar surface.
Several versions of a smaller launch vehicle were proposed during the 1961 studies.
The Saturn C-2 that had been part of NASA’s plans in the spring was soon abandoned, and an “Advanced Saturn” with several powerful F-1 engines in its first stage became the focus of attention; the issue was how many of the large engines to use.
The two-engine version became known as the Saturn C-3 and the four-engine version the C-4.
Rosen reported that “to exploit the possibility of accomplishing the first lunar landing by rendezvous,” NASA should develop an “intermediate vehicle” that had five F-] engines in the first stage, four or five J-2 engines in its second stage, and one J-2 in its third stage.
The four-engine Saturn C-4 had a “hole” in the center of its four first-stage F-1 engines; adding a fifth F-1 would thus be relatively straightforward.
Adding a fifth engine would increase first stage thrust at liftoff to 7. million pounds.
The recommendation for a five-engine first stage for the launch vehicle, soon called the Advanced Saturn C-5 and ultimately the Saturn V, was quickly accepted by the NASA leadership.
Wiesner noted in his November 20 memorandum that the NASA budget being discussed for Fiscal Year 1963 was 50 percent greater than had been projected just six months earlier.
Indeed, the budget projections accompanying the accelerated space effort that President Kennedy had approved in May had projected a NASA budget of $3.029 billion for FY1963.
However, when NASA submitted its FY1963 request to the BOB several months later, that total had grown to $4.238 billion, which was a 40 percent increase over the May estimate.
In his review of the situation for the president, Bell said that even in May the BOB had thought that NASA’s projections for future budgets “appeared to us to be understated,” and that BOB had anticipated a $3. billion budget request for FY1963, although it had not used that number in any official documents.
Bell estimated that the NASA budget would continue to increase, reaching $4. billion in FY1964, $5. billion in FY 1965, and $5. billion in FY1966.
This meant that at the end of 1961 the accelerated space effort was projected to cost at least $2. billion more than had been estimated just six months earlier.
Space Programs Reviewed The rapidly increasing costs of the United States space program, and particularly its civilian component, continued to trouble President Kennedy after he sent his $3.787 billion Fiscal Year 1963 request for NASA to the Congress in early 1962.
There was no parallel single national security space budget request; Department of Defense and intelligence space programs were incorporated into the general DOD budget, rather than receiving separate budget treatment.
However, increasing DOD expenditures for space were also of concern to the president.
To obtain a total overview of the United States space program, Kennedy asked the BOB in June 1962 to carry out a comprehensive review of all United States space efforts.
Webb also reported that the president “had expressed some concern” about the geographical distribution of NASA funding; Kennedy noted that he had received complaints from states such as “Michigan, Pennsylvania, and the eastern states” that NASA was focusing its expenditures on California, Florida, Mississippi, and Louisiana.
To provide the White House with its own channel of information on NASA procurement actions, Kenneth O’Donnell sent Richard Callaghan, a Kennedy loyalist and congressional staffer, to NASA as a special assistant to Webb.
He told Kennedy that during 1961, states west of the Mississippi River received 56 percent of NASA prime contracts; states east of the Mississippi, 44 percent.
However, Webb continued, when both prime contracts and first-tier subcontracts by the prime contractors were considered, 53 percent of the work was in the East and 47 percent in the West.
Webb also noted that in the second half of 1961 Massachusetts had received 64 percent more in NASA funding than it had received in the first half of the year.
Special Space Review Beginning in late June 1962, the BOB began a review that was intended to lay out in a consistent format the five-year space programs of the Department of Defense, NASA, the Atomic Energy Commission, and, although it could not be acknowledged at the time, the National Reconnaissance Office, the organization developing and operating United States reconnaissance satellites, the very existence of which was highly classified.
It is not clear whether it was the president himself who was raising this question; given his interest just a few months later to push for an earlier date for the first lunar landing attempt, this seems unlikely.
More probable was that his budget, technology, and policy advisers, who were in general more skeptical of the value of Apollo than was the president, were making sure that Kennedy recognized the full implications of his space commitment.
In addition, there were short-term concerns in mid-1962 about a possible recession, talk of a temporary tax cut, and a desire to avoid an unbalanced federal budget; this meant that Kennedy was paying particular attention to controlling rapid increases in spending in discretionary areas such as space and defense.
These were put into two loose-leaf binders and, because intelligence satellite programs were included, classified at such a high level that only relatively few people inside the government were cleared to possess the binders.
The report examined the short-term budget impacts of slipping the target date for the first landing attempt until late 1968.
As the BOB was finishing its review, James Webb was once again reminded of President Kennedy’s concern about the rising costs of the NASA program.
On August 15 Kennedy sent a brief memorandum to Webb, asking him about press reports that the cost of the new Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston had increased from $60 million to $123 million.
Webb said that “the figures quoted are substantially correct; the implications are not,” and provided a lengthy explanation of the reason for the higher cost figure.
In a note to budget director Bell, the president said that it seemed to him that the cost of the new center was “excessive,” and the cost increase “does raise the question of funding of the entire program.
A year had passed since the second Soviet orbital flight of cosmonaut Gherman Titov on August 6, 1961.
That flight had had its share of troubles; in particular, Titov, unlike Yuri Gagarin, had experienced significant motion sickness during his seventeen-orbit, day-long flight; in contrast, Gagarin had completed his one orbit with no ill effects.
On August 11, 1962, the Soviet Union launched its third human space flight and then, on the next day, much to the surprise of Western observers, launched a fourth human mission.
The two Soviet spacecraft passed close to one another early in their joint mission; the two cosmonauts communicated using their on-board radios, and, according to at least some reports, saw each other’s spacecraft, but they did not have the maneuvering capabilities required for a rendezvous attempt.
Until the lack of that capability became evident to United States observers, there was concern that the Soviet Union had beaten the United States to another important milestone, the ability to carry out a space rendezvous.
His response suggested both his continuing commitment to catching up with the Soviet Union and his recognition of how expensive the space effort was becoming.
Q; Mr President, the Soviet Union’s latest exploit, the launching of two men within 24 hours, seems to have caused a good deal of pessimism in the United States.
It’s a tremendous job to build a booster of the size that the Soviet Union is talking about, and also have it much larger size, which we are presently engaged in the Saturn program.
But I believe that before the end of this decade is out, the United States will be ahead.
And it’s going to take us quite a while to catch up with a very advanced program which the Soviets are directing and there’s no indication the Soviets are going to quit.
We increased after I took office, after 4 months, we increased the budget for space by 50 percent over that of my predecessor.
The fact of the matter is that this year we submitted a space budget which was greater than the combined eight space budgets of the previous eight years.
But we might as well recognize that we’re behind now and we’re going to be for a while.
By contrast, the United States launch of its Mariner II spacecraft to Venus on August 27 went well; for the first time, the United States was on its way to another planet, and the White House was anxious to contrast the United States success with the Soviet failure.
On August 31, Kaysen sent a memorandum to White House press secretary Pierre Salinger discussing how best to announce this and prior Soviet failures without revealing the classified means through which the information had been acquired.
On September 5, Lieutenant General Marshall Carter, acting director of the CIA, provided to President Kennedy a “fact sheet” on six Soviet failures of probes to Venus or Mars.
The White House decided to accept this risk, and on September 5 James Webb sent a letter to the chairmen of the Senate and House Space Committees detailing the Soviet failures; the letter was intended to be leaked to the media, and the press soon picked up the story.
This presented a problem with respect to NASA’s ability to manage its contracts with industry and academia, since NASA calculated that 40 percent of the cost of launch vehicles was related to their electronic components; for spacecraft, the cost was 50 to 70 percent.
In addition, experience with early robotic spacecraft suggested that there were significant differences in the reliability requirements for electronic components in space as compared to on Earth.
Most NASA employees at the time were more interested in the structural and propulsion aspects of spacecraft and launch vehicle design and development than their electronic aspects.
Albert Kelly, director of electronics and control in NASA’s Office of Advanced Research and Technology, spent the next ten months preparing a detailed report on the issue; the November 1962 report concluded that the best approach to gaining the needed competence was to create a new NASA laboratory, or “field center,” dedicated to managing NASA’s electronics research.
The NASA leadership had in fact several months earlier reached the same conclusion; the issue then became where to locate the new center.
President Kennedy was of course from Massachusetts, and thus such a decision could appear as if it had been influenced by his desire to bring some of the benefits of the space buildup to his home state.
Kennedy also “stated that he was prepared to accept it in his budget” and “agreed that it should not be introduced into public discussion until the budget was to go to Congress” in early 1963, after the Senate election.
To avoid the appearance of Kennedy’s political influence on the decision, Webb buried the initial funding for the new center in the NASA budget request submitted to the BOB in September 1962; this was not difficult to do, since the initial request of $5 million was very small compared to the overall $6. billion NASA budget request.
As a former director of the BOB, Webb was well versed in ways to manipulate the normal process of BOB review.
Before meeting with budget director Bell on December 13 to finalize the NASA FY1964 budget request, Webb asked Kenneth O’Donnell to check with the president to make sure that Kennedy still agreed with NASA’s decision to develop the new center.
There was no leak to the press of this decision until the budget became public with its submission to the Congress in mid-January 1963.
The Congress, and particularly NASA’s House of Representatives oversight committee, the Committee on Science and Astronautics, was not pleased to learn that NASA had made this decision without prior consultation with the committee.
Over the next several years, the committee and NASA remained at loggerheads over whether NASA could proceed with its plans.
There was also opposition from some Senate members who believed that the areas they represented should have been able to compete for the new NASA center.
At one point, President Kennedy got personally involved, meeting on June 11, 1963, with Webb and Representative Joseph Karth , who thought that the center was not really needed, but if NASA went ahead with its plans to create it, the new center could very well be located in his state.
Kennedy was “very gracious,” but he was unable to change Karth’s mind regarding the issue.
It was not until 1966 that the Congressional opposition died down, even though the Electronics Research Center had become operational in 1965.
This was too late for the center to have much of an impact on the Apollo program.
The Electronics Research Center was to have a short lifetime; NASA announced in December 1969 that as part of its post-Apollo retrenchment, it had decided to close the facility.
Conclusion While Jerome Wiesner at the end of 1961 might have been concerned by what appeared to be too slow a pace in NASA’s implementation of the lunar landing decision, to those at NASA involved in the effort the rate of activity during 1961 and 1962 seemed extremely rapid.
In the weeks following Wiesner’s November 20, 1961, memorandum, NASA chose the contractors for the Apollo spacecraft and the first and third stages of the Saturn V vehicle.
By the start of 1962, construction had begun at all the new facilities that would be required for Apollo.
A major NASA reorganization to prepare the space agency for managing Apollo was announced on November 1, 1961; among the changes made was the creation of a separate Office of Manned Space Flight as one of the major program units at NASA headquarters.
Chosen as its head, with the title associate administrator for manned space flight, was a dynamic young executive from RCA named Brainerd Holmes.
Webb and Seamans had thought briefly about asking Wernher von Braun to become the human space flight manager, but that possibility disappeared when Hugh Dryden said that he would retire if it became reality.
On April 11, 1962, President Kennedy assigned to Project Apollo the highest national priority, designated DX; this gave the undertaking first call (together with some defense and a few other space efforts) on whatever human and physical resources were needed for its accomplishment.
It was thus clear by mid-1962 that the mobilization of the resources needed to accomplish a lunar landing was well underway.
In the fifteen months following his May 25 speech, the realism of that warning became increasingly evident; by September 1962, President Kennedy concluded that it was time for him to take a first-hand look at the unfolding effort.
Chapter 9 “| Am Not That Interested in Space” One critical decision with respect to the lunar landing project still remained unsettled as President Kennedy prepared in September 1962 to make an inspection tour of the facilities being developed for the accelerated space effort.
That decision was the best approach to getting astronauts to the lunar surface.
NASA in July 1962 had selected as its preferred approach rendezvous in lunar orbit, a way to the Moon that had emerged in its consideration only at the very end of 1961.
Kennedy’s science adviser Wiesner and his staff did not agree with this choice, and were actively pressuring NASA to reverse it in favor of an Earth orbit rendezvous approach.
As he toured the NASA facilities, Kennedy, as was his style, asked many questions, and learned that some within NASA believed that the first landing on the Moon could come as much as a year sooner than the late 1967 date that was at that point NASA’s target.
To advance the landing date by that many months would require requesting from Congress an extra short-term supplement to the NASA budget, and there was considerable debate during October and November 1962 about the wisdom of that action.
Adding more money to the human space flight budget was strongly advocated by associate administrator for manned space flight Brainerd Holmes, but equally strongly resisted by NASA administrator James Webb.
Their disagreement escalated into tensions that culminated in Holmes leaving NASA in mid-1963.
The debate over extra money for NASA led to a November 21 White House meeting in which President Kennedy and Webb disagreed about the priority of the lunar landing program compared to other NASA activities.
Even pursuing that path required a NASA Fiscal Year 1964 budget request of $5.712 billion, an increase of 55 percent over the NASA FY1963 budget of $3.674 billion but almost a half billion dollars less than what NASA had requested in September 1962.
The continuing exponential increase in NASA funding came at a time when Kennedy and his White House advisers were striving to limit overall budget growth, even as the financial demands of Apollo approached 4 percent of the total federal budget.
How Best to Go to the Moon The first stop on President Kennedy’s two-day tour to inspect the facilities being developed for Apollo was the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama.
This approach had emerged in the first half of 1962 as NASA’s preferred approach to getting to the Moon, but the White House Office of Science and Technology and its external advisers on the President’s Science Advisory Committee were at the time of JFK’s trip embroiled in a dispute with NASA over the wisdom of that choice.
As von Braun described the LOR approach, Kennedy interrupted, saying that “I understand that Dr.
Wiesner doesn’t agree with this,” and calling his science adviser to join the discussion.
Key to the LOR concept was separating the functions of the lunar landing mission between two spacecraft, rather than the single heavy spacecraft contemplated in both the direct ascent and the Earth orbit rendezvous approach to the lunar landing.
After the crew and lunar samples were transferred to the CSM, the LEM could then be discarded.
Identifiable in the image, in addition to President Kennedy are center director Wernher von Braun, NASA administrator James Webb, Vice President Lyndon Johnson, Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, presidential science adviser Jerome Wiesner, and director of defense research and engineering Harold Brown.
NASA associate administrator Robert Seamans, Jr. is partially visible behind von Braun.
Most of those in this photograph participated in a brief but spirited debate about the wisdom of the lunar-orbit rendezvous approach to the lunar landing mission (NASA photograph). heavy fuel and even heavier heat shield required for the return to Earth, it could be much lighter than a spacecraft that would both land on the Moon and also have to carry the crew back to Earth.
This weight reduction resulting from this separation of functions made it possible to launch the whole lunar landing mission with one Saturn V booster, rather than the two that would be required by the Earth orbit rendezvous approach.
The LOR concept had been brought to Seamans’s attention in an impassioned nine-page November 15, 1961, letter from John Houbolt, an engineer at NASA’s Langley Research Center, who had bypassed several layers of the NASA chain of command in sending the letter.
In anticipation of the announcement, NASA on July 3 sent a summary of its comparison of the various options to science adviser Wiesner.
This was especially the case since there had been no experience with rendezvous, and Project Gemini, the just-initiated effort to gain that experience, was at that time not scheduled to have its first flight until late 1963.
Given the end of the decade deadline, the choice of mission approach would have to be made before the feasibility of its key element, rendezvous, had been demonstrated.
NASA’s engineering analyses showed that LOR was safer than EOR, but Wiesner and his staff did not trust those analyses.
The principal staff person supporting Wiesner on space issues was Nicholas Golovin, who had been forced to resign his position at NASA the preceding fall and left the space agency with “bitter gall” in his throat, only to be quickly hired by Wiesner as his top staff person for space issues.
Golovin was tenacious in his criticism of NASA’s choice of LOR during 1962 and became a particular irritant to the space agency as NASA attempted to move forward.
Wiesner was also hearing from the space vehicle panel of PSAC that it had serious reservations about the LOR choice.
The panel had followed NASA’s planning for the lunar mission throughout the year.
Members of the panel together with Wiesner met with the NASA leadership on July 6 to outline their concerns.
As a result of this meeting, NASA was forced to change its message for the July 11 press conference to saying that the LOR choice was tentative and subject to further study and review.
Jerome Wiesner transmitted the PSAC views as an attachment to a July 17 letter to James Webb; in that letter Wiesner also set forth his own views.
The pressure resulting from President Kennedy’s “end of the decade” deadline was being felt within NASA, and continued criticism from the White House science office was a barrier to NASA’s moving ahead with its plans.
Wiesner and his assistant Golovin continued to intervene in NASA’s decision process during July and August, and on September 5, a few days before the president was to visit various NASA installations, Wiesner once again wrote Webb reiterating his concerns regarding the LOR choice.
This is where the situation stood as President Kennedy visited Huntsville and was party to the Wiesner-NASA debate.
As Kennedy flew to Cape Canaveral, the next stop in his tour, he was asked what the likely outcome of the controversy would be.
NASA finally assembled all of its analyses into a document that it hoped would be a final comparison of the approaches to carrying out the lunar landing mission and sent it to Wiesner on October 24.
The NASA report was accompanied by a “peevish” letter from Webb to Wiesner.
As Webb wrote his October 24 letter, President Kennedy was totally involved with dealing with the problem of Soviet missiles in Cuba, and most certainly was not going to take time to referee the NASA dispute with his science adviser.
Webb and Wiesner talked by telephone on October 29, the Monday after the weekend during which the Cuban missile crisis was resolved.
Wiesner said that his message to the president would not be to overrule any decision NASA might reach, but rather to be sure that a full and honest assessment had been made of all the options; Wiesner still questioned whether this was the case.
Webb told Wiesner he “thought it better not to go to a formal hearing or involve the President personally in the decision,” but Wiesner thought that “involving the President couldn’t be avoided” because someone was sure to ask Kennedy whether the decision was made after the best possible analysis.
On November 2, Wiesner and three PSAC members met with Webb and his senior staff to go over once again the White House objections to LOR; Wiesner recommended that NASA select instead a new alternative, a two-person flight using the direct ascent approach that was being strongly advocated by the builder of the Apollo command and service module, North American Aviation.
Choosing this approach would mean that North American would manufacture spacecraft that would land on the Moon, not just the ship that would ferry astronauts from the Earth to lunar orbit and back.
Again NASA refused to alter its position that LOR was the preferred approach.
By this time, Webb was aware of Kennedy’s desire to accomplish the initial lunar landing at the earliest possible date in order to give maximum assurance of accomplishing the landing before the Soviet Union did.
With NASA’s November 7 announcement and Webb’s letter to Kennedy, NASA now indeed had all the pieces in place to “drive forward vigorously” on Project Apollo.
Kennedy’s approach with respect to the LOR decision was again typical of his management style as president.
He welcomed a wide variety of views being expressed while decisions were being made, but seldom if ever forced on an operating agency of the executive branch a course of action with which its leadership disagreed.
If Kennedy felt that a wrong policy was being pursued, he was more likely to remove the agency head than insist on his carrying out a White House—imposed perspective.
At Huntsville, he saw one of the very large F-1 engines that would be used to power the Moon rocket, and witnessed a test firing of the engines of the first stage of the Saturn 1 booster that generated 1. million pounds of thrust.
At the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station and the NASA Launch Operations Center on Merritt Island in Florida, he saw the launch pad from which two Saturn 1 boosters had already been successfully launched, and was briefed on the Gemini and Apollo programs.
Kennedy was surprised to discover that he and Seamans had both been members of the Class of 1940 at Harvard.
Like many other of the president’s speeches, various government agencies had suggested to the White House what Kennedy might say; in this case, material had been submitted to JFK’s top speechwriter Theodore Sorensen from at least NASA, BOB, the State Department, and by Sorensen’s brother Tom at the United States Information Agency.
Even so, most of Kennedy’s speeches as president, including this memorable space address, were group products.
Well, space is there, and we’re going to climb it, and the moon and planets are there, and new hopes for knowledge and peace are there.
Louis to visit the plant of the McDonnell Aircraft Corporation, where the Mercury and Gemini spacecraft were developed.
At some point during his tour of NASA’s installations, President Kennedy asked NASA administrator James Webb whether it was possible to get to the Moon earlier than the late 1967 target date that NASA was using in its planning.
This question was most likely prompted by Kennedy’s conversation with manned space flight head Brainerd Holmes, whom Kennedy met for the first time during the Huntsville stop on the tour.
Holmes had come to NASA in October 1961, and a year later was becoming impatient with the pace of the Apollo program and James Webb’s resistance to Holmes’s suggestion that it might be accelerated.
Time magazine featured Holmes on the cover of its August 10, 1962, issue; in the issue’s six-page story “Reaching for the Moon,” Holmes was frequently mentioned, Webb not at all.
On October 29, Webb wrote to Kennedy, responding to the president’s question of what it would take to move the target date for the first lunar landing to 1966.
By this time, NASA had sent BOB a request for a $6. billion budget for FY1964; this represented a 68 percent increase over the agency’s FY1963 budget.
NASA also estimated that the first lunar landing might be targeted six months earlier if there was an immediate $427 million supplement to the FY1963 NASA budget.
To target the first landing in late 1966, a year earlier than then planned, NASA planning would have to be drastically revised and a supplementary $900 million would have to be provided in FY1963; in addition, the NASA budget for FY1964 would have to increase to $7. billion.
Holmes at some point in this period had formally asked Seamans to approve a $440 million FY1963 budget supplement, saying that such an increase would allow the first lunar landing attempt to come in late 1966.
Seamans “couldn’t believe” Holmes’s claim that the program could be accelerated by twelve months with such a relatively modest budget increase.
He denied Holmes’s request; Holmes then asked for a meeting with Webb and Dryden; both also gave him a negative response.
Wiesner did so on November 16; only Lamont was able to make the meeting because Sidey’s plane was grounded.
He quickly called a cabinet room meeting to find out for himself what was going on.
The meeting took place on November 21; it was also an occasion to review NASA’s budget proposal for Fiscal Year 1964.
The BOB had not yet forwarded to the president Webb’s October 29 letter about the budgetary implications of accelerating the target date for the first lunar landing.
Like many communications to the president from government agencies, this letter had been referred to one of the staff agencies of the executive office, in this case BOB, for review and a decision of whether it needed direct presidential attention.
Kennedy may well have wondered why he had not heard from Webb after asking him about this possibility on his September tour, and that could have added to his concern about the accuracy of the Time article.
Of course, Kennedy had also been immersed with the Cuban missile crisis and the midterm congressional elections in the interim.
Budget director Bell prepared a November 13 memorandum on the NASA budget situation that incorporated the schedule and budget estimates in Webb’s October letter; this memorandum was distributed to all participants in the meeting.
NASA’s budget request for FY1964 was $6. billion, including $4. billion for the lunar landing program and $1. billion for all other NASA activities.
To keep the program on an “optimum” schedule aiming at a mid-1967 landing, Bell told the president, would require a supplementary appropriation of over $400 million in 1963 and about $550 million above the estimates for FY1964 made three months earlier.
NASA’s recommended program aiming at a late 1967 landing would not require a FY1963 supplement, but would require the full $4. billion funding in FY1964.
This may have been one of the first warnings to President Kennedy that the race to the Moon he thought the United States was running may not have been a race at all.
But as the November 21 meeting unfolded, it became clear that Kennedy was still in a race mentality.
But this is important for political reasons, international political reasons.
If we get second to the Moon, it’s nice, but it’s like being second any time.
So if we’re second by six months because we didn’t give it the kind of priority , then of course that would be very serious.
Obviously you wouldn’t put it on that priority except for the defense implications.
And the second point is the fact that the Soviet Union has made this a test of the system.
Everything we do ought really to be tied to getting on the Moon ahead of the Russians.
But I do think we ought to get it, you know, really clear that the policy ought to be that this is the top priority program of the agency, and one of the two things, except for defense, the top priority of the United States government.
I think it’s good, I think we ought to know about it, we’re ready to spend reasonable amounts of money.
But we’re talking about these fantastic expenditures which wreck our budget and all these other domestic programs and the only justification for it in my opinion to do it in this time or fashion is because we hope to beat them and demonstrate that starting behind, as we did by a couple of years, by God, we passed them.
In the course of the November 21 meeting, Brainerd Holmes apologized for letting his differences with James Webb get into the press.
Just before he left the meeting, President Kennedy requested a letter from NASA stating clearly the agency’s position.
First, Dryden drafted a relatively brief reply; then Seamans prepared a more extensive response.
He took his draft to James Webb, who had stayed home from work with a severe migraine headache.
Seamans and Webb revised the letter to their and Dryden’s satisfaction; it was sent to President Kennedy on November 30.
At that point, final decisions on the NASA FY1964 budget had still not been made, and so the nine-page letter included a plea for approval of NASA’s $6. billion request.
Even with all that he had heard, President Kennedy did not easily give up on the idea that the lunar landing program could be accelerated.
Wiesner thought that funds in this amount might be transferred from the Department of Defense budget to pay for DOD involvement in NASA’s Project Gemini, the new NASA program to test out rendezvous activities in Earth orbit and to serve as a bridge between Mercury and Apollo.
Wiesner told the president that funds in that amount could be used to advance the date of the first Saturn V launch by some five months, and there was some chance that this acceleration could allow an earlier attempt at the landing.
Wiesner noted that “the date of the first lunar landing attempt can be accelerated only” if Saturn V availability were advanced.
Kennedy the same day sent the Wiesner memorandum with these suggestions to Vice President Johnson, asking for his views.
Kennedy had once again accepted the position of NASA administrator Webb on how best to go forward.
Indeed, BOB made reductions in both the lunar landing budget and the “other activities” portion of the NASA request.
The president in midJanuary 1963 sent a FY1964 budget proposal to the Congress requesting $5.712 billion for NASA, an almost half-billion dollar cut from what NASA had requested in September.
Although the increase was not what NASA had hoped for, it still reflected a 55 percent jump over NASA’s FY1963 appropriation.
Conclusion By the end of 1962, the White House appeared to have accepted the arguments set forth in the November 30 NASA letter arguing that the lunar landing program, though clearly a very high NASA priority, was in itself insuffi158 JOHN F KENNEDY AND THE RACE TO THE MOON cient to achieve the goal of American space preeminence—a clearly leading position in all areas of space activity.
During 1963, John Kennedy was no longer totally focused on how soon the United States could get to the Moon; he seemed in fact to have accepted NASA’s argument that preeminence in all areas of space activity was the more appropriate goal.
In addition, at least some of the president’s associates, and perhaps Kennedy himself, questioned whether getting to the Moon before the Soviet Union remained a compelling national objective.
John Kennedy had brought with him the idea that space might be a particularly promising arena for tension-reducing U.S.-Soviet cooperation as he entered the White House in January 1961, and it had never totally disappeared from his thinking.
In light of his soon-to-be-made decision to enter a space race in competition with the Soviet Union, it is worth noting that JFK’s initial priority on becoming president was to make space an area for U.S.-Soviet cooperation.
Kennedy came into the White House believing that science and technology could be used as tools to advance foreign policy interests and to reduce international tensions, and hoping that the habits of cooperation developed in sectors such as science and technology could spill over into areas more central to security interests.
Kennedy’s transition task force on space reinforced the view that space offered a promising area for cooperation.
The report of the Wiesner panel said that “our space activities, particularly...in the exploration of our solar system, offer exciting possibilities for international cooperation with all the nations of the world.
President Kennedy soon followed up the call in his inaugural address “to explore the stars together” with a more detailed and specific proposal.
Today this country is ahead in the science and technology of space, while the Soviet Union is ahead in the capacity to lift large vehicles into orbit.
Both nations would help themselves as well as other nations by removing these endeavors from the bitter and wasteful competition of the Cold War.
Even so, the notion that cooperation was a more desirable path than competition stayed with him, and the White House in late May 1961 made one more attempt to engage the Soviet Union in a cooperative mission to the Moon, even as Kennedy announced his decision to send Americans to the lunar surface.
Again in 1962, after the successful flight of John Glenn, the first American to orbit the Earth, Kennedy offered to Premier Nikita Khrushchev a range of cooperative possibilities, this time in areas other than lunar exploration.
Khrushchev agreed to discuss these possibilities, and in 1962 and 1963 there were NASA-Soviet Academy of Sciences discussions that reached agreement in principle to cooperate.
However, there was only modest substantive cooperative activity in subsequent months and years.
This chapter focuses on attempts during 1961 and 1962 to foster U.S.-Soviet cooperation in space, since they were of direct personal interest to President Kennedy.
In a reversal from the position taken during the Eisenhower administration, where the emphasis with respect to space cooperation was on developing international arrangements and controls, Kennedy believed that direct cooperation between the two Cold War rivals was likely to make a greater contribution to an overall reduction in bilateral and thus global tensions.
NASA from its inception did develop such relations, particularly with Canada and the countries of Western Europe, but those emerging relationships are not discussed here.
A 1959 Soviet-sponsored General Assembly resolution had called for setting up a United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and for convening a United Nations Conference on space matters.
After several weeks of discussion within the White House on how best to follow up the president’s speech initiatives, McGeorge Bundy replied to Secretary Rusk on February 28.
To address this situation, the White House set up a “Task Force on International Cooperation in Space” in early February.
The group was composed of both non-governmental people, particularly members of and consultants to the President’s Science Advisory Committee , and officials from NASA, the Department of State, and the White House science office.
The group was chaired by Bruno Rossi, a professor of physics at MIT, who had been a member of the Wiesner transition panel on outer space.
It came up with twenty-two specific proposals for U.S.-Soviet space cooperation, ranging from projects involving only data exchanges or coordination of separate projects, to intimate cooperation in ambitious projects for the human exploration of the Moon and the robotic exploration of the planets, particularly Mars.
At the first meeting on February 17, one of the members of the task force, Richard Porter of General Electric, submitted a memorandum suggesting a U.S.-Soviet “Rendezvous on the Moon” project to establish an international base on the surface of the Moon, along the lines of scientific bases in the Antarctic.
Porter suggested that “if agreement could be reached on this major project between the United States and the USSR, all other bilateral and multilateral cooperative projects involving the USSR would become feasible and operative”; the group found this proposal intriguing.
On March 8, Rusk met with new NASA administrator Webb and deputy administrator Dryden.
Rusk in reply wondered “what the purpose was of activities in space on this major scale.
The Rossi task force submitted its final report to Wiesner on March 20.
An early start on U.S.-Soviet space cooperation was not in the cards, however.
Even as the task force began its work, President Kennedy was receiving initial indications that the Soviet Union was unlikely to be receptive to the kind of initiatives he had in mind.
On February 13, he congratulated Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev on the launching of a Soviet scientific probe to Venus.
Even so, as he met with new NASA administrator James Webb on March 22, the president stressed to Webb “his desire that we try to work out as many ideas as possible for utilization in the proposed conference with the Russians [a hoped-for Kennedy-Khrushchev summit meeting] for international cooperation.
As President Kennedy and his associates discussed how best to react to this newest Soviet achievement in space, notions of a cooperative initiative took a back seat.
But the preference for cooperation was never far from Kennedy’s mind, and even as he decided that the United States should enter a space race, he at the same time made one more attempt to engage the Soviet Union in space cooperation.
On May 16, President Kennedy received a letter from Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev formally accepting Kennedy’s February suggestion that he and Kennedy meet.
Khrushchev suggested that the meeting take place in Vienna in early June.
This was to be the first (and what turned out to be the only) time the two superpower leaders met face-to-face.
This late acceptance of Kennedy’s suggestion for such a meeting came after several rounds of communications between Moscow and Washington.
In preparing for the meeting with Khrushchev, the idea of proposing U.S.-USSR space cooperation was resurrected, even as planning for setting the goal ofa lunar landing before the Soviets was in its final stages.
One of these papers was a memorandum for the president from the Department of State dated May 12 summarizing the work that had been carried out in the FebruaryApril time period; the other was the April 13 report on possible cooperative initiatives.
However, “the president did have in mind certain concrete possibilities for improving relations should the opportunity for proposing them arise.
Beginning in the aftermath of the Bay of Pigs crisis, the president had established a secret, back-channel line of communication with the Soviet leadership.
His brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, developed a relationship with Georgi Bolshakov, a mid-level agent of the intelligence service of the Soviet Army, the GRU, who was working under the cover of being a Soviet reporter in Washington.
In the weeks before the summit, Robert Kennedy and Bolshakov met privately several times.
The attorney general used the GRU agent to communicate President Kennedy’s thinking on what might be accomplished at a summit meeting directly to the Kremlin, and to receive back messages from the Soviet leadership, particularly with respect to the possibility of a summit agreement on a nuclear test ban as a step toward arms control.
There was no response to this suggestion, and the president proceeded with announcing the lunar landing project in his address to Congress on May 25.
Kennedy and Khrushchev Meet Space was one of four areas of scientific cooperation initially identified for possible discussion at the June 3-4 Vienna summit; the others were nuclear science, earth science, and life science.
This memorandum listed only four potential cooperative projects, two in space and two in nuclear science.
The Soviet leader insisted that he would sign a peace treaty with the German Democratic Republic by the end of the year, and that the new East German government would then have the right to cut off United States access to Berlin.
Kennedy responded that this was unacceptable, and that if necessary the United States would use force to assure its access.
The only opportunities for more relaxed conversation came at two luncheons for the United States and Soviet delegations.
At the June 3 lunch hosted by President Kennedy, the talk turned to the flight of Yuri Gagarin and then to the possibility of lainching a man to the Moon.
None of the other proposals for scientific cooperation prepared for Kennedy’s use were discussed.
To Kennedy’s suggestion that perhaps Soviet and United States lunar missions could be coordinated in their timing in order to save money, Khrushchev replied “that this might be possible but noted that so far there had been few practical uses of outer space launchings.
The reason for this overnight change of mind, even if he had been serious in his response on the preceding day, was apparently Khrushchev’s consultations with his advisers.
In addition, “the military men came out against this proposal—they wanted to protect their secrets.
In his memoirs, Nikita Khrushchev explains his unwillingness to cooperate in space as being due to the Soviet weakness in intercontinental ballistic missiles.
Thus, “they would have learned its limitations, and from a military standpoint, it did have serious limitations.
During the remainder of 1961, Cold War tensions were high and the Berlin Wall was erected; the outlook for any significant space cooperation between the United States and the Soviet Union was correspondingly bleak.
President Kennedy’s proposal to the Congress and the nation that the United States embark on an extremely ambitious space effort, with Project Apollo as its centerpiece, received widespread political support.
The idea that the lunar landing program might be a joint U.S.-Soviet undertaking appeared stillborn, and other areas of potential space cooperation remained unexplored.
The Beginnings of U.S.-Soviet Space Cooperation On February 20, 1962, United States astronaut John Glenn completed the first United States orbital space flight.
Among the congratulations for the success received at the White House was a February 21 telegram from Nikita Khrushchev.
On the next day, Kennedy sent a replying telegram to Khrushchev, saying “I welcome your statement that our countries should cooperate in the exploration of space.
On February 27, Bundy sent out a revised memorandum, adding the executive secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council to the list of those being asked to develop the cooperative proposals.
However, “there is real political advantage for us if we can make clear that we are forthcoming and energetic in plans for peaceful cooperation with the Soviets in this sphere.
According to Eugene Skolnikoff, who at the time was on Wiesner’s White House staff handling international issues, NASA proposed to include only those projects that it judged both technically and politically desirable, and tended to emphasize information exchanges rather than more extensive and intimate cooperation.
This was consistent with the approach that had been developed several years earlier by Hugh Dryden and NASA’s international affairs head, Arnold Frutkin.
NASA argued that any cooperative undertaking must have meaningful substantive merit as a necessary condition, and not be undertaken primarily for political reasons.
Only through the intervention of the White House science office was a broader range of potential projects added to the draft list of proposals.
Jerome Wiesner was, together with President Kennedy, interested in cooperative undertakings that might produce substantial political benefits, even if their technical contributions were relatively minimal.
Wiesner and his staff were often at odds with NASA over the space agency’s conservative approach to space cooperation.
The letter reflected the State Department concern that the potential contributions of other nations be recognized, but it did not link any potential bilateral discussions to the upcoming initial meeting of the UN Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, which was scheduled for later in March, saying only that the results of the bilateral talks would be reported to the Committee.
Rusk told Kennedy, “if you approve this proposed letter, we would plan to deliver it promptly...without publicity for a sufficient period of time to allow for a serious Soviet reply.
It first listed some relatively modest proposals for specific areas of cooperation, including a joint weather satellite system, cooperation in space tracking, research on the Earth’s magnetic field, satellite communications experiments, and space medicine.
There was no mention of specific cooperation in human flights to the Moon or even in Earth orbit.
He reacted favorably to most of the United States proposals contained in Kennedy’s letter, and added to the list of areas for possible cooperation joint robotic exploration of the Moon and the planets, search and rescue of re-entered satellites, especially spacecraft with people on board, and various legal problems associated with space activity.
Although Dryden was a senior official of NASA and thus intimately knowledgeable about United States space policy and programs, Blagonravov as a member of the Soviet Academy of Sciences was several steps removed from a similar position of influence and knowledge in the Soviet Union.
The talks identified several areas of mutual interest for further negotiations, and the delegations agreed to meet again in one or two months.
Both NASA administrator Webb and Space Council executive secretary Welsh agreed that such a step-by-step approach was preferable; Wiesner also thought that this would probably have to be the way to proceed, even though, reflecting the president’s priorities, he would have preferred more substantial cooperative engagements.
From May 30 to June 8, 1962, there was a second round of meetings, this time in Geneva, between a United States delegation, once again headed by Dryden, and a Soviet delegation, once again headed by Blagonravov.
Under secretary of state George Ball wrote the president on July 5 to inform him of the results of these discussions and to propose a future course of action.
In his cover memorandum obtaining the president’s concurrence, Bundy noted that “I know that you have been concerned lest Dryden make agreements that might come under political attack.
The three initial areas for cooperation were quite limited in comparison with both the hopes of early 1961 and President Kennedy’s June 1961 suggestion to Nikita Khrushchev of cooperation in going to the Moon.
This incremental approach, favored by NASA and the State Department, was not sufficient for President Kennedy.
As 1963 unfolded, he once again sought Soviet cooperation in going to the Moon.
Kennedy’s suggestion to Nikita Khrushchev at the June 1961 Vienna summit that the United States and the Soviet Union cooperate in flights to the Moon was made privately, and was not subsequently widely reported.
The 1962 discussions on space cooperation were carried out on a low-key basis, with their results being made public only after agreement had been reached.
In contrast, President Kennedy’s next cooperative initiative came in a most public fashion.
Kennedy’s proposal came as a major surprise to all but a few people who had been involved in preparing his United Nations speech or had been advised by the president of his intent.
The decision to include the proposal in the president’s speech was made just a day or two before September 20, although Kennedy had been mulling the idea for some time.
The offer was the personal initiative of the president and a few of his closest advisers.
Responsible for drafting the UN address were presidential assistant Arthur Schlesinger, Jr. and State Department official Richard Gardner.
Between the September 20 speech and his assassination two months later, President Kennedy continued to hope for a positive response to his proposal and, when it seemed to come in early November, to push NASA to come up with ways of turning the proposal into reality.
The second was to prevent the field to be occupied to the Russians to the exclusion of the United States.
And the third was to make certain that American scientific prestige and American scientific effort were at the top.
Those three goals all would have been assured in a space effort which culminated in our beating the Russians to the moon.
All three of them would have been endangered had the Russians continued to outpace us in their space effort and beat us to the moon.
But I believe all three of those goals would also have been assured by a joint Soviet-American venture to the moon.
The difficulty was that in 1961, although the President favored the joint effort, we had comparatively few chips to offer.
There was a very real chance we were even with the Soviets in this effort.
He first tried to once again engage Nikita Khrushchev in discussions on a test ban treaty, but progress toward that objective was slow.
Kennedy, they suggest, “was really interested only if the Russians should prove ready to cooperate in a manner and ona scale that would involve meaningful movement toward a genuine rapprochement between the two countries.
The President in mid-1963 was actively considering resurrecting the idea.
He certainly did not seem to think that he was “in pursuit of an illusion,” but rather pursuing a course of action that was in the United States interest.
An August 9 Central Intelligence Agency memorandum on “The New Phase of Soviet Policy” provided evidence that Kennedy’s strategy was well conceived.
By mid-1963 there was increasing criticism of the lunar landing program from both sides of the political spectrum.
Sorensen replied that Kennedy “was understandably reluctant to continue that rate of increase.
One issue as Kennedy considered resurrecting a cooperative proposal was whether the U.S.-USSR race to the Moon was real.
The White House in 1963 in fact did not know whether there was an ongoing Soviet effort to send people to the Moon.
It is believed that the Soviets intend to compete vigorously in the early exploration of the moon and that this effort will include manned flights, although probably not early manned landings.
It is not yet possible to settle with assurance whether the Soviets are engaged in a manned lunar landing program competitive with the United States.
Definitive indications of the Soviets being in such a race have not been found, but could be submerged to such an extent that they might exist without being so identified.
In December 1962, it was estimated that there was a better than even chance that the Soviets had a competitive manned lunar landing program though no firm conclusion could be reached.
A later review of pertinent material produced essentially the same judgment.
At present there is still no firm evidence of the existence of such a program, but because of the passage of time, it is estimated that a competitive program aimed at the 1968-1970 time period is somewhat less likely than before.
While design work on a large booster able to carry out a manned lunar mission was already underway, those developments were not yet known to USS. intelligence services.
There was a debate within the Soviet space system over both the wisdom of a lunar mission and the assignment of responsibility for such a mission, should it be initiated.
On July 17, 1963, there were press accounts that British scientist Sir Bernard Lovell, director of the Jodrell Bank Radio Observatory, who had just returned from a visit to the Soviet Union, was saying, “a month ago I believed, like everyone else in the West, that the US-Soviet Moon race was a real struggle.
He reported that Keldysh had informed him of “the rejection of the plans for the manned lunar landing” because of several uncertainties regarding the feasibility of such a mission.
Keldysh also said that “the manned project might be revived if progress in the next few years gave hope” that such an undertaking would indeed be feasible.
As noted earlier, the Soviet Academy of Sciences had limited involvement in, and knowledge of, the Soviet space program, and particularly its human spaceflight aspects, yet Keldysh’s statements were seen by the media and some politicians as authoritative.
President Kennedy was kept aware of the issues raised by Lovell’s letter.
The reality was that neither President Kennedy, nor NASA, nor anyone else in the United States government knew the true state of Soviet space efforts and internal debates as of September 1963.
Each participant in the decision process brought his own values and objectives to the deliberations.
JFK Still Interested Whether or not Kennedy had ever given up on the idea of such cooperation during the difficult days of 1961 and 1962, the changed situation in 1963 made him again interested in actively pursuing the idea.
As noted above, in his July 17 press conference, Kennedy for the first time had publicly stated his preference for a cooperative approach to lunar exploration.
Kohler referred to President Kennedy’s August 26 conversation with Dobrynin, and asked whether the Soviet government “had given consideration to the President’s broad, imaginative proposal for joint cooperation in outer space projects and if he would be prepared to discuss this subject” during his forthcoming visit to the United States to attend the United Nations General Assembly’s opening sessions.
Kennedy first asked Kohler for his views on the concept of a joint lunar mission.
But there is no doubt that the concept had been widely discussed by President Kennedy and others between July and September 1963.
Kennedy kept a previously scheduled September 18 appointment with NASA administrator James Webb to discuss a variety of space policy and budget issues.
In a memorandum to the president in advance of the meeting, national security adviser McGeorge Bundy reported that Webb had called him to say that there had been “more forthcoming noises about cooperation from Blagonravov in the UN” and that “Webb himself is quite open to an exploration of possible cooperation with the Soviets” in the lunar landing effort.
By the time he met with Webb on September 18, Kennedy had all but finally decided to proceed with the cooperative proposal.
Webb’s fear was that damage might be done the United States program without any real prospect of achieving anything insofar as the Russians were concerned.
Webb also felt that there had not been sufficient consultation within the administration and with congressional leaders.
Indeed, given the last minute insertion of the cooperative proposal into the speech, no one in the Congress had been consulted.
The cooperative proposal was incorporated in Theodore Sorensen’s final draft of Kennedy’s United Nations speech, prepared only on September 19.
The same day, Bundy telephoned James Webb and told him that the president had decided to go ahead with the proposal.
Kennedy’s September 20 address was intended to set out the role of the United Nations in his strategy of peace.
Such a pause, he suggested, could lead to the Soviet Union and the United States, together with their allies, finding additional areas of agreement.
Reactions to the Proposal Reactions to Kennedy’s proposal were quick to appear and mixed in character.
The trade publication Missiles and Rockets was most negative, rejecting “such a naive internationalist approach to the lunar project.
Congressional Criticism While some in Congress, such as Senator William Fulbright , chairman of the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, received the president’s proposal positively, many members questioned whether the Kennedy was intending to back away from the commitment to a United States lunar landing program for which they had been willing to approve exponential budget increases in 1961 and 1962.
Based on his September 18 conversation with the president, reducing his support for Apollo was not Webb’s understanding of the reason for Kennedy’s proposal; Webb took “Kennedy’s word on the basis of full faith and credit” that his reason for suggesting cooperation was related to broader strategic issues.
The belief that you have to build one success on top of another if the peace is to be won.
He had scored one important international success with the test-ban treaty.
Thomas, who had used his position as chair of the House appropriations subcommittee in control of NASA funds to bring the Manned Spacecraft Center to the Houston area, wrote to President Kennedy on September 21.
This great national effort and this steadily stated readiness to cooperate with others are not in conflict.
We do not make our space effort with the narrow purpose of national aggrandizement.
We make it so that the United States may have a leading and honorable role in mankind’s peaceful conquest of space.
It is this great effort which permits us now to offer increased cooperation with no suspicion anywhere that we speak from weakness.
And in the same way, our readiness to cooperate with others enlarges the international meaning of our own peaceful American program in space.
In my judgment, then, our renewed and extended purpose of cooperation, so far from offering any excuse for slackening or weakness in our space effort, is one reason more for moving ahead with the great program to which we have been committed as a country for more than two years.
If cooperation is possible, we mean to cooperate, and we shall do so from a position made strong and solid by our national effort in space.
If cooperation is not possible—and as realists we must plan for this contingency too—then the same strong national effort will serve all free men’s interest in space, and protect us also against possible hazards to our national security.
No Soviet Response There was no immediate response to the president’s proposal from Nikita Khrushchev or any other official Soviet source.
As the White House waited for a Soviet reply, a report from a new source appeared that seemed to counter the idea that the Soviet Union had abandoned or postponed its lunar landing program.
The Washington Post on October 8 reported that Leonid Sedov, characterized as the “father of the Sputnik,” had said that it would be two or three years “at least” before an initial Soviet lunar landing attempt.
I have a report to the effect that the Americans want to land a man on the moon by 1970.
We do not want to compete with the sending of men to the moon without careful preparation.
There were a number of interpretations of Khrushchev’s remarks within the United States intelligence community.
The United States lunar landing decision has also “contributed in a non-belligerent way to imposing major strains on the Soviet economy and their ability to carry out expansionist objectives.
In the first weeks of November 1963 there was seemingly a real opportunity to act on President Kennedy’s initiative to turn the lunar landing program into a cooperative enterprise.
In the weeks following the president’s United Nations speech, the lack of a Soviet response had left United States officials somewhat uncertain on how to proceed.
Webb sent a copy to the White House, where it was approved by McGeorge Bundy the same day.
In thinking about how the president’s proposal might be implemented, should a positive response from the Soviet Union be received, NASA once again preferred a cautious, step-by-step approach.
NASA pointed out that even the modest cooperative activities agreed to in June 1962 had not yet been implemented by the Soviet Union, which was “seriously delinquent” in this respect.
On October 25, McGeorge Bundy requested that interested parties prepare concrete proposals for how to proceed with planning for space cooperation negotiations with the Soviet Union.
Wiesner suggested to Kennedy that “It might be extremely advantageous to you to publicly offer this plan to the USSR...while the Khrushchev statement is still fresh in the mind of the public.
If the proposal is accepted we will have established a practical basis for a cooperative program.
It is not clear whether the “efforts” he was referring to were the cooperative overture to the Soviet Union or to the lunar landing program itself.
I did not get any assurances that Mr Khrushchev or the Soviet Union were out of the space race at all.
The fact of the matter is that the Soviets have made a very intensive effort in space, and there is every evidence that they are continuing and that they have the potential to continue.
I think that he said before anyone went to the moon, there should be adequate preparation.
In my opinion the space program we have is essential to the security of the United States, because as I have said many times before it is not a question of going to the moon.
Nikita Khrushchev finally addressed President Kennedy’s proposal in a statement at a November 1] Kremlin reception.
He suggested that “were a relaxation in international tension in relations between states not only reached morally, so to speak, but were it supported by practical steps in the field of disarmament, then the sphere of cooperation between states in exploring outer space could be materially expanded.
We consider, with due attention to the proposal of the United States President, that it would be useful if the USSR and the United States pooled their efforts in exploring space for scientific purposes, specifically for arranging a joint flight to the moon.
According to Khrushchev’s son Sergey, this indeed is what happened in the weeks following Kennedy’s United Nations speech.
Schlesinger noted that NASA’s plans were “procedural rather than substantive in character,” focusing, as was the consistent NASA preference, on exchange of information on existing programs and plans.
It was Schlesinger’s impression “that NASA remains rather negative about the whole idea” of lunar collaboration.
Schlesinger suggested that to move the effort forward “an expression of Presidential interest in their progress” might be appropriate.
By this point in the Kennedy administration, the vice president often had not been included in the development of new space initiatives; even so, his seeming lack of involvement in a fundamental shift in United States space policy is notable.
The White House moved quickly on Schlesinger’s suggestion of an expression of presidential interest in moving forward on planning for cooperation.
On November 8, Schlesinger and National Security Council staff person Charles Johnson drafted a presidential directive in this vein, and “checked in substance” with “dependable people in NASA and State,” who were reported to be “enthusiastic” about such a message.
NASA administrator Webb also “heartily” concurred with the draft directive.
Ten days later, President John F Kennedy was dead, felled by an assassin’s bullets in Dallas.
With him died the possibility of U.S.-Soviet cooperation in going to the Moon, although there was sufficient momentum behind the Kennedy initiative to keep it alive for a few more months.
Epilogue United States ambassador to the United Nations Adlai Stevenson was scheduled to make a speech to the UN Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space on November 27, and the speech was already in preparation in early November.
The senior State Department official on United Nations matters, Harlan Cleveland, in a lengthy November 21 memorandum had developed a reasoned justification for continuing to push the cooperative effort.
Cleveland reported that after a November 23 Cabinet meeting, Ambassador Stevenson had raised with new President Lyndon B Johnson the question of what he should say about President Kennedy’s proposal.
To make sure that this was indeed the case, Cleveland suggested that President Johnson be asked to review and concur with the specific language on this issue in the final draft of Stevenson’s speech.
Secretary of State Rusk sent the draft speech to the White House on the next day for presidential review.
We believe that there are areas of work—short of integrating the two national programs—from which all could benefit.
Stevenson included those words in his speech, which was actually delivered on December 2.
Frutkin was reported as “very pleased” with the revised text, which reflected the NASA approach to cooperation.
But as the United States waited for a Soviet offer, “he wanted to get the lunar issue off the front burner.
Webb suggested that “on balance, the most realistic and constructive group of proposals which might be advanced to the Soviet Union... relates to a joint program of unmanned flight projects to support a manned lunar landing.
Indeed, the Soviet Union did not fully honor even the agreements on limited cooperation that had been reached in 1962, even though some modest U.S.-Soviet cooperation did eventually take place, especially in the biomedical area.
As the months passed, President Johnson turned his attention to his ambitious agenda for the Great Society.
The United States was of course first to the Moon, and the Soviet Union experienced a series of failures in its lunar program.
The opportunity to test whether dramatic space cooperation between the United States and the Soviet Union could serve as a counterweight to their Cold War rivalry had passed.
In addition, the successful outcome of the Cuban missile crisis, the easing of tensions over Berlin, the signing of the Limited Test Ban Treaty, and Kennedy’s overall desire to reach out to the Soviet Union with a new “strategy of peace” may have suggested to Kennedy that demonstrating United States technological and managerial superiority vis-a-vis the Soviet Union through a spectacular space achievement had lost some of its urgency.
President Kennedy’s rationale regarding the reasons why he had decided to accelerate the United States space program matured in the course of 1963.
In November 1962 he had disagreed with James Webb, who had argued that the goal of the acceleration was preeminence in all areas of space activity; in response, Kennedy had insisted that “everything we do ought really to be tied to getting on the Moon ahead of the Russians,” and that he was “not that interested” in being the leader in other areas of space activity.
Webb won his point; from mid-1963 on, Kennedy justified the fast-paced space program primarily in terms of its overall contribution to national power rather than as a race to the Moon.
Debating Space Priorities In the immediate aftermath of President Kennedy’s May 25, 1961, declaration that “we should go to the Moon,” and for most of the following twenty months, there was very little Congressional or public questioning of pursuing the ambitious lunar landing goal as a high national priority.
Leading newspapers and other shapers of public attitudes seemed caught up in the excitement of Project Mercury and the initial steps toward the Moon.
But as 1963 began, questioning of the lunar landing project began to emerge in various circles; the wisdom of the commitment to Apollo became the focus of a national discussion on the best United States path forward in space.
Growing Criticism of Project Apollo President Kennedy on January 17, 1963, sent to Congress a Fiscal Year 1964 budget request for NASA of $5.712 billion.
In his March 21 press conference, President Kennedy was questioned about the pace of the United States space program as compared to that of the Soviet Union.
We are expending an enormous sum of money to make sure that the Soviet Union does not dominate space.
On March 29, Congressman Charles Halleck released a letter from former President Dwight Eisenhower in which Eisenhower suggested that “the space program, in my opinion, is downright spongy.
This is an area where we particularly need to demonstrate some common sense.
I don’t think we should look with equanimity upon the prospect that we will be second all through the sixties and possibly the seventies.
He has disagreed with this, I know, at least a year or year and a half ago when the Congress took a different position.
If there is waste, then I think it ought to be cut out by the Congress, and I am sure it will be.
Abelson suggested that “the lasting propaganda value of placing a man on the moon has been vastly overestimated.
Abelson’s editorial received attention well beyond the scientific community; his criticism was noted in front-page articles in prominent newspapers and in an April 20 appearance on the Today television program.
At an April 19 meeting with newspaper editors, he noted with some irritation that “the space program...is now under some attack.
Bundy added that “what the President would like particularly to have is an account of the deficiencies of the space program as it was, and was projected, under the outgoing Administration.
Kennedy soon also decided to use the Space Council to coordinate the process of developing the defense of his space program.
NASA’s James Webb first sent a four-page cover letter with a sixty-three page attachment; this was later reduced to a seventeen-page memo signed by Webb; it still had ten pages of attachments.
The AEC response discussed only the organization’s efforts to develop nuclear power sources for space uses.
McNamara suggested that the coordination problem was of “sufficient importance” that it required attention at the White House level.
A “principals only” meeting of the Space Council was held on the afternoon of May 7 to review and approve the vice president’s report to the president.
Welsh read the president’s questions and Lyndon Johnson, reading from a seven-page draft prepared by the Space Council staff, indicated the intended replies.
Johnson delivered the Space Council’s report to President Kennedy on May 13; it painted the overall situation in very positive terms.
A much more fundamental issue is at stake—whether a dimension that well can dominate history for the next few centuries will be devoted to the social system of freedom or controlled by the social system of communism.
We cannot close our eyes to what would happen if we permitted totalitarian systems to dominate the environment of earth itself.
For this reason our space program has an overriding urgency that cannot be calculated solely in terms of industrial, scientific, or military development.
Wiesner discussed it with President Kennedy on May 16, telling him that “the impact of the NASA program on the nation’s supply of scientists and engineers is much greater” than that indicated in the report.
While NASA might require the services of only 7 percent of the total supply of United States scientists and engineers, it would utilize up to 30 percent of those involved in research and development, he suggested.
The individual on McGeorge Bundy’s staff with primary responsibility for tracking space issues was Charles E Johnson.
Johnson replied to Bundy that while the “purple prose” in the report’s conclusion left him “quite unimpressed,” his primary concern was that the report might be released as a public statement of the administration’s position on the space program.
While Kennedy himself remained publicly committed to proceeding with the accelerated space program he had endorsed in May 1961, the questioning of the program’s values and implementation by his senior staff suggested not only that was there a public debate over the proper goals and pace of the space program, but also that a similar debate was beginning to take place inside the top levels of the Kennedy administration.
The report suggested that “the question is not, then, whether man will ultimately reach the moon and beyond.
The Kennedy administration in May began an intensified effort to respond to the critics of its space program.
There was general agreement in the hearings that the deadline set for the first lunar landing was probably conducive to waste, and that many national problems deserved equal attention; there was no agreement that the American science enterprise was being distorted by so much attention to space.
The strongest protest against the program was a written statement submitted to the committee by Warren Weaver, vice president of the Alfred P Sloan Foundation; it listed many other desirable uses for $30 billion of federal spending, which Weaver projected as Apollo’s ultimate cost.
Another Round of Presidential Questions As he began during the summer to think again about suggesting to the Soviet Union that sending men to the Moon become a cooperative undertaking, President Kennedy was faced not only with the lingering doubts regarding whether Russia in fact was intending to go to the Moon, but also questions regarding the possible hostile purposes of the Soviet space program.
On July 22 he sent a memorandum to Robert McNamara and James Webb, noting “the lead article in the Reader’s Digest this month states that the Soviet Union is making a major effort to dominate space while we are indifferent to this threat.
An important justification for the sums being spent on the NASA program, said Webb, was to develop “the power to operate in space” and “as insurance against surprise and as the building of the necessary underlying capacity” for an accelerated military space program, should the United States decide that such a speed-up was needed.
The Department of Defense reply to Kennedy’s questions was signed by deputy secretary Roswell Gilpatric.
A rapidly convened meeting of the Space Council on July 31 discussed the appropriate reply to the president’s questions.
This somewhat disingenuous comment, since Webb had participated in the July 31 Space Council meeting, was indicative of the preference on Webb’s part to report directly to the president rather than working through the Space Council.
Webb’s belief in the military value of NASA’s activities was not shared by Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara.
Congress Cuts the NASA Budget The $5.712 billion Fiscal Year 1964 budget request for NASA sent to the Congress in January 1963 was almost $500 million less than what NASA had requested from the White House the previous September, but still represented a 55 percent increase over NASA’s appropriation for Fiscal Year 1963.
While the president’s September 20, 1963, United Nations proposal to turn lunar exploration into a cooperative undertaking was viewed with dismay by NASA and its congressional advocates, the reality was that most of the reductions in the NASA budget, particularly by the House of Representatives, predated the cooperative proposal.
In June and July, the House Committee on Science and Astronautics cut a total of $475 million from the NASA budget, and during floor debate an additional $34 million was taken out; the House on August 1 approved a NASA FY1964 authorization of $5.203 billion.
NASA fared somewhat better in the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, but still took a $201 million reduction; the full Senate on August 8 authorized a $5.511 NASA budget.
On August 28, after a conference committee had compromised on the differences between the two bills, the Congress approved a $5.351 billion NASA authorization; this amount was almost $400 million less than the president had requested and $850 million less than what NASA the previous fall had thought needed to keep Apollo on schedule.
The White House made no public statements in support of reversing the cuts in the NASA budget, although science adviser Wiesner in an August 2 memorandum to President Kennedy did note that the House cuts in robotic missions intended as precursors to human missions to the Moon would make it difficult to ascertain lunar surface characteristics, an understanding critical to a successful lunar landing.
NASA’s hope that there would be no further cuts in its budget proved illusory.
Authorization bills set the upper limit on the funding for a particular federal agency; the actual funds available are contained in the congressional appropriation for the agency.
Hearings on the NASA FY1964 appropriation began in the House of Representatives on August 19.
Webb in his testimony urged the Appropriation Subcommittee on Independent Agencies, which had jurisdiction over NASA and which was chaired by space program supporter Albert Thomas, to approve the full amount that Congress would soon authorize.
On September 24, in the aftermath of President Kennedy’s United Nations speech, the House Subcommittee approved a $5. billion NASA appropriation.
The full Appropriations Committee confirmed the $5. billion budget on October 7, leading James Webb to say that NASA could not achieve a lunar landing before 1970 at that budget level.
Even so, the House of Representatives approved the $5. billion NASA appropriation on October 10.
NASA’s expectation at this point was that the Senate Appropriations Committee, which in the past had been a strong NASA supporter, would restore the $250 million that the House appropriation had cut from the NASA authorization level.
However, taking the White House and NASA “somewhat by surprise,” the Senate committee on November 13 approved a NASA FY1964 budget of $5.19 billion, only $90 million above the House level.
As the appropriations bill was being debated on the Senate floor, Senator J William Fulbright proposed an additional 10 percent cut in the NASA budget.
The Senate rejected this proposal, but did accept an amendment from Senator William Proxmire to reduce the budget to the House level of $5. billion.
Project Apollo in Management and Schedule Trouble Congressional budget cuts and widespread criticism were not the only threats to Apollo’s success during 1963.
The relationship between James Webb and “Apollo czar” Brainerd Holmes never recovered from their differences in the final months of 1962 with respect to requesting additional funding to try to move forward the date of the initial lunar landing attempt.
It became increasingly clear in the following months that Webb and Holmes could not work together effectively.
During a reception that evening at Webb’s home, Holmes and Webb got into a public argument.
NASA sought the president’s assistance in quickly finding a replacement for Holmes.
On June 11, Webb sought J FK’s help in recruiting to the NASA position Ruben Mettler, president of Space Technology Laboratories, an organization providing systems engineering support for the Air Force ICBM and space programs.
Webb told the president that Mettler had “exactly the qualifications and the experience necessary...and has the complete confidence of men like Secretary McNamara and Dr.
At any rate, NASA was not able to convince Mettler to leave his West Coast position, and so turned to one of his senior associates at the Space Technologies Laboratories, George Mueller, as Holmes’s successor.
Soon after assuming his position at NASA, George Mueller asked two senior NASA engineers to conduct a quick and discreet inquiry into the state of the Apollo program.
Mueller showed this report to Robert Seamans, who directed that it not be distributed, much less publicized; there are reports that he told Mueller to destroy the report since it was so at variance with what NASA was saying publicly, but at least some copies were retained.
On the basis of this report and his own experience, by the end of October Mueller mandated a dramatic change in the Apollo schedule, known as “all up” testing; this required that all parts of the Saturn V launch vehicle be tested together, rather than separate tests for each launcher stage.
Given John Kennedy’s avid reading of the general media, it is probable that he noticed the Times and Newsweek stories.
The program’s troubles in maintaining its schedule are likely to have played a role in a major White House review of the nation’s civilian and national security space programs that was just beginning in early October 1963.
Conclusion Certainly if the Soviet Union had responded positively to Kennedy’s September 20, 1963, offer to cooperate in sending people to the Moon, there could have been profound changes in the character of the Apollo program.
But even if such cooperation were not to have materialized, there is strongly suggestive evidence that Kennedy’s advisers, if not the president himself, were thinking about significant changes in the national space program in the October-November 1963 period.
Those changes might well have included relaxing the schedule aimed at an initial lunar landing by late 1967, or even abandoning the Moon goal altogether.
That questioning extended to John Kennedy’s inner circle, and it was very uncertain in the fall of 1963 whether the White House would maintain the lunar landing program on its planned course.
Reasoning both to President Kennedy’s concern over the increasing costs of the United States space effort and criticisms such as those in the August Reader’s Digest that there was too much emphasis on the lunar landing program at the expense of space efforts more directly relevant to national security, the White House in late September 1963 initiated a sweeping review of the United States civilian and military space programs and the balance between them.
National security adviser McGeorge Bundy replied on October 4 that he and White House congressional liaison Larry O’Brien had discussed Teague’s letter with the president.
Bundy told Teague that Kennedy asked Bundy to contact Teague with “an interim answer to the important question which you raise” regarding the national security implications of the cooperative proposal.
What precisely was meant by the tantalizing term “new expressions” was not specified.
Others argued that more emphasis should be placed on human flights in Earth orbit carried out under Department of Defense auspices.
Who the members of this “group” were was not clear to Webb; he suggested in a 1969 interview that “I don’t know whether it meant Schlesinger and Sorensen or whether it meant the disarmament arms control or whether it meant Mr McNamara.
NASA-DOD Review In this context, on October 5, 1963, senior officials from NASA and Department of Defense , including James Webb and Robert McNamara, met at the Pentagon with McGeorge Bundy.
Bundy informed the officials that the NASA and DOD efforts in response to this set of questions would not only be used to rationalize the overall national space program to balance civilian and national security space efforts, to minimize duplication of effort, and thus to contain costs.
In response to this directive, NASA and DOD in October and November first conducted a series of separate studies on the various elements of their individual programs.
Then, during November and December, they carried out five joint studies in the areas of launch vehicles, manned Earth orbital activities, communications satellites, geodetic, mapping, and weather satellite programs, and various ground facilities.
These studies were not completed until January 1964, and with one important exception discussed below, did not lead to major changes in the already planned NASA and DOD space efforts.
Even so, suggested Finney, for the United States “the question is not whether to go to the moon or not,” but rather “the pace at which the lunar expedition should be pursued,” particularly, as Khrushchev had seemed to suggest, if the Soviet Union was not engaged in a competitive lunar effort.
In preparation for an October 31 presidential press conference, Charles Johnson of the National Security Council staff had suggested to McGeorge Bundy that there was “some merit in trying to unhitch ourselves from the idea of going to the moon in this decade as a hard proposition and focusing public attention on the critical period 1966-1967 when we will know if we have achieved adequate booster power” with the first launch of the Saturn V rocket.
This was because “technology comes from passing certain critical points.
On October 30, Seamans, who was acting NASA administrator because both James Webb and Hugh Dryden were absent,’ tried to reach Bundy to voice NASA’s concerns with respect to what the president might say at his October 31 press conference.
He was unsuccessful in contacting Bundy and so relayed NASA’s concerns to budget official Willis Shapley.
He added that both NASA and the White House would find themselves in an “extremely awkward position...if it were to be indicated by the President or any other official administration spokesman that the current objectives of the manned lunar landing program are likely to be relaxed or abandoned” before the ongoing White House reviews were completed.
The space agency reported to the White House that during the preceding 48 hours it “had received important expressions of support for the present program and timetable—some of this support is from unexpected sources.
President Kennedy was very likely aware of the arguments among his associates for and against slowing down the pace of the space buildup.
At his October 31 press conference, Kennedy said, when questioned about Khrushchev’s statement that the Soviet Union did not have a lunar landing program, “I think that we ought to stay with our program.
A Final Kennedy Visit to the Apollo Launch Site On November 16, 1963, John Kennedy made the short flight to Cape Canaveral from his family home in Palm Beach, Florida for an inspection tour of progress being made by NASA in the Gemini and Apollo programs.
He also took a helicopter to a Navy ship offshore to witness the launch of a submarine-based Polaris missile.
Kennedy was first briefed on the Gemini program by astronauts Gus Grissom and Gordon Cooper.
He then had a short presentation on Apollo by George Mueller in the launch control center at Launch Complex 37; a Saturn 1 booster was sitting on that launch pad for a planned December launch attempt.
As his party left the control center, the president lagged behind to inspect the models of the various launch vehicles being used by NASA, ranging from the small Redstone booster that had been used for the suborbital launches of Alan Shepard and Gus Grissom to the mighty Saturn V that would be used to send astronauts to the Moon.
President Kennedy is briefed on Apollo plans by associate administrator for manned space flight George Mueller on November 16, 1963.
Before leaving the launch pad, and much to the discomfort of his Secret Service detail, Kennedy walked over and stood directly underneath the rocket.
He recognized that with the upcoming launch the United States would finally surpass the Soviet Union in lifting capacity, a goal that he had pursued from his first presidential decisions on space.
The party then flew by helicopter over the Saturn V launch facilities under construction at Launch Complex 39 on the adjoining Merritt Island; Kennedy had been shown a model of the complex during his earlier briefing by Mueller.
As he returned to the mainland after witnessing the Polaris launch, Kennedy said to Seamans, “I’m not sure that I have the facts really straight” with respect to the launch capability of the Saturn 1.
He asked Seamans to get on the press plane to emphasize that the United States would soon close the weight-lifting gap in space.
However, backing off of being first to the Moon did not seem to be on Kennedy’s mind in November 1963.
In remarks he planned to deliver in Dallas on November 22, Kennedy would have said “the United States of America has no intention of finishing second in space.
The pace of the lunar landing program was not an issue in the joint NASA-DOD effort.
Rather, the focus with respect to human space flight was the balance between NASA and DOD in Earth-orbital spaceflight activities.
The Department of Defense at this point was becoming increasingly interested in the military and intelligence potentials of humans in orbit, and there were suggestions that DOD at some point might take over from NASA the leading role in the Gemini project.
NASA during this period examined what was “the minimum manned earth-orbit program required to support a manned lunar landing”; the space agency wanted to make sure that there were enough Gemini flights to satisfy its requirements in support of Apollo before any consideration was given to the potential transfer of the project to Air Force control.
In late November, a report summarizing BOB’s conclusions was drafted by the BOB staff, primarily Willis Shapley, in consultation with senior representatives of NASA and the Department of Defense.
This report had two sections, one dealing with the “Manned Lunar Landing Program” and the other with “Military Space Objectives,” with a particular focus on the future of a separate Air Force effort in human space flight.
This draft best represents the analysis and conclusions that would have been presented to the president for final decision if he had lived.
The bottom line of the 1963 Special Space Review was that there was no reason for “backing off” the lunar landing goal.
It is very unlikely that either President Kennedy’s top advisers or the president himself would have countermanded this conclusion, had Kennedy lived to consider that choice.
When James Webb, Robert McNamara, Jerome Wiesner, Edward Welsh, new budget director Kermit Gordon, and their top associates met on November 30 to consider the draft Special Space Review, the possibility of changes in Apollo was not even discussed; the meeting focused on the second part of the report dealing with the Air Force program of human space flight.
The group decided to cancel the Air Force DynaSoar program and replace it with the Manned Orbital Laboratory program, a small outpost combining the Gemini spacecraft and an attached module with room to experiment with various military and intelligence payloads.
Without even reaching the level of a presidential decision, Apollo had survived an intense and wide-ranging review with its basic character ‘ 20 intact.
Kennedy’s Final Words on Space The recommendation to continue Apollo on its current path would most likely have been welcomed by the president.
As the BOB review was underway, John F Kennedy repeatedly made clear his view that the United States should continue its effort to assume the leading position in space.
Kennedy’s excitement during his November 16 visit to Cape Canaveral in recognizing that the upcoming Saturn 1 launch would give the United States the weightlifting lead in space reflected this determination; he referred to that soon-tobe-realized achievement several times in remarks on November 21 and the morning of November 22 as he moved forward with his tragic Texas tour.
Frank O’Connor, the Irish writer, tells in one of his books how, as a boy, he and his friends would make their way across the countryside, and when they came to an orchard wall that seemed too high and too doubtful to try and too difficult to permit their voyage to continue, they took off their hats and tossed them over the wall—and then they had no choice but to follow them.
Chapter 14 John F Kennedy and the Race to the Moon “hee assassination of President John F Kennedy on November 22, 1963, had, of course, many consequences.
One of them was turning the United States space program, and particularly the lunar landing effort, into a memorial to the fallen president.
There was essentially no chance that the new president, Lyndon B Johnson, would modify the goal set by President Kennedy in 1961, a goal that Johnson had himself so strongly recommended.
In the more than five-and-a-half years between Kennedy’s death and the July 20, 1969 landing of Apollo 11 astronauts Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin on the Moon, dedication to Kennedy’s commitment to achieving that feat “before this decade is out” sustained the program through delays and difficult times, including the death of three Apollo 1 astronauts in a launch pad accident on January 27, 1967.
While the broadest historical significance of the initial journeys to Moon may indeed take centuries to fully appreciate, it is certainly possible to evaluate the impacts of the lunar landing program to date and of John F Kennedy’s role in initiating the effort and continuing to support it until the day of his death.
Understanding Kennedy’s Commitment to Apollo In the American public memory, John F Kennedy stands as one of the most successful and important of United States presidents.
This public image, however, is not universally shared by scholars of the presidency and of American government.
A half century after John Kennedy entered the White House, they disagree on how best to evaluate the Kennedy presidency.
In deciding to go to the Moon, and then reiterating that choice several times after extensive White House reviews, Kennedy demonstrated with respect to space a steadiness of purpose and a clear understanding of the arguments for and against implementing his choice.
He had the flexibility to pursue a cooperative path if it were open to him, but his judgment that space leadership was in the United States national interest made him determined to compete if competition was necessary.
As his science adviser Jerome Wiesner commented, “I think he became convinced that space was the symbol of the twentieth century.
The validity of this assumption of American exceptionalism is, of course, open to challenge, but that is not my point.
President Dwight Eisenhower had come to a different judgment of the importance of space achievement in terms of preserving United States global leadership, which he saw as being based more on a sound defense, fiscal soundness, and social stability.
John Kennedy, with his much more activist approach to government, had an opposing view.
I believe that this was a wise judgment, one from which the United States has benefitted over the past half century.
Perhaps the technical capabilities developed for Apollo were in fact too large and too expensive for subsequent regular use, but the principle that the United States should be the leading spacefaring nation has served the country well.
In my 1970 book The Decision to Go to the Moon, 1 portrayed Kennedy’s 1961 decision to enter a space race with the Soviet Union as closely resembling the rational choice model of decision-making, in which a decisionmaker identifies a desirable goal to be achieved or a problem to be addressed, assesses various options for achieving that objective, and selects the option with the best ratio of benefits to costs.
It is important to note that what makes this decision process “rational” is the purposeful evaluation of alternatives to achieve a stated goal and the choice of the alternative that embodies the best relationship between benefits and costs; the goal itself is a matter of judgment, and must be evaluated on the quality of that judgment.
As image-conscious as he was, Kennedy judged that what other nations thought about American power and resolve to use it was as important, if not more important, than the reality of that power.
In addition, Kennedy judged that the potential contributions of space capabilities to military power justified a significant investment in developing those capabilities, albeit through a peaceful, civilian-led effort.
Once these judgments were made, the choice of sending Americans to the Moon emerged from a rapid but searching assessment of what space activity would best achieve a dramatic space “first” before the Soviet Union, thereby both enhancing United States prestige and serving as the focal point for the development of various space capabilities.
It was this decision process that can best be characterized as rational.
For example, veteran budget official Willis Shapley, who had been observing national security policy choices since he joined the BOB in 1942, commented that “after having been through quite a few major decisions, there was never a major decision like this made with the same degree of eyes-open, knowing-what-you’re getting-in-for” character.
Science adviser Jerome Wiesner agreed, saying that he and Kennedy “talked a lot about do we have to do this.
Time/Life reporter Hugh Sidey suggests that the Moon project “was a classic Kennedy challenge.
Some years later, the admiring Sidey added that in deciding to go to the Moon, Kennedy “heard the poets.
We have in the tape recording of his November 21, 1962, meeting with his space and budgetary advisers an uncensored record of his thinking on the reasons behind his commitment.
One clear conclusion of this study is that Kennedy was not a space visionary.
Commitment Reviewed and Reiterated It is important to realize that Kennedy’s decision to go to the Moon was not made once and for all time in April and May 1961.
In 1963, Kennedy saw an opportunity to cooperate with the Soviet Union in going to the Moon as a means of reducing United States costs while achieving other important strategic objectives; if the Soviet Union had responded positively, it certainly would have changed the character of Project Apollo.
There was thus not a single decision to aim at a lunar landing, but rather a series of decisions, each time with alternative paths being considered and each time with the resulting choice being to proceed with the program to land Americans on the Moon “before this decade is out,” either as a unilateral undertaking or cooperatively.
Only at the very end of the Kennedy administration was serious consideration given to slipping the end of the decade schedule, and even then the decision made was to reject such slippage and to stay with the planned schedule.
Kennedy’s consistently reiterated commitment to Apollo can be best understood in terms of how he carried out his presidency overall.
Viewing JFK’s commitment to Apollo in these terms is particularly useful.
Policies in the space arena were indeed a reflection of Kennedy’s broader objectives as president.
To those more focused on the totality of the United States space program than was John Kennedy, it was also clear from 1961 on that a program aimed at sending Americans to the Moon could serve as a focal point for the development of space capabilities of strategic value for the United States.
These were the reasons John F Kennedy decided in 1961 to go to the Moon, and they remained the objectives of Apollo at the time of his death.
This stability in the actual reasons for the lunar race served as the political foundation for White House decisions to allocate the massive resources required for Apollo’s success, even after Kennedy’s assassination.
It is perhaps his willingness to stay the course in the face of increasing criticisms of the path in space that he had chosen that most indicates the quality and strength of John F Kennedy’s original decision to go to the Moon.
The question is whether a rational approach was the predominant influence on policy choice in the 1961-1963 period, even as politics and personalities also played a part.
I believe the preceding narrative suggests that this indeed was the case.
A rational decision process can address both solving current problems as well as finding a way to achieve longer-term goals.
Certainly the immediate stimulus to the decision to go to the Moon was the threat to United States global leadership posed by the world’s reaction to Soviet space successes at the same time as the United States looked weak in its conduct of the Bay of Pigs fiasco.
Kennedy’s desire to regain his personal prestige and his administration’s momentum were also problems addressed by the Apollo choice.
Finding a way at the same time to move away from current problems and to pursue a worthy goal is an optimum policy-making objective, and Kennedy’s space strategy was well-crafted to achieve this outcome.
John Kennedy shared with others in his family an intensely competitive personality, and that characteristic certainly influenced the way he interpreted the U.S.-Soviet space relationship.
As Manned Spacecraft Center director Robert Gilruth commented, “he was a young man; he didn’t have all the wisdom he would have had.
It was a combination of Kennedy’s youthful faith in the future, his fundamentally competitive personality, and his broader conception of the national interest that made him willing to accept the costs and risks of the lunar enterprise.
In 1964, political scientist Vernon van Dyke suggested that Kennedy’s need to restore national pride, which van Dyke characterized as “a need for national achievement and national morale” and as “gratification stemming from actual or confidently anticipated achievement,” was the basic motivation for the decision to initiate the United States lunar landing program.
Words like “desperately” and “panic” do not seem to me to describe Kennedy’s state of mind as he considered whether to use a “space achievement which promises dramatic results” as a tool of his foreign policy.
But on April 14, before the invasion began, Kennedy met with his space advisors and commented that “there’s nothing more important” than getting the United States into a leading position in space.
Kennedy’s final approval of the acceleration of the space effort came on May 10; the summit meeting with Khrushchev was not finally set until a week later.
Even then, Kennedy sent out feelers regarding a possible agreement at the summit meeting on U.S.-Soviet cooperation in going to the Moon; this is inconsistent with assertion that the need for a “quick, theatrical reversal” of Kennedy administration fortunes before the summit was a key factor in Kennedy’s space decisions.
In summary then, I conclude that President Kennedy’s commitment to a lunar landing program as the centerpiece of an effort to establish United States space leadership was the result of thoughtful consideration, particularly given that it was reiterated a number of times between May 1961 and November 1963.
The commitment was publicly embellished with rhetorical flourishes, but at its core was a Cold War-—driven but rational policy choice.
The commitment also reflected values deeply embedded in the national psyche.
I suggested then that the Apollo decision reflected assumptions at the core of Western liberal philosophy.
That man can do whatever he chooses, given only the will to do it and the techniques and resources required, is a belief that reflects motivations and characteristics basic to Western and particularly American civilization—a will to action, confidence in man’s mastery over nature, and a sense of mission.
Specific decisions on what a government should do are made by its leaders, and ideally reflect a lasting conception of the national interest rather than more parochial concerns or the specifics of their character.
Through such decisions, the values and aspirations of a society can then be expressed through state action.
The liberal perspective— that it is appropriate for the Federal government to undertake large-scale programs aimed at the public good—has been embraced by American presidents such as Woodrow Wilson, notably Franklin D Roosevelt with his New Deal initiatives, John F Kennedy and, after Kennedy, by Lyndon Johnson and Barack Obama, as well as by the more progressive elements of the United States political community.
So the proposal to focus massive government resources on a lunar landing effort in fact reflected only one of the two dominant strains in American political thought, the one that sees government steering of United States society as legitimate.
Conservative thinking as it applies to the commitment to Apollo was best articulated by historian Walter McDougall in his 1985 prize-winning study... the Heavens and the Earth.
He suggests that Project Apollo and the other initiatives proposed by Kennedy in his first months in office resulted in “an American-style mobilization that was one step away” from the Soviet approach to a planned society.
To McDougall, “the commitment to go to the moon did more than accelerate existing trends in space.
This call for concentration of effort was also found in Wernher von Braun’s April 29, 1961, letter to Vice President Johnson responding to the questions President Kennedy had asked in his April 20 memorandum.
Overall, however, McDougall’s analysis is derived more from his overall conservative perspective than from the facts of the situation in 1961-1963.
While those charged with implementing the lunar mission individually went to extraordinary lengths to achieve success, neither John Kennedy’s nor James Webb’s management approach called for strong centralized control.
The policy and budget decisions that steered Apollo in its early years were made through the normal decision-making process, not in a war-time or Soviet style.
Those impulses stretched back to the activist presidency of Franklin D Roosevelt.
Both Johnson and Webb were committed New Dealers who used their positions in government to take actions that in their view would be for the common good.
The debate over the appropriate role of the federal government in undertaking large-scale efforts on behalf of the United States citizenry is a continuing one, and a full discussion of that role is well beyond the scope of this study.
What can be discussed, however, is what lessons can be drawn from the Apollo experience, and particularly from the way it was initiated by President John Kennedy, should there be a desire to begin another very expensive multiyear government initiative.
Project Apollo became the twentieth-century archetype of a successful, large-scale, government-led program.
As peacetime engineering endeavors sponsored by the government, only the construction of the Panama Canal between 1904 and 1914 and the construction of the Interstate Highway System over several decades beginning in the 1950s rivaled Apollo in terms of the scope and difficulty of the task and the scale of human and financial resources required.
Eggers and O’Leary attribute much of the successful execution of the lunar landing program to the leadership of NASA administrator James Webb.
President Kennedy gave Webb a great deal of freedom to manage NASA as Webb saw fit.
A number of times between 1961 and 1963 Kennedy heard from others, often science adviser Jerome Wiesner or budget director David Bell, who questioned or disagreed with the path chosen by Webb.
In particular, Wiesner waged a vigorous campaign to overturn NASA’s choice of the lunar orbit rendezvous approach for carrying out the landing mission.
Brainerd Holmes let it be known to Kennedy that Webb opposed his suggestion that the schedule for the first lunar landing be accelerated; Kennedy shared Holmes’s desire for the earliest possible landing.
Even the Mercury astronauts took their plea for an additional flight in the Mercury program directly to President Kennedy.
In every instance, Kennedy deferred to Webb as the individual responsible for carrying out the space program and thus the person who should make these decisions.
The objective sought must be known to be feasible, with a high degree of probability, at the time the decision to seek it is made.
The objective must have been the subject of sufficient political debate so that the groups interested in it and opposed to it can be identified, their positions and relative strengths evaluated, and potential sources of support have time to develop.
Some dramatic “occasion for decision,” such as a crisis resulting from an external or domestic challenge, must occur to create an environment in which the objective and the policies to achieve it become politically feasible.
There must be in leadership positions in the political system individuals whose personalities and political philosophies support the initiation of new large-scale government activities aimed at long-term payoffs and who have the political skill to choose the situations in which such activities can be initiated successfully.
Even writing in 1970, I recognized that the first of these conditions was very limiting, and would not work when the end desired required both technological breakthroughs and significant changes in deep-seated behavior patterns.
What was unique about going to the Moon is that it required no major technological innovations and no changes in human behavior, just mastery over nature using the scientific and technological knowledge available in 1961.
There are very few, if any, other potential objectives for government action that have these characteristics.
The reality is that attempts to implement other large-scale nondefense programs over the past forty years have never been successful, in the space sector or in the broader national arena.
Bush in 1989 and President George W Bush in 2004 set out ambitious visions for the future of space exploration, but neither of those visions became reality; the political and budgetary support needed for success were notably missing.
More recent attempts to re-create a space race mentality by positing that China was intending to send humans to the Moon before a United States return have fallen flat.
This proposal was met with skepticism and political controversy; as I write these words, its fate is still unclear.
In the nonspace sector, there have been few opportunities for largescale government programs that do not require for their success a combination of technological innovation and significant changes in human behavior.
The attempts to declare a “War on Cancer,” for example, required not only research breakthroughs but also changing the smoking habits of millions of Americans.
Attempts to move toward United States “energy independence” run afoul both limited research and development spending and the complex ties between nonUnited States energy suppliers and the United States financial and government sectors.
Providing adequate health care for all Americans turns out to be primarily a political, not merely a technical, challenge.
Managing global environmental change has both high technical uncertainties and challenging social inertia to overcome.
If this is indeed the case, then there is little to learn from the decision to go to the Moon relevant to twenty-first century choices.
Other approaches to carrying out large-scale government programs will have to be developed; the Apollo experience has little to teach us beyond its status as a lasting symbol of a great American achievement.
Apollo’s Impacts Indeed, it may be the symbolic character of America’s voyages to the Moon that is the most important heritage of the Apollo program.
Certainly the image of the Earth rising over the barren lunar surface taken by Apollo 8 astronaut Bill Anders on Christmas Eve 1968 and of Apollo 11’s Buzz Aldrin standing next to the American flag at “Tranquility Base” have become iconic, communicating to subsequent generations that the United States did years ago achieve something unique in human experience, the first steps off the home planet.
Achieving JFK’s Purposes John Kennedy chose to go to the Moon as a means of restoring the United States prestige that he judged had been lost during the Eisenhower administration.
What prestige is, it would be hard to describe precisely, It may be nothing more substantial than an effect produced upon the international imagination—in other words, an illusion.
It is, however, far from being a mere bubble of vanity; for the nation that possesses great prestige is thereby enabled to have its way, and to bring things to pass which it could never hope to achieve by its own forces.
In terms of both shorter-term and more lasting impacts on United States international prestige and the associated national pride, Apollo was a substantial success.
Within months of JFK’s clarion call, NASA and United States industry were mobilized in a high-profile pursuit of the lunar landing goal.
By declaring that the United States intended to take a leading position in space, and by then taking the steps to turn that declaration into practice, Kennedy effectively undercut the unilateral Soviet space advantage in dramatic space achievements well before any comparable United States success.
The successive achievements of Projects Mercury and Gemini, and most notably the February 1962 first United States orbital flight of John Glenn, became initial steps in JFK’s lunar quest and thus made the United States space program of the 1960s a source of international prestige and national pride.
The psychological and political advantages of early Soviet space successes were quickly and effectively countered.
Americans who were abroad at the time of the first Moon landings, United States diplomats, and Apollo astronauts returning from post-mission international tours all attested to an immense flow of admiration for the country that could accomplish such a feat.
According to Johnson, “we are left, however, with a very substantial residue of admiration and prestige.
By choosing a Cold War competitive arena that did not involve military or direct political confrontation, Kennedy channeled one dimension of the U.S.-Soviet rivalry into what some have described as “the moral equivalent of war,” rather than armed confrontation.
As it turned out, however, during the Kennedy administration the United States was racing only itself to the Moon.
We now know that while by 1963 the Soviet Union had begun to develop a large space rocket capable of sending a cosmonaut to the Moon, it had not yet decided to use it for lunar missions.
It was not until spring 1964 that Central Intelligence Agency analysts identified activity at the Soviet launch site in central Asia as a launch complex for a very large rocket.
But he continually referred to U.S.-Soviet competition in going to the Moon in his public statements defending his decision.
This was certainly the politically expedient thing to do; it would have been far more difficult to maintain political support for Apollo if the threat of Soviet competition had been absent.
Several of President Kennedy’s advisers in 1962 and 1963 alerted Kennedy to the lack of evidence in support of Soviet lunar intentions, and Kennedy was quite aware of the mid-1963 claims by Bernard Lovell that the Soviets did not have a lunar landing program.
By then, he seems to have accepted James Webb’s argument that the United States lunar program was an extremely valuable focal point for developing overall United States space capability, and that it should proceed, cooperatively if possible but unilaterally if not, even if the Soviet Union did not have a similar program.
Both during the Kennedy administration and during the rest of the 1960s , critics have argued that the Apollo program was an unfortunate reflection of misplaced United States priorities.
President Kennedy was aware of these criticisms, and in 1963 worked to prepare answers to the program’s doubters.
Apollo came to culmination at a time when the United States was experiencing urban riots, civil rights conflicts, political assassinations, and a seemingly pointless war in Southeast Asia.
In starting Apollo, Kennedy gave more weight to the situation in 1961 than to the longer-term situation in which the landings would actually take place.
From his perspective in spring 1961, Apollo looked like the right thing to do.
Allin all, then, an evaluation of Project Apollo in terms of the objectives that led John Kennedy to initiate and sustain it must be positive.
Although it is impossible clearly to separate the positive impacts of Apollo from the many negatives of the decade of the 1960s, if not for the achievements of the United States space program at the end of the decade there would be little positive for Americans to remember from that time.
Apollo’s Impact on the United States Space Program By contrast, the impact of Apollo on the evolution of the United States space program has on balance been negative.
Apollo turned out to be a dead end undertaking in terms of human travel beyond the immediate vicinity of this planet; no human has left Earth orbit since the last Apollo mission in December 1972.
Like many others close to the space program, I was caught up in the excitement of the initial lunar landings, and could not conceive of the possibility that having served its political purposes, Apollo and whatever human exploration efforts might follow it would so rapidly be brought to a close.
What happened, however, was that most of the Apollo hardware and associated capabilities, particularly the magnificent but very expensive Saturn V launcher, quickly became museum exhibits to remind us, soon after the fact, of what once was had been done.
For the first time in history, the Moon is not just a mystery and a muse, but a nightly rebuke.
By being first to the Moon, the United States achieved the goal that had provided the sustainable momentum that powered Apollo; after Apollo 11, that momentum very rapidly dissipated, and there was no other compelling rationale to continue.
President Richard Nixon had no stomach for what NASA proposed—a major post-Apollo program aimed at building a large space station in preparation for eventual human missions to Mars.
Instead, Nixon decreed, “we must think of them as part of a continuing process...and not as a series of separate leaps, each requiring a massive concentration of energy.
There were in the 1960s proposals, called the Apollo Applications Program, to use Apollo hardware for a variety of Earth orbit and deep space missions.
Only one of those missions, the Skylab space station, ever came to fruition; its May 1973 launch was the last use of the Saturn V The booster’s production line had been shut down in 1970.
The 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Program mission was the last use of an Apollo spacecraft and the Saturn 1B launch vehicle.
With the 1972 decision to begin the shuttle program, followed in 1984 with the related decision to develop a space station, the United States basically started over in human space flight, limiting itself to orbital activities in the near vicinity of Earth.
By setting a firm deadline for the first lunar landing, Kennedy put NASA in the position of finding a technical approach to Apollo that gave the best chance of meeting that deadline.
This in turn led to the development of the Saturn V launcher, the choice of the lunar orbit rendezvous approach for getting to the Moon, and the design of the Apollo spacecraft optimized for landing on the Moon.
It has determined the priorities, the engineering designs, and the scientific objectives of the space program in this decade, and it is quite likely to control future space work for the remainder of this century.
The consequences of selecting the lunar orbit approach to the Moon landing were of concern to Kennedy’s science adviser Jerome Wiesner as he opposed the LOR choice in 1962.
NASA during the second half of the 1960s became what James Webb had feared, a one-program agency; given the budget constraints of the period, there was no money available for major new starts on alternative programs.
The Apollo program created in NASA an organization oriented in the public and political eye toward human space flight and toward developing large-scale systems to achieving challenging goals.
It created from Texas to Florida the institutional and facility base for such undertakings.
With the White House rejection of ambitious post-Apollo space goals, NASA entered a four-decade identity crisis from which it has yet to emerge.
Repetitive operation of the space shuttle and the extended process of developing an Earth-orbiting space station have not been satisfying substitutes for another Apollo-like undertaking.
The innocent clarity of purpose, the relatively easy and economically painless public consent, and the technical confidence ...are gone and will probably never occur again.
Trying to recreate those by-gone moments by sloganeering, frightening, or appealing to mankind’s mystical needs for exploration and conquest seems somehow futile considering all that has happened since Jack Kennedy set the nation on course to the Moon.
Brewer’s comments of more than two decades ago might usefully be applied to the twenty-first century NASA and its supportive space community, which still struggle to maintain the approach to human space flight developed during the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs.
It is well beyond the scope of this study to discuss the future of the United States space exploration program; the point to make here is that the conditions that made Apollo possible and the NASA of the 1960s a “perfect place” were unique and will not reoccur.
Apollo will forever be a milestone in human experience, and particularly in the history of human exploration and perhaps eventual expansion.
Like other ventures into unknown territory, Apollo may not have followed the best route nor have been motivated by the same concerns that will stimulate future space exploration.
The Apollo 8 “Earthrise” picture is surely one of the iconic images of the twentieth century.
That perception alone cannot justify the costs of going to the Moon, but it stands as a major benefit from going there, one that has influenced human behavior in many ways.
I hope that sometime in the future—if not in the coming decades then in the coming centuries—humans will once again choose to venture beyond the immediate vicinity of Earth.
I believe that the urge to explore—to see what is over the next hill—is a fundamental attribute of at least some human cultures.
Michael Collins, the Apollo 11 astronaut who remained in orbit as Armstrong and Aldrin experienced being on the Moon, has commented that the lasting justification for human space flight is “leaving”—going away from Earth to some distant destination.
As future voyages of exploration are planned, I also hope that the United States chooses to be in the vanguard of a cooperative exploration effort involving countries from around the globe.
There are two things I judge as certain, whenever those voyages take place.
One is that they will not be like Apollo, a grand but costly unilateral effort racing against a firm deadline to reach a distant and challenging goal.
The other is that President Kennedy’s name will be evoked as humans once again begin to travel away from Earth.
John F Kennedy, like the astronauts who traveled to the Moon during Apollo, was a true space pioneer.
The highway costs were paid through a special user tax, not general government revenues, and thus are not directly comparable to the funding appropriated through annual congressional actions for Apollo.
Chapter 1 Before the White House The point that Joseph Kennedy expected his eldest living son to run for public office is made in almost every biography of John F Kennedy and his family.
Who actually composed this response for Kennedy’s signature is unknown; Kennedy may have dictated it himself.
Kennedy’s close aide Theodore Sorensen noted that “Senator Kennedy signed very little of the correspondence he approved for his signature and dictated even less of it.
As a footnote to this history, the author was present at the Los Angeles Coliseum as Kennedy made his acceptance speech.
It is worth noting that President Eisenhower had approved the CORONA reconnaissance satellite program in February 1958 and that CORONA flew its first successful mission in August 1960, before JFK’s question.
The CORONA program was very highly classified, and clearly Senator Kennedy was not aware of its existence.
In what seems to be Kennedy’s handwriting, the notation “Library” appears on the first page of the paper, indicating that it may have been read by the candidate.
Sorenson, Counselor, 199, 203; author’s interview with Theodore C Sorensen, May 28, 2009.
This account of the space issues facing President-elect Kennedy is by design very selective.
He intended the diary only for his children, but NASA prevailed on him to have it published, and the result is fascinating reading.
T Keith Glennan, Oral History Interview, February 20, 1987, GlennanWebb-Seamans Project for Research in Space History, National Air and Space Museum.
Bernard Schriever and the Ultimate Weapon The first United States attempt to launch a satellite called Vanguard, which was the approved United States IGY entry, failed on December 6, 1957.
Vanguard was even lighter than Explorer 1, weighing only a little over 3 pounds.
The panel’s skeptical view may also have been influenced by two recent failures in the Mercury program.
The first suborbital test of the Mercury-Atlas combination on July 29, 1960, was a complete failure.
Then on November 21, 1960, a test launch of a Mercury capsule atop a von Braun—developed Redstone rocket rose only a few inches off the launch pad before settling back to the ground.
The Mercury-Redstone combination was to launch the first few United States astronauts on brief suborbital flights before NASA would commit to sending an American into orbit.
Kistakowsky, Scientist in the White House, 409; Glennan, Birth of NASA, 292.
Seamans was the “privileged source” source quoted in Logsdon, Decision, 35.
George M Low, “Manned Lunar Landing Program,” October 17, 1960 in Logsdon with Launius, Exploring the Unknown, Volume VII, 457.
Interview with Senator Clinton Anderson, August 18, 1967, in Logsdon, Decision, 68.
The order in which other goals were listed was also shifted from that report to move “national prestige” to the top of the list.
The task force report also covered the United States ballistic missile program; that portion of the report will not be discussed here.
Michael Bechloss, “Kennedy and the Decision to Go to the Moon,” in Launius and McCurdy, Spaceflight and the Myth of Presidential Leadership, 54.
A February 2, 1961, memorandum from C Berg of the Bureau of the Budget notes that Wiesner had informed the NASA staff that he “disassociates” himself from the content of his task force’s report.
It is not clear that Dryden was ever told of this message from Clifford.
Dryden remembers that he “had submitted my resignation” but that “no acknowledgement had been received.
In a speech to the National Press Club on March 16, 1967, Lyndon Johnson said that he had interviewed nineteen people; in a press conference after the Apollo 8 flight in December 1968, he put the number at twenty-eight.
In his careful biography of James Webb, W Henry Lambright also uses the number nineteen.
For Wiesner’s comments, see interview of Jerome Wiesner by W Henry Lambright, November 15, 1990, NHRC, Folder 7106.
In some accounts, Webb asked Lyndon Johnson, not President Kennedy, whether he was being hired to implement a predetermined policy.
Roswell Gilpatric, telephone interview with W Henry Lambright, December 17, 1991.
Lambright’s notes from the interview can be found in NHRC, Folder 7106.
Department of Defense Directive 5160.32, “Development of Space Systems,” March 6, 1961.
At the Earth’s surface, it is 1 This force increases as an object is accelerated or decelerated, as during a space lift-off or reentry.
Letter from Jerome B Wiesner to Hugh Dryden, March 7, 1961, NHRC, Folder 012506.
The instructions given to Low’s group are discussed in Seamans, Project Apollo, 8.
Excerpts of the report are reprinted in Logsdon with Launius, Exploring the Unknown, Vol.
Newell in 1961 was NASA’s top scientist and its liaison to the Space Science Board.
This was one of the many similar organizational histories prepared during the final year of the Johnson administration.
Elmer Staats was the Deputy Director of the Bureau of the Budget and a holdover from the Eisenhower administration.
No author, “Possible Questions and Answers on the Soviet Venus—Probe for the President’s Press Conference on Wed.
Letter from James E Webb to the Director, Bureau of the Budget, March 17, 1961, NHRC, Folder 012504.
Bell had been a junior budget examiner when James Webb had been the BOB director during the Truman administration.
James E Webb, “Administrator’s Presentation to the President,” March 21, 1961.
See also Robert Seamans, Oral History Interview, November 2, 1987, Glennan-Webb-Seamans Project for Research in Space History, National Air and Space Museum, for Seamans’s account of this meeting.
The Soviet statement is reported in Swenson, Grimwood, and Alexander, This New Ocean, 332.
It is not clear if the memorandum was actually sent to the president, but the draft does show the state of Wiesner’s thinking in the immediate aftermath of the Gagarin flight.
Another source is a letter dated December 6, 1971 that Sidey wrote to fellow veteran journalist Robert Sherrod, who was working on a book on the space program, describing the April 14 meeting.
Kennedy’s interaction with Sidey is a revealing example of how JFK used the press to further his interests.
Every history of the Kennedy presidency contains a detailed analysis of the Bay of Pigs failure, the decisions that led to it, and its aftermath.
The Robert Kennedy quote is from an interview with Walt Rostow, at the time of the Bay of Pigs on McGeorge Bundy’s national security staff, in Strober and Strober, Kennedy Presidency, 349.
NASA Presentation to the Vice President, April 22, 1961, NHRC, Folder 012504.
For a biography of Bernard Schriever, see Sheehan, A Fiery Peace; for the definitive von Braun biography, see Neufeld, Von Braun.
Such a demonstration of the United States ability to rendezvous with and capture a satellite in orbit and return it to Earth would certainly have been seen by the Soviet Union as a very provocative act.
Letter from Richard N Gardner to the Vice President, April 24, 1961, NHRC, Folder 12288.
The other two private citizens invited by Vice President Johnson to participate in the space review did not submit written inputs.
Frank Stanton in an August 18, 1967, letter to the author wrote that his involvement was “minimal,” and George Brown, asked by the NASA History Office for his recollection of the consultations, said that he did not remember them at all.
Author’s interviews with James Webb and Letter from James E Webb to Dr.
This account of the May 6-7 meetings is drawn largely from an oral history interview of Robert Seamans, March 27, 1964, JFKL, oral history interviews a 10.
Central Intelligence Agency, “Soviet Technical Capabilities in Guided Missiles and Space Vehicles,” National Intelligence Estimate Number 11-5-61, 25 April 1961, 34, 42, 44.
Letter from Jerome Wiesner to David Bell, May 10, 1961, NHRC, Folder 12288.
Given the date on the letter, it appears that Wiesner had not yet seen the May 8 report that resulted from the May 6-7 meetings, which had already proposed setting as a new goal the creation of such a system.
The Life & Times of Alan Shepard, America’s First Spaceman , 265, oral history interview with Alan Shepard, June 12, 1964, JFKL, and oral history interview with Robert R Gilruth, October 2, 1987, Glennan-Webb-Seamans Project for Research in Space History, National Air and Space Museum.
The final “Staff Report on Proposed Increases in Space Programs,” dated May 20, 1961, can be found in NHRC, Folder 012457.
The suggested answer was “women demonstrate every day versatility reaching far beyond the confines of the kitchen.
It is interesting to contrast this first-hand account of the reception to Kennedy’s address with accounts in other Kennedy biographies.
In an interview with the author on May 28, 2009, Sorensen suggested that his use of the word “hundreds” was an exaggeration.
The author has not been able to locate in the John F Kennedy Presidential Library archives the “stream of written questions” to which Sorensen refers.
This document is one of the histories of all Federal agencies prepared at the end of the Johnson administration.
For a discussion of locating Saturn production and testing facilities, see Bilstein, Stages to Saturn, chapter 2.
This account of the site selection process is taken from this attachment.
Kenneth O’Donnell’s views on the site selection process can be found in a telephone interview with Robert Sherrod, May 13, 1971.
Sherrod was a veteran journalist who started, but never completed, a detailed history of the events leading up to the Apollo 11 mission; his interview notes can be found in NHRC, Folder 13288.
James Webb, in response to a question after a September 12, 1961, address to the National Press Club.
Unless otherwise noted, Wiesner quotations in this section are from the November 20 memorandum.
Reflecting the controversies surrounding its efforts, the group’s report was not issued until almost a year after it had completed its work.
Americans to the Moon,” in Logsdon with Launius, Exploring the Unknown, Vol.
Letter from James E Webb to the President, June 1, 1962, NHRC, Folder 012518.
Military Division, Bureau of the Budget; “Draft Staff Report—Special 34.
Willis Shapley, Oral History Interview, August 2, 1994, Glennan-WebbSeamans Project for Research in Space History, National Air and Space Museum.
Ibid and Letter from James Webb to the President, March 21, 1963, NHRC, Folder 012518.
Committee on Science and Astronautics, Toward the Endless Frontier, 224—225.
Interview of Jerome Wiesner by W Henry Lambright, November 15, 1990, NHRC, Folder 7106.
Houbolt’s letter is reprinted in Logsdon with Launius, Exploring the Unknown, Vol.
The “C-5 direct” approach would have reduced the crew size to two rather than three astronauts and sent their spacecraft directly to the lunar surface without any need for a rendezvous.
Wiesner, November 7, 1962, reprinted in Logsdon with Launius, Exploring the Unknown, Volume VII, 585.
For a discussion of the process through which Kennedy’s speeches were developed, see Sorensen, Counselor, chapters 12 and 18.
Apparently this memorandum was never put in final form and signed by Bell.
Interview with John F Kennedy published in Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, November 1960, 347.
Even as he discussed cooperation with the USSR, Kennedy also emphasized matching the Soviets in rocket thrust.
Frutkin was the NASA official in charge of international affairs during the period covered by this study.
Kohler was a Soviet specialist in the Department of State who in 1962 became the United States ambassador to the Soviet Union.
Richard Reeves, in his President Kennedy, suggests that Kennedy’s final words were even stronger.
He quotes the President as saying “Then, Mr Chairman, there will be war.
The description of Khrushchev’s June 3 reaction as “half joking” is in Sorensen, Kennedy, 544.
Khrushchev added “from the perspective of today this was definitely a mistake.
It is worth noting that Sergey Khrushchev is not always a reliable source of specific historical information; for example, it is unlikely that his father consulted Korolev in the twenty-four hours between the two Kennedy-Khrushchev luncheons.
Rusk also noted that the Department of Defense had been involved in preparing the letter.
The fact that Kennedy had made a proposal to Khrushchev in Vienna for joint lunar missions was not widely known, either at the time of the summit or in early 1962.
The reference to Congressman Olin Teague , who was chairman 52. oo NO 10.
The phrase “pursuit of an illusion” is the title of the chapter in Harvey and Ciccoritti, U.S.-Soviet Cooperation in Space discussing Kennedy’s UN proposal.
It is fair to surmise that the analysis in the book’s chapter on the cooperative initiative, and indeed the portions of the study that deal with the 1961-1968 period when Webb was NASA administrator, reflect to a significant degree Webb’s views.
As suggested previously, this analysis appears to reflect the perspective of James Webb on Kennedy’s views at the time.
Central Intelligence Agency, National Intelligence Estimate Number 11-1-62, “The Soviet Space Program,” December 5, 1962.
The quote is taken from Bernard Lovell, “Soviet Aims in Astronomy and Space Research,” New Scientist, July 25, 1963, 175.
An audio tape of the September 18 meeting between Webb and Kennedy exists, but as of November 2010 it has not yet been released by the Kennedy Library.
It was presumably Finney’s story, which may have been given to President Kennedy before he met with Webb that morning, that prompted Kennedy’s comment about not being undercut by NASA, although Kennedy was also likely to have been aware of a general skepticism about the wisdom of the proposal among NASA’s leaders.
Drew Pearson, “JFK Vetoed Experts on Space Bid, Washington Post, September 26, 1963, F11l.
The language of the letter bears the unmistakable eloquence of Sorensen’s writing style.
Sedov was one of the few Soviet scientists connected to the Soviet space program whose identities were publicly known.
Khrushchev’s remarks were reported in the government newspaper Izvestia and are quoted in Harvey and Ciccoritti, U.S.-Soviet Cooperation, 124.
It should be noted that this memorandum was discussing both the October 25 and November 1 statements by Khrushchev.
NOTES on the Soviet Manned Lunar Program,” Spaceflight, November 2003 and March 2004.
Harvey and Ciccoritti, U.S.-Soviet Cooperation, 125, quoting a Pravda report.
The shift in Khrushchev’s views, as reported by his son, is described in Siddiqi, Challenge to Apollo, 400.
Sergey Khrushchev, in Launius, Logsdon, and Smith, eds., Reconsidering Sputnik, 282.
The text of the speech can be found in the Department of State Bulletin, December 30, 1963, 1011.
The Eisenhower letter is quoted in NASA, Astronautics and Aeronautics, 1963, 112.
The content and language of this memorandum suggests that it was drafted by the staff of the Space Council, who may have been unhappy that the Council had been bypassed by Kennedy’s earlier request to James Webb for information to help defend Apollo.
John Disher and Del Tischler, “Apollo Cost and Schedule Evaluation” in Logsdon with Launius, Exploring the Unknown, Vol.
Dryden by this time had been diagnosed with what turned out to be a fatal cancer and was often away from NASA undergoing medical treatment.
Shapley, “NASA’s suggestion to Mr Bundy on position on manned lunar landing program at President’s news conference,” October 30, 1963, NHRC, Folder 012457.
Letter from Olin E Teague to NASA Historian Eugene Emme, January 24, 1979, NHRC, Folder 012499.
Boone, “National Manned Space Flight Program,” November 21, 1963, both in NHRC, Folder 3802.
Seamans with revised draft of the introduction and manned lunar landing section of the space report, November 13, 1963, NHRC, Folder 10668.
Seamans, November 22, 1963, with attached November 20 draft of Special Space Review, NHRC, Folder 10668.
The renaming of the geographical area in Florida was reversed in 1973 to return to the historical designation Cape Canaveral.
Quoted material here and in the rest of this chapter is drawn from the previous chapters, unless otherwise noted.
I have drawn heavily from my analysis in The Decision to Go to the Moon in preparing the current chapter.
James N Giglio, “John F Kennedy and the Nation” in Giglio and Rabe, Debating the Kennedy Presidency, 134.
Guiding Metaphors from Eisenhower to Bush for a discussion of Kennedy’s language as he justified Apollo.
Murray and Cox, Project Apollo, provide the best account of the many NASA managers and employees who made Apollo successful.
Stephen Rabe, “John F Kennedy and the World” in Giglio and Rabe, Debating the Kennedy Presidency, 7.
Scientific American, June 1994, for a discussion of the Soviet lunar program.
Columbia Accident Investigation Board, “Report,” Volume 1, August 2003, 209.
Daniel Boorstin, “The Rise of Public Discovery” in Space Policy Institute, Apollo in Its Historical Context, 21.
The global televising of Neil Armstrong’s first steps on the Moon was possible because the International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium had completed its global satellite network just a few weeks before the lunar landing.
A Technological History of the Apollo/Saturn Launch Vehicles, NASA SP-4206.
Smithsonian Institution Press, 1998 Dethloff, Henry C Suddenly, Tomorrow Came: A History of the Johnson Space Center, NASA SP-4307.
The Private Diary of President Eisenhower's Special Assistant for Science and Technology.
United States House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Astronautics.
