It is also known as October Crisis or the Caribbean Crisis or the Missile Scare.
It began when Soviet Union started building missile sites in Cuba in 1962.
It is one of the important confrontation which came after Berlin wall during Cold War Era.
During the Crisis, American deployed missiles in Italy and Turkey whereas Soviet Union deployed ballistic missiles in Cuba.
Later on Kennedy Administration reached an agreement with Soviet Union to remove Jupiter Missiles from Turkey and in exchange Soviet agreed to remove the Nuclear Missiles from Cuba.
USA on the other hand does not want the communist Soviet to expand its communism or socialism across the world.
So a Cold war started from 1945 with USA and Soviet Union being the main parties.
During 1959, when Fidel Castro took over the power in Cuba he nationalized all the American companies.
In response, USA broke all economic relations with Cuba, stopped all the aid provided to Cuba and also stopped buying Cuban Sugar.
This became a disaster for Cuba since USA was the largest buyer of Cuban Sugar.
Then Russia came to rescue the economy of Cuba by buying Cuban Sugar at higher prices.
Castro then turned to USSR and signed contract with Nikita Khrushchev to sell the Cuban Sugar.
After the failure of Bay of Pigs Invasion, Castro was sure that he might not survive the second invasion of USA so he asked Nikita Khrushchev to built Missile sites in Cuba to protect himself from any American Threat.
This event also led the establishment of direct phone link between Soviet Union and USA which was called as hotline to avoid any miscommunication in the Future.
Countries like USA, USSR were amassing nuclear stockpile since World War which further threaten the peace and safety of this world.
Countries needs to resort to more on dialogue instead of waging war to solve any confrontation.
Policy Makers needs to design the policy keeping other countries in mind.
Government needs to expand its communication channels with other countries and work closely to increase the cooperation and development.
UN needs to play a central role to encourage the countries to sign disarmament of Nuclear Missiles treaty.
Although USA and USSR did signed a treaty to destroy some of its stockpiles but still they need to do lot of work in this area.
Finally, all the countries should work together to become a Nuclear Free World.
