The leaders of both nations handled the crisis with varying degrees of success.
In some ways, the American leader Kennedy can be seen to have handled the crisis better than Soviet leader Khrushchev.
Middle Kennedy had also successfully stood up to some of his military advisors who wanted to invade Cuba.
This could have caused nuclear conflict which would have had devastating world consequences, but Kennedy was calm under pressure and able to negotiate a more effective solution.
This helped him to be recognised as a strong leader, which was important as many had doubted him after the failed Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961.
However, some believe Khrushchev handled the crisis better than his counterpart.
Firstly, he had prevented an American invasion of Cuba, and had a guarantee that no further invasion attempts would take place.
This meant that Castro remained in power, and Cuba remained a Communist ally for the Soviets so close to America. ...read more.
Conclusion Although this was a secret agreement, it still meant that the Soviet Union had been able to achieve one of its main aims during the crisis.
It removed much of the threat America held over the Soviet Union, and also marked a huge step towards the peaceful coexistence of the two countries.
Overall, I believe Kennedy handled the Cuban missile crisis best and as a result secured the most from it.
Cuba was still a Soviet satellite, but missiles had been removed and Kennedy had successfully stood up to the Russians without causing nuclear war.
The above preview is unformatted text This student written piece of work is one of many that can be found in our GCSE International relations 1945-1991 section.
By announcing to Kennedy his proposal, Khrushchev put the ball into the American President's court.
History Cuba Missile Crisis Within this concept he planned to reduce the oppressive aspects of communism and bring in common capitalist aspects.
These reforms were very popular amongst the citizens of Czechoslovakia but not with Suez Crisis was split since Eden had left them in the dark about the vital facts about Suez including the secret meeting between France Israel and Britain and had made this decision by himself.
In conclusion from the sources and my own knowledge I know that the majority of the public supported In February 1943, the German army surrendered at Stalingrad.
Was Hitler's interference the main ... had already fired his Commander-in-Chief , leaving the position available to anyone who sufficiently impressed Hitler.
This meant that the generals were more concerned with impressing Hitler, making battles look decisive and dramatic, than considering in depth tactical details such as minimising casualties.
The USSR feared a Muslim takeover in the USSR and thus they invaded Afghanistan to establish a communist government.
However, this source does not show how the other events were just as important.
In addition, this source was published in the daily mail which tells me that this it is exaggerated to interest the audience.
Therefore, this source cannot be academically referenced or used to confirm a series of events.
Two superpowers then became intensely involved in the conflict by rushing arms to their client states.
Because of the potential of nuclear conflict between superpowers --> dangerous time for the world.
Sign up to view the whole essay and download the PDF for anytime access on your computer, tablet or smartphone.
Created by teachers, our study guides highlight the really important stuff you need to know.
