Its transmission o^the revelatipn of its contents in any janner to Jin unauthorized perslon is prohibited blr law.
At seven on the preceding evening President Kennedy informed the nation that intelligence efforts had uncovered a Soviet pK t to leapfrog American defenses by placing medium and intermediate range missiles and jet bombers in Castro's Cuba.
He also directed increased close surveillance of the military buildup in Cuba and threatened ""further action"" by the Armed Forces if the buildup continued.
Furthermore, in unmistakable language he warned the Soviet Union:* It shall be the policy of this nation to regard any nuclear missile launched from Cuba against any nation in the Western Hemisphere as an attack by the Soviet Union on the United States, requiring a full retaliatory response upon the Soviet Union.
Premier Khrushchev also threatened that United States aggression against Cuba could lead to thermonuclear world war.
The Soviets avoided a direct naval clash by diverting nearly all Soviet-bloc ships enroute to Cuba.
The President's warning that further action would be taken unless work on missile bases ceased became creditable when alarge U S. military buildup in Florida and the Caribbean became apparent. 1 UNCLASSIFIED Aerial surveillance soon confirmed that the work in Cuba had been halted.
United Nations Secretary U Thant used his offices to promote direct United States -Soviet exchanges in which Khrushchev and Kennedy communicated terms for a settlement.
On 28 October the threat of war lessened when Khrushchev agreed to dismantle the Cuban bases and remove the missiles under United Nations supervision.
However, U Thant failed to persuade Cuban Premier Castro to accept United Nations inspection.
Nevertheless, the Soviet actions amounted to virtually complete acceptance of the demands made by President Kennedy.
THE CUBAN ROLL-BACK The Cuban Crisis proved many things that needed to be proved.
Those tense hours showed how quickly a cold war could change to a hot one, emphasizing the necessity to have war readiness materiel in true readiness-both as to amount and condition.
Although the Air Force Logistics Command furnished effective logistics support, it was not an easy job.
The command had to meet support requirements without a supporting USAF-approved program.
This situation necessitated crash actions to obtain or redistribute assets, with the result that costs were high and normal logistics support was not possible.
It was clear that to avoid a similar situation in future emergencies, the Air Force would have to do more advance planning.
In February 1963 USAF headquarters (upon AFLC recommendation) established an ad hoc committee to study the problems of support for contingency operations.
The emphasis necessarily would be upon having assets on hand, either prepositioned at forward bases or in back-up stock.
However, advance planning for the roll -back after a crisis was also important and merited study.
This study, the command's War and Emergency Plans Branch stated, should be in sufficient detail to insure maintaining both an operational and logistics support capability.
The roll-back of supplies and equipment was a big undertaking, * The vehicles were of many types, including refueling, fire, and cargo handling trucks, forklifts, cranes, runway sweepers, tow tractors, and trailers.
Although the original intention was to return all nonTAC equipment to the owning commands, it did not work out that way.
Additional items were added prior to the Cuban Crisis, and still more were added as the result of experience gained in that contingency.
Page Not Available * In order to have POL located closer to the critical bases during the Cuban emergency, the Air Force leased two retail distribution station terminals from industry.
Industry met the demand on very short notice; however, normal supply costs were exceeded since cargo lots were less than the maximum and also required premium. transportation.
USAF LOGISTICS SYSTEM PROBLEMS On the first day of the Cuban Crisis the Chief of Staff directed the major commands to keep a historical record of their participation.
Under instructions from the USAF Historical Liaison Office, Headquarters AFLC historians and the field historians prepared separate, detailed chronologies and documentation of the command's participation in the crisis.
These chronologies did not represent a complete, analytical history of the command's role.
Many of the source documents were hastily prepared during the emergency.
And the stringent deadline for the chronologies precluded a complete check of conflicting and uncertain evidence.
Again, this summary represented only the best evaluation that could be drawn at that time and within the space of a few days.
The historians lacked the perspectives of time and complete knowledge of other command' s participation in the crisis actions.
However, in the rush of events that surrounded the crisis a deadline of less than 24 hours was levied on these evaluations.
Consequently, no more than a cursory look could have been taken at the AMA crisis operations.
Moreover, the observations of a particular AMA might be colored by incomplete knowledge of the total situation, or might be locally defensible but not reflect a general condition.
Despite the hasty and incomplete nature of the chronologies and summary messages, these products did serve one important function.
On the basis of the available evidence, they pointed up some of the problems and object lessons encountered in the Cuban Crisis.
These historical products, then, plus the first-hand experience of operating and staff officials formed the basis for AFLC attempts to correct deficiencies and prepare for future contingencies.
Changes in Force Planning The Cuban Crisis gave AFLC an opportunity to alert the Air Force to the difficulties encountered in logistical support of contingency operations.
At that early date the list of problems could only be looked upon as tentative.
However, experience with earlier contingencies in other parts of the world tended to support the list of Cuban Crisis problems.
Page Not Available General Bradley felt that action should be taken either to provide more funds or to centrally store critical WRM items, such as fuel tanks, pylons, and munitions.
Central storage of some items would allow them to be positioned rapidly in areas where they were required.
As funds became available, the quantities required in the most distant areas could be prepositioned.
The Commander wanted a study group to investigate the problem, unless he could get assurance that funds to procure the necessary items would be made available at an early date.
Priority and Precedence Delay For an explanation of Air Force doctrine and policy on limited war see Charles H Hildreth, ""USAF Logistic Preparations for Limited War, 1958-1961,"" October 1962, in AFLC Hist.
Page Not Available The report was compiled by the USAF Historical Liaison Office at Headquarters USAF with input from the major commands involved in the crisis.
The appendix included a summary of the major commands' messages on problems and lessons learned.
AFLC PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS The newly formed Directorate of Operations at AFLC headquarters initiated one of the earliest attempts to solve Cuban Crisis support problems.
The Command Post, headed by Lieutenant Colonel James E Sturgis, was assigned the project.
Command Post personnel extracted 90 problems mentioned in the AMA chronologies and referred them to the appropriate headquarters components for action.
The final reports from the directorate on the actions taken on the 90 problems could be listed in five categories.
First, in over half of the cases headquarters components did not recognize a valid command-wide problem.
Some in this category were immediately eliminated from further consideration; some were considered only locally defensible; and others were considered normal gripes from organizations that had felt pinched for resources or did not understand the broader implications of a particular action.
In a second category were problems which could not be solved by AFLC alone.
The USAF Ad Hoc Committee on Support of Contingency Operations took up some of these problems on an Air Force-wide basis.
Third, AFLC headquarters components considered some problems to have been at least temporarily solved during the crisis.
Here again, the Ad Hoc Committee picked up the broader implications of some of these problems.
Fourth, headquarters components forwarded the problems concerning a particular commodity or system to the individual AMA's for local solution.
Finally, the list contained some twenty-odd problems for which Headquarters AFLC attempted to find solutions.
For purposes of discussion, however, the number of problems in the last category can be considerably narrowed by combining many of the similar ones.
UNCLASSIFIED Page Not Available Immediately after the crisis, the Manpower and Organization Division at AFLC headquarters requested workload information from the AMA's so that it could provide more guidance in future contingencies.
Manpower and Organization intended to chart the information received by functional areas so the common problem areas could be isolated.
But, it found this impractical because neither the additional requirements nor the methods used to supply more manpower showed any consistency among the AMA's.
Since the AMA's had successfully met the additional workload requirements by various means, Manpower and Organization concluded that specific planning for limited emergencies was unnecessary.
The HOI contained separate instructions for an emergency action staff operating under strategic warning of general war.
For emergencies short of strategic warning and exercises, an accelerated action staff would operate the augmented Command Post.
The action staff teams were similar in composition to the old teams, but the instructions for each headquarters component involved were much more explicit.
Further, a given staff representative would only attempt to accomplish all the required actions when the workload for his activity was minimal.
Should the workload increase, actions would be accomplished in the normal operating environment.
Also, message processing and distribution would be provided from the normal operating location, but all messages would be routed through the action staff.
Most of the difficulties were similar to those covered by General Bradley in his remarks before the Air Force commanders in November.
In the ensuing weeks the committee and the functional components at USAF, TAC, and AFLC headquarters began to tackle these difficult support problems.
Some solutions depended upon the new non-nuclear war tactics which had not been clearly established, and many other required actions needed prerequisite changes in existing concepts, policies, and procedures at Air Force and DOD levels.
Thus, progress in the year following the Cuban Crisis was slow and tedious.
The Ad Hoc Committee used most of the remaining weeks in FY 1963 to define the problem areas and discuss possible solutions.
New Non-Nuclear Stockage Objectives * After completion of the narrative and just prior to the release of this history, additional documents related to Ad Hoc Committee progress became available.
See DocT. 43, 45, 47, for the latest information on progress in Air Force support of contingency operations.
It continued Headquarters USAF responsibility for compression or acceleration schedules, including input stoppages, during limited emergencies.
USAF headquarters would also develop and specify the actions to be taken in accelerating or compressing maintenance or modification prior to general war D-Day.
These specifications would vary according to the particular circumstances.
When this history was written, however, USAF had not yet provided specific guidance concerning discontinuance of input into maintenance facilities during emergencies.
CONCLUSION Although the Cuban Crisis did not involve American forces in any combat action, it constituted the clearest immediate military danger to the United States since World War II and the only close threat in distance to the continental U S. in the twentieth century.
It involved a considerable emergency movement of U S. forces into Florida bases and the Caribbean area.
The rapid movement of troops, ships, and aircraft in response to the critical situation only 90 miles from the U S. shoreline required widespread, coordinated activities by the military services in planning, intelligence, logistics, and operations.
These activities were complicated by the need to deter a strategic threat at the same time.
In these circumstances the Air Force gained important knowledge for the support of contingency operations in the future, and AFLC added more lessons to those learned in past emergencies.
AFLC's successful support of the Cuban buildup, however, did not offer a completely typical or realistic example for all contingency planning in the future.
In the first place the criticalness of materiel shortages and deficiencies for actual combat operations could only be projected.
Second, the emergency supply pipeline to oversea areas was not tested to any extent.
Third, the Cuban experience was not an adequate test of simultaneous support for two or more widely separated trouble spots.
Nor was it a test of logistical reaction to a threat of a less critical nature.
More than anything else, perhaps, the Cuban Crisis prompted the Air Force to strengthen its support of contingency operations by focusing attention on certain weaknesses which had been overlooked or ignored in the past.
Page Not Available UNCLASSIFIED In regard to the fact gathering and problem solving techniques, the Cuban Crisis experience left room for improvement at the AFLC headquarters level.
The Historical Research Division compiled the only extensive record of AFLC participation from a command-wide point of view.
Yet, this Cuban Crisis chronology was by no means a critical analysis of the command's operations.
Although the entire historical staff worked on the project, a short deadline and limited manpower meant that only the most easily accessible records could be used and that most evidence had to be accepted at face value.
These limitations were even more restrictive when the historical staff was directed to prepare a brief, but comprehensive, evaluation of the command performance.
Again, with a stringent deadline the historians relied almost completely on the unilateral observations of the staff and operating officials.
While these people could, of course, give the most knowledgeable account of operations in their own particular field, they were not necessarily equipped to check the validity of their own observations and criticisms from the command or Air Force-wide point of view.
A similar situation arose when the Command Post selected 90 problems from the AMA chronologies and hastilyprepared evaluation messages.
The Command Post did not attempt to select ""problems"" on the basis of validity, but merely as a representative sample of AMA complaints and suggestions.
Quite naturally, in the heat of the crisis or immediately afterwards, AMA officials made observations that did not hold up after careful evaluation or that were unrealistic from a command-wide point of view.
Unfortunately, the so-called problems that were ""more fiction than real"" tended to downgrade the ones that merited further study.
Also, the very success of AFLC's support mission in the face of difficult obstacles worked against efforts to correct the real problems.
Under these circumstances, it was perhaps understandable that the AFLC staff's replies to complaints about their procedures often tended to be defensive and to justify past actions rather than to openly admit the validity of a search for better alternatives in the future.
UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Nevertheless, the Cuban Crisis documentation and evaluation efforts did have positive benefits.
Several problems and deficiencies were uncovered which could have been more serious in a combat situation.
The documentation offered evidence that similar logistics problems from past crises had not been completely solved.
In many cases it backed up the contentions of the AFLC representatives to the Ad Hoc Committee.
Ash & Walter M Wilson, AFLC Ad Hoc Comm. members, to D/Plans & Progs., Hq.
SAC, etal., 1 Dec. 1962, in Special Missions Support Br. , Aerospace Div. , D/S, files.
Ash & Walter M Wilson, AFLC Ad Hoc Comm. members, to D/Plans & Progs. , 10 April 1963; Memo., Lt.
TAC, 7 Feb. 1963, in Special Missions Support Br. files. 42 UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED "" *•"" Notes, II & HI 26.
Working paper, prep, by Special Missions Support Br., circa 23 Jan.63; Wire, DM 2-11316 to C/S, USAF, 5 Dec.62, Docs., 11.
Edward S Ash, Chief, War & Emergency Plans Br. , Plans Div. , D/Plans & Prog., Hq.
Action item report for support of contingency operations, prep, by War & Emergency Plans Br., 8 Oct.63, Doc.
Edward S Ash & Walter M Wilson, AFLC Ad Hoc Comm. members, to D/Plans k Progs., Hq.
Mark E Bradley, Jr., Comdr. , AFLC, to D/Setal., 14 March 1963, Doc.. 49 UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED GLOSSAR Y Actg.
Acting Air Defense Command Air Force Base Air Force Logistics Command Air Force Manual Air Force Regulation Air Force Systems Command Air Force Vehicle Control Group Aerospace Ground Equipment Air Materiel Area Analysis Attachment Br.
C/S Consolidated Materiel Distribution Objective Command Commander Committee Comptroller Conference Consolidation Chief of Staff Dep.
Division D/ME Director of Maintenance Engineering D/O Director of Operations Doc.
Director of Plans and Programs D/S Director of Supply DSA Defense Supply Agency D/S&S Director of Supply and Services 50 UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED ed.
IG Installs. editor Equipment History, Historical Headquarters Office Instruction Headquarters Inspector General Installations Log.
United Nations USAF United States Air Force USAFE United States Air Forces in Europe VC/S Vice Chief of Staff Vol.
