The Korean Missile Crisis Why Deterrence Is Still the Best Option By Scott D Sagan, FOREIGN AFFAIRS, September 10, 2017 It is time for the United States government to admit that it has failed to prevent North Korea from acquiring nuclear weapons and intercontinental ballistic missiles that can reach the United States.
And civilian leaders must convince Kim that the United States will not attempt to overthrow his regime unless he begins a war.
The window of opportunity for a successful U.S. attack to stop the North Korean nuclear program has closed.
That fear was why Khrushchev was so alarmed when a United States U-2 spy plane accidentally flew into Soviet airspace during the crisis.
The same approach that prevented nuclear catastrophe during the Cold War can deter Pyongyang.
Another factor that makes today’s situation more dangerous than the Cuban missile crisis are the leaders involved.
And in June, the spectacle of U.S. department secretaries falling over themselves to declare their deep devotion to Trump and flatter him on live television during the administration’s first full cabinet meeting brought to mind the dysfunctional decision-making in dictatorships.
Cecil Stoughton / John F Kennedy Presidential Library / REUTERS President John F Kennedy signs a proclamation for the interdiction of the delivery of offensive weapons to Cuba during the Cuban missile crisis, October 1962.
When the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommended an immediate air strike and an invasion of Cuba, Kennedy insisted on the more prudent option of a naval blockade.
But from a North Korean perspective, the statement implies that the United States is contemplating launching a nuclear first strike.
The Obama administration made a commitment, in its 2009 Nuclear Posture Review, not to use nuclear weapons against any non-nuclearweapons state that was in compliance with its nonproliferation commitments.
But then Secretary of Defense Robert Gates quickly added that “because North Korea and Iran are not in compliance with the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, for them, all bets are off.
But it is equally important that U.S. leaders acknowledge loudly and often that it would be a disaster for the United States to start a war.
If those in White House do not do so, the civilian and military leadership in the Pentagon should more forcefully and publicly make this point.
The current Korean missile crisis is even more dangerous than the Cuban one.
In 1974, during the final days of Richard Nixon’s presidency, when Nixon had become morose and possibly unstable, Secretary of Defense James Schlesinger told the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General George Brown, that if Nixon gave military orders, Brown should contact Schlesinger before carrying them out.
Yet U.S. military leaders have failed to pour cold water on the idea of a United States first strike.
When it comes to the current conflict with North Korea, that means admitting that there are no military options that do not risk starting the most destructive war since 1945. kim Hong-Ji / REUTERS South Korean marines during a U.S.-South Korean exercise, Pohang, South Korea, April 2017.
WHY THERE’S NO MILITARY SOLUTION Some Trump supporters, including former un Ambassador John Bolton and Trump’s evangelical adviser Robert Jeffress, have argued that a United States strike to assassinate Kim is the best solution.
Moreover, even a limited attack by the United States would appear to North Korea as the beginning of an invasion.
Mattis and senior military leaders should be prepared to resist any orders that they believe reflect impetuous or irrational decision-making by the president.
According to a detailed study published in 2012 by the Nautilus Institute, a think tank based in California, North Korea has thousands of conventional artillery pieces along the demilitarized zone that by themselves could inflict some 64,000 fatalities in Seoul on the first day of a war.
A major attack on South Korea could also kill many of the roughly 154,000 American civilians and 28,000 United States service members living there.
South Korea increasingly relies on a strategy of preemption and decapitation.
Reducing the risk of war will require an end to United States threats of first-strike regime change.
There are few, if any, military targets in North Korea that the United States could not destroy with advanced conventional weapons in a long war.
Should the United States succeed in bringing North Korea back to the negotiating table, it should be prepared to offer changes to United States and South Korean military exercises in exchange for limits on—and notifications of—North Korean missile tests and the restoration of the hotline between North and South Korea.
But to reassure Ankara, it also assigned some submarine-based missiles to cover the same retaliatory targets in the Soviet Union that the Jupiter missiles had and arranged for a United States submarine to regularly visit a Turkish port.
Today, occasional United States submarine calls at South Korean harbors could enhance deterrence without provoking North Korea.
The United States must wait with patience and vigilance until the Kim regime collapses under the weight of its own economic and political weakness.
