Our plan for modified services began in handy step-by-step guide for individuals wanting to early July, with guidance and approval from the Illinois participate in virtual programs.
The handout covers Department of Public Health and the Village of Arlington Heights. desktop computers, tablets and phones.
National Senior Center  All patrons must wear a mask that covers the Accreditation Update nose and mouth during the entirety of your visit.
The Arlington Heights Senior Center has completed all of  Hand sanitizer and wipes are located the documents for the National Institute of Senior Centers throughout the building.
Vending machines and approved for accreditation near the end of January. café are not in service.
The Senior Center was first accredited with NCOA in • Senior Center is operational Monday through Friday, 2008.
If you would like to learn more please do not come to the Senior Center.
Symptoms about the process or to be considered to participate in a include but are not limited to cough, fever, chills, meeting with the Peer Reviewers, please contact shortness of breath, or flu-like symptoms.
Please contact the Senior Center Manager, Tracey Colagrossi if you have questions.
By appointment Escorted Transportation Service, Northwest Phone: 847.222.9227 Arlington Heights Park District Web: www.etsnw.org Phone: 847.797.5341 Hours: Mon Fri: 8:30 am 2:30 pm Web: www.ahpd.org/50plus Park District Office &Gift Store Hours: Northwest Community Healthcare Mon Fri: 8:30m. 3:30m.
The Arlington Heights Senior Center Newsletter is a publication of Arlington Heights Senior Center, Inc., a not-for-profit organization that raises funds for the Arlington Heights Senior Center.
Arlington Heights Senior Center, Inc. does not endorse any of the products or services advertised in this publication.
For advertising rates and information, contact Alex Nicholas, Liturgical Publications, Inc. at 1.800.950.9952.
The 2021 Village of Arlington Heights budget will be discussed as part of this program.
You will be Foreign Policy Association VIRTUAL sent a link to the Zoom session at least one day prior.
Saturday, 1/9, 9:30a-11:00a Sip-N-Swirl Painting Events VIRTUAL 2021 Great Decisions program dates: with Tracey Colagrossi Saturdays, 2/6, 3/6, 4/3, 5/1, 6/5, 7/10, 8/7 & 9/11, 9:30a-11:00a To register for this FREE discussion group, call the Senior Winter Cardinal Acrylic Paint Along Center at 847.253.5532 and specify if you are signing up for the Thursday, 1/21, 7:00p-8:30p final 2020 program discussion, the 2021 program series or both.
Once registered, you will be sent a link to the Zoom session at least one day prior to each of the dates.
Senior Center Manager, Tracey Colagrossi, will take you through the process of the painting Program funded by step-by-step, virtually through Zoom.
You must register for the program before the date of the class by contacting the Senior Center at 847.253.5532.
Friday, 2/26, 1:00p-2:30p In October of 1962, the United States and the Soviet Union came within a few minutes of nuclear war.
Neither John Kennedy nor Textured Rose Acrylic Paint Along Nikita Khrushchev wanted to show weakness by backing down Thursday, 2/18, 7:00p-8:30p from a dispute about Soviet missiles being deployed in Cuba.
Both men did not understand each other and, as a result, made poor decisions based on incorrect assumptions.
Tracey Colagrossi, will take you To sign up for this this FREE Zoom program, call the Senior through the process of the painting Center at 847.253.5532 and register with your name, email step-by-step virtually through Zoom. address and phone number.
You must register for the program before the date of the class by Save the Date for Future Gary Midkiff Virtual contacting the Senior Center at 847.253.5532.
In this intermediate-level class, students learn to express Inside the Life and Mind of Germany’s themselves properly in Spanish in a variety of situations.
Need to understand the main points of clear, perhaps the most illustrious of all Germans. standard input on familiar matters regularly encountered in work or Best known as an eccentric whose love for art leisure.
Can deal with most situations likely to arise while traveling and in an area where the language is spoken.
Can produce simple architecture is legendary, the young King had a connected text on topics which are familiar or of personal interest. charmed but also tragic existence.
The Senior Center offers ongoing, 8-week long sessions all Join German Historian Anette Isaacs, M.A., as throughout the year.
Register in the program, call the Senior Center at 847.253.5532 and advance by calling the Senior Center at information will be provided.7.253.5532 to sign up with your name and email address.
Welcome to the Wonderful bought card with a fellow Senior World of Wine! VIRTUAL Center patrons this Valentine’s Day.
Simply drop off or mail-in This fun and educational online course blends wine knowledge your card to the Senior Center with humor to create a relaxed yet structured atmosphere to by Wednesday, February 3. develop/strengthen your fundamental wine principals in addition to You don’t need to sign your optimizing your enjoyment, appreciation and overall wine name; just share a few words of well-wishes.
This course is designed for all levels of wine your full return address on the outside of the envelope.
No names or addresses will be We begin with the fascinating journey back millions of years ago shared with others.
This will be a strictly anonymous exchange to to the origins of wine and delve into fascinating topics of grape bring someone else joy this Valentine’s Day.
The exchange will be varietal characteristics and grape growing/production methods.
We reveal the simple secrets of wine tasting principles as well as food and wine pairing guidelines.
The Senior Center will hold a taught by Sommelier Robin Tarragano, CSW free drawing of 12 Starter Kits that have been purchased as part , WSET-2 of a pilot program.
Classes will be held virtually on Wednesdays, provided with more details at the time of registration.
For more details and to register, call the more about what’s included in the kit and its benefits, visit Senior Center at 847.253.5532 on or after Monday, 2/1. www.ncoa.org and search Aging Mastery Starter Kit.
Upon request, the Arlington Heights Senior Center will provide a list of students who have signed up to shovel snow for Arlington Heights residents age 60 and over or Arlington Heights residents who have a disability.
Students, older adults and adults with disabilities must submit a signed referral request form to the Arlington Heights Senior Center.
Applications can be found online at vah.com or you may stop by the Senior Center to pick up a form.
The resident will contact the student and make all arrangements with the teen to have their snow shoveled.
Both parties should do their own interview and/or reference check if desired before signing on with a particular client or student.
I’m grateful to those of you The Arlington Heights Nurses Club who were still able to At time of print, the Arlington Heights Nurses Club Lending Closet volunteer your time at the is closed until further notice.
Volunteer opportunities are on hold due to the pandemic, but please contact Sharon Swanson at Arlington Heights Senior Center.
The As we enter the New Year, Lending Closet offers durable medical equipment to Arlington Heights residents of all ages.
Volunteers staff the closet five days may we approach it with a a week, Monday thru Friday, for a two-hour shift.
We will new sense of hope that be looking for volunteers to help staff the Lending Closet once it reopens for business.
Retired nurses are especially welcome, but the Senior Center will no experience is necessary.
Some computer knowledge is helpful soon be filled with the buzz of and light lifting is required. activity that we all enjoy.
Assist senior citizens in your community get to their routine medical check-ups by becoming a volunteer driver.
Catholic Charities, Northwest Senior Services Volunteer opportunities are on hold due to the pandemic, but contact Debbie Bohli-Mitchell in the Catholic Charities Northwest Senior Services office if interested in volunteering in the future, at 847.253.5500.
Wishing all of you a Catholic Charities, Senior Nutrition Program Drivers are needed to deliver meals to homebound residents in the surrounding area one day a week or more if you choose.
Check out Drum Circle Therapy, led by Chris Lavidas of Breaking Grounds in Drumming, Inc.
Chris has created a curriculum of a number of building block classes that instruct the basics of rhythm, coordination, drum history, tone, melody, and musical creativity to name a few.
Don’t miss these interactive and informative classes that are full of energy and enthusiasm.
This FREE program will be held in-person with a limited capacity of 10 participants, resuming in January 2021.
Please call 847.253.5532 to register in advance and specify your preference of in-person or virtual registration.
A Zoom link will be emailed at least one day prior for those participating virtually.
Senior Center Musical Group POSTPONED Also known as the “Senior Band,” this group plays assorted Broadway, movie and patriotic tunes as well as other music.
A successful, person-centered rehabilitation program from a trusted healthcare leader in the community.
The library’s Senior Center classes and programs continue to be offered virtually.
Returns of Arlington Heights library materials, including Reading Room items, can be made in the outside book drop to the west of the Senior Center entrance, at the main library and at any of our book drops throughout the community.
Register online at ahml.info/attend/events or call us at 847.870.3712 unless otherwise directed in the program description.
Your registration email confirmation will include a link to join the program on Zoom.
After you register, call Senior Services at 847.870.3712 to request a book at the library’s drive-up window.
In January, read Then She Was Gone by The January book is Apeirogon by Colum Lisa Jewell and for February, The Henna McCann.
Film Discussion Circle Senior Tech Classes Tuesdays, January 5 and February 2, 2:30-3:30m.
Registration for tech classes opens the first of the month in Watch the films at your convenience, then join which the class is scheduled.
January’s film is Agatha and the Truth of Library staff will assist you to join this 1-hour practice session, Murder , 93 minutes, rated PG. help you troubleshoot issues you have with sound and video, and In February, discuss Firelight ., provide tips and best practices so you can ZOOM, too.
Host a Zoom Meeting Novice and experienced computer users discuss current technology, exchange tips and offer advice for solving problems.
Robert De Niro, Uma Thurman, Rob Riggle Free Friday movies are funded by Arlington Heights Senior Center, Inc.
Jojo Rabbit Friday, 2/12 at 10:00a or 1:00p Movies have closed captioning and are available at time of print; subject to change without notice.
A young boy in Hitler's army finds out his mother is hiding a Jewish girl in their home.
Directed by Taika Waititi; Fox Searchlight Reduced/limited seating capacity for each showing.
Roman Griffin Davis, Thomasin Call 847.253.5532 to register for the McKenzie, Scarlett Johansson 10:00a or 1:00p movie time.
Registered participants may arrive no more • Limited to 10 participants.
For more information or to register to attend a • Four cards per person will be provided for the duration of the meeting, please call Jim Nauheimer at 847.577.1392. one-hour of bingo play.
Bingo cards will be free and prizes will be in the form of snacks and other small items.
Park Registered participants may arrive no Place Investment Club reviews more than 10 minutes early.
Masks must the performance of stocks be worn at all times. owned by the club and works to identify new stocks to purchase.
The focus is determining when to buy and when to sell these securities for maximum gain.
People interested in the club can attend two monthly meetings before deciding to participate as club members.
Those who join M2M Writers the club are required to pay monthly dues of $25.00 which is used Club VIRTUAL to fund new stock investments.
Your written memories will be treasured by your family and you will enjoy the support from fellow M2M Writers Club members in a non-critical atmosphere.
To sign up for this FREE Zoom club meeting, call the Senior Center at 847.253.5532 and register Postponed Programs at Senior Center with your name, email address and phone number.
A senior must access the service drive from Weber Road which is west of the strip mall where the Senior Center is located.
If you have not registered for the Catholic Charities’ meal program, we will provide an AgeOptions form to complete.
Home Delivered Meals Catholic Charities provides a daily meal Tuesday through Friday to Home Bound Seniors in Wheeling and Maine Townships.
Volunteers Needed We are looking for a few good people to deliver meals and help to Catholic Charities ensure our Seniors can remain at home.
Each route has around 12 to 22 clients and takes no more than 2 hours to complete.
Please call 847.797.5350 and leave a message or go to www.catholiccharities.net and click on Get Involved.
Open Discussion Wednesday, Feb.: Open Discussion If you are unable to meet with Rose in-person, she can be reached for Registration required.
Diabetes 7 Self-Care Behaviors, Classes are led by NCH Community Nurse #1 Healthy Eating Rose Jensen, MSM, MSN, RN Tuesday, Feb., 10:30m. to 12m.
Diabetic Eye Disease Tuesday, May Wednesday, Feb., 10,1010toto11:30 11:30a.m. m.
Community Nurse Rose Jensen, MSM, MSN, RN Both sessions are led by NCH Diabetes Services.
Forwill You people who have be required pre-diabetes, diabetes or family to remove members your sock and of people shoe forwith thediabetes.
Call 847.618.5575, or email mcenteno@nch.org to make your Registration required. appointment, no walk-ins allowed.
Call NCH for more information and to register at NCH Health Maureen Centeno, Senior Services Specialist and SHIP Connection, 847.618.4968.
Get screened for various benefit programs to see if you qualify for assistance.
Obtain information about Medicaid and their MMAI plans that allow you to receive all of your health benefits under one plan.
If you are looking for company to go out to eat with and have Let the Park District do all the planning — you just have to register good conversation, come join us.
If you want to go to restaurants for the tour, check-in on the day of the tour, sit back and a little farther away and do not want to drive, come join us. relax in a luxury motor coach while we do the driving.
Stop by the Wood Shop December; however, if you go on at least two tours within that located in the Senior Center and see all it has to offer.
SawStop table saw; 14” band saw’ variable speed drill Due to COVID-19, the Park District is trying to protect our Tour press; Dewalt 12” sliding compound miter saw; Grizzly 15” planer; Club members and will take all necessary precautions needed to belt sander; disk sander; 12” lathe, Delta 6” jointer, Dewalt provide a safe environment for our participants.
Monday/Tuesday/Wednesday/Thursday, 9:00a-12:00p Annual Wood Shop Safety Training Certification is required prior to becoming a member and purchasing punch passes for shop visits.
What Happens in Vegas — The Fireside — March 2021 $80 good for 10 visits; $48 good for 6 visits; $14 daily use fee Cinderella — The Fireside — July 2021 Crosstown Classic/Cubs & Sox — August 2021 Face masks are required.
To make a reservation to work in the The Devil Wears Prada — Broadway in Chicago — August 2021 Wood Shop, please call the Park District Office in the Senior Disney’s Frozen — Broadway in Chicago — December 2021 Center at 847.797.5341.
There are more tours to look forward to in 2021 and will be advertised in future tour schedules.
Tour details will be in the next edition of the Visit Shop 1801 for holiday stocking stuffers, fashionable Arlington Classic Tour Schedule.
Call the face masks, greeting cards and much more (located in the Park District at 847.797.5341 for membership information.
AAC Tours and Certifications are given at 10:00 am, Tuesday – Tuesdays, 1/12-2/23 Contracted 12:45p-1:45p Friday.
Thursdays, 1/14-2/25 Contracted Noon-1:00p Monday Friday 9:00 am 2:45 pm Reservation Only The club is closed on days the Senior Center is closed.
Due to COVID-19 and social distancing, usage of the Pieced Machine Quilting Fee: $50 Mondays, 1/4-2/22 6:15-8:15p Arlington Athletic Club will be by reservation only.
Tai Chi Advanced Fee: $64 Fun & Fit Classes have resumed on a limited basis due to Tuesdays, 1/12-2/23 11:15a-12:15p COVID-19 and social distancing.
Bring your own Beginning and Intermediate will be offered in Spring 2021. water bottle.
Monday Fun & Fit Aerobic 9:00-9:45a When “Downsizing” is “Rightsizing” Thursday Fun & Fit Aerobic 9:00-9:45a and 10:00-10:45a During COVID Friday Fun & Fit Aerobic 9:00-9:45a and 10:00-10:45a Please call 847.797.5341 to make your weekly reservations.
This complimentary workshop, conducted by an area Real Estate Interested in joining the Club but don’t want to invest in a full Broker, will give you a road map for taking this next step.
Arlington Athletic Club of living in smaller houses/townhomes/condos; staging your PLUS Fun & Fit home for sale; how to stay safe during the process and more… Combo Pass includes: This presentation will be held on Saturday, 2/27 at the Arlington Unlimited visits to the Arlington Athletic Club PLUS unlimited Lakes Golf Course, located at 1211 S New Wilke Rd. (two blocks attendance to all Fun & Fit classes. south of the Senior Center) from 10:00-11:30 am.
Prior to purchasing your membership, you will need to be certified by one of our fitness instructors by appointment only.
In case of inclement weather, call the Sign up for Arlington Heights Park District Park District classes early.
SENIOR HELPLINE The Illinois Department of Human Services 1-800-252-8966 offers an emotional support resource for those 1-888-206-1327 feeling COVID-19-related stresses throughout the holiday season.
Once a resident sends a text to the hotline, they will receive a call from a counselor within 24 hours.
All suggestions are responded to by the Senior Center Manager, Tracey Colagrossi, and the Advisory Council President, Bruce Cruz.
This free service is offered through the Tax Counseling Service for the Elderly program.
Appointments will be conducted on Wednesdays and Thursdays, beginning February 3 through April 15.
COVID-19Tax Preparation Details TCE and the Arlington Heights Senior Center continues to keep patrons safe and healthy.
Beginning Monday, January 4, you can stop by the Main Office or call 847.797.5304 to schedule your appointment.
You will leave with your documents and a Tax Preparer will complete your tax return.
You will return on another scheduled date/time to review, sign, and receive a copy of your return.
With e-filing, taxpayers receive their refund in half the usual time and even faster with direct deposit.
IF FILIING A JOINT RETURN, BOTH SPOUSES MUST BE PRESENT OR, BRING A SIGNED POWER OF ATTORNEY This power of attorney is not the healthcare power of attorney, but the official financial power of attorney.
Copies of all your W-2, 1099-INT, 1099-DIV, 1099-R, 1099-B forms you have received for 2020.
Check from your bank for possible direct deposit or direct debit information.
Remember that we cannot do joint returns without both spouses present or a financial power of attorney for the absent spouse.
Wednesdays, 1/20, 5/12, 7/14 & 9/15 Appointments will be conducted in 15-minute increments, by Appointments will be conducted by advance registration only. advance registration only.
To register for a Monday morning blood To register, please call the Senior Center Main Office at pressure screening, please call the Senior Center Main 847.253.5532.
Medicare cannot be billed for this service, as the Village of Arlington Heights is not an approved Be Informed, Stay Informed provider.
ONLY APPOINTMENTS BY TELEPHONE Please call 847.797.5315 for information and details on SHIP is a free counseling service provided by the Illinois Dept. on scheduling curbside check-out and return of equipment.
SHIP does not sell or solicit insurance and is not an insurOnce you have made your appointment for curbside check-out or ance plan.
Tuesdays 10:00 am 12:00 pm • Medicare Wednesdays 10:00 am 12:00 pm • Medicare Supplemental Insurance Thursdays 10:00 am 12:00 pm • Medicare Advantage Plans HMOs, PPOs, PFFS Fridays 10:00 am 12:00 pm • Prescription Drug Coverage through Medicare and other sources This is a FREE service for Arlington Heights residents of any age.
Thrive with Pride Residents may properly dispose of unwanted or expired medication at the Arlington Heights Police Department.
The take back program accepts prescription or over-the-counter Join us on Zoom at 11am on the fourth drugs in an enclosed container or original packaging.
This service and hear experts present on topics of interest to the community. is not available to retailers or manufacturers with excess or Plenaries are new each month, as we will begin the new year by expired inventory.
There is no need to register for these free events; just call or long in on the fourth Tuesday of the Sharps Disposal month at 11am.
If you are interested in meeting virtually on the Due to the pandemic, Memory Café is meeting virtually.
While the third Wednesday of the month from 7:00-8:30pm, please call Arlington Heights Memory Café does have a waiting list for Jasmine Chorath at 847.338.7319. in-person gatherings, there is room for more participants on our In the meanwhile, for those seeking online support, you may find virtual platforms.
Caring.com is a leading please call the Senior Center at 847.253.5532. online destination for caregivers seeking information and support as they care for aging parents, spouses, and other loved ones.
They offer thousands of original articles, helpful tools, advice from GOLDEN AGE OF RADIO more than 50 leading experts, a community of caregivers, and a comprehensive directory of caregiving services.
Join us to reminisce about the Golden Age of Radio Alzheimer’s/Dementia Caregiver when families gathered around the radio and mysteries, Support Group IN-PERSON & VIRTUAL radio plays, quiz shows, westerns, soap operas and more filled the airwaves.
Facilitated by Jim Harbaugh, pictured at right, this support group will allow Discuss popular radio shows that went on to become you to meet others who face similar television shows, including Gunsmoke, Lassie and challenges in caring for a loved one with Guiding Light, and share any favorites you recall.
Call the Senior Center at Services, Arlington Heights Memorial Library, Arlington Heights 847.253.5532 to reserve a spot at an Park District, and the Village of Arlington Heights Senior Center. in-person or virtual session.
Korean American Parkinson’s Support Group POSTPONED The Saturday Korean American Parkinson’s Support Group meetings at the Senior Center are postponed until further notice.
For information regarding online classes, go to Cars are becoming more technologically advanced every day and aarpdriversafety.org. show no sign of slowing down.
This means there’s more safety technology in today’s cars than ever before.
However, many drivers aren’t familiar with how to use the technology to keep them Illinois Secretary of State Information safe.
AARP Driver Safety offers an interactive Zoom workshop, Per the Illinois Secretary of State’s Office, expiration dates for led by a trained AARP volunteer, to include an overview of vehicle driver’s licenses and ID cards will be extended until June 1, 2021. technology, a step-by-step guide of how these technologies work The deadline for the Real ID has been postponed to October 2021. and how they can benefit drivers.
At time of print, the closure of Driver Services Registration for this program will be conducted directly through facilities was extended until January 5, 2021.
Your generosity and contributions were overwhelming and so very much appreciated.
Join the ETS family as a volunteer driver taking older adults to their doctors’ appointments.
Our volunteers pick up our passengers, take them to their appointments, wait for them, and bring them back home.
Our online scheduling software makes it easy to select rides that fit your schedule.
Simply logon to our scheduling software and see what rides might work for you.
We have implemented additional guidelines for both our passengers and volunteers.
The additional guidelines were developed using the recommendations of the CDC and IDPH and include required face masks, screening questions, etc.
Give us a call at 847.222.9227 or email us at info@etsnw.org We look forward to hearing from you.
Road • Help Qualify for Medicaid Arlington Heights • Transferable • Eliminate Emotional Overspending When you are ready, a Glueckert Funeral Home representative will meet with you at a convenient time and location for your free Funeral Pre-arrangement consultation.
If paying by check, make payable to Arlington Heights Senior Center, Inc.
We will not release your name, address, telephone number or any other information that you provide us without your explicit consent.
Through an innovative “one-stop” approach that places a myriad of programs, services, amenities, and information together.
The Senior Center provides meaningful, timely and cost-effective services.
The Arlington Heights Senior Center serves as the community focal point for older adults, caregivers, and students.
Our Guiding Principles  The whole of the Arlington Heights Senior Center is greater than the sum of its parts.
STATEMENT OF NONDISCRIMINATION  This collocation of senior services fosters an extensive network of The Village of Arlington Heights Senior Center does not discriminate in admission to information, referral and assistance. programs or treatment of employment in programs or activities in compliance with the  This synergistic environment produces outreach best practices.
For information call 1-800-252-8966 (Voice & professions as well as in the field of aging.
