The connection between the internal and external struggle towards revisionism – launched by Mao in the first half of 1962 to eradicate the critics of the Great Leap Forward from the CCP – was energised by Mao’s ability to exploit the opportunities offered by the Cuban crisis.
Introduction As recently noted by Xia Mingxing and Shu Zhen Lan, the absence of references to the Cuban crisis in the official publications of the People’s Republic of China suggests that it is still one of the most delicate pages in the history of its foreign policy.
The lack of references to this important historical event in a recent photographic exhibition in Beijing on Che Guevara seems to corroborate this conclusion.
The delicate political nature of the issue under consideration could therefore be one of the reasons for the lack of reliable historical literature in Chinese on the subject.
The few available studies on the issue – published only in recent years – do not provide adequate critical analysis and are mostly based on public sources.
A study published in 2007 by Cheng Yinghong in the Journal of Cold War Studies relied on autobiographical accounts of Chinese diplomats and envoys of the Xinhua News Agency to Cuba recently published in Chinese.
The nature of the Chinese sources used, however, inevitably led Cheng to overlook the profound influence that the internal political dynamics in the country had on its foreign policy in those years.
One of the first Chinese historians to shed light on the importance of this aspect was Niu Jun in a working paper published in English in 2005 by the Cold War International History Project.
Niu’s work has provided Western historians with a fundamental tool for understanding the evolution of Maoist foreign policy at that stage.
The interpretive keys provided by Niu have proven to be particularly useful in allowing some historians of Sino-Soviet relations, such as Lorenz Luthi6 and Sergey Radchenko,7 to better contextualise the findings of their extensive research conducted 2 ‘The way China handled the Cuban missile crisis was not very diplomatic and did not fully understand the world’s fear of nuclear war.
A few weeks after the research conducted for this article, the Archive of the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs restricted the number of documents available to the public and consequently affected the possibility to expand this and many other ongoing research.
Cold War History 75 in the archives of the countries of the former socialist bloc, including China.
This research, conducted, especially in Luthi’s case, also in the central and provincial archives of the PRC, has addressed the issue of Sino-Cuban relations primarily from the perspective of Sino-Soviet relations and is therefore focused on the documents available on the subject.
Neither of them has, however, analysed the papers on SinoCuban relations found in the MOFA archives in Beijing.
However, the key to interpretation offered by the authors is limited only to the history of diplomatic relations and strangely does not mention the important insights provided by Niu Jun on the origins of Maoist foreign policy.
This article is therefore in line with that of Hershberg and Radchenko, and attempts to gain greater insight by broadening the scope of analysis of the sources and using the interpretive keys provided by Niu Jun.
Fardella the sudden withdrawal of Soviet experts in the summer of 1960.
As shown by Chinese sources, starting from the 7,000 Cadres Conference in January 1962 (following the meeting of the Politburo Standing Committee in February and that of the Central Committee in May), a number of party leaders started to share the opinion that there was an urgent need for a drastic revision of the country’s economic policy.
Criticism of the economic development model promoted by Chairman Mao would obviously have political repercussions both on the role of the Great Helmsman and the policy he promoted.
Therefore, Mao tried from the beginning to defend himself and prevent the debate on economic policy from undermining the centrality of class struggle and the building of socialism in China.
In August 1962, during the technical meeting on the economic policy of the Central Committee, Mao suddenly decided to change the agenda by imposing a discussion on class struggle.
By associating the detractors of his economic policy with the symbol of revisionism, the Great Helmsman established an important link between the domestic front and the foreign front.
According to this theory, there was a vast ‘intermediate zone’ consisting of non-Western oppressed nations, including China, that stood between the opposing forces of American imperialism and Soviet socialism.
Mao believed that control over this area was crucial to the United States plan to encircle the socialist bloc.
Maoist anti-imperialism and support for communist movements of national liberation in Asia were hence instrumental to defending the socialist camp and at the same time to creating the conditions for China’s new leading role in the region.
Recent frictions between the two countries on the policy of peaceful coexistence, the alleged collusion between the USSR and the United States against China, and Mao’s belief that European countries rejected the hegemonic role of the superpowers, led him to revise his previous theoretical assumptions in order to gradually redefine the role of the PRC in the world.
Therefore, the bipolar hegemony of the superpowers loosened the bond between Maoist anti-imperialism and the Soviet front and, by weakening the cohesion of the two blocs, a space for Beijing’s influence opened right before Mao’s eyes, stretching from Asia to the Caribbean.
The concept of ‘revisionism’ appeared for the first time in an essay on the differences between the leaders of China and the Soviet Union published in the Renmin Ribao on 6 September 1963.
The slogan later appeared in a letter from Mao published in the same newspaper on 14 July 1964.
On both occasions, however, and even later on, there never was a clear definition of the concept, making it become a mere instrument of political struggle to identify and wipe out opponents within the party.
China was therefore set on presenting itself as the centre of the global revolution and the only true vanguard of national liberation movements.
If Khrushchev the revisionist gave up the interests of the revolution in favour a bipolar condominium based on a compromise with imperialists, the opponents of the Great Leap within the CCP became the ‘associates’ of Soviet revisionism because they kept Maoist China from taking the lead and revitalising the international revolutionary front by sabotaging the country’s revolutionary transformation.
In 1959, in the months immediately following Castro’s victory in the Cuban revolution, the Chinese were very cautious and their propaganda machine did not criticise Moscow’s position toward the new regime in Havana.
As suggested by Soviet diplomats in China, the reason for this was probably that China wished to keep a diplomatic channel open with Taiwan, which at the time was still recognised by the Cuban government.
New Evidence from the Russian Archives’, in New East-Bloc Evidence on the Cold War in the Third World, Cold War International History Project, Bulletin 9– 9, Winter 1996/1997, Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars, Washington, D.C., 252.
Cold War History 79 relations between Castro’s new regime and Beijing in September 1960, Chinese diplomacy set in motion a radical change of policy and started to actively court the Cubans – by identifying those closest to Beijing’s positions – in order to tap their influence on other revolutionary movements in Latin America and spread Chinese propaganda throughout the region.
The risk that Cuba could fall prey to Chinese propaganda led the Soviets to boost their engagement.
In Khrushchev’s eyes and in view of Cuba’s strategic importance – the first socialist country in the Western Hemisphere, just 90 miles from the shores of the United States – the understanding between the Chinese and Cubans was a dangerous challenge to Moscow’s role and urged it to compete with Beijing in courting Cuba’s leaders.
The same could probably be said of the Soviet promise, revealed by Chinese documents, to send the Baltic fleet in case of a US attack.
The Chinese – who according to some sources were already aware of the presence of missiles in Cuba before the crisis in October 27 – interpreted the move as yet another Soviet attempt to control and monopolise the Cuban revolution.
When the crisis broke out after the famous speech delivered by President Kennedy on 22 October, the Chinese embassy in Havana constantly stressed Khrushchev’s increasing difficulties with the Cubans.
While Khrushchev could not help but support the Cubans, at the same time – according to the Chinese embassy – he was terrified by the risk of an escalation with the United States.
The United States leadership, aware that Moscow was not ready to engage in a war over Cuba, continued to exert pressure to force the Soviets into accepting a compromise and abandoning the Cubans.
Khrushchev’s decision to withdraw the missiles seemed to confirm the Chinese insights.
According to their sources, Khrushchev sought to use the threat of US imperialism to kill the ‘tiger’, that is, to destroy the Fidelist revolutionary bloc and pave the way for the triumph of revisionism on the island.
The growing tensions between the Cubans and Soviets opened the way to China’s action.
As noted by Chinese diplomats in Cuba, between November and December, the frustration of Cuban leaders with Moscow seemed to result in growing support for Beijing’s position.
From 22– 28 October, the Chinese had been very cold towards Moscow, as the Soviets did not fail to note with dismay.
In the days following the meeting between Che Guevara and Shen Jian, this analysis was confirmed.
Che shared his disappointment at the Soviet betrayal with Shen and apologised for having been too naive in the past and having believed the promises made by Moscow.
He said that the United States does not have the courage to inspect Soviet ships because they are afraid.
Zhong Su Guanxi Cold War History 81 support, expressed in Pravda on 25 October, in favour of Chinese positions in the ongoing border conflict with India.
According to a current opinion among scholars and Chinese diplomats, the Soviet statements were the result of Khrushchev’s need at that stage to secure Beijing’s support in the most delicate moment of the Cuban crisis.
Once the agreement was reached with Washington, the Soviet position on the SinoIndian conflict would become more balanced and neutral, as demonstrated by the editorial in Pravda on 31 October.
After the agreement reached on 28 October – and perhaps even following the change of Soviet positions on the border conflict with India – the Chinese propaganda machine became openly vehement in their criticism towards the Soviet decisions on Cuba.
In the early days of November, while Chinese newspapers accused Khrushchev of ‘adventurism’ for sending missiles to Cuba and criticised him for having ‘caved in’ before the imperialist aggression, millions of Chinese took to the streets in cities across China to show their solidarity with the Cuban revolution.
The fierce tones of the propaganda machine were balanced though by the approach taken by Chinese diplomacy.
The Foreign Ministry in Beijing feared that the harsh criticism against Moscow’s position in Cuba could be seen abroad as a cynical Chinese effort to use the Cuban crisis as a way to score points against Moscow.
A series of documents drawn up by Chinese diplomats in early November helps shed light on this aspect.
After a meeting with the Propaganda Department, the Liaison Department, the Xinhua agency and Shen Jian, the Chinese ambassador to Cuba, Qiao Guanhua, China’s deputy foreign minister, submitted a detailed plan to minister Chen Yi and prime minister Zhou Enlai on 1 November 1962, aimed at supporting the Cuban cause.
The plan included the suggestion that the party’s Central Committee send a letter to the Soviets openly criticising Khrushchev’s policy and urging Moscow to support their Cuban comrades in their fight against imperialism.
According to Zhang, once the tension in the Caribbean subsided, Khrushchev turned his back on the Chinese and betrayed them.
Fardella plan, ambassador Shen, who had been called back to Beijing at the height of the crisis to study the situation together with China’s leaders, would have had to return immediately to Cuba to deliver the letter criticising Khrushchev personally to Castro, while Chen Yi would have shared the letter’s content with the Cuban representative in Beijing.
Zhou Enlai and Chen Yi called for caution and suggested taking time to discuss with Shen on the best way to face the crisis.
In particular, Chen Yi replied that much had already been done and that there was no need to continue criticising Moscow.
On 7 November, during a speech delivered at the Soviet embassy in Beijing on the forty-fifth anniversary of the October Revolution, the Chinese foreign minister lectured the Soviet diplomats about the inadmissibility of any ‘wishy-washiness’ in relations with the imperialist aggressors.
The caution called for by Chen Yi and Shen Jian belonged more to the sphere of diplomatic tactics rather than strategy.
It was evident in fact that the Chinese were trying to capitalise on Cuban frustration towards Moscow.
In this regard, the meeting on 1 December 1962 between the Chinese ambassador to Cuba, Shen Jian, and Che Guevara is quintessential.
In the last meeting between the two before the crisis broke out, on 13 October 1962, Che Guevara had been very satisfied with the aid from Moscow and appeared to be confident about the ‘total’ protection that the Soviets would grant Cuba in the event of a United States attack.
Shen took advantage of the occasion and, by drawing a parallel between the damage caused to the Cuban revolution by the withdrawal of the missiles and that inflicted on China by the withdrawal of Soviet experts in 1960, he suggested that the Cuban leader – in line with the new framework of the two intermediate zones – follow the Chinese model and rely on his own strength.
Shen stressed to the Cuban leader that there was no way of trusting Moscow.
The Soviet Union seemed naturally inclined to be harsh with true Marxist-Leninists and accommodating with imperialists and the enemies of the revolution.
By neutralizing the threat of escalation, in fact, they reaffirmed their bipolar leadership and tamed at the same time ‘the tiger’ of Chinese radicalism.
This element emerges clearly enough from the talks between the Americans and the Soviets during the crisis.
Harriman, in particular, had sensed that Chinese maximalism was a thorn in the side of Khrushchev’s Cuban policy, a goad that forced him to expose himself further with Castro to prevent the spread of Maoist sympathies among his fellow Cubans.
During talks with the Soviets, in their arguments for bipolar dialogue, the Americans often used Beijing as a bugbear, as a symbol of a form of radicalism that could destabilise world peace.
McCloy said he was very concerned about the Sino-Indian war, an event that seemed to be progressively reaching large proportions.
The clashes might have escalated further and caused both severe damage in the future; so he Footnote 39 continued dooni diplomatiche cinesi nce Minister Ernesto ‘Che’ Guevara, Havana, 13 October 1962, doc.
It’s never too early to share some thoughts about it also to avoid harsh reactions as a result of events that are likely to threaten peace in the world.
He said it was an issue that worried them and that perhaps it could have been discussed sooner or later.
Finally, he added that similar situations indicated the need to solve the Cuban problem as quickly as possible so they could then devote themselves to other common problems.
While Chinese radical antagonism helped to strengthen bipolar dialogue, Chinese courtship of the Cuban leadership did not seem to bear any fruit in the meantime.
While Che Guevara had appeared ideologically closer to the Chinese position, the Cuban president Roa seemed less inclined to yield to their blandishments.
Roa was elusive, took no position and promised Shen that he would study the issue in depth.
Kuznetsov specifies that he is speaking for himself and not on behalf of his government.
In the document approved by Zhou Enlai, the ministry suggested not to ask for clarification on the Cuban position on this issue.
Probably the instructions received later by ambassador Shen Jian – who was visiting Beijing in November – would have been different.
It should be noted that on 18 November, the Chinese would launch the final offensive against the Indians and the next day they declared a unilateral ceasefire.
As demonstrated by Shen’s words in his meeting with Roa on 30 November, this manoeuvre could be used in diplomatic relations with Cuba.
As noticed by Beijing’s diplomats as well, the Cubans, while proving to be friendly and grateful for the solidarity expressed by the Chinese, continued not to reveal anything of their conversations with the Soviets even in the most critical moments.
As reported by the Soviet and Polish ambassadors, in some conversations between late October and mid-November of 1962, Fidel Castro himself was very critical of China’s position on Cuba.
According to these sources, Fidel believed that if the Chinese had really wanted to help the Cuban cause, rather than exacerbate the situation on the border with India, they could have created a diversion in Quemoy and Matsu in order to complicate the United States strategic position in the Far East and ease Washington’s pressure in the Caribbean.
From this point of view, the thesis of a shift in the Cuban position towards Beijing, supported by Cheng Yinghong, is not entirely convincing.
Based on the documents analysed, China’s courtship of the Cubans certainly aroused much sympathy in Cuba but yielded few concrete results.
China did not have the ability to provide any direct military or technological support to Cuba during the crisis.
Even if the heart of some Cuban leaders was beating for Beijing, their stomach inevitably tied them to Moscow.
Instead of interpreting Cuban intransigence during the months of November and December as the result of Chinese influence, it could perhaps be argued that the leadership in Havana, aware of Soviet sensitivity towards Beijing’s competition and of the structural limits of Chinese solidarity, tried to raise the price for Moscow’s attempts to mend the rift with Cuba.
However, only Cuban documents may shed additional light on these aspects regarding Havana’s leadership.
In August 1958, Mao had justified his decision to bomb the islands as an attempt to indirectly help the anti-imperialist forces who had just risen to power in Baghdad – pushing the Americans to concentrate their forces elsewhere.
The resolute Chinese response to India’s ‘forward policy’,50 the subsequent withdrawal of troops across the border and the solidarity expressed to the Cuban comrades, if compared to Khrushchev’s surrender to United States pressure, to the withdrawal of the missiles at the expense of the Cubans and to the change of the Soviet position towards the Chinese in the Sino-Indian conflict, seemed to consolidate the status of the Great Helmsman within the country and in the communist pantheon, especially among the parties of the third world countries.
It is interesting to note that this success was achieved, as Castro himself seemed to point out,52 even at the expense of the Cuban cause.
Beijing’s solidarity with Cuba clearly responded more to the logic of realpolitik rather than that of genuine proletarian internationalism.
While the Warsaw Pact reacted immediately to Kennedy’s famous speech on 22 October by putting its forces on alert, the Chinese hesitated for days and moved only in response to Khrushchev’s announcement of the withdrawal of the missiles.
As the Soviet ambassador to Havana emphasised in his reports of those days to Moscow, the Chinese seized every opportunity to exploit the apparent acquiescence shown by the Soviets towards Washington to their advantage.
Beijing and its diplomats in Cuba vented their finest rhetoric in an effort to demonstrate their solidarity with the Cuban people and push the country to firmly resist the aggression of United States imperialism.
However, it was ‘empty’ solidarity, which was basically limited to classical mass demonstrations in major 49 Y Feng, ‘Guba daodan weiji yu sulian dui zhongyin bianjie wenti lichang de zhuanbian’ [The Cuban missile crisis and the change of the soviet position towards the Sino-Indian border issue], 5 and notes 41 and 42.
The Polish ambassador to Cuba, Boleslaw Jelen, in reporting a conversation with Raul Valdes Vivo, editor of Hoy, revealed that Castro was deeply upset by the late and uncertain reaction of the Chinese to the break-out of the crisis.
Cold War History 87 Chinese cities and some theatrical blood donation drives organised by the CCP’s propaganda machine.
In fact, Mao’s China not only did not actively participate in Cuba’s defence, but – as the Soviets and Cubans pointed out several times – it did not even make the effort to divert United States attention away from the Caribbean with an offensive, for example, in an area particularly ‘sensitive’ to Washington such as Taiwan.
Beijing decided instead to attack India and it did so only after being reassured by the Americans that the United States would not support a simultaneous attack by Chiang Kai Shek on the mainland.
This marked a major rift on issues concerning the very ideological foundations of the socialist bloc.
If the United States remains involved in Cuba, the situation around the world will become more tense especially in Vietnam, Taiwan, South Korea, Laos, and West Germany.
Fardella leading to the creation of pro-Maoist splinter groups in pro-Soviet communist parties.
