Literally, the phrase means, who doesn't have Congo blood has Carabalm blood; in other words, all Cubans share an African genetic and/or cultural heritage.
So, we can already see that this declaration by Castro, made at the height of the Missile Crisis in October 1962 “Cuba no es el Congo” identified an intrinsic frame of reference that posited Cuban international identity not only outside the bounds of US hemispheric and global domination, but, more problematically, also beyond the edges of the old triangular trade route of slavery we call the Black Atlantic, within which Cuba had always played a historic and pivotal role.
My goal for this paper is to explore the extent to which the Missile Crisis was, to use Laclau’s term, a dislocatory experience for the Revolutionary leadership.
I shall argue that the events of October 1962 were instrumental in the development of Cuba’s international identity along self-consciously racial lines, even though this ran counter to traditionally-held myths of a colour-blind society.
I will not take up too much time by going into details of the Missile Crisis, the story of which is probably very familiar to most of you.
It has been told and re-told by scholars of the United States; each version a slightly different re-telling of the sequence of events that brought the world to the brink of nuclear war.
But each 1 49th Parallel Conference Special Edition, Summer 2006 version similarly casting Cuba as ‘at best a pawn of the Soviet Union, at worst a raging mute offstage’; in any case marginal to the really important action between the two superpowers.
Cuban writers, however, have focused upon how the crisis influenced the development of revolutionary ideology.
Laclau and Mouffe have theorized that ‘social antagonisms occur because social agents are unable to attain their identities , and because they construct an “enemy” who is deemed responsible for this “failure”’.3 By analyzing the Missile Crisis with reference to this hypothesis, we can confirm that Cuban interests were ignored, belittled or blatantly disregarded both by their avowed allies, the Soviets, and by the openly hostile United States.
The Cuban leadership really didn’t want the nuclear weapons; what they sought was a show of solidarity with the USSR in order to deter United States aggression.
If it had been a matter only of our own defense, we would not have accepted the deployment of the missiles.
But not because we were afraid of the dangers that might follow the deployment of the missiles here; rather, it was because this would damage the image of the revolution, and we were very zealous in protecting the image of the revolution in the rest of Latin America.
But once the decision had been made to accept the missiles; the Cuban leaders did not want secrecy.
Having been cast adrift politically and economically within the Americas, Castro believed that a show of solidarity with the international socialist camp would best serve the island’s security interests.
What he could not understand was the Soviet’s insistence that the installation of the missiles be kept secret; especially since over-flights by United States military aircraft would undoubtedly detect the activity, and furthermore no attempts had been made to camouflage the missiles. 2 49th Parallel Conference Special Edition, Summer 2006 Up until the missile crisis, Cuba’s international identity as a leader in the fight against imperialism had saved it from overt military intervention by the United States.
What Castro demonstrates is the consciousness he has of the continuing existence of the rule of violence.
This more than anything enraged the Cubans, who had always claimed supremacy in terms of morality and dignity.
No one can come under that banner or any other banner to inspect our country.
We know what we are doing, and we know how we must defend our integrity and our sovereignty.
That is our definitive answer to the illusions and to the proposals for carrying out inspections in our territory"".7 Rebuffed by Washington, and unsupported by Moscow, the Cuban leadership received a further blow to its dignity when members learned from a Radio Moscow broadcast of Khrushchev’s October 28 letter to Kennedy ordering the removal of missiles from Cuba.
The Cubans had assumed that talks were at an impasse; nobody in Cuba knew about the secret negotiations between Khrushchev and Kennedy.
Such language is akin 3 49th Parallel Conference Special Edition, Summer 2006 to that used by United States state officials when discussing Third World leaders, who were routinely described as immature, irrational, or overly emotional.
Interpellation is thus a ‘speculary’ or mirror-like process, in which a subject can only recognize itself in an external image that is fixed and absolute, and it is this fixed image which can in turn confer an identity on the subject.
For our purposes, we can connect this with Laclau and Mouffe’s previously mentioned writings on the construction of the enemy.
That is to say that, confronted by intransigence to their demands, which acted like a speculary to Cuba’s true position within the global geopolitical power structure, the result was a ‘peeling away’ or ‘shedding’ of a particular ‘false consciousness’ held by the leadership that stemmed from Cuba’s geographical proximity and close cultural ties with the United States.
All of our people vied to be in the front lines of combat, in a battle whose lines might not even be defined, a battle where the front lines were everywhere…”12 4 49th Parallel Conference Special Edition, Summer 2006 Antonio Maceo was a highly regarded black military leader in the Cuban War of Independence against Spanish rule.
His name invoked in this statement by Guevara acts on the national consciousness in the same manner as the phrase with which I started this paper; signifying a common African slave ancestry – previously shackled, but now liberated from bondage.
In the absence of a significant native Indian population, United States hegemonic relations with Cuba were rooted in the cultivation of the European/Spanish and negation of the African racial and cultural roots.
This idealistic ‘new man’ was to be an unselfish, self-sacrificing, frugal, socialized, and egalitarian human being, armed and ready to assist revolutionary groups throughout Latin America and the world.
By the time that the Organization for Solidarity with the Peoples of Africa, Asia, and Latin America was launched in the wake of the Tricontinental Conference, held in Havana in January 1966, Cuba had already provided military assistance to Algeria, and formed close ties to Congo-Brazzaville.
While there in 1964, Che Guevara had met with leaders of the main nationalist groups from the Portuguese colonies, and 5 49th Parallel Conference Special Edition, Summer 2006 within a year Cuba had begun providing weapons and military advisers to the MPLA in Angola, the PAIGC in Guinea-Cape Verde, and FRELIMO of Mozambique.
Cuba’s African policy from the 1960s had far greater success than its efforts in Latin America.
By September 1964, all Latin American countries except Mexico had broken relations with Cuba, and Cuban support for Latin American insurgents, a policy known as focoism, was abandoned after Guevara’s failure in Bolivia in 1967.16 In his diaries, Guevara noted his inability to communicate with the Bolivian Indians in any meaningful way.
His frustration at their inscrutability, and enduring belief that they would betray him, contrasted sharply with his experiences in Congo-Brazzaville in 1966, where he was readily embraced as a leader within the revolutionary forces— if only their fighting ability and organizational skills had matched their enthusiasm and loyalty.
It is a matter of debate whether Guevara might have been more successful in Bolivia if Martí’s efforts to define Cuban identity according to mestizaje, a combination of the Spanish and the Indian, had been more successful.
The problem of course with Martí’s rhetorical invocation of the Indian in the process of national self-identification is that it eliminates the role of the African.
The axiom that there are no races in Cuba belongs to the ‘history of the problematic silencing of race as a significant ideological category for the revolution’.19 However, the growing significance of Africa as a fertile site for the expression of Cuban internationalism, made it possible for Cubans to proclaim both their African-ness and their patriotism.
Articulation of the ‘Congo’ within discourses on security after the Missile Crisis would ultimately allow the Cuban leadership to formulate a foreign policy based upon an international identity that is essentially Caribbean.
It yielded and still yields a world where identities are in a state of perennial flux and are constantly being revised in new encounters and improvised to confront new challenges.
It is precisely this process that keeps the culture in motion and prevents its identity from ever crystallizing into a reified, recognizable entity.
