The study documents the Pentagon’s resistance to, and resentment of, President Kennedy’s foreign policy, especially on Cuba and Vietnam.
He avoided nuclear holocaust during the Cuban missile crisis and negotiated a partial nuclear test-ban treaty with the Soviet Union.
He took office with a muscular promise that the United States would “pay any price, bear any burden” in the battle for freedom.
Kennedy was “far more interesting intellectually and far less appealing personally” than his family and friends wanted the world to know, Naftali told the Guardian.
The polemical fire in Obama’s address targeted the many critics of the deal who supported the disastrous invasion of Iraq in 2003.
The setting invoked JFK’s “strategy of peace” speech, delivered on the same campus in June 1963.
The analogy of Obama’s Iran nuclear deal to JFK’s Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty took up much of the speech.
His bold but deft diplomacy spared the world a war that might have gone nuclear.
President Kennedy’s offense in the judgment of today’s right-wing is that he resolved the Cuban missile crisis in secret collaboration with communists.
At height of missile crisis, Pentagon proposed assassination of Cuban officials Jefferson Morley February 21, 2014 A newly declassified Pentagon study, published today by the non-profit National Security Archive, sheds new light on the thinking of United States military leaders at the height of the Cuban missile crisis in October 1962.
As President Kennedy searched for a solution that did not involve a war that might have gone nuclear, the Pentagon was itching to escalate.
At height of missile crisis, Pentagon proposed assassination of Cuban officialsRead More » Nov.
After the funeral, Washington’s response firms up rexbradford November 25, 2013 On the Monday following the tragic and astonishing events in Dallas, President Kennedy’s body was laid to rest in Arlington cemetery.
A host of foreign dignitaries took part, including British Prime Minister Home, French President Charles de Gaulle, and many others.
Meanwhile the federal government’s response to the assassination was taking shape.
After the funeral, Washington’s response firms upRead More » In Syria, lessons of the Cuban missile crisis Jefferson Morley September 11, 2013 In a smart piece for the Washington Post, Michael Dobbs notes the similarities between President Obama’s predicament in Syria and President Kennedy’s dilemma during the Cuban missile crisis of October 1962.
Kennedy, Khrushchev, and Castro on the Brink of Nuclear War,” writes; … In Syria, lessons of the Cuban missile crisisRead More » Comment Policy Site rules to insure a full, fair and civil debate.
Contributors We’re looking for experts in all aspects of the JFK story to respond in writing to reader’s questions.
Support If you like what you’re reading here, support JFK Facts with a tax-deductible donation to Mary Ferrell Foundation.
