Defeat looked inevitable until the USA influenced the UN to send hundreds of thousands of troops to protect the south.
Khrushchev was not happy with the reforms that Imre Nagy was putting down and tried to make him reason however, when he didn't stop implementing capitalist ideas Khrushchev sent in the tanks.
In November Spontaneous revolutions occured in Hungary and there was viscious fighting which lasted for 4 days.
On May 1st 1960 the spy plane was shot down by a soviet missile and the pilot, Gary Powers, was taken for questioning and the plane was recovered by soviet engineers.
The USA tried to cover it up however they didn't know that the pilot had admitted spying.
On the 7th of May Khrushchev announced he had the pilot and plane with the pictures and asked for a full United States apology but Eisenhower didn't give one.
This led to a breakdown of talks at the Paris summit and the cold war was getting colder as Khrushchev described the United States as someone impossible to deal with.
Gary Powers was sentenced to 10 years in prison but was swapped after 1 year for another top soviet spy. 15 of 40 The Berlin Wall AUGUST 1961 On the night of the 13 August, barbed wire mesh armed with machine gunners was put around West Berlin and gradually grew into a huge wall keeping East Berliners out of West Berlin, in the first Year 41 People were shot trying to cross.
Why was it built? To stop East Germans escaping communism through West Berlin. million had done so up to 1961.
This led to Castro turning to the USSR and asking for alliance in turn for trade.
This was a massive failure as they were quickly defeated and received little support.
This led to Castro publically declaring himself a marxist, he now totally relied on the USSR for support making Kennedy convinced that Cuba was now a Soviet Satellite State.
His reforms included more democratic cencepts such as free trade with the West, easing of state control and censorship and allowing the capitalist ideas of competition and profit within industry.
Brezhnev, the new leader of the Soviet Union was not happy with these reforms even though Dubcek promised not to leave the Warsaw Pact, he felt that it could threaten the prosperity of the other soviet nations and encourage the growth of capitalism.
However there was some light-weight resistance mainly in the form of home-made petrol bombs made by students called molotov cocktails.
Underground radio and TV were kept going to inform the outside of events.
He was replaced with Gustav Husak who reversed all the reforms put in by Dubcek in the prague spring.
This led to Brezhnev creating the Brezhnev Doctrine which declared that a threat to one socialist country was a threat to all of them.
He indicated that force would be used to keep the satellite states under Soviet control if needed. 23 of 40 Reasons for Detente Detente Easing of tensions between East and West.
Oil Both the Soviet Union and the USA were worried about the conflict in the middle East.
Oil supplies from that area were vital for both countries, and the suez canal was important for sea routes.
Communist and non-communist countries had become involved in the conflict between arabs and israelis.
Both Nixon and Brezhnev were keen to improve relations so that they could increase trade. 25 of 40 SALT 1 Helsinki Agreement 1969-1972 and 1975 SALT 1 Strategic Arms Limitation TalksAn agreement which lasted for 5 years and limited the number of ICBM's and ABM' on both sides.
Helsinki August 1975, 35 countries signed an agreement including USSR and USA marking the high point in Detente.
The West recognis the frontiers of Eastern Europe and Soviet influence. 26 of 40 SALT 1 Helsinki Agreement continued... West Germany officially recognized East Germany. The Soviets agreed to buy United States grain and to export oil to the West. All countries agreed to try and improve human rightsg freedom of speech and religion. 27 of 40 Afghanistan Background Afghanistan is an oil rich country in the middle east and both the USA and the USSR wanted to take advantage of this.
Since 1955, the Soviet Union had been giving aid and amendents, the USA tried to compete but never gave more than one third of the USSR's aid. 1979, a communist president, Amin, took over with many large muslim groups opposed to him.
The president was killed and the old president, Barak Karmal took over again with soviet help.
China said that they would support the islamic guerilla group, the mujaheddin to try and regain control of the country.
Carter also reacted by boycotting the moscow olympic games, stopping trade with the Soviet Union to starve them economically and sending 1800 marines to protect the oil routes in the middle east.
The War Continues The mujaheddin were well equipped thanks to China and the USA so they took control of the country and used guerilla warfare tactics to fight the Soviet troops.
The 125,000 Soviet troops could not defeat the rebels and suffered increasing casualties and in 1982 the massive attack on the Panjahir valley failed which proved the point that this was, like the war in vietnam for the Americans was unwinnable.
Consequences The new leader of the soviet union Mikhail Gorbachev was elected in 1985 and started talks with the USA in 1987 which ended 1n 1988 at geneva with Reagen.
Over 3 million afghans had fled to Pakistan or Iran and 1 million civilians died.
Reagan increased the USA's spending on weapons from $178 billion to $367 billion.
Reagan spent more and more money on trying to develop more sophisticated weapons such as the cruise missile, the neutron bomb and the MX missile.
The aim was to prevent any long range soviet missiles from reaching the USA by making a huge lazer shield in space. 32 of 40 Solidarity in Poland 1980-1983 1980, there were huge protest movements in poland caused by high food prices and fuel shortages.
Reforms in the Soviet Union Political Prisoners were to be released. 1987 People were allowed to buy and sell for profit for the first time in 60 years. Gorbachev allowed freedom of speech.
These reforms angered hardline communists. 35 of 40 End of Soviet control in Eastern Europe In 1989, Gorbachev' popularity in the world was at an all time high, in october he was awarded the noble peace prize then in December he and the new United States president, George Bush, met to discuss the end of the cold war.
The communist countries of Eastern Europe had become more and more with the control from Moscow during the 1980's.
March 1989, Gorbachev told the communist leaders of Eastern Europe that the Red Arm would no longer be able to defend them. 36 of 40 Collapse of Communism in Eastern Europe Poland June 1989 free elections were held after the increasing pressure from the people in Demonstrations, this was the first time since 1939.
Bulgaria In November 1989 the communist leader, Todor Zhikov, since 1954, resigned under increasing pressure and free elections were held the next year in April 1990.
The Baltic States In 1990 Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia declared themselves independent of the Soviet Union and held there own free elections in which non-communist governments were set up. 39 of 40 The Collapse of the Soviet Union People were unhappy at the slow effect that Gorbachevs reforms were having and saw the easy collapse of communism in Eastern Europe as a weakness.
