New units are published each academic year and all Thomas J Biersteker units are updated regularly.
Known as the Bay of Pigs invasion, it was a disastrous failure. siles capable of carrying nuclear weapons on The president had met with Soviet leader the island of Cuba, just ninety miles from the Nikita Khrushchev the previous year in United States. an effort to improve relations between the Tensions between the Soviet Union and two nuclear powers but with little success. the United States had been high since the late Khrushchev, convinced that the Soviet Union 1940s.
For every United States president since Truman, was a growing power and emboldened by adthis ideological standoff—known as the Cold vances in Soviet rocket technology, saw little War—had shaped foreign and domestic policy. reason for compromise.
Kennedy had worried for months about Soviet Nonetheless, Khrushchev had promised to intentions toward West Berlin and in Southdo nothing that might affect the upcoming U.S. east Asia, but this was much closer to home. elections.
Furthermore, he had promised not Kennedy realized that, if launched, these misto place offensive weapons in Cuba.
Now Kensiles could hit the United States in minutes. nedy wondered what Khrushchev was doing The Cold War seemed about to boil over. and how he should respond.
Cuba’s leader, Fidel Castro, welcircumstances that brought the United States comed in the United States with open arms to the brink of nuclear war in 1962.
You will just a few years before, had recently aligned explore the history of United States relations with himself with the Soviet Union.
Cuba—the country to challenge United States dominaMany Americans felt that Castro’s revolution of the Caribbean and Central America tion was a rejection of the United States effort to bring most boldly.
The island had become a flashpoint for United States how should the United States respond to the anxiety about the world.
An epilogue reviews overthrow Castro, Kennedy had authorized the outcome of the missile crisis.
The size In the Caribbean, Spain overwhelmed the native populations in the 1500s.
In the next two centuries, the British, French, and Dutch and strength of the United States have cast joined the Spanish in colonizing the cluster of an enormous shadow over the small states of islands that stretches from the tip of Florida to the region.
Sugar cane became the Central America have often found themselves most profitable crop of the islands, and Afriswept up in the currents of United States history. can slaves the European colonizers imported worked on the huge plantations.
A successful slave revolt in Haiti When Americans developed a taste for badefeated the French colonial powers in 1804, nanas, coffee, sugar, and other products of the but for much of the Caribbean, independence tropics, American businessmen moved quickly was not achieved until the twentieth century. to set up huge plantations in the Caribbean Unlike Mexico, many countries of the Cariband Central America.
When the needs of United States bean and Central America lacked a unifying trade and defense required a shorter ocean sense of nationhood.
Their small size and route between the Atlantic and the Pacific, the economic weakness left them vulnerable to United States stepped in to build the Panama pressures from their larger neighbors, espeCanal in the early 1900s.
From the earliest days of the republic, Americans felt that the United States was a What role did European explorers unique force for good in the world.
By 1543, however, the Spanish had in self-government. imposed control, uniting an area from what Manifest Destiny served as a guiding is today southern Mexico to Panama under a principle of United States foreign policy during the single jurisdiction.
Mexican-American War, which was ignited in In 1823, after the Spanish empire crum1846 by a dispute over the boundary of Texas. bled in Mexico and South America, the United After United States forces captured Mexico City the folProvinces of Central America was formed.
The lowing year, Mexico was forced to give up not federation disintegrated by 1838, giving rise to only its claims to Texas but also territories that the independent states of Costa Rica, Nicaranow comprise the American Southwest and gua, Honduras, El Salvador, and Guatemala.
Considering its Place in Cold War History  posed the treaty, arguing that the United States settlements in Central America and a boundshould annex all of Mexico. ary dispute between Venezuela and the British By the mid-1800s, the present boundaries colony of Guiana raised United States concerns about of the United States had been drawn except British plans.
With expansion to the mans were seeking to increase their influence west closed, attention turned toward the Caribin the Caribbean and Central America. bean and Central America.
In the years leading Among the colonial powers of Europe, the up to the Civil War, Southerners sought to United States most resented Spain.
Not only expand the plantation system to Cuba and did the Spanish rule Cuba and Puerto Rico Nicaragua, and in the process strengthen with a heavy hand, but many Americans saw their position against the North.
Cuba was the Spanish monarchy as backward and corespecially attractive to the South, because the rupt. economy was already dominated by sugar, Cuban attempts to overthrow Spain’s coffee, and tobacco plantations using the labor control attracted widespread support among of African slaves.
The Pierce expressed the United States desire to obtain Cuba Cuban poet and patriot, José Martí, organized from Spain.
When a new revolt began States had a reasonable right to buy Cuba for in 1895, American sympathies again went out a fair price or even use force if the offer were to the Cubans fighting for independence.
An American Empire Spanish efforts to crush the rebellion in 1896 The North’s victory in the Civil War put raised the stakes further.
A Spanish army of an end to the South’s plans of expansion and 200,000 men attacked villages where support spurred the emergence of the United States for the revolt was strong and herded hundreds as an industrial giant.
More than ever, Ameriof thousands of peasants into fortified towns. cans felt their country had a special mission The Spanish also burned crops and slaughto promote democratic values in the world. tered thousands of farm animals in hopes of The late nineteenth century was also a time destroying the roots of the uprising. of fierce competition among the major powers of Europe.
Britain maintained the largest navy during the By 1898, the war in Cuba had stalemated. 1800s, but Germany was rapidly closing the The Spanish held the cities while the Cuban gap.
In this atmosphere of mistrust and susrebels controlled the countryside.
Meanwhile, picion, Americans feared that the European newspapers in the United States inflamed nations would extend their struggle to the the public with details of Spanish brutality.
When President James Monroe origliam McKinley could not resist the mounting inally proclaimed it in 1823, the United States public pressure.
Considering its Place in Cold War History McKinley’s war goals, however, differed ered, governing an empire was much more from the popular call to intervene on the side difficult than conquering one.
McKinley believed Cuba, the conclusion of the Spanish-American that the United States should take military War failed to lay the foundation for a peaceaction to end the conflict and establish a ful future.
But Congress feared that thirty years of their lives into the indepenMcKinley’s real intent was to make Cuba a dence movement when United States troops arrived permanent United States possession.
Their struggle had united supporters President McKinley the authority to enter of independence throughout the island.
As the war in 1898, Congress also passed an might be expected, Cuban nationalists were amendment requiring the United States to deeply disappointed when the United States grant Cuba self-government once the Spanish negotiated an end to Spanish rule without colonial army was defeated. their participation.
The United States provided The Spanish-American War lasted only benefits that the Cubans could not have four months and ended with a decisive victoprovided for themselves.
Spain and the United their advanced technology and administrative States concluded a peace treaty that turned expertise to the island.
Roads and telegraph over to United States control the Spanish colonies of lines were built, finances reorganized, schools Puerto Rico, Guam, and the Philippines, as opened, sanitation improved, and yellow fever well as Cuba.
A trainload of sugar cane in Cuba around the beginning of the twentieth century.
Considering its Place in Cold War History  sought to create a political system that would Why did the United States closely follow Washington’s guidance.
The American experience in Cuba proved Nonetheless, elections in 1900 produced an to be the first of many United States involvements assembly that strongly favored immediate in the Caribbean and Central America.
The McKinley adminconstruction of the Panama Canal in the early istration now found itself in a quandary.
Interest in a House policymakers wanted to protect United States canal across the isthmus of Central America business and security interests in Cuba, but had steadily grown since the United States had the American public expected Washington to expanded across the continent to the Pacific establish a strong democratic government on Ocean in 1848.
United States concerns about the future of Cuba were ultimately settled, but in Washington The Panama Canal drew the United States rather than Cuba.
Under a plan crafted largely closer to the Caribbean and Central America. by the United States State Department, Cuba was to As American economic and military power receive independence only after accepting a increased in the first decades of the 1900s, number of limitations.
The plan, known as United States leaders began to view the region as their the Platt Amendment, gave the United States country’s backyard.
News of the proposed amendment creased United States involvement during his State of sparked angry demonstrations and protests in the Union address to Congress in 1904 by addCuba, but the McKinley administration ining an additional idea to the Monroe Doctrine. sisted that the Platt Amendment was the price In what came to be known as the Roosevelt Cubans would have to pay for ending the United States Corollary, he warned that the United States military occupation of their island.
In 1901, would act as an “international police power” the amendment passed the Cuban assembly by to maintain stability in the Western Hemione vote. sphere.
Cubans who had fought in the World War I raised new concerns about the independence struggle found few opportunisecurity of the Caribbean and Central America. ties in an economy dominated by Americans The commander of the United States Marine Corps was and recent immigrants from Spain.
They came convinced that Germany had provoked chaos to resent the alliance between foreign busiin Haiti and Santo Domingo (now the Domininesses and wealthy Cuban plantation owners. can Republic) in order to set up military bases Their frustration would later emerge as a powon the island.
President Woodrow Wilson erful force in Cuban politics. ordered troops into the two countries in 1914 and 1916 respectively.
United States involvement in Nicaragua left a particularly lasting impact.
Originally, United States troops landed in 1910 to back a proUnited States government.
The force soon grew to three thousand soldiers, and the Nicaraguan government increasingly came under the management of United States experts and advisPresident Theodore Roosevelt is depicted as “the world’s constable.” ers.
Opponents of U.S. domination in Nicaragua turned to guerrilla warplantations throughout the region, became the fare in 1927.
The United States committed six largest agricultural enterprise in the world. thousand soldiers against a small rebel army Along with its rival, Standard Fruit, the led by Augusto César Sandino, and eighteen company built highways, railroads, ports, and United States warplanes conducted history’s first divecommunications facilities.
The guerrillas, however, and housing were constructed for the workers. moved too quickly and the terrain proved too difficult for the Americans to gain a decisive American businesses linked the economies victory.
Frustrated, the United States withdrew of the region to the outside world, boosted its forces in 1933.
Before leaving, the Amerithe production of export crops, and created cans set up the Nicaraguan National Guard thousands of jobs.
The force soon became munication improvements opened up new the private army of its commander, Anastasio possibilities for development.
In 1934, Somoza lured Sandino to a officials worked toward establishing sound fimeeting in Nicaragua’s capital with a promise nancial institutions and effective government. of peace talks, and then assassinated him.
By At the same time, the United States presence had 1937, Somoza had toppled Nicaragua’s elected negative consequences.
With nies in the Caribbean and Central America control of the National Guard, Somoza intimimeddled in local politics and relied on the dated his opponents and built the framework United States military to support their interests.
In of a family dynasty that ran Nicaragua until Cuba, 60 percent of the property in the coun1979. tryside belonged to Americans by 1905.
In Honduras, an American Overall, the American presence in the commanded the army, and the United States dollar was Caribbean and Central America during the legal currency.
Economic development often early 1900s was more economic than military. proved imbalanced and smothered local initiaThe United Fruit Company, operating banana tive.
Considering its Place in Cold War History 7 United Fruit Company The story of the United Fruit Company is intertwined with the history of Central America and the Caribbean.
The emergence of new industries in the Caribbean and Central America has loosened the economic hold of Chiquita Brands International , but the company remains a powerful force to this day. railroads connected the plantations to Caribernment loans to Latin American countries, bean ports but did not serve national capitals. and pledged not to intervene in the region.
The emphasis on export crops left countries The policy withstood a major challenge in dependent on a single product.
During the 1938, when Mexico took over the property of Depression of the 1930s, for example, a fall American oil companies in the country.
Dein the price of Cuban sugar from twenty-two spite pressure from business interests to send cents a pound to half a cent pushed millions of in troops, Roosevelt negotiated a settlement Cubans into desperate poverty. with Mexico that provided payment to the oil companies.
America would be overtaken by a rapidly President Franklin D Roosevelt brought changing world.
The beginning of the Second changes to United States relations with Latin America.
World War launched a series of events that Under his “Good Neighbor Policy,” Roosevelt would force profound changes in the foreign repealed the Platt Amendment, offered govpolicy of the United States.
The Soviets remained ever, the United States faced a new challenge in Eastern Europe and imposed their rule.
Despite leaders feared that the Soviets would attempt their enormous war losses, the Soviets had to extend communist rule over the entire conbuilt up an army of twelve million soldiers to tinent.
Union and the spread of communism became the top priority of the United States.
By February 1946, Soviet Premier Stalin predicted that Known as the Truman Doctrine, the policy the conflict between communism and capistatement was linked to a request to Congress talism would lead to a new war.
Alhis troops remained firmly in place throughthough few Americans were deeply interested out much of Eastern Europe.
British Prime in the Greek civil war or Soviet territorial Minister Winston Churchill had warned his claims in Turkey, Americans increasingly United States allies about the Soviet threat even while viewed communist aggression as a serious World War II was raging.
In 1946, after losing menace. the prime minister’s post, he became more convinced that Stalin was seeking to divide What two policies were the basis Europe in two.
Better known as “ From Stettin in the Baltic to Trieste the Marshall Plan, the program was an ecoin the Adriatic, an iron curtain has nomic aid package that invested $12. billion descended across the Continent. into the Behind that line lie all the capitals reconstruction of sixteen European states from of the ancient states of Central and 1948 to 1952.
The next month, communists led by Mao Zedong won control of mainland China and joined Moscow in pressing for the spread of communism worldwide.
In June 1950, communist North Korean forces invaded South Korea, drawing the United States into a three-year conflict that ended in a stalemate.
By the mid-1950s, United States leaders had given up on the idea that the frontier of communism in Eastern Europe could be rolled back by force.
President Dwight D Eisenhower rejected appeals that the United States respond militarily when the Soviets sent tanks into Hungary in 1956 to crush the independent-minded government there.
Rather, United States leaders reluctantly accepted the Soviet sphere of influence Turkey.
At the same time, Eisenhower and fense of Western Europe and pledged for the his successors believed that the United States first time in history to maintain a substantial had no choice but to maintain its role as a United States troop presence overseas. military superpower.
The United States in 1950 was in many Moscow’s development of nuclear weaprespects at its zenith in global power.
The United States ons forced American defense planners to share of the world’s income was 52 percent. devise a new approach to national security.
Americans held 49 percent of international Without a nuclear monopoly, Truman and financial reserves.
The United States produced Eisenhower bolstered the United States presence in approximately half of the world’s oil and steel.
The And yet, many Americans were deeply wormilitary built up United States conventional, or non-nuried by the international political climate. clear, forces.
By 1955, the number of American International events in large part shaped troops in the region had reached 431,000, the consensus that emerged around United States Cold and over half of the United States military budget was War policies.
Meanwhile, posed a blockade on the western part of Berlin American policymakers hoped to maintain to unify the German capital under commutheir head start in the arms race.
With overland the doctrine of “massive retaliation” committraffic cut off by the surrounding Soviet forces, ted the United States to use nuclear weapons the United States and its allies airlifted eight to counter a Soviet attack on Western Europe. thousand tons of supplies daily to western Berlin.
Western Hemisphere The United States saw another threat to United States leaders were also determined to its security in Guatemala.
Since 1950, Guaprevent communism from gaining a foothold temalan President Jacobo Arbenz had been in the Western Hemisphere.
His that the establishment of a single communist government had confiscated the unplanted regime would set off a chain reaction, toppling fields of large landowners and had divided governments friendly to the United States the land among 100,000 peasant families.
According to this theory, United Fruit Company lost land under the communism could eventually reach the U.S. reform and claimed Arbenz was a communist border with Mexico. sympathizer.
The United States grew particuThe Cold War struggle with the Soviets larly concerned when Guatemala received caused the United States to be more concerned a shipment of weapons from communist about stability in the Caribbean and Central Czechoslovakia in 1954.
The first makers feared that the Soviets were courting example of this policy occurred in 1947, when Guatemala to gain an ally in the region. the president of Nicaragua, Anastasio Somoza, In response, the United States Central Intelligence refused to honor election results in his counAgency began a secret operation to overtry.
For a a few hundred Guatemalan exiles military few months, President Truman denied Somotraining at a base in neighboring Honduras. za’s regime official recognition, but in the end It also paid pilots to conduct bombing raids the United States resumed close relations with on the Guatemalan capital to undermine the Nicaragua.
Meanwhile, CIA radio ried that instability in the region would open broadcasts convinced Arbenz that a huge rebel the door to communist revolution. force was preparing to invade.
Carlos Castillo, an army That same year, the United States unified colonel friendly to the United States, replaced the Western Hemisphere in a mutual defense him in 1954. treaty known as the Rio Pact.
The agreement, Castillo returned the land of the United signed in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, called on the Fruit Company and signed a defense pact with countries of Latin America to come to the the United States.
The Rio Pact view, the overthrow of Arbenz had succeeded was one of Washington’s first steps designed in removing a potentially troublesome regime. to enlist Latin America on the United States side in For Guatemala, however, the events of 1954 the Cold War.
Castillo lead in forming the Organization of American himself was assassinated in 1957.
In the years States to strengthen alliances within that followed, large landowners increasingly the Western Hemisphere further.
The United turned to the military to crush calls for land States also signed military treaties with ten reform.
Under these were killing thousands of peasants, mostly agreements, the United States supplied equipIndians, in a desperate attempt to maintain the ment and training to armies in Latin America, status quo.
Within Latin America, United States policy and the governments pledged to reduce trade received much of the blame for Guatemala’s with the Soviet bloc. plight.
Cuba’s capital, with more Cadillacs per capita United States worries in the Caribbean and Central than any city in the world during the 1950s.
On the contrary, Cuba was an even bigger By the 1950s, American organized crime was concern in the 1950s.
Politically, Cuba had firmly established on the island, along with been fairly stable since Fulgencio Batista drugs and prostitution. seized power from a reform-minded governEconomically, Cuba could claim one of the ment in 1934.
Washington supported Batista highest per capita incomes in Latin America. as a strongman who would maintain order on In reality, however, many Cubans could not the island and not upset United States interests.
Even find full-time employment, especially in the after Batista’s defeat in elections in 1944, Cuba countryside.
At the Cubans depended on expensive imports from same time, though, official corruption was the United States to maintain their lifestyle, mounting.
Hope for reform suffered a setback which was far below the standard of their when Batista staged a coup to take power in American neighbors.
Few Cubans expected the Batista regime prospects for the future were not reassuring. to tolerate democratic change in their country.
Cuba in the 1950s relied more than ever on the As a result, resentment against the government export of sugar.
Price increases in the 1940s grew during the 1950s. had brought prosperity to the island, but the Few Americans were aware of Cuba’s poups and downs of the sugar market in the litical troubles.
In the United States, Cuba was 1950s badly shook the economy. known best as a glamorous resort.
A boom in tourism to the island began in the 1920s and reshaped Cuba’s image.
Cuba was associated The Castro Era Opposition to Batista developed gradually with casinos, nightclubs, and tropical beaches. in the 1950s.
Most Cuban political parties gave up on the democratic process when Batista rigged elections in 1954.
Instead, most of Castro’s nearly two hundred followers were killed, and Castro himself was jailed for two years.
Considering its Place in Cold War History Cuba in 1956, Castro and eighty fellow revoqualities which make him a leader lutionaries launched another attack against of men.
Most were killed by Batista’s forces him, he is going to be a great factor before reaching shore.
Without arms or supin the development of Cuba and very plies, the eighteen survivors of the landing possibly in Latin American affairs straggled into Cuba’s isolated eastern moungenerally.
Far from the center of power, Castro —Vice-President Richard M Nixon began his guerrilla war by attacking outposts of the unpopular Rural Guard.
Thousands of By the middle of 1959, the United States landless peasants joined the struggle against no longer felt unsure of Castro.
Mindful of the Batista in 1957 and 1958, especially after the long history of United States involvement in Cuba and government forced many villagers into miliLatin America, Castro increasingly viewed tary camps. the United States as a threat.
His government As Castro’s movement gathered strength began taking American-owned property in in the countryside, other opponents of BaCuba without compensating the owners.
The rebels suppressed Cubans who were critical of him bombed government offices, cut power lines, by exiling them or putting them in jail, and and derailed trains.
Batista responded with he became increasingly critical of the United still greater violence and repression against States.
By 1958, even States during the Cold War, Castro’s speeches factions in the military and police were joinseemed to align him with the Soviet Union. ing the opposition.
In February of that year, Cuba increasingly came to be regarded as a Catholic bishops in Cuba called for a new base for communist subversion in the United government.
Batista’s human rights violations also Candidates Senator John F Kennedy and turned United States opinion against him and led the Vice-President Richard M Nixon both tried to United States to halt arms deliveries to Cuba. show that they would be better able to stand Facing opposition from almost every direction, up to the Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev.
On Janufact, in their campaigns both candidates talked ary 1, 1959, he resigned and fled the country. mostly about the Cold War and the competiCastro’s forces quickly assumed the leadership tion with the Soviet Union.
For example, they of the revolutionary movement, and on Janudiscussed a traditional subject of domestic ary 8, Castro entered Havana. politics—increasing economic growth—in the terms of the Cold War.
Kennedy argued In April 1959, The United States welthat increasing economic growth would allow comed Castro, who spoke to large enthusiastic the United States to win the arms race and crowds at United States universities.
Although Castro to demonstrate capitalism’s superiority over stated that he was against communism and communism.
Kennedy also harshly criticized dictatorship, United States government officials reNixon and the Eisenhower administration for mained unsure of Castro’s stance towards the failing to support Cuban “freedom fighters” Soviet Union.
Nonetheless he was briefed by who wanted to return to Cuba and overthrow the CIA about United States perceptions of the Soviet Castro. threat and met with Vice-President Nixon.
However, Kennedy learned after his inauguration as president in January 1961 that “ The one fact that we can be sure of is that he has those indefinable the Eisenhower administration had planned an operation to overthrow Castro.
Considering its Place in Cold War History  aged by their success in Guatemala in 1954, nurtured a deep dislike for Castro in Kenthe CIA had trained fourteen hundred Cuban nedy, his brother, Attorney General Robert F. exiles to invade Cuba, march toward Havana, Kennedy, and his advisers.
The worried that an invasion might cause Khrushoperations, code-named Mongoose, included chev to react militarily in Berlin or elsewhere. sabotage and assassination—all designed to get Nonetheless, Kennedy approved the invasion, rid of Castro. with the provision that United States military forces not be used.
The landing at the Bay of Pigs on “The purpose of the program...is to April 17, 1961, was a complete failure and an bring about the replacement of the embarrassment to the Kennedy administraCastro regime with one more devoted tion.
Kennedy also realized that he had not ing at the Bay of Pigs in 1961 and Operation listened to enough advisers nor had he taken Mongoose convinced Fidel Castro that the enough time to consider the issues carefully.
United States would soon make another, more The humiliating failure of the Bay of Pigs forceful attempt to attack Cuba.
It sent arms to aid rebels in Guatemala in hopes of disrupting free elections.
Considering its Place in Cold War History assumed, United States troops would lead the invasion. hand, the United States led the campaign to As a result, Castro believed that he needed to expel Cuba from the Organization of American strengthen Cuba’s defenses.
To protect Cuba States and organized a corps of counterfrom the might of the United States, Castro insurgency specialists to help Latin American turned to the other superpower, the Soviet leaders fight communist guerrilla movements.
Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev had By early 1962, the triangle of U.S.-Soalready threatened to respond if the United viet-Cuban relations seemed to be pointing States intervened in Cuba.
Castro announced that Pigs, he backed up his commitment to Cuba by he was a Marxist-Leninist and that Cuba was supplying the Cuban military with sophistia communist state.
Soviet officers and technicians ary government against the United States, he also arrived to teach Cuban soldiers the tactics relied on his Soviet allies to supply Cuba with of modern warfare. arms.
Securing a The United States denounced Cuba’s alstrong communist Cuba located only ninety liance with the Soviet Union as an affront to miles off the coast of Florida represented an the principles of both the Rio Pact and the important move for Moscow on the global Monroe Doctrine.
American policymakers saw the oped a two-pronged approach to pressure the Soviet presence in Cuba as a threat to United States naCastro regime.
Political pressure at home was promote economic growth and democratic remounting in 1962 for Kennedy to take action form in Latin America to provide an attractive against Castro’s revolution and the threat of alternative to Castro’s revolution.
Considering its Place in Cold War History 15 October 1962: The Moment of Decision O n October 14, 1962, an American U-2 reconnaissance aircraft flew over the province of San Cristobal in Cuba on a roupowerful in their explosive force and the Soviet Union has such powerful rockets to carry these nuclear tine mission to gather data.
The photos revealed Soviet efforts to install —TASS approximately forty nuclear missiles, each September 11, 1962 capable of devastating an American city.
Since Cuban leader Fidel Castro’s first The discovery of evidence that nuclear appeals to Moscow in 1960, United States officials had missiles had been sent to Cuba forced U.S. repeatedly warned the Soviets against attemptleaders to respond.
The Soviets had the reconnaissance photos were examined on assured the United States that they had no inOctober 15 was the most dangerous confrontatention of giving the Cubans nuclear missiles. tion between the Soviet Union and the United They pledged that Cuba would receive only States of the fifteen-year-old Cold War. non-nuclear weapons to defend the island Today, it is known to Americans as “the from attack.
Considering its Place in Cold War History Kennedy’s Critical Concerns West Berlin and the Crisis In 1958, the Soviet Union demanded a resolution to the divided status of Berlin.
The Soviets argued that Berlin was in their occupation zone of Germany and should fall completely under their control.
This prompted hundreds of thousands of East Germans to flee to the West through Berlin.
To stem the flow, the Soviets put up a wall in August 1961 between the two halves of the city to keep East Germans from fleeing to West Germany.
During the missile crisis, many U.S. policymakers feared that Berlin again would become a point of conflict.
Used with permission. the Soviets might demand that the United States leave Berlin in exchange for removing their missiles from Cuba.
Another possibility was that the Soviets would counter a U.S. attack on Cuba with an attack on West Berlin, all the more likely considering that Soviet forces already surrounded the city.
United States and Soviet because the United States had pledged to use tanks stare each other down across Checkpoint nuclear weapons to defend West Germany and Charlie (a crossing point between the United States and other NATO countries.
Jupiter Missiles At the time of the missile crisis, the Soviet Union had many more troops and non-nuclear weapons in Europe than the United States and its NATO allies.
The United States, however, had a greater nuclear capacity and depended on nuclear weapons to deter the Soviets from attacking United States allies.
In response, the United States had developed the Polaris submarine, which carried nuclear missiles.
Traveling deep underwater, the submarine was very difficult to destroy.
President Kennedy made plans in 1961 to add a Polaris submarine to the United States Mediterranean fleet and had scheduled the removal of the old Jupiter missiles.
Considering its Place in Cold War History 17 circle simply did not know what Khrushchev’s the missiles should be removed but how. motives were.
President Kennedy and his advisers were particularly concerned about the operational “ The only honest answer I have is, status of the missiles in Cuba.
We missiles and their silos were not yet ready for could only speculate about what use.
Kennedy, however, was uncertain of the Khrushchev was up to.” progress being made on the missile bases.
As —Theodore Sorensen far as the president and his advisers were concerned, they were maneuvering in a minefield.
Khrushchev’s motives aside, the White Initially, President Kennedy and his House was shocked that the Soviets had igadvisers decided to keep their knowledge of nored United States warnings against putting missiles the missiles secret from the Soviets and the in Cuba.
On October 16, the president dignant at the secrecy surrounding the Soviet called together his closest and most trusted operation.
Kennedy administration officials advisers to help him manage the crisis.
This recognized that members of Congress and the group was the Executive Committee of the American media would press for a strong United States National Security Council, or “ExComm.” response.
President Kennedy and ExComm met to consider the options for removing the Soviet Why was the Kennedy administration missiles from Cuba.
For the of the three strategies had supporters within first time, American territory would be highly ExComm and President Kennedy weighed vulnerable to Soviet nuclear attack.
Considering its Place in Cold War History Options in Brief Option 1: Pursue Diplomacy Option 3: Airstrike and Invade The United States should pursue purely The United States military should launch an air diplomatic actions through the United Nastrike followed by an invasion to destroy the tions in order to pressure the Soviets to missile sites.
This would risk American lives and is likely to kill Soreduce the likelihood of military conflict.
Any viet and Cuban military personnel and Cuban other steps could be too dangerous.
We should civilians, it is worth the cost to preserve our also work with the Organization of American safety and our credibility as an opponent of States to bring pressure on Cuba from the Soviet Union.
As a means of remissile build-up will lead to a loss of consolving the crisis, the United States would be fidence in the United States, particularly in publicly willing to eliminate United States Jupiter misLatin America, and provide encouragement to siles in Turkey in exchange for the withdrawal pro-communist forces there.
The free peoples of Soviet missiles from Cuba. of the world are depending on us.
Considering its Place in Cold War History 19 Option 1: Pursue Diplomacy T he placement of missiles in Cuba is an affront that we cannot bear.
The United States must be with the Soviet Union and grave willing to trade missile bases in damage to the United States.
Diplomacy and communication removal of the missiles in Cuba. hold the most promise for resolving an Supporting Arguments for Option 1 1.
Diplomacy gives the United States risk the lives of Americans and others. time to assess the situation, gather 2.
Diplomatic efforts would help information, and build coalitions with build world opinion on the side of the other nations.
The OAS could the moment…you should have made it clear constitute itself as an organ of consultation that the existence of nuclear missile bases anypromptly, although maybe it may take two or where is negotiable before we start anything.” three days to get instructions from governments and things of that sort.
The OAS could, Statement to ExComm by Secretary of State Dean Rusk I suppose, at any moment, take action to insist “I think we’ll be facing a situation that to the Cubans that an OAS inspection team be could well lead to general war.
The objective therefore is Statement to ExComm by Secretary of State Dean Rusk their elimination by whatever means may be “I think also that we ought to consider getnecessary.
I think perhaps diplomatic action, but it seems to me essential the Canadian ambassador would be the best, that this channel should be tested out before the better channel to get to Castro, get him military action is employed.
If our decision apart privately and tell him that this is no is firm I can see no danger in longer support for Cuba, that Cuba is becommunication with Khrushchev privately, ing victimized here, and that the Soviets are worded in such a way that he realized that we preparing Cuba for destruction, or betrayal. mean business.
Considering its Place in Cold War History 21 Option 2: Blockade Cuba T he United States cannot put up with the presence of offensive nuclear weapons just ninety miles from its shores.
The Soviet Union has misled us privately and publicly about its intentions in Cuba.
We must be prepared for any eventuality, including that the weapons would be used against us or used to pressure us to withdraw from Berlin.
Accepting Soviet missiles on Cuban attack on the missiles in Cuba are impossible territory erodes United States standing around the to predict.
A surprise military attack erodes world as a defense against the Soviet Union.
Using diplomacy could take months actually change the strategic balance.
The or years, allowing more missiles to be United States still has an overwhelming edge brought to and assembled in Cuba. in nuclear weapons over the Soviet Union.
A blockade is a prudent and flexible continue to assemble missiles in Cuba. step that would allow the United States 3.
A blockade of Cuba would prevent to move to military action the Soviet Union from delivering more without being accused of having conducted missiles and weapons to Cuba.
Well, first place, Kennedy we carry out open surveillance, so we know “If we attack Cuban missiles, or Cuba, in what they’re doing. all times.
Twenty-four any way, it gives them a hours a day from now and forever, in a sense, clear line to go ahead and take Berlin, as they indefinitely.
We prevent were able to in Hungary under the further offensive weapons coming in.
We would affect the West Germans’ atsociated with these two actions, a statement titude towards us.
And to the world, particularly to Khrushchev, that that we let Berlin go because we didn’t have we have located offensives.
We’re maintaining the guts to endure a situation in Cuba.” a constant surveillance over them.
If there is ever any indication that they’re to be launched Statement to Joint Chiefs of Staff by President John F against this country, we will respond not only Kennedy against Cuba, but we will respond directly “So there isn’t any doubt that, whatever against the Soviet Union with a full nuclear action we take against Cuba, no strike.
Now, this alternative doesn’t seem to be matter how good our films are, or what this a very acceptable one.
We didn’t say we’d our whole post-war effort of trying to organize go in or not, and kill them.
Well, we want to act to in shards and tatters.” prevent their use, and it’s really the act.
Considering its Place in Cold War History 23 Option 3: Airstrike and Invade K hrushchev has gone too far this time.
A full-scale invasion could accomplish not only the removal of the missiles but also the end of the Castro regime.
The Soviet Union is testing the resolve of the United States by placing missiles in our strategic backyard.
History has taught us what comes from appeasing tyrants—war, suffering, and more tyrannical aggression.
Soviet missiles in Cuba are an can successfully neutralize the immediate threat to the security of the Soviet missiles in Cuba.
The Soviet Union will not respond by whatever means are necessary. militarily elsewhere in the world to 2.
A military strike against Cuba Hemisphere by demonstrating our will signals that the United States is not to fight to protect national interests. prepared to bargain bases in Cuba for 3.
Military action against the positions in Berlin and elsewhere. missiles and Cuba would eliminate a 2.
Now, as for intentions that can determine the future course the Berlin situation, I don’t share your view of world events for many years to come.
If that if we knock off Cuba, they’re going to we allow the offensive capabilities presently knock off Berlin.
We’ve got the Berlin problem in Cuba to remain there, I am convinced that staring us in the face anyway.
So I see no other solution. resist Soviet military power will have been This blockade and political action, I see leadremoved in the eyes of the Latins.
It also expect similar reactions elsewhere, for will lead right into war.
Lemay, Air Force Chief of Staff “I’d emphasize, a little strongly perhaps, that we don’t have any choice except direct military action.
Considering its Place in Cold War History 25 Epilogue: On the Brink O n October 20, President Kennedy decided on a blockade of Cuba by the United States Navy to prevent further shipments of military supplies and self-discipline lie ahead, months in which both our patience and our will will be tested.” to the island.
This option nize the American public into supporting the allowed the president to steer a middle course quarantine decision of their president.
Noneamong ExComm’s varied options. theless, some critics felt that Kennedy had On the evening of October 22, Kennedy anbeen too rash and that he should have given nounced in a televised speech to the American diplomacy more of a chance.
Others feared public that the Soviets were installing nuclear that Kennedy would behave with the “same timissiles in Cuba.
At the time, breath and hoped that the world would not be the president expected that the quarantine consumed in a nuclear holocaust. would be only the first step in a long war of nerves with the Soviets.
On October 23, he blasted the United States quarantine of Cuba as a violation of international law.
Considering its Place in Cold War History What diplomatic steps did the antine line.
United States vessel that tried to prevent their passage The United States government moved quickly to to Cuba.
That same day, the government put gain international backing for the quarantine.
On OcHe charged that Castro “aided and abetted an tober 25, at least a dozen Soviet ships en route invasion of the hemisphere,” making himself to Cuba turned back, but preparations at the “an accomplice in the communist enterprise missile sites on the island accelerated.
Stevenson called for a and Cubans started working around the clock UN vote to condemn the installation of Soviet to make the missiles operational. missiles in Cuba, but the Soviet ambassador to War seemed even more likely when Soviet the UN vetoed Stevenson’s proposal. forces shot down a United States reconnaissance flight The Organization of American States over Cuba on October 27, killing the pilot, , on the other hand, did vote twenty to Major Rudolf Anderson.
The day before Castro zero in support of the United States quarantine, conhad ordered Cuban air defense forces to fire demned the Soviet Union as an aggressor, on any United States aircraft that flew within range. and branded Cuba as a threat to security in Meanwhile, ExComm received reports that the the hemisphere.
The secret manner in which missiles in Cuba were about to become operathe missiles were placed in Cuba infuriated tional.
American leaders also feared Cuban support of If the Soviets refused to back down, the United communist guerrilla movements in their own States would be faced with the options to countries. allow the missiles to remain in Cuba, launch an air strike, or to invade the island.
The United States naval quarantine went warheads had reached Cuba, but United States leaders into effect October 24.
Initially, Khrushchev had no choice but to assume that they were on ordered Soviet ships to race toward the quarthe island.
With these pressures bearing down DEFCON DEFCON, or Defense Condition, refers to the United States state of readiness for nuclear war.
Considering its Place in Cold War History 7 out of Cuba in return for a “A Hard Rain’s A-Gonna Fall” United States pledge not to invade The feelings that many Americans had during the missile the island. crisis may be hard to imagine today.
Although reactions varied, On October 27, a secthe effects of the crisis influenced the lives of many and found ond letter arrived signed expression in popular culture.
Dylan wrote the song took a much more hardline “A Hard Rain’s A-Gonna Fall” during the missile crisis. position, insisting that the United States remove “ Hard Rain is a desperate kind of song.
Every line in it is its nuclear missiles from actually the start of a whole song.
But when I wrote it, Turkey in return for a withI thought I wouldn’t have enough time alive to write all drawal of Soviet missiles those songs so I put all I could into this one.” from Cuba.
Kennedy found —Bob Dylan the demands contained in the second letter unacceptBelow is the third stanza from Dylan’s “A Hard Rain’s A-Gonna able for two reasons.
Heard the roar of a wave that could drown the whole world, medium-range nuclear Heard one hundred drummers whose hands were a-blazin’, missiles to deter an atHeard ten thousand whisperin’ and nobody listenin’, tack by the Soviet Union.
But even supportthe two letters, Kennedy and his advisers ers of such a plan recognized that it should not decided to respond only to the first letter and be seen as a public trade. to ignore the second one.
The first pected the Soviets to remove the missiles from letter, received October 26, was an emotional Cuba under international observation and suappeal apparently composed by Khrushchev pervision.
Kennedy also demanded safeguards himself, calling on Kennedy to avoid the catasto ensure that the Soviets would not place trophe of nuclear war.
Considering its Place in Cold War History sent his brother, Attorney General Robert F reaction would be to a United States invasion of Cuba.
Members of the ExComm pondered the dangers facing their country after their meeting at 9m. on Satur“ We had to have a commitment by tomorrow that those bases would be removed.
He bara Tuchman’s The Guns of August, which should understand that if they did described how the leaders of Europe miscalcunot remove those bases, we would lated their way into World War I in 1914.
I am not we needed an answer immediately going to push the Russians an inch from the Soviet Union.
Dobrynin’s report of his meeting with Robert However, he advised Dobrynin that if the SoviKennedy.
In addition, he received a cable from ets tried to present the withdrawal as a missile Castro.
Khrushchev was faced with a difficult Neither the president nor his advisers decision.
Should the Soviet leader refuse the were confident that Khrushchev would accept United States offer, risk military confrontation, and a the final American offer.
Should he stick to an air strike against the missile sites and an his proposed swap of Turkish missiles for Cuinvasion of Cuba intensified.
Considering its Place in Cold War History 29 to defuse the confrontation.
In order to get the In the weeks following the resolution of message as quickly as possible to President the missile crisis, Soviet diplomats pressed Kennedy, Khrushchev ordered that a message Castro to accept the Kennedy-Khrushchev be broadcast by radio.
Castro, however, would not permit nounced that the Soviet Union was ordering United States specialists to come to Cuba to verify the the dismantling and removal of the missiles in removal of the missiles, and he accused the exchange for United States guarantees of Cuban soverSoviets of abandoning Cuba in the face of U.S. eignty.
Verification had to take place in brought the superpowers to the brink of war, international waters.
The Soviet-Cuban talks possibly nuclear war, was over. dragged on until November 19 before Castro reluctantly gave his assent to other aspects of the agreement.
Adding to the pressure the “ The Soviet government, in addition to earlier instructions on the discontinuance of further work on Cuban leader felt, the United States continued its naval quarantine and daily reconnaissance flights during the negotiations. construction sites, has given a new order to dismantle the weapons, In the end, Castro saw the arrangement which you describe as offensive, and that resolved the missile crisis as a threat to to crate them and return them to the Cuba’s security.
Khrushchev had not only Soviet Union.” agreed to withdraw the missiles, but also to —Official Communiqué of the remove a squadron of Soviet bombers from the Soviet Union island.
News of the deal between the Soviets “ We believe that besides having salvaged world peace and having prevented nuclear war, we should and the Americans reached him by radio.
Guantanamo to Cuba, and end the ongoing Throughout the Cuban missile crisis, the United States economic blockade of Cuba. fear of nuclear war hung over the heads of both United States and Soviet leaders.
President KenWhile Moscow, Washington, and the rest nedy said he believed that there was a 30 to 50 of the world breathed easier after October 28, percent chance that the missile crisis would Castro kept Cuba on a war footing.
He had lead to a nuclear war. already ordered the mobilization of 270,000 Cuban soldiers on October 22 in anticipation In order to avoid a nuclear exchange, of a United States invasion.
Castro was convinced that Khrushchev turned his back on his Cuban ally the United States would not honor its pledge and came to terms with his Cold War rival.
He had believed all along doing so, the Soviet leader risked both his ties that the Soviet missiles were needed to deter with Cuba and his country’s reputation as a United States intervention and defend the Cuban revoglobal superpower. lution.
Considering its Place in Cold War History and the Soviet Union established a hotline to would have been incomparably ease communication between leaders in times greater.
The arrangement featured teletype been used in Vietnam and in other machines installed in both the Kremlin and cases.” the White House.
Leaders reportedly used the —Georgy Shakhnazarov, an aide to former hotline dozens of times.
The hotline reduced Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev the risk of a misunderstanding resulting in deadly conflict.
Kennedy focused on building on the openThe missile crisis also impressed on the ing in SovietUnited States relations that the Cuban minds of Kennedy and Khrushchev the danmissile crisis created.
The ideological conflict gers of making nuclear threats against each would continue, but both Khrushchev and other.
Having come so close to the unthinkable Kennedy worked to diminish the tensions horror of a nuclear war, leaders on both sides between the two nations. recognized the need to embark on a new path to prevent nuclear confrontation in the future.
For, in the final “ I am convinced that if there had been no Caribbean crisis, the danger of nuclear war in the subsequent years analysis, our most basic common link is the fact that we all inhabit this planet.
A United States destroyer inspects a Soviet ship transporting a missile from Cuba to the Soviet Union.
Considering its Place in Cold War History 31 We all cherish our children’s future. missiles stationed in other NATO countries.
Confident In contrast, though we did not know it at and unafraid, we labor on—not the time, the Soviets’ ability to strike United States tertoward a strategy of annihilation, but ritory was limited.
Americans feared the Soviets would take the “One Hell of a Gamble” lead in deploying long-range nuclear missiles, With the end of the Cold War and the just as they had launched the first space sateldissolution of the Soviet Union thirty years lite in 1957. later, key participants in the 1962 crisis from Under Presidents Dwight Eisenhower the United States, the former Soviet Union, and John Kennedy, additional funding went and Cuba met on several occasions to review toward strengthening the country’s nuclear cathe events.
Meanwhile, United States policymakers came the declassification of secret U.S., Soviet, and to realize that many of Khrushchev’s claims Cuban documents, we now know much more were exaggerated.
By the time of the missile about Khrushchev’s motives for installing crisis, Soviet nuclear capability was still far nuclear missiles in Cuba as well as Castro’s behind United States capability.
Moreover, the Soviets had no submarineSoviets shared Castro’s conviction that the launched missiles and were at a seven-to-one United States would use force to snuff out disadvantage in long-range bombers. communism in Cuba.
They believed that nu“ clear weapons would be a powerful deterrent It naturally tormented our leadership to a United States invasion of the island.
Because we were believe that one of Khrushchev’s primary moactually subject to a possible attack tives for installing the weapons was to protect of American missile forces, and Cuba. aviation forces, and we had nothing Khrushchev also hoped to address the with which to respond.” imbalance of nuclear forces between the su—Sergei N Khrushchev, son of Premier perpowers.
In 1962, the United States could Nikita Khrushchev claim a decisive edge over the Soviet Union both in sheer number of nuclear warheads Khrushchev believed that placing the and in missiles in Cuba would address the nuclear the number of missiles.
Considering its Place in Cold War History States to abandon West Berlin.
According —Cuban Official Jorge Risquet to Douglas Dillon, Kennedy’s treasury secretary, the presence of forty missiles in Cuba In Castro’s mind, accepting the missiles “radically altered the numbers of deliverable was proof that Cuba was willing to position warheads, and in that sense radically initself on the front line of the Cold War.
Castro creased Soviet capability.” may have even been flattered by Khrushchev’s offer to make Cuba the first communist counFormer Soviet officials and scholars have try, other than the Soviet Union, in which confirmed that Khrushchev felt Soviet misSoviet nuclear missiles would be deployed. siles in Cuba would serve as a response to the deployment of United States missiles in Turkey.
Khrushchev simply had not considered the According to scholars close to the crisis, Caspossibility that the United States would react tro probably hoped that his actions would be as strongly as it did. reciprocated in some way at a later date.
While understanding Soviet motives in Both Kennedy and Khrushchev were terthe crisis is crucial, the Cuban viewpoint is ribly anxious about the possibility of nuclear equally important.
Newly discovered evidence suggests that Soviet missiles risked provoking a United States invatheir fears were justified.
Yet, Castro unhesitatingly head of operational planning for the Soviet welcomed the missiles, not only because he General Staff in 1962, General Anatoly Gribthought they would deter a United States attack on kov, nuclear warheads had indeed reached Cuba, but also because he believed that they Cuba in the weeks before the missile crisis would strengthen the Soviet Union and other erupted in the international arena.
The Soviet communist countries. warheads were designed to be delivered by short-range, tactical nuclear missiles.
Considering its Place in Cold War History 33 missiles on the island were capable of strikresponding with nuclear warheads. ing targets up to one hundred miles away.
In Although the United States mainland was beyond the utter disaster.” range of the missiles, they could have been —Kennedy’s Secretary of Defense used with devastating results against AmeriRobert S McNamara can troops invading Cuba.
At a 1992 meeting in Havana, Gribkov said that the missiles Kennedy, who had been under considercould have been launched by the Soviet comable pressure from the military and members mander in Cuba without authorization from of Congress to invade Cuba, had feared an Moscow. invasion could provoke a nuclear response.
Considering its Place in Cold War History Optional Reading: Forty Years of U.S.-Cuban Relations T he end of the Soviet Union and the Cold War in 1991 has changed the definition of United States security throughout most of the world. for continuing to defy the United States.
To the consternation of the United States, Castro sought to take advantage of Cuba’s growing United States officials today are not worried about the stature by encouraging revolutions in other naspread of communism, but they are concerned tions, especially in Latin America. about refugee crises, drug trafficking, enviAn angered United States government continued ronmental issues, terrorism, and the spread of a strict economic embargo against Cuba and weapons of mass destruction. worked to isolate Castro’s government in the United States relations with Russia and other nainternational arena.
For its part, Cuba loudly tions of the former Soviet Union have evolved, condemned what Castro viewed as United States impebut the relationship between the United States rialism. and Castro’s Cuba remains frozen in time.
Cuba’s aggressive foreign policy even Since the Cuban missile crisis, U.S.-Cuban strained its relationship with the Soviet relations have been filled with confrontation Union.
The combination of Castro’s Castro was a potentially dangerous upstart continued defiance of the United States couwho needlessly provoked the anger of the pled with a politically active Cuban-American United States.
Moscow had been supportcommunity have not allowed the remaining ing communist parties for years in Latin embers of the Cold War to go out.
America and favored a slower, more calculated approach to laying the groundwork for a comWhy did tense relations with Cuba munist revolution.
The The United States had its own reasons to United States had stood up to communism; be upset at Castro.
There was even the his lieutenants, Ernesto Che Guevara, loose to possibility of better relations with the Sofoment revolution in Bolivia.
Looking toward the future, most shipped arms to guerrillas seeking to overAmericans felt confident that their country throw democratic governments in Venezuela remained unrivaled as the strongest nation and Costa Rica.
There seemed to be few limits that Castro’s actions were designed to underto United States power in the early 1960s.
States was willing to do whatever was necesprogram designed to bolster democracy and sary to contain the influence of the Soviet social reform in Latin America.
President Kennedy in 1961, the program called Without question, the Cuban missile crisis for the United States to provide $20 billion aggravated the hostility between the United over ten years to fund economic developStates and Cuba.
Kennedy had also created Castro undertook a bold foreign policy which the Peace Corps to allow thousands of young clashed with United States efforts to contain commuAmericas to participate in projects designed nism. to improve everyday life in Latin America and other parts of the world.
Considering its Place in Cold War History 35 United States military response to the Cuban threat. promote communism in what was then known To help governments in Latin America and as the third world. other regions defeat communist rebels, the United States formed an elite counterinsurHow did the election of Ronald Reagan gency corps, known as the Green Berets.
United States helped modernize military The election of Ronald Reagan in 1980 units throughout the hemisphere to combat marked a new direction for the United States well-organized guerrilla units and also trained in the world.
President Reagan placed antipolice forces to control urban riots and prevent communism at the heart of his foreign policy. sabotage.
He labeled the Soviet Union the “evil empire” The ongoing conflict between the United and saw Cuba as the source of revolutionary States and the Soviet-Cuban alliance made seaggression in Central America and the Caribcurity and stability in the region a top priority bean.
To counter forces supexpansion led to several clashes with the Casported by the Castro government, the United tro government over its policies in Grenada, States often found itself on the side of leaders Nicaragua, and El Salvador. who violated democratic principles.
At the close of the 1980s, the contest between the United States and Cuba clearly How important was the favored Washington.
Elections had replaced the government of NiOther countries in Latin America did not caragua with one more friendly to the United follow Cuba’s example.
Meanwhile, the Cuban-American maintained an economic embargo against community of more than one million people, Cuba, and the revolution’s radical economic centered in South Florida, was becoming more experiments led to confusion and shortages.
He signed trade agreements in 1972 that firmly linked the two Historical Association of Southern Florida.
Cuba also loyally supported the Soviet position in the UN and other international forums.
By the middle of the 1970s, Cuba had received billions of dollars in aid from Moscow.
Soviet oil shipments shielded Cuba from the energy price hikes that began in 1973.
At the same A billboard in Cuba illustrates the warm relations between Fidel Castro time, Cuba and the Soviet and Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev.
Considering its Place in Cold War History aggressive in its efforts to force Castro out of Castro.
These regimes were important econompower. ic and military allies for Cuba.
As Cuba’s trade On balance, the Reagan administration’s links with the former Soviet bloc unraveled, anticommunist offensive in the region had Cuban imports fell by more than 75 percent. reasserted United States strength, leaving Castro in a Oil imports dropped by more than half, leavlonely position.
Yet critics argued that Reaing much of Cuba’s agricultural economy gan exaggerated the communist threat in the without fuel.
Caribbean and Central America and that United States Castro enacted a strategy for holding onto policies contributed to the cycle of violence power.
He clamped down on political oppoand poverty in the region. sition and tightened his grip on the national economy.
During the 1980s, more to fight in defense of the Cuban revolution and than two-thirds of Cuba’s trade was with the warned his people to prepare for a United States assault Soviet Union.
The Cubans relied on the Soon the island. viets for oil and grain, while exporting to the USSR mostly sugar, nickel, and citrus fruits.
The desperate economic situation forced Soviet trade subsidies supplied Cuba with at Castro to find new trading partners.
He opened least $3 billion in annual assistance, amountbeaches and nightclubs to foreign tourists.
In ing to approximately one-quarter of Moscow’s 1995, he lowered barriers to foreign investtotal foreign aid spending.
The fall of comment, giving foreigners the right to fully own munist leaders in Eastern Europe also stung businesses in Cuba.
Cuban citizens themselves Castro and Human Rights After coming to power, Fidel Castro imprisoned thousands of Cubans who had opposed him in a bitter political struggle.
Castro’s regime then imprisoned Valls in 1964 after he continued the struggle for democratic rights in his country.
If someone found a cockroach or other unusual object ﬂoating in his dinner, he would say, ‘This is protein,’ and either eat it or throw it away.
Considering its Place in Cold War History 37 found ways to make the best of a bad economic situation.
Reprinted with permission by TMS. ment also legalized some kinds of self-employment, decriminalized dollar possession, and allowed private markets to exist.
Castro now argues that his reforms have been designed not to transform but rather to save socialism.
The Cubans receive and depend on over one bilHelms-Burton Act of 1996 put further pressure lion dollars per year from friends and family on the Castro government by punishing any in the United States.
Today, there is growing nation that traded with or invested in Cuba. bi-partisan support for ending the embargo The United States State Department has not fully against Cuba and opening Cuba’s market for implemented the Helms-Burton Act because United States goods.
Nonetheless, Castro angrily continof the adverse effect it would have on United States ues to reject United States calls for democratic reforms relationships with other countries.
Even so, in Cuba. the United States has paid a diplomatic and The difficult economic situation has forced economic price for its hard line toward Cuba.
Castro to appeal to Cuban nationalism (and In 1994, more than one hundred countries in anger toward the United States) rather than the UN voted to condemn the United States embargo communist or socialist ideals to rally support against Cuba.
W hile the Cold War with the Soviet Union is over, it still casts a shadow over U.S.-Cuban relations.
Castro seems determined to hold onto power; the United States remains determined to see him go.
How long the standoff between the two nations will endure is unclear, although as long as Castro remains in power change seems unlikely.
We send you a copy. of Cuba to strengthen its defensive capacity and to defend the motherland will provoke the We consider this declaration of the govangry protest of all peace-loving peoples and ernment of the United States and Kennedy’s will provoke the mobilization of great masses speech of October 22 to be an exceptional to defend the just cause of Revolutionary intervention in the affairs of the Republic of Cuba.
Cuba, a violation of the norms of international law and of the fundamental rules that govern We send you, comrade Castro, and all your relations between states and a blatant act of comrades in arms, our warm greetings and provocation against the Soviet Union.
The express our firm certainty that the aggressive Republic of Cuba has the same rights as any plans of Northamerican imperialism will sufother sovereign state to defend its country and fer defeat. to choose its allies according to its wishes.
We N Khrushchev reject the Northamerican government’s shameless demands to control the shipment of weapons to Cuba and its aspirations to deterUnited States Proclamation on mine the type of weapons that the Republic Interdiction of Offensive of Cuba may possess.
Any vessel or craft which it is beNOW, THEREFORE, I, JOHN F KENNEDY, lieved is en route to Cuba and may be carrying President of the United States of America, prohibited material or may itself constitute acting under and by virtue of the authority such material shall, wherever possible, be conferred upon me by the Constitution and directed to proceed to another destination of statutes of the United States in accordance its own choice and shall be taken into custody with the aforementioned resolutions of the if it fails or refuses to obey such directions.
Considering its Place in Cold War History which might restrain them. you success with the enormous task and great You can be sure that we will resist with responsibilities which are in your hands. determination, whatever the case.
The Cuban Fraternally, people’s morale is extremely high and the Fidel Castro people will confront aggression heroically.
Soviet Union must never allow circumstances From your letter I got the feeling that you have in which the imperialists could carry out a some understanding of the situation which has nuclear first strike against it. developed, and sense of responsibility.
I tell you this because I believe that the I value this. imperialists’ aggressiveness makes them Now we have already publicly exchanged extremely dangerous, and that if they manage our evaluations of the events around Cuba and to carry out an invasion of Cuba—a brutal act each of us has set forth his explanation and his in violation of universal and moral law—then understanding of these events.
Consequently, that would be the moment to eliminate this I would judge that, apparently, a continuation danger forever, in an act of the most legitimate of an exchange of opinions at such a distance, self-defense.
However harsh and terrible the even in the form of secret letters, will hardly solution, there would be no other. add anything to that which one side has alThis opinion is shaped by observing the ready said to the other. development of their aggressive policy.
The I think you will understand me correctly if imperialists, without regard for world opinion you are really concerned about the welfare of and against laws and principles, have blockthe world.
We, comproblem. munists, are against all wars between states You have been, and are, a tireless defender in general and have been defending the cause of peace, and I understand that these moof peace since we came into the world.
We ments, when the results of your superhuman have always regarded war as a calamity, and efforts are so seriously threatened, must be not as a game nor as a means of the attainment bitter for you.
We will maintain our hopes for of definite goals, nor, all the more, as a goal saving the peace until the last moment, and we in itself.
Our goals are clear, and the means are ready to contribute to this in any way we to attain them is labor.
But, at the same time, we are serene and calamity for all the peoples. ready to confront a situation which we see as It is thus that we, Soviet people, and, very real and imminent. together with us, other peoples as well, underI convey to you the infinite gratitude and stand the questions of war and peace.
I can, in recognition of the Cuban people to the Soany case, firmly say this for the peoples of the viet people, who have been so generous and socialist countries, as well as for all progresfraternal, along with our profound gratitude sive people who want peace, happiness, and and admiration to you personally.
Considering its Place in Cold War History 41 I see, Mr President, that you too are not uses and various power, but using only these devoid of a sense of anxiety for the fate of means.
These missiles are a means of extermithe world, of understanding, and of what war nation and destruction.
You are with these missiles, even nuclear missiles of a threatening us with war.
Without people, any means in reply would be that you would experience however powerful cannot be offensive. the same consequences as those which you How can one, consequently, give such a sent us.
And that must be clear to us, people completely incorrect interpretation as you invested with authority, trust, and responsibilare now giving, to the effect that some sort of ity.
All the means petty passions, regardless of whether elections located there, and I assure you of this, have a are impending in this or that country, or not defensive character, are on Cuba solely for the impending.
These are all transient things, but purposes of defense, and we have sent them to if indeed war should break out, then it would Cuba at the request of the Cuban Government. not be in our power to stop it, for such is the You, however, say that these are offensive logic of war.
It is apparent from what new appeared in military strategy that one can you have written me that our conceptions think that it is possible to attack thus, I say are different on this score, or rather, we have precisely attack, and not destroy, since barbardifferent estimates of these or those military ians, people who have lost their sense, destroy. means.
You can regard us with distrust, but, You are a military man and, I hope, will in any case, you can be calm in this regard, understand me.
Let us take for example a that we are of sound mind and understand simple cannon.
But you too will means if it is set up to defend boundaries or a receive the same that you hurl against us. fortified area.
But if one concentrates artillery, And I think that you also understand this.
My and adds to it the necessary number of troops, conversation with you in Vienna gives me the then the same cannons do become an offensive right to talk to you this way. means, because they prepare and clear the war for infantry to attack.
The same happens with This indicates that we are normal people, missile-nuclear weapons as well, with any that we correctly understand and correctly type of this weapon. evaluate the situation.
However, who themselves want to perish and to destroy let us not quarrel now.
It is apparent that I the whole world before they die, could do will not be able to convince you of this.
Considering its Place in Cold War History with you, we have differences on ideological because one cannot legalize lawlessness.
But our view of the world consists were permitted, then there would be no peace, in this, that ideological questions, as well as there would also be no peaceful coexistence. economic problems, should be solved not by We should then be forced to put into effect the military means, they must be solved on the necessary measures of a defensive character basis of peaceful competition,e., as this is to protect our interests in accordance with understood in capitalist society, on the basis international law.
We have coexistence of the two different social-political received an appeal from the Acting Secresystems, now existing in the world, is necestary General of the UN, U Thant, with his sary, that it is necessary to assure a stable proposals.
That is the sort of principle we hold. proposals come to this, that our side should You have now proclaimed piratical meanot transport armaments of any kind to Cuba sures, which were employed in the Middle during a certain period of time, while negotiaAges, when ships proceeding in international tions are being conducted—and we are ready waters were attacked, and you have called to enter such negotiations—and the other side this “a quarantine” around Cuba.
Our vessels, should not undertake any sort of piratical apparently, will soon enter the zone which actions against vessels engaged in navigation your Navy is patrolling.
I consider these proposals vessels, now bound for Cuba, are carrying the reasonable.
Do you really uation which has been created, which would think that we only occupy ourselves with the give the peoples the possibility of breathing carriage of so-called offensive weapons, atomic calmly.
I will tell you frankly, Mr assure you that they are the most ordinary President, what evoked it. peaceful products.
We were very grieved by the fact—I spoke Consequently, Mr President, let us show about it in Vienna—that a landing took place, good sense.
I assure you that on those ships, that an attack on Cuba was committed, as a which are bound for Cuba, there are no weapresult of which many Cubans perished.
The weapons which were necessary yourself told me then that this had been a for the defense of Cuba are already there.
You not want to say that there were not any shiprepeated it to me several times, pointing out ments of weapons at all.
No, there were such that not everybody occupying a high position shipments.
But now Cuba has already received would acknowledge his mistakes as you had the necessary means of defense. done.
For my part, I I don’t know whether you can understand told you that we too possess no less courage; me and believe me.
But I should like to have we also acknowledged those mistakes which you believe in yourself and to agree that one had been committed during the history of our cannot give way to passions; it is necessary to state, and not only acknowledged, but sharply control them.
If you stop the vessels, then, If you are really concerned about the as you yourself know, that would be piracy. peace and welfare of your people, and this If we started to do that with regard to your is your responsibility as President, then I, as ships, then you would also be as indignant as the Chairman of the Council of Ministers, am we and the whole world now are.
Considering its Place in Cold War History 43 concern, since if, under contemporary conditro, but I think that he and the government of tions, war should break out, it would be a war Cuba, evidently, would declare demobilization not only between the reciprocal claims, but a and would appeal to the people to get down to worldwide cruel and destructive war. peaceful labor.
At one time, our tion, not only of the armaments which you call people itself had a revolution, when Russia offensive, but of all other armaments as well, was still a backward country.
We were the target of attack by I spoke in the name of the Soviet Governmany countries.
The USA participated in that ment in the United Nations and introduced a adventure.
This has been recorded by participroposal for the disbandment of all armies and pants against our country.
Sidney] Graves, who, at that time, commanded Armaments bring only disasters.
Graves called it one accumulates them, this damages the American Adventure in Siberia. economy, and if one put them to use, then they We know how difficult it is to accomdestroy people on both sides.
Consequently, plish a revolution and how difficult it is to only a madman can believe that armaments are reconstruct a country on new foundations. the principal means in the life of society.
No, We sincerely sympathize with Cuba and the they are an enforced loss of human energy, and Cuban people, but we are not interfering in what is more are for the destruction of man questions of domestic structure, we are not himself.
The Soviet Union in the final analysis they will come to a clash, desires to help the Cubans build their life as like blind moles, and then reciprocal extermithey themselves wish and that others should nation will begin. not hinder them.
Let us therefore show statesmanlike wisYou once said that the United States was dom.
But you also dethat our ships, bound for Cuba, will not carry clared that you sympathized with the Cuban any kind of armaments.
You would declare counterrevolutionary emigrants, that you supthat the United States will not invade Cuba port them and would help them to realize their with its forces and will not support any sort plans against the present government of Cuba. of forces which might intend to carry out an It is also not a secret to anyone that the threat invasion of Cuba.
Then the necessity for the of armed attack, aggression, has constantly presence of our military specialists in Cuba hung, and continues to hang over Cuba.
It was would disappear. only this which impelled us to respond to the Mr President, I appeal to you to weigh request of the Cuban government to furnish well what the aggressive, piratical actions, it aid for the strengthening of the defensive which you have declared the USA intends to capacity of this country. carry out in international waters, would lead If assurances were given by the President to.
You yourself know that any sensible man and government of the United States that the simply cannot agree with this, cannot recogUnited States itself would not participate in nize your right to such actions. an attack on Cuba and would restrain others If you did this, as the first step towards from actions of this sort, if you would recall the unleashing of war, well then, it is evident your fleet, this would immediately change that nothing else is left to us but to accept this everything.
Considering its Place in Cold War History lost your self-control and sensibly conceive for the preservation of peace, and I note this what this might lead to, then, Mr President, with satisfaction. we and you ought not now to pull on the ends I have already said that the only concern of the rope in which you have tied the knot of our people and government and myself of war, because the more the two of us pull, personally as chairman of the Council of the tighter that knot will be tied.
And a moMinisters is to develop our country and have ment may come when that knot will be tied so it hold a worthy place among people of the tight that even he who tied it will not have the world in economic competition, advance of strength to untie it, and then it will be necesculture and arts, and the rise in people’s living sary to cut that knot.
We are ready for this. ships, and, consequently, a deepening of the We welcome all forces which stand on crisis, which because of this contact can spark positions of peace.
Consequently, I expressed off the fire of military conflict after which any gratitude to Mr Bertrand Russell, too, who talks would be superfluous because other forcmanifests alarm and concern for the fate of the es and other laws would begin to operate—the world, and I readily responded to the appeal laws of war.
I agree with you that this is only a of the Acting Secretary General of the UN, U first step.
The main thing is to normalize and Thant. stabilize the situation in the world between There, Mr President, are my thoughts, states and between people. which, if you agreed with them, could put an I understand your concern for the security end to that tense situation which is disturbing of the United States, Mr President, because all peoples. this is the first duty of the president.
HowThese thoughts are dictated by a sincere ever, these questions are also uppermost in desire to relieve the situation, to remove the our minds.
The same duties rest with me as threat of war. chairman of the USSR Council of Ministers.
You have been worried over our assisting Cuba Respectfully yours, with arms designed to strengthen its defensive Nikita Khrushchev potential—precisely defensive potential—because Cuba, no matter what weapons it had, could not compare with you since these are Letter from Chairman different dimensions, the more so given up-toKhrushchev to President date means of extermination.
All countries want to relieve persuades me that you are showing solicitude themselves from danger.
Considering its Place in Cold War History 45 Soviet Union and our government, assess your United Nations.
Your representatives will actions which, in effect, mean that you have make a statement to the effect that the United surrounded the Soviet Union with military States, on its part, bearing in mind the anxiety bases, surrounded our allies with military and concern of the Soviet state, will evacuate bases, set up military bases literally around its analogous weapons from Turkey.
American officials demonstratively declare After this, representatives of the UN Sethis.
Your rockets are stationed in Britain and curity Council could control on-the-spot the in Italy and pointed at us.
Of course, it stationed in Turkey. is necessary that the Governments of Cuba and You are worried over Cuba.
You say that Turkey would allow these representatives to it worries you because it lies at a distance of come to their countries and check fulfillment ninety miles across the sea from the shores of of this commitment, which each side underthe United States.
Our sentinels are pacing up and down representatives enjoyed the trust of the Secuand watching each other.
Do you believe that rity Council and ours—the United States and you have the right to demand security for your the Soviet Union—as well as of Turkey and country and the removal of such weapons that Cuba.
You have stationed devastating rocket We, having assumed this commitment in weapons, which you call offensive, in Turkey order to give satisfaction and hope to the peoliterally right next to us.
This does not tally at all. the Soviet Government gives a solemn pledge It is good, Mr President, that you agreed to respect the integrity of the frontiers and the for our representatives to meet and begin talks, sovereignty of Turkey, not to intervene in its apparently with the participation of United Nations Actdomestic affairs, not to invade Turkey, not to ing Secretary General U Thant.
Consequently, make available its territory as a place d’armes to some extent, he assumes the role of interfor such invasion, and also will restrain those mediary, and we believe that he can cope with who would think of launching an aggression the responsible mission if, of course, every against Turkey either from Soviet territory or side that is drawn into this conflict shows from the territory of other states bordering on good will.
We agree an aggression against Cuba either from U.S. to remove those weapons from Cuba which territory or from the territory of other states you regard as offensive weapons.
Considering its Place in Cold War History Of course, for this we would have to reach tween us.
These problems have not yet been agreement with you and to arrange for some solved, but they wait for an urgent solution deadline.
Let us agree to give some time, but which would clear the international atmonot to delay, two or three weeks, not more than sphere.
The weapons on Cuba, that you have Respectfully yours, mentioned and which, as you say, alarm you, are in the hands of Soviet officers.
Therefore Nikita Khrushchev any accidental use of them whatsoever to the detriment of the United States of America is Letter from President Kennedy excluded.
These means are stationed in Cuba at the request of the Cuban Government and to Chairman Khrushchev, only in defensive aims.
Therefore, if there is October 27, 1962 no invasion of Cuba, or an attack on the Soviet I have read your letter of October 26th Union, or other of our allies then, of course, with great care and welcomed the statement these means do not threaten anyone and will of your desire to seek a prompt solution to not threaten.
The first thing that needs to be aims. done, however, is for work to cease on offensive missile bases in Cuba and for all weapons If you accept my proposal, Mr President, systems in Cuba capable of offensive use to be we would send our representatives to New rendered inoperable, under effective United York, to the United Nations, and would give Nations arrangements. them exhaustive instructions to order to come to terms sooner.
Because Secretary General and your representative—an the entire world is now agitated and expects arrangement for a permanent solution to the reasonable actions from us.
The greatest Cuban problem along the lines suggested in pleasure for all the people would be an anyour letter of October 26th.
As I read your letnouncement on our agreement, on nipping in ter, the key elements of your proposals—which the bud the conflict that has arisen.
The problem of tests could be solved ons systems from Cuba under appropriate simultaneously, not linking one with the other, United Nations observation and supervision; because they are different problems.
However, and undertake, with suitable safeguards, to it is important to reach an understanding to halt the further introduction of such weapons both these problems in order to make a good systems into Cuba. gift to the people, to let them rejoice in the 2) We, on our part, would agree—upon news that a nuclear test ban agreement has the establishment of adequate arrangealso been reached and thus there will be no ments through the United Nations to ensure further contamination of the atmosphere.
Your the carrying out and continuation of these and our positions on this issue are very close. commitments— to remove promptly the All this, possibly, would serve as a good quarantine measures now in effect and to impetus to searching for mutually acceptable give assurances against an invasion of Cuba.
I agreements on other disputed issues, too, on am confident that other nations of the Western which there is an exchange of opinion beHemisphere would be prepared to do likewise.
Considering its Place in Cold War History 47 If you will give your representative similar understand what kind of weapons these are. instructions, there is no reason why we should In order to eliminate as rapidly as posnot be able to complete these arrangements sible the conflict which endangers the cause of and announce them to the world within a peace, to give an assurance to all people who couple of days.
The effect of such a settlement crave peace, and to reassure the American on easing world tensions would enable us people, all of whom, I am certain, also want to work toward a more general arrangement peace, as do the people of the Soviet Union, regarding “other armaments,” as proposed in the Soviet Government, in addition to earlier your second letter which you made public.
I instructions on the discontinuation of further would like to say again that the United States work on weapons constructions sites, has is very much interested in reducing tensions given a new order to dismantle the arms which and halting the arms race; and if your letter you described as offensive, and to crate and signifies that you are prepared to discuss a dereturn them to the Soviet Union. tente affecting NATO and the Warsaw Pact, we are quite prepared to consider with our allies Mr President, I should like to repeat what any useful proposals.
I had already written to you in my earlier messages—that the Soviet Government has given But the first ingredient, let me emphasize, economic assistance to the Republic of Cuba, is the cessation of work on missile sites in as well as arms, because Cuba and the Cuban Cuba and measures to render such weapons people were constantly under the continuous inoperable, under effective international guarthreat of an invasion of Cuba. antees.
The continuation of this threat, or a prolonging of this discussion concerning Cuba A piratic vessel had shelled Havana.
They by linking these problems to the broader quessay that this shelling was done by irrespontions of European and world security, would sible Cuban emigres.
However, the surely lead to an intensified situation on the question is from where did they shoot.
It is a Cuban crisis and a grave risk to the peace fact that these Cubans have no territory, they of the world.
For this reason I hope we can are fugitives from their country, and they have quickly agree along the lines outlined in this no means to conduct military operations. letter and in your letter of October 26th.
This means that someone put into their John F Kennedy hands these weapons for shelling Havana and for piracy in the Caribbean in Cuban territorial waters.
It is impossible in our time Excerpt of a Letter from not to notice a piratic ship, considering the Chairman Khrushchev concentration in the Caribbean of American ships from which everything can be seen and to President Kennedy, observed.
In these conditions, pirate ships freely roam around and shell Cuba and make piratic I have received your message of 27 Octoattacks on peaceful cargo ships.
I express my satisfaction and thank you that they even shelled a British cargo ship.
In a for the sense of proportion you have displayed word, Cuba was under the continuous threat of and for realization of the responsibility which aggressive forces, which did not conceal their now devolves on you for the preservation of intention to invade its territory. the peace of the world.
The Cuban people want to build their life I regard with great understanding your in their own interests without external interconcern and the concern of the United States ference.
This is their right, and they cannot be people in connection with the fact that the blamed for wanting to be masters of their own weapons you describe as offensive are forcountry and disposing of the fruits of their midable weapons indeed.
Considering its Place in Cold War History all other schemes for creating tension over Mr John F Kennedy, President of the United China are designed to strike the Cuban people States, in a letter addressed to Mr Nikita with a sense of insecurity, intimidate them, Khrushchev, Chairman of the Council of and prevent them from peacefully building Ministers of the U.S.S.R., to the effect that the their new life.
United States would agree, after suitable arMr President, I should like to say clearly rangements had been made through the United once more that we could not remain indifferNations, to remove the blockade now in effect ent to this.
The Soviet Government decided and to give guarantees against an invasion to render assistance to Cuba with means of of Cuba, and with reference to the decision, defense against aggression—only with means announced by Mr Nikita Khrushchev, to withfor defense purposes.
We have supplied the draw strategic defence weapons facilities from defense means which you describe as offenCuban territory, the Revolutionary Governsive means.
I regard with respect and trust the stateThe guarantees mentioned by President ment you made in your message of 27 October Kennedy that there will be no aggression 1962 that there would be no attack, no invaagainst Cuba will be ineffective unless, in sion of Cuba, and not only on the part of the addition to the removal of the naval blockade United States, but also on the part of other which he promises, the following measures, nations of the Western Hemisphere, as you inter alia, are adopted: said in your same message.
Cessation of the economic blockade which induced us to render assistance of such and of all the measures of commercial and a kind to Cuba disappear. economic pressure being carried out by the It is for this reason that we instructed United States against our country throughout our officers—these means as I had already the world. informed you earlier are in the hands of the 2.
Cessation of all subversive activities, Soviet officers—to take appropriate measures of the dropping and landing of weapons and to discontinue construction of aforemenexplosives by air and sea, of the organization tioned facilities, to dismantle them, and to of invasions by mercenaries, and of the infilreturn them to the Soviet Union.
As I had intration of spies and saboteurs—all of which formed you in the letter of 27 October, we are activities are being carried on from the territoprepared to reach agreement to enable UN repry of the United States and certain accomplice resentatives to verify the dismantling of these countries. means.
Cessation of the piratical attacks being have given and our instructions on dismancarried out from bases in the United States and tling, there is every condition for eliminating Puerto Rico. the present conflict.
Cessation of all violations of our air Respectfully yours, space and territorial waters by United States N Khrushchev aircraft and warships.
Withdrawal of the naval base of GuanLetter from Prime tanamo and return of the Cuban territory occupied by the United States.
Minister Castro to Acting Accept, Sir, the assurance of my highest Secretary General U Thant, consideration.
We allies in the Western Hemisphere from doing interpreted that cable as a sign of maximum so, to end their so-called “quarantine”—their alert.
This commitment has led sultations in such conditions, knowing that to an end to the conflict in the Caribbean, the bellicose and unbridled militarists of the a conflict which implied, as you can well United States wanted to seize the occasion to understand, a superpower confrontation and attack Cuba, we would have been wasting our its transformation into a world war where the time and the strike could have taken place. missiles and thermonuclear weapons would have been used.
According to our ambassador, We think that the presence of our strategic certain Cubans feel that the Cuban people missiles in Cuba has polarized the attention would prefer a different kind of statement, of the imperialists.
They were afraid that they one that would not deal with the withdrawal would be used, which is why they risked of missiles.
It is possible that such feelings wanting to eliminate them either by bombing exist among the people.
And we must recand heads of state, are the people’s leaders and ognize that they had the capability to put them the people do not know everything.
This is why, I repeat, your sense why we must march as the head of the people. of alarm was totally justified.
In your cable of October 27 you proposed If, by giving in to popular sentiment, we that we be the first to carry out a nuclear strike had allowed ourselves to be swept up by the against the enemy’s territory.
Naturally you more inflamed sectors of the populace, and if understand where that would lead us.
It would we had refused to reach a reasonable agreenot be a simple strike, but the start of a therment with the government of the USA, war monuclear world war. would have probably broken out, resulting in Dear Comrade Fidel Castro, I find your millions of deaths.
Those who survived would proposal to be wrong, even though I underhave blamed the leaders for not having taken stand your reasons. the measures that would have avoided this We have lived through a very grave mowar of extermination. ment, a global thermonuclear war could have The prevention of war and of an attack on broken out.
Of course the United States would Cuba did not depend only on the measures have suffered enormous losses, but the Soviet taken by our governments, but also on the Union and the whole socialist bloc would analysis and examination of the enemy’s achave also suffered greatly.
In short, the situation to say how things would have ended for the had to be considered as a whole.
First of all, Cuba would have Some people say that we did not consult burned in the fires of war.
Considering its Place in Cold War History would have perished heroically.
We struggle What we did in the face of events, Comagainst imperialism, not in order to die, but to rade Khrushchev, was to prepare ourselves draw on all of our potential, to lose as little as and be ready to fight.
When, according to us, the The measures which we have adopted imperialist attack was imminent, I thought it have allowed us to reach the goal which we appropriate to reveal this to you and to alert had set when we decided to send the missiles both the Soviet government and the Soviet to Cuba.
We have extracted from the United command since there were Soviet forces States the commitment not to invade Cuba and determined to fight with us in defending the not to allow their Latin American allies to do Republic of Cuba against an external aggresso.
We have accomplished all of this without a sion, which we could not have stopped but nuclear war. against which we could have resisted.
We believe that we must take advantage I told you that the morale of our people of all the possibilities to defend Cuba, to was very high and that we would resist agstrengthen its independence and sovereignty, gression heroically.
At the end of my message to thwart military aggression, and to prevent a I told you that we would wait for the events global thermonuclear war in the present stage. calmly.
Danger could not impress us because we had seen it hover over our country for a long Of course, we have made concessions, we time, in a way, we were used to it. have made certain commitments.
The Soviets who were with us know how The United States has also made concessions, admirable the stance of our people during the it has committed itself publicly, before the crisis has been, and of the great fraternity that whole world, not to attack Cuba. has developed between men of our two peoples in these decisive hours.
Nevertheless, I did not hesitate to cording to you, we were consulted before you do it.
Do you think, Comrade Khrushchev, that took the decision to withdraw the strategic we were selfishly thinking of ourselves, of our missiles.
You justify this statement by referring generous people who were prepared to immoto the alarming news coming out of Cuba and late themselves, not without thought, but fully to my last cable of October 27.
Considering its Place in Cold War History 51 run such a danger, never has a people been so stay in the White House, that, to use an expresready to fight and die with such a universal sion, goes without saying.
We believe that you sense of duty. will be able to receive a mandate at the next We knew, don’t think that we didn’t, that election too, that is that you will be the U.S. we would have been exterminated, as you President for six years, which would appeal to insinuate in your letter, in the case of thermous.
That would, nevertheless, not a long period of time and during that period have prompted us to ask you to withdraw the we could create good conditions for peaceful missiles, to ask you to concede.
That, well as by all other peoples. precisely, was a possibility, since the imperiTherefore, Mr President, I would like to alists were blocking every solution and their express a wish that you follow the right way, demands, in our opinion, were unacceptable as we do, in appraising the situation.
Now to the USSR and to Cuba. it is of special importance to provide for the Fraternally, possibility of an exchange of opinion through confidential channels which you and I have Fidel Castro set up and which we use.
December 10, 1962 This is needed in order that all the peoples be Dear Mr President, sure that tension in the Caribbean is a matter I will tell you frankly that we have reof yesterday and that now normal conditions moved our means from Cuba relying on your have been really created in the world.
And for assurance that the United States and its allies this it is necessary to fix the assumed comwill not invade Cuba.
Those means really had mitments in the documents of both sides and the purpose of defending the sovereignty of register them with the United Nations.
Cuba and therefore after your assurance they Respectfully yours, lost their purpose.
We hope and we would like N Khrushchev to believe—I spoke of that publicly too, as you know—that you will adhere to the commitments which you have taken, as strictly as we Excerpt of a Letter from do with regard to our commitments.
You refer to the importance of my stateyou of your commitments cannot be as clearly ments on an invasion of Cuba and of our demonstrated as it was done by us since your intention to fulfill them, so that no doubts commitments are of a long-term nature.
I have already stated it is important to fulfill them and to do everymy position publicly in my press conference thing so that no doubts are sown from the very on November 20th, and I am glad that this start that they will not be fulfilled. statement appears to have your understanding; we have never wanted to be driven by We believe that the guarantees for the acts of others into war in Cuba.
Considering its Place in Cold War History to have adequate assurances that all offensive weapons are removed from Cuba and are not reintroduced, and that Cuba itself commits no aggressive acts against any of the nations of the Western Hemisphere.
Many resources on Cuba and U.S.Cuba relations, both current and historical.
So CHOICES continually reviews and updates our classroom units to keep pace with the changes in our world; and as new challenges and questions arise, we’re developing new units to address them.
And while history may never change, our knowledge and understanding of it are constantly changing.
So even our units addressing “moments” in history undergo a continual process of revision and reinterpretation.
Permission is granted to duplicate and distribute the student text and handouts for classroom use with appropriate credit given.
The unit examines the history of United States involvement in the region, the impact of the Cold War, and the issues that shaped the United States response to the crisis.
Choices materials place special emphasis on the importance of educating students in their participatory role as citizens.
Considering ii its Place in Cold War History The Choices Approach to Historical Turning Points Choices curricula are designed to make complex international issues understandable and meaningful for students.
Using a student-centered approach, Choices units develop critical thinking and an understanding of the significance of history in our lives today—essential ingredients of responsible citizenship.
Teachers say the collaboration and interaction in Choices units are highly motivating for students.
Studies consistently demonstrate that students of all abilities learn best when they are actively engaged with the material.
Cooperative learning invites students to take pride in their own contributions and in the group product, enhancing students’ confidence as learners.
Research demonstrates that students using the Choices approach learn the factual information presented as well as or better than those using a lecture-discussion format.
Choices units on historical turning points include student readings, a framework of policy options, primary sources, suggested lesson plans, and resources for structuring cooperative learning, role plays, and simulations.
Historical Understanding Each Choices curriculum resource proIn each unit the setting is the same as it was vides students with extensive information during the actual event.
By providing stuplaying a meeting of the National Security dents only the information available at the Council, a town gathering, or a Senate debate. time, Choices units help students to underStudent groups defend their assigned policy stand that historical events often involved options and, in turn, are challenged with quescompeting and highly contested views.
The tions from their classmates playing the role Choices approach emphasizes that historiof “decisionmakers” at the time.
This debate demands analysis and evaluation of approach helps students to develop a more the conflicting values, interests, and priorities sophisticated understanding of history. reflected in the options.
Each Choices unit presents the range of The final reading in a Choices historical options that were considered at a turning point unit presents the outcome of the debate and in history.
The final lesson these options through a role play activity. encourages students to make connections between past and present.
Considering TRB its Place in Cold War History  Note To Teachers Like no other region of the globe, the tions since the missile crisis through political Caribbean Basin has served as a testing ground cartoons.
Each section Big Stick and Dollar Diplomacy to the Good of reading is accompanied by two distinct Neighbor Policy and the Alliance for Progress, study guides.
The standard study guide is the countries of the Caribbean and Central designed to help students harvest the informaAmerica have felt the full weight of their tion provided in the readings in preparation colossal neighbor to the north.
United States expanfor tackling analysis and synthesis within sion overseas can trace its beginnings to the classroom activities.
The advanced study explosion of the Maine and Teddy Roosevelt’s guide requires the student to tackle analysis charge up San Juan Hill.
This provides additional information decision-making process within the Kennedy on key concepts of particular importance. administration.
Materials of the Cuban missile crisis. are included in the student text that may be used to supplement lessons.
In particular, you may find the colduces students to important milestones in our lection of web-based lesson plans posted there country’s relationship with Cuba and places a useful resource.
These lesson plans, develthem in the context of United States involvement in the oped by classroom teachers, draw on research Caribbean and Central America.
The second emerging from fifteen years of international day of the lesson plan focuses on the tangled research on the subject. web of U.S.-Cuban-Soviet relations.
Considering its Place in Cold simulation set in October 1962 in which they War History are provided as a guide.
They assume the role of advocates of three opare designed for traditional class periods of tions the Kennedy administration faced.
Those on block fifth day contains an exercise that explores schedules will need to make adaptations. the Cuban point of view about the crisis.
An Many teachers choose to devote additional optional lesson examines the role of the letters time to certain activities.
We hope that these exchanged between Nikita Khrushchev and suggestions help you in tailoring the unit to fit John F Kennedy during the crisis.
Considering  its Place in Cold War History Integrating This Unit into Your Curriculum Units produced by the Choices for the 21st World History: As the battle lines of the Century Education Program are designed to Cold War extended beyond Europe in the be integrated into a variety of social studies 1950s, the Caribbean and Central America courses.
Meanwhile, deeply ish-American War at the turn of the century rooted conflicts in Central America and the istransformed the United States into an impelands of the Caribbean took on the ideological rialist power.
Considering its Place in Cold War Hising of the Panama Canal created a new set of tory offers students a broader understanding interests for United States foreign policy.
Proponents of of the international consequences of the Cold naval might pressed for an expansion of the War and the challenges facing what was once United States fleet.
American businesses strengthened known as the third world. their presence in the Caribbean Basin.
The history of the United States was destined to acquire the Latin America, especially the Caribbean and worst features of the European colonial powCentral America, has been inextricably interers.
Considering twined with the history of the United States. its Place in Cold War History allows students The United States political system initially served as a to assess how our country’s experience with model, and later as a yardstick, for the repubimperialism in the Caribbean Basin shaped the lics of Latin America.
Economically, the region United States role in the world in the twentieth century. has been bound to the United States in the The Cuban missile crisis stands out as the twentieth century by trade and investment. most dramatic superpower confrontation of United States interests have largely circumscribed the the nuclear age.
The has trickled down into the daily lives of Latin strategies, goals, and fears driving the foreign Americans.
Considpolicies of the superpowers emerge clearly ering its Place in Cold War History provides from the events of October 1962.
At the same an introduction to the complex, multifaceted time, the Cuban missile crisis offers lessons relationship between the United States and in political psychology that transcend the other countries of the Western Hemisphere. tensions of the Cold War.
Scholars and policymakers continue to study the crisis for insight into how the presence of nuclear weapons has reshaped the nature of international conflict and heightened the pressures of national leadership.
Considering TRB its Place in Cold War History Day One  United States Influence in the Caribbean and Central America Objectives: Good Neighbor Policy Students will: Identify the main themes 2.
Student Presentations—Instruct the related to United States involvement in the Caribbean groups to use the background reading, as well Basin. as textbooks and other information sources, Assess the perspective of Caribbean Basin to prepare two-to-three minute presentations countries toward the United States. on their topics.
Collaborate with classmates to develop efAfter students have completed their preparafective group presentations. tions, call on group spokespersons to make their presentations to the class.
Forming Small Groups—Divide the Require students to summarize the main class into groups of three to four students.
Considering TRB Name:______________________________________________ its Place in Cold War History Day One  8.
Considering TRB Name:______________________________________________ its Place in Cold War History Day One  Examining United States Involvement in the Caribbean and Central America Instructions: Your group has been assigned an important topic featured in the reading.
In addition to reviewing the reading, you should use other available information sources that deal with your topic.
Emphasize that students should U.S.-Soviet-Cuban relations that contributed to respond to the questions from the perspecthe Cuban missile crisis. tive of their assigned country in early October 1962.
Explore the differences in perspective that divided U.S., Soviet, and Cuban leaders up to 2.
Extra Challenge—Ask students to Questions” design posters to represent their assigned perspective.
The ___________ War struggle with the__________________ caused the United States to be more concerned about _____________________ in the Caribbean and Central America than about __________________ reform.
Considering 10 its Place in Cold War History Day Two Name:______________________________________________ 7.
Considering 12 its Place in Cold War History Day Two Name:______________________________________________ U.S.-Soviet-Cuban Relations—Discussion Questions Instructions: Your group has been assigned to represent the viewpoint of either the United States, the Soviet Union, or Cuba in early October 1962.
Keep in mind that your responses should be based only on information that was available in early October 1962—just before the events of the Cuban missile crisis unfolded.
Considering TRB its Place in Cold War History Day Three 13 Role-Playing the Three Options: Organization and Preparation Objectives: 2a.
Disframed the debate on the United States response to the tribute “Presenting Your Option” to the three Soviet missiles in Cuba. option groups.
Inform students that each option group will be called upon in Day Four to Identify the core assumptions underlying present the case for its assigned option to the the options. president.
Note that the option groups should persuasive, coherent presentation. begin by assigning each member a role.
President Kennedy—The remainder of nize effective presentations. the class will represent the role of President Kennedy.
Planning for Group Work—In order ministrators may be invited to play the role of to save time in the classroom, form student President Kennedy. groups before beginning Day Three.
During the class period, students will be preparing for the Day Four simulation.
This worka member of ExComm, the president’s most sheet will help you prepare. trusted advisors.
Each member of that the Soviets were working towards placyour group will take a specific role and paring nuclear missiles on Cuba—some warheads ticipate in the presentation.
You do not know why explanation of the responsibilities for each the Soviets seem to have taken this secret, role.
Your assignexplaining why your option best addresses the ment is to persuade President Kennedy and security challenges facing the United States other ExComm members that your option in Cuba.
The Soviet Expert is responsible for should be the basis for the United States response to explaining why your option best serves the Cuba and the Soviet Union.
On Day Four, your interests of the United States in its relationgroup will give a three-to-five minute presentaship with the Soviet Union.
The historian is tion to persuade the president to follow your responsible for explaining how the lessons of suggested action plan.
Considering TRB Name:______________________________________________ its Place in Cold War History Day Three 15 President Kennedy: The United States Response to Soviet Missiles in Cuba Your Role: As the president, you consider Isn’t there a danger that diplomacy will issues vital to our country’s security.
These presentations will introduce On Day Four, the three option groups will you to three distinct approaches for the United States present their positions.
The decision the tions are completed, your teacher will call on president faces is a serious one and of vital you and your fellow committee members to importance to the safety of the nation. ask questions.
The “Evaluation Form” you will receive is designed for you to record your impressions of the options.
While the three option out in class after the option groups make their groups are organizing their presentations, each presentations.
Your teacher will collect you may be called upon to explain your evaluthese questions at the end of Day Three. ation of the options.
Articulate the issues that the simulation will begin with three-to-five framed the debate on United States policy toward the minute presentations by each option group.
Guiding Discussion—Following the presentations, invite members of the group Cooperate with classmates in staging a representing President Kennedy to ask crosspersuasive presentation. examination questions.
The questions should “Evaluation Form” for the group be evenly distributed among all three option representing President Kennedy groups.
Setting the Stage—Organize the room allow any option group member to respond. so that the three option groups face a row (As an alternative approach, permit cross-exof desks reserved for the group representing amination following the presentation of each President Kennedy.
Students should read the Epilogue in The second part of the worksheet should be the student text , and complete completed as homework.
Analyze and interpret the weigh the relative strengths and weaknesses of most important documents of the missile the United States and the Soviet Union at the crisis.
Remind students that most ExComm Students should have read Khrushchev’s members did not believe Khrushchev would October 26, 1962, and October 27, 1962, letters accept Kennedy’s proposal.
Note that the first letter has a more perers conclude that the first letter represented sonal, emotional tone, as well as a style that Khrushchev’s personal sentiments while the is often rambling and disjointed.
Call on students to identify the assume Khrushchev’s perspective in considermost meaningful paragraphs of the letters. ing Kennedy’s response.
Considering TRB its Place in Cold War History Day Five 19 The Cuban Point of View and Lessons for Today Objectives: ers have made since the end of the Cold War.
Ask students how this the missile crisis. knowledge, had it been known at the time, might have affected Kennedy’s decision-makAnalyze and interpret the recent historical ing. discoveries about the missile crisis.
Reviewing the History—If necessary, rea list of lessons from the crisis, and indicate view with students the crucial junctures after how those lessons might be applied to events the United States decided to impose a blocktoday.
Ask students to identify the moment they dents to write a letter to their Congressional believe that the United States came closest to representative or the White House (or to the war.
Why was President Kennedy so plied today. sensitive about not making a public trade of 2.
Strangelove and Distribute “Exploring the Cuban Point of Fail-Safe are two examples of this.
You may wish to have song “A Hard Rain’s A-Gonna Fall” and others students work in groups, pairs, or individu(e.g., Barry McGuire’s song “Eve of Destrucally.
After students complete the exercise tion”) captured the mood in popular music.
Considering 20 its Place in Cold War History Day Five Name:______________________________________________ Study Guide—Epilogue 1.
On October 20, President Kennedy decided on a ____________________ of Cuba by the United States Navy to prevent further shipments of ______________________ supplies to the island.
Considering TRB Name:______________________________________________ its Place in Cold War History Day Five 21 7.
Considering 22 its Place in Cold War History Day Five Name:______________________________________________ Advanced Study Guide—Epilogue 1.
Since the end of the Cold War, there have been important new revelations about the Cuban missile crisis.
Considering TRB Name:______________________________________________ its Place in Cold War History Day Five 23 Exploring the Cuban Point of View The Setting Your letter should outline the main eleAlthough critical letters went back and ments shaping Castro’s point of view of the forth between Kennedy and Khrushchev durUnited States and the crisis.
You will be ing the missile crisis, Castro never wrote a evaluated on your ability to make a compelletter to Kennedy.
At the time, ExComm did ling case—incorporating what you know about not think the Cuban point of view was relthe history of Cuba, the history of U.S.-Cuban evant. relations, and Castro’s political philosophy.
Your Assignment For this assignment, you are to imagine Dear President Kennedy, yourself in Castro’s shoes and write to PresiI would like to explain to you the readent Kennedy.
Interpreting Political Cartoons—DistribInterpret a political cartoon. ute “Forty Years of U.S.-Cuban Relations” to students, or project the cartoon on an overhead In groups, describe an event in their own projector.
Ask students to consider the carpolitical cartoon. toon’s main message.
You might also need to “Forty Years of U.S.-Cuban Relations” discuss the purpose of political cartoons and their common elements to give some background to students.
Visual Descriptions—Form student Guide—Optional Reading” . pairs or small groups.
Ask students to design their own cartoon based on one event or issue raised in the reading.
Reviewing Significant Events—Ask human rights record, or about the United States emstudents to identify the significant events in bargo of Cuba.
Have students share their U.S.-Cuban relations since the end of the miscompleted cartoons with the class.
Considering TRB Name:______________________________________________ its Place in Cold War History Optional Lesson II 25 Study Guide—Optional Reading 1.
Considering 26 its Place in Cold War History Optional Lesson II Name:______________________________________________ Forty Years of U.S.-Cuban Relations TOLES © 2004 The Washington Post.
Following the defeat of Hitler in 1945, Manifesto, Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels SovietUnited States relations began to deteriorate.
The outlined a form of scientific socialism in United States adopted a policy of containing which the workers of the world would unite the spread of Soviet communism around the against capitalist exploitation.
In the early world, which led to, among other things, United States twentieth century, the Soviet leader Vladimir involvement in Vietnam.
During this period, Lenin adapted and added to Marx’s ideas. both the Soviet Union and the United States Castro attempted to impose a Marxist-Leninist devoted vast resources to their military but system on Cuba. never engaged in direct military action against each other.
Strong every foreign policy decision was intricately nationalist feelings were behind the United States deciexamined for its potential impact on U.S.-Sosion to go to war with Spain and behind the viet relations.
The end of the Cold War in the revolution in Cuba. early 1990s forced policymakers to struggle to define a new guiding purpose for their foreign policy.
Socialism is a political and economic system in which resources, property, and income Imperialism: are distributed subject to social control rather The policy of extending the rule of a than individual or market forces. nation over foreign countries as well as acquiring colonies and dependencies.
Castro objected thought led by naval Captain Alfred Thayer to UN inspections of the missile sites on the Mahan stressed the importance of naval power grounds that this would violate Cuban soverfor the United States’ physical and economic eignty. security.
Others drew from DarThe institutions and organizations of winian theory and suggested that there was a government.
Different political systems have struggle between nations and people in which assigned different roles to the state.
They believed Castro believed that the power of the state that the Anglo-Saxon race and particularly should be absolute and that it should have Americans were best-suited to spread their control over all aspects of its citizens’ lives in religious, cultural, and civic values throughorder to achieve socialism. out the world.
Senator Alfred J Beveridge of Indiana stressed the economic benefits of imperialism and believed that Americans were obligated to govern others who were not able to govern themselves.
Choices curricula on historical turning point •Combine reading with political cartoon to their classrooms.
They are drawn from the analysis, map analysis, or movie-watching. experiences of teachers who have used Choices curricula successfully in their classrooms •Read some sections of the readings out and from educational research on student-cenloud. tered instruction.
Managing the Choices Simulation A central activity of every Choices unit •Supplement with different types of readis the role play simulation in which students ings, such as from trade books or text books. advocate different options and question each •Ask student groups to create a bumper other.
Just as thoughtful preparation is necsticker, PowerPoint presentation, or collage essary to set the stage for cooperative group representing their option. learning, careful planning for the presentations •Do only some activities and readings can increase the effectiveness of the simulafrom the unit rather than all of them. tion.
Teachers who Adjusting for Large and Small Classes have been able to schedule a double period or Choices units are designed for an average extend the length of class to one hour report class of twenty-five students.
When necesadditional roles, such as those of newspaper sary, the role play simulation can be run over reporter or member of a special interest group, two days, but this disrupts momentum.
The can be assigned to increase student particibest strategy for managing the role play is to pation in the simulation.
With larger option establish and enforce strict time limits, such as groups, additional tasks might be to create a five minutes for each option presentation, ten poster, political cartoon, or public service anminutes for questions and challenges, and the nouncement that represents the viewpoint of final five minutes of class for wrapping up.
In smaller classes, the teacher can is crucial to make students aware of strict time serve as the moderator of the debate, and adlimits as they prepare their presentations. ministrators, parents, or faculty can be invited to play the roles of congressional leaders.
Telling students in advance that the group will receive •Go over vocabulary and concepts with one grade often motivates group members to visual tools such as concept maps and word hold each other accountable.
This can fospictures. ter group cohesion and lead to better group •Require students to answer guiding quesresults.
Considering 30 its Place in Cold War History recognize an individual’s contribution to the Testing: Research demonstrates that stugroup.
The “Assessment Guide for Oral Predents using the Choices approach learn the sentations” on the following page is designed factual information presented as well as or to help teachers evaluate group presentations. better than from lecture-discussion format.
Having stuStudents using Choices curricula demonstrate dents complete self-evaluations is an effective a greater ability to think critically, analyze way to encourage them to think about their multiple perspectives, and articulate original own learning.
Teachers should hold students forms and are useful in a variety of circumaccountable for learning historical informastances.
They are particularly helpful in tion and concepts presented in Choices units. getting students to think constructively about A variety of types of testing questions and group collaboration.
In developing a self-evalassessment devices can require students to uation tool for students, teachers need to pose demonstrate critical thinking and historical clear and direct questions to students.
Stenhouse PubThese insights can help teachers to organize lishers, 2005. groups for future cooperative assignments.
Considering TRB its Place in Cold War History 31 Assessment Guide for Oral Presentations Group assignment: Group members: Excellent Good Average Needs Unsatisfactory Group Assessment Improvement 1.
Considering 32 its Place in Cold War History Alternative Three Day Lesson Plan Day 1: See Day Two of the Suggested Five-Day Lesson Plan.
Students should read “October 1962: The Moment of Decision” and the Options in Brief.
Assign each student one of the three options, and allow a few minutes for students to familiarize themselves with the mindsets of the options.
