Except for brief quotations in a review, this book, or any part thereof, may not be reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the publisher.
My sincere thanks to Professor W Roger Louis for his time and patient support; he provided counsel and encouragement that can only come from a true teacher and educator.
Professor Louis also provided invaluable advice and encouragement during the publishing process.
My thanks go to Professor Voll for his interest in the topic and investment of time and effort.
His on-going investment of time and effort was fundamental to the success of this research project.
I also want to thank Phillips Talbot, Wiliam ‘Bill’ Lakeland, General Andrew Goodpaster, Mohammad Hakki, Christopher Van Hollen, and the late Walt W Rostow for their willingness to sit down and explain theit view of events described in this work.
Roby C Barrett 3 April 2007 Preface The idea for the structure of this book came to me more than a decade ago while evaluating the potential impact of a specific project on a business client’s broader interests on a major project in what in a country in what I have defined here as the Greater Middle East.
The immediate considerations were largely tactical and bilateral, but long-term the implications of the project were strategic and multi-lateral and potentially far more important than the specific project at hand.
Given those ‘immediate considerations’, obtaining real consideration of the broader context and the longer-term perspective was difficult, but the effort paid off ultimately when taking the longer view allowed a more rewarding strategy to emerge.
It was an exceptional event because whether in government or business, my experience had been that the immediate interests almost always trumped the strategic.
At the time, I was reading Keith Kyle’s Svez, prompting me to consider the degree to which tactical decisions driven by ‘immediate’ pressures faced by United States administrations and the foreign policy apparatus often risked or sacrificed United States strategic interests.
The events of the last few years have tended to put an exclamation point on that conclusion.
With this thought in mind, I began to think that a systematic study of a given period of time might be a rewarding and stimulating endeavor.
This brought another observation, namely, that area studies and international relations tended to narrow the policy to the point that perspective on the broader context was lost.
It also occurred to me that this had an effect on historical writing on the Middle East.
Rarely did authors attempt to deal with the region within a context that reflected the fundamental organizational structure of the policy making and implementation organizations within the United States xx GREATER MIDDLE EAST AND THE COLD WAR government.
That is to say that when John Foster Dulles described the Middle East as stretching form ‘Morocco to India,’ this statement reflected not only the reality and linkages on the ground but it also reflected the organizational structure within the United States government that dealt with it.
The Near East and South Asia Bureau and divisions within other government agencies reflected the connectivity across the region that I have chosen to describe here as the Greater Middle East.
Historical writing on the topic tended to be broken into vety focused monographs on bilateral relations, the Arab world, Iran, or South Asia.
The insistence by the Bush administration over the last six years that various issues across the region are unconnected and can be successfully dealt with on an independent basis, Palestine, Iran, Iraq, Lebanon, Pakistan, radical Islam, etc., also spatked a desire to explore the recent past and evaluate the experience of previous administrations in attempting to deal with tactical problems against a mote strategic backdrop.
At the same time, I became increasingly interested in the 1950s and the struggles that accompanied the US’s emergence as the dominant western power in the Greater Middle East.
This interest brought me to the relationship between President Eisenhower and his two Secretaries of State, John Foster Dulles, and Christian Herter.
As my interest grew from casual reading to focused research, the idea came to me that a comparison between Eisenhower and Kennedy policy with regard to the Middle East might be worthwhile.
Originally, I believed that the comparison would contrast the realist and, at times, ideological hard-line Cold War policies of Eisenhower against a broader, mote flexible and open approach to the region under Kennedy.
In fact, both were driven by very similar views of the best course for maintaining pro-western states and achieving modernization in the developing world.
The real story laid not in the differences between the two administrations but in the similarities.
At this point, I concluded that only an in-depth research effort could adequately make the point.
This effort would have to explain the policies of both administrations from the broader context of a Middle East that fundamentally covered the geographical area from North Africa to India.
In addition, to dealing with the region at the macro level, the study would have to delve into the details of the relationships and key events in order to glue the overall argument together.
Beginning in 2001, that effort involved a global three year research project to obtain a clearer understanding of what actually happened and to cast light on the real policy relationship between the administrations of Eisenhower and Kennedy.
The research represented here is a broad selection of sources and materials.
It includes multiple archives, PREFACE xxi collections, interviews, and libraries.
It is an effort to interpret events and policy from a wide-angle perspective and support those views by telescoping in on key events, decision makers, and their motivations.
Many of the topics discussed here have been dealt with within individual monographs, but their scope has been largely limited to single states or bilateral issues between two or three states; the dimension of the broader geo-political context is generally missing.
To accomplish this, the initial research effort focused on unpublished soutce materials.
From the unpublished materials the research effort progressed to published collections, interviews, memoirs and first person accounts, and then secondary source materials.
By going directly to the raw documents, I determined the historical significance uninfluenced by a previous judgment.
It then became possible to compare a broader segment of documents to ascertain what actually happened and why.
This methodology was also used at the Eisenhower, Johnson, and Kennedy presidential libraries.
When combined with the research effort at the British, Eeyptian, Indian, Australian, and New Zealand national archives, the historical shadow cast by published documentation sometimes took a different, and hopefully, more accurate form.
With regard to referencing,, I have also culled duplicate footnotes from the text.
If there were three endnotes in succession from the same source and pages, I eliminated the first two and kept only the last reference.
In practical terms this means that in some cases a notation might refer to the information in multiple preceding paragraphs within the same section.
Transliterations reflected common usage, ie., Nasser, not Nasir, and a simplification of Arab names,e., Abd-al-Karim al-Qasim to Qasim.
Despite the linkages and broadened geographical conceptualization, some regions and countries receive only passing mention.
The North African states of Libya, Tunisia, Algeria, and Morocco are a case in point.
This limited treatment results in part from the more peripheral role played by North Africa in the political action from 1958-1963.
President Habib Bourgiba of Tunisia ranked almost as high as Nuri Said in the Egyptian president’s hierarchy of reactionary leaders, but these states were not central to the struggles of the late 1950s and early 1960s.
They were central to the struggle for North African independence but that had its own much more European overtones.
In Algeria, the liberation movement drove French participation in Suez in 1956 and later support for Israel but, by the late 1950s, there was growing acceptance that France would eventually have to seek an accommodation with local resistance leaders.
Turkey also receives limited Xxil GREATER MIDDLE EAST AND THE COLD WAR attention.
Had Iran and Pakistan collapsed or joined the neutral camp Turkey would have stayed in the Western orbit of NATO and Europe.
In examining the historiography, there is no single historical work that compares in scope to this study, but the list of historical writings dealing with vatious aspects of this study is lengthy.
My purpose is to create an historical mosaic as opposed to a natrow study.
L Carl Brown’s International Politics and the Middle East to some degrees introduces this idea of a mosaic and provides an ovetview of the ‘Eastern Question’ from the eighteenth century to the 1980s.
Brown convincingly asserts that the Cold War competition in the Middle East constituted metely an extension of the Eastern Question that had plagued European powers since the beginning of Ottoman decline in the early 1700s, and that the United States is merely the latest new player.
Assuming this is correct, the broader context of United States involvement needs elucidation.
The current coverage of United States policy in the Middle East during the formative years of the late 1950s and early 1960s comes in the form of limited treatments in articles or works on the Eisenhower and Kennedy years.
None have dealt in depth with the late Eisenhower administration, and most tend to take the position that Kennedy brought in a completely new progressive approach.
Warren Bass’ Swpport Any Friend provides an interesting look at ‘Kennedy’s Middle East’ from the perspective of the relationship with Israel, but consistently understates the impact of the pro-Israeli lobby on the administration.
In American Presidents and the Middle East, George Lenczowski provides a series of short policy summaries.
A\ Study of Ideology in Politics perhaps comes closest to offering a snapshot of the inter-Arab confrontation of 1958 to 1967.
Kerr also produced the excellent PREFACE Xxili article, ‘The Emergence of a Socialist Ideology in Egypt,’ in The Middle Eastern Journal in early 1962.
This article is particularly interesting for its informed, ground level view of Nasset’s attempt to establish an ideological basis for his regime.
Eeypt adopted the ideological weapons of class struggle without the content.
Jordan 1955-1967 are examples of the often solid works of limited scope that deal with the period targeted by this work.
Both the Iraqi and Jordanian works are useful and take advantage of published and periodical documentation from the period.
The Middle East in 1958, offers interesting views of the emergence of the United States as the preeminent Western power in the Middle East, but limited references to Iran and Pakistan are the only ventures outside the Arab Middle East.
Robert McNamara in Britain, Nasser and the Balance of Power in the Middle East, 1952-1967 discusses the British relationship with Nasser but the chronological span leaves treatment of key issues at a cursory level and does not examine the impact across South Asia.
The various biographies of Nasser, Anthony Nutting’s Nasser, Said K Abutish’s Nasser, The Last Arab, Robert Stephen’s Nasser, and Jean Lacouture’s Nasser provide insight into the Arab Middle East equation and some understanding of Nasser and non-alignment, but all suffer from the limitations imposed by narrow biographical focus.
Wilton Wynn’s Nasser of Egypt deserves mention because it is a sympathetic, contemporary account of the Egyptian leader by a journalist who knew him and Egypt in the 1950s.
Wynn takes the view that handled correctly a Middle East peace could have come to fruition in 1955 following Anthony Eden’s Guildhall speech that the Israelis scuttled.
This and other sympathetic views of Nasser earned Wynn’s work banishment from the political and journalistic mainstream.
Nevertheless it is an interesting work that offers an informed alternative view of the Egyptian regime.
Useful works target national history but these usually provide an overview of some of the specific issues affecting Israel, Jordan, Iraq, Saudi Arabia, Yemen, and Egypt; no work attempts to examine the period.
With respect to Iran, Jim Bill’s work, The Eagle and the Lion, focuses primarily on the 1979 revolution.
His treatment of the Eisenhower period is cliché in the sense that it borrows from generally accepted later interpretations of the Kennedy administration.
Bill argues that Eisenhower coddled the Shah with military and security support and created the Iranian animosity and hatred of the regime that ultimately led to 1979.
Bill’s emphasis not only underscores the problems associated with interpretations of the relationship between the Eisenhower and Kennedy policies but also contributes to the idea that the Xxiv GREATER MIDDLE EAST AND THE COLD WAR United States might have brought about a different outcome.
John F Kennedy and the Shah of Iran, comes much closer to the fundamentals of Kennedy policy toward Iran.
The article does not adequately explain the struggle over policy formulation between the White House activists typified by Robert Komer and the State Department led by Ambassador Julius Holmes, nor does it explain how the resolution of that struggle pushed the United States down the road to 1979.
Britain, Iran, and Afghanistan, 1798-1850, offers a useful perspective on Persia in the nineteenth century that applies almost equally as well to the Iranian situation of the 1950s and 1960s.
Both Eisenhower and Kennedy saw Iran as an albatross as well, but in the competition with the Soviet Union both were unwilling to risk potential consequences of aggressively pursuing an alternative to the Shah’s rule.
Much of the post-1979 writing on Iran suggests that the United States might have prevented 1979, an interesting ‘salvationist’ idea that seems to imply that the United States was more responsible for Iran than the Iranians.
Others take the less popular view that the Shah was actually in control and used the relationship with the United States to his own ends.
He stabilized his personal rule, modernized his army, and assured himself of enough United States support to allow him to undertake reforms to undercut his opposition.
To the east, Pakistan and India were inseparable from the Middle East political and diplomatic dynamic of 1958-1963.
The best existing historical writing on this period comes in the form of biographies of Nehru.
A Political Life, concludes that Nehru’s insistence on personally conducting Indian foreign policy provided the innovation of the ‘non-aligned’ concept but ultimately impeded implementation because of poor management and the flow of new ideas in a shifting diplomatic environment.
The author asserts that, unfortunately, Nehru was extremely difficult to deal with.
On the issue of connectivity with the Arab Middle East, Brown argues that it was Nehru’s relationship with Nasser that allowed him to attempt mediation at Suez and to work closely with Eisenhower who forced the British and French withdrawal.
The author points out that as a result of PREFACE XXV Suez, Nehru came to believe that Eisenhower was actually ‘flexible’ with regard to non-alignment.
Krishna Menon’s gaffs and for the pathetic performance of the Indian defense establishment during the border war with China.
Brown’s treatment of foreign policy represents the best overview of Indian foreign policy of any of the biographies.
With regard to the border war with China, Neville Maxwell’s India’s War with China is superb, well balanced, and broad in its scope of inquiry.
The 1970 publication date prevented Maxwell from accessing significant declassified research materials but interviews with participants more than compensate.
Other works discuss Indian foreign policy and non-alignment but in a much less organized fashion.
Sarvepalli Gopal’s three-volume biography of Nehru explains Indian policy predominately in terms of Pakistan and China.
Gopal’s tationalizations of Nehru’s shortcomings detract from an otherwise factually interesting work.
Gopal’s is the stronger work with regard to the Middle East and United States foreign policy, but both Gopal and Akbar suffer from the limitation imposed by the biographical narrative.
In the case of Pakistan, several works discuss 1958 to 1963 within the context of its relations with India, the United States, and the members of the vatious western alliances to which Karachi adhered.
These include Ayesha Jalal’s The State of Martial Rule, Lawrence Ziring’s The Ayub Khan Era, and Hasan Askari-Rizvi’s The Military ¢ Politics in Pakistan.
Ayab Khan’s autobiography, Friends Not Masters, is also an explanation for the military role in Pakistani politics from the former Pakistani president himself.
As one would expect, Ayub is highly critical of Kennedy’s ‘betrayal’ of Pakistan in 1962 and 1963.
The best overall study of Pakistan that cotrelates with this study is The United States and Pakistan, 1947-2000 by Dennis Kux.
This work addresses the history of US-Pakistani relations paying particular attention to the Eisenhower and Kennedy years.
In a final comment on the formation of United States policy, this work attempts to go beyond the normal historical analysis that focuses on the principals or ‘decision-makers’ in United States foreign policy.
In the Kennedy administration, Robert Komer exemplifies how a knowledgable, frenetic, and prolific fountain of memos and papers placed in a key position on the NSC can at times influence the policy process out of all proportion to his perceived position.
For this reason, his oral history and files at the Kennedy Library are a highly informative and instructive.
Kennedy’s distrust of the traditional foreign policy appartus and his desire to create a new policy paradigm magnified the influence of officials of Komert’s ilk.
This occurs to some degree in every administration but it was patticularly pronounced in the early Kennedy years; thus a balanced well informed policy depended on the mental acuity and intellectual rigor applied by senoir administration officials and particularly the one in the Oval Office.
In the case of the Kennedy administration, the fundamental, pragmatic intelligence of the President allowed him recognize policies gone awry and then to flexibly adjust.
In late 1962 and 1963, Kennedy salvaged the United States policies in the Middle East by shifting back to his predecessor’s pragmatic model.
Kennedy grasped that world was not what he had conceived it to be in 1961.
This is all the more interesting when viewed in light of other chief executives who have been hampered by the apparent inability to understand the difference between the world as they have conceived it to be, the reality that exists, the interests of the United States, and the necessity to adjust policies to avoid looming policy debacles.
History may not repeat itself but it certainly contains some interesting parallels and comparisons.
This study is an attempt to provide a fundamentally different perspective.
Its goal is to provide a breadth and depth in analysis that connects events, movements, and leaders across the Greater Middle East.
It discusses the motivations that drove the complementary policies of Nasser and Nehru during the early 1950s.
It includes an explanation of the profound impact that the Baghdad coup of 1958 had not only in the Atab world, but also in Iran, Pakistan, and India as well.
It contains a careful examination of the similarity in the policies of the Eisenhower and Kennedy administrations, and the frustrations that faced the latter as he attempted, apparently in ignorance, to reinvent the policy initiatives that failed under Eisenhower between 1953 and 1956.
This study takes all of these issues and places them in the larger regional context to which they belong.
In doing so, The Greater Middle East and the Cold War offers new facts and a detailed reexamination of the events and key players from a fresh, more holistic perspective.
Hopefully, the reader will find it useful and informative, but most of all, in light of the current myopic policies and unwillingness to see the connectivity between issues, the demonstrable historical interconnectivity of events across the region during the 1950s and 1960s will provide provocative perspective on the ideas and policies of the recent past.
United States Foreign Policy under Eisenhower and Kennedy examines Ametican foreign policy in the Middle East from 1958 to 1963.
It also examines the Eisenhower experience between 1953 and 1955 as the basis for the more realistic approach to the region following Aswan decisions, Suez and mixed reaction to the Eisenhower Doctrine.
This work’s implicit lack of emphasis on the Suez war reflects the view that while certainly attention-getting, the flash and bang of 1956 represented an interlude, the exception rather than the rule in political, diplomatic, and even military interaction between the US, its Western allies, and the vatious states in the Greater Middle East.
Much mote typical and thus more central to an overall understanding of the policy interaction during the Eisenhower and Kennedy yeats were the periods before and after Suez.
Both the Eisenhower and Kennedy administrations continuously searched for ways to sway countries of the Muslim Middle East to cooperate and participate in Washington’s campaign to contain the Soviet Union and Communist influence.
Both administrations promised rewards for countries that would come to either a formal arrangement or, in some cases, just a working arrangement with the United States, if it benefited containment.
Initially, the ‘promises’ were most often heavily weighted toward economic aid and development assistance, but after 1958, security and military aid received increasing emphasis.
This study of United States foreign policy in the Greater Middle East examines the attempts, some successful and some not, to enlist the Muslim world in Eisenhowet’s and Kennedy’s Cold War struggle to contain the Soviet and Communist expansion in the Greater Middle East.
It reevaluates and challenges many of the fundamental assumptions associated with the Eisenhower and Kennedy periods.
At the same time, the work examines the political and diplomatic interaction behind this policy formulation at a level of 2 GREATER MIDDLE EAST AND THE COLD WAR significantly greater granularity, thus providing a more detailed view of the actual events and how policies related to those events developed.
United States policy in the Middle East, which, for the purposes of this study, includes the Arab Middle East, Iran, and the South Asia subcontinent, reflected this commitment.
Containment in the region was the top priority of both administrations; Kennedy was no less a ‘Cold Warrior’ than Eisenhower.
Despite these similarities, the Kennedy administration has consistently been given credit for more nuanced, sophisticated, reform-oriented policies.
In contrast, Eisenhower and John Foster Dulles, his foreign policy confidant and lightning-rod, are often viewed as bumbling, coercive, and less astute than Kennedy and his team of policy experts.
In reality, both administrations practiced containment in a remarkably similar manner.
Both were uncomfortable with non-progressive, traditional regimes; both had a strong faith in and desire to see controlled reform in the region; and both, when faced by the possibility of anti-Western instability, supported anti-democratic elements and measures.
As the most recent United States administration is in the process of learning, liberal democractic notions of representative politics and economic development are much more easily talked about than realized throughout most of the region.
In those cases where popular democracy did exist, it often ran counter to Western interests in general and United States interests in particular.
Eisenhower and Kennedy found the more democratic progressive regimes, Musaddiq’s Iran and Nehru’s India, at odds with Western interests, and exhibited a noted preference for authoritarian and even reactionary elements because of the stability they offered.
Both administrations followed the mantra of imposed stability as the basis for ‘controlled’ political reform and economic development.
Policymakers in both administrations borrowed eclectically from the precepts of ‘modernization theory’ to create a set of policies that supported economic development as a means to economic, social, and political reform.
Military, in rare instancesdirect support for a regime, covert and overt internal support for security organizations, and a push towatds economic development and political reform comprised the major elements of American containment policy.
In fact when all these elements are evaluated, economic development emerged as the preferred path to political, economic, and social reform, and thus pro-Western stability.
Influential foreign policy advisors, including Walt W Rostow, were intimately involved in both administrations and advocated policies that approached an almost absolute faith in the efficacy of economic development as a fundamental pillar of political stability and containment.
This faith in economic reform also carried with it a steadfast belief that when necessary political stability had to be maintained by force in order to create a secure environment for development, INTRODUCTION 3 but it was economic development that would provide the engine for long-term pro-Western social development and political liberalization.
The danger is that the underdeveloped countries develop along lines hostile to the West and Western tradition.
An opinion expressed in 1957, the accuracy of which the West now can better appreciate.
This growth constituted the path to social and political reform, fostering democratic political institutions and social justice.
Spurred by the perceived success of post-war economic and development aid in thwarting Communist influence in Western Europe and Japan, these views became the Western democratic vetsion of economic determinism, an answer to Marxist-Leninism.
Both administrations adopted these arguments more or less as ground-truth.
For both, economic aid was the preferred type of assistance in the Greater Middle East, accompanied, to varying degrees, by advocacy of political and social reform.
Both administrations saw economic development and reform as the only way to establish stable societies and governments, the most effective bulwarks against Communist expansion.
Both administrations pushed for political, economic, and, to some degtee, social reform as the preferred means of preventing Communist expansion and of limiting Soviet, and to a lesser extent, Chinese influence.
Economic development and reform became fundamental corollaries of Cold War containment.
Whether the emphasis fell on economic modernization or political reform depended almost entirely on Washington’s perception at any given point in time of the course that would best contribute to pro-Western stability.
Eisenhower and Kennedy were also quick to drop calls for reform and to support repressive governments through military and security assistance when they perceived that reform would induce instability and threaten Western interests.
The Kennedy ‘mystique’ or ‘myth’ left an indelible imprint on outside perceptions.
The understandable urge to canonize Kennedy and his policies as exceptional certainly had a major impact, but timing also played a significant role.
In terms of the Middle East and Asia, Kennedy’s tenure in office fell between the era of chaotic policy formulation in the mid-1950s and the 4 GREATER MIDDLE EAST AND THE COLD WAR realization in the late 1960s that his policies in Southeast Asia had been a fundamental mistake.
If the relationship between Eisenhower’s and Kennedy’s policies is to be properly calibrated, understanding the chronological context is critical.
In the early 1950s, Eisenhower faced the task of constructing a United States policy in the developing world largely from scratch.
This task was considerably more complex than that faced by the Kennedy administration.
The initial learning curve in the Middle East was steep, and the Truman had administration left no blueprint.
In 1953, the United States was feeling its way through the Middle Eastern labyrinth.
From Truman, Eisenhower, much to his chagrin, inherited Israel and an ill-defined set of policy ideas, including Middle East Defense Organization and ‘northern-tier’ concepts.
Washington had largely relied upon the former colonial powers, principally the British and the French, to protect Western interests, and the United States tended to follow their policy lead.
The events of 1955 to 1958 increased the complexity of Washington’s responsibilities in the Middle East.
The period 1958 to 1963 witnessed the beginning of an even more profound change in the nature of British and French influence in the region.
The British and French now made consultations and coordination with the United States a fundamental part of their policy formulation in the Middle East.
Ironically, in the case of the British, these consultations tended to increase their influence in Washington, as United States responsibilities in the region increased.
To adequately understand these developments and relationships, they must be examined within a chronological progression.
Understanding Eisenhowet’s accomplishments in the 1958 to 1960 time-frame requires a review of his early years, from 1953 to 1955.
The dashed hopes for economic development and political and social reform during the early administration and the chaos of 1956 and 1957 resulted in the emergence of the pragmatic, workable United States policies of 1958-1960.
Thus, in 1961, Kennedy and his advisors inherited a largely functional set of policies and alliances.
Try as they might to represent it in another light, Kennedy and his team essentially followed the course set by Eisenhower.
Their attempts to deviate from the 1958-1960 models invariably failed, for one of two reasons.
First, Kennedy’s team failed to recognize that their policy initiatives were often replications of earlier, failed Eisenhower initiatives that ran fundamentally against the political grain in the region.
Second, Kennedy often overestimated the impact of personal presidential diplomacy and his ability to use it to manage regional conflicts.
Of these two problems, the most egregious was the unwillingness of Kennedy and his advisors to give credit where credit was due with respect to Eisenhower.
As a result, the Kennedy administration dissipated much of its strength and influence in the Middle East trying to resurrect long-dead policy initiatives.
Under both Eisenhower and Kennedy, regional issues, leaders, and forces determined the agenda, and for these, parochial regional interests took precedence over Washington’s fixation on containment.
The shift toward regional influences reinforces the need for an examination of events within a significantly broader geographical setting.
This geographical INTRODUCTION 5 context exceeds the limitations imposed by traditional area studies.
It reflects Dulles’ repeated references to the Middle East as the region stretching ‘from Morocco to Pakistan’, thus drawing India into the equation.
This expanded geographical view of the ‘Middle East’ is a particularly effective vantage point for viewing the 1950s and 1960s.
The advent of non-alignment and positive neutralism overlaid an often ignored historical connectivity with a loose ideological and political framework.
At the same time, Washington’s global commitment to containment and its support for political and economic modernization further reinforced this more holistic conceptualization of the region.
In 1958, events in Iraq affected relations with Egypt and India, as well as with neighboring Iran and Jordan.
In like manner, problems between India and Pakistan complicated United States relations with Egypt.
Colonial control had tended to isolate problems, whereas its temoval resulted in a reemergence of historical regional connectivity.
As a result, policymakers in Washington had to adjust to a situation in which decisions in one area of the Greater Middle East often had immediate and pronounced repercussions in another.
Beyond a shadow of a doubt, the British, of all the Allies, exerted the greatest influence on Washington’s practice of containment.
Policy differences, sometimes major, existed, but each recognized that they needed the other.
In the Persian Gulf and Arab Middle East, where British interests were paramount, London’s influence created a series of fluctuations in United States policy.
The confusion, disagreements, and sometimes cross-purpose policies, as well as the areas of cooperation between Washington and London, are central to any evaluation of the evolution of the Anglo-American relationship.
Fundamental changes in their abilities to project power brought on the confounding and always perplexing task of rethinking long-held assumptions.
As Britain’s unilateral ability to protect its interests collapsed, the British adjusted their tactics and began to use their influence with Washington to achieve many of those same goals.
Eisenhower and Kennedy often found themselves modifying policy because of British influence.
Good relations with London constituted the bedrock of United States Cold War strategy, and global containment depended on it; therefore, British interests in the Greater Middle East had to be considered, even when they ran counter to United States plans and views.
With Winston Churchill as its initial practitioner, the British learned early on that United States concerns over Communist inroads could be exploited in a way that directly benefited the interests of Her Majesty’s Government.
The Suez crisis in 1956 taught London that the failure to manage Washington could have serious and humiliating consequences.
To this end, Prime Minister Harold Macmillan used his relationship with Eisenhower to reestablish British influence in Washington.
This influence most often aggravated United States relations with revolutionary nationalist regimes and resulted in a clear United States tilt toward the traditional rulers of the region.
In general, the British saw aid not in terms of political and economic modernization, but as a means of influence and maintaining the 6 GREATER MIDDLE EAST AND THE COLD WAR status quo.
Thus, they consistently urged the United States to desist from providing aid to revolutionary tegimes, ot what Washington often viewed as the more progressive states in the region, and urged an aid policy that fostered traditional regimes and British interests.
The British focus on influencing Washington became particularly acute following the 1958 debacle in Iraq.
The British had their pet regimes and interests, and they were adept at using their influence in Washington to protect them.
In addition to Anglo-American relations, Israel and oil also influenced the practice of United States foreign policy and containment.
Israel and Zionism constituted the only issues upon which all of the Arab states and Muslim populations in the region could agree.
Even Hindu-dominated India shunned Israeli patticipation in the non-aligned movement because of the potential political and diplomatic fallout.
The Jewish state was a clear liability for United States hopes in the region.
Both Washington and London viewed Israel as a policy albatross, an obstacle to a successful policy in the Middle East.
Despite this problem, the Eisenhower and Kennedy administrations clearly supported Israel’s survival.
Both administrations attempted to orchestrate peace settlements and both failed.
Beyond the generalities, Eisenhower contrasted sharply in his ArabIsraeli policies with Kennedy.
The Republican administration attempted to putsue a balanced policy between the Arabs and Israel.
Kennedy, after considerable internal debate, succumbed to domestic political pressure and increasingly pursued pro-Israeli policies for domestic political reasons.
From 1958 to 1963, the so-called Arab Cold War had sublimated the Arab-Israeli dispute to a degree; however, the Palestinian refugees and the Arab-Israeli conflict remained a fundamental regional issue.
The revolutionary regimes in the Arab Middle East had all achieved power in part as a result of the inability of their predecessors to deal successfully with the Zionist issue.
Across the region, being a good Arab, a good Muslim, or, for that matter, a non-aligned, anti-colonial regime in good standing, required opposition to Zionism as a colonial creation.
Fundamental to the struggle for power, influence, and leadership in the Arab and Muslim worlds was the question of who would best confront expansionist Zionism.
Israel as an issue existed at or neat the surface of any United States attempt to further its influence in the Middle East.
As a further complication, Tel Aviv pursued its own interests regardless of the consequences to the US, and the Israelis consistently undermined any United States attempts to bring about a more pro-Western stance on the part of the secular, mote ‘progressive’, revolutionary Arab regimes.
Oil constituted the other background influence on United States policy.
Oil definitely contributed to the United States obsession with containing the Soviet Union in the Middle East.
The Eisenhower and Kennedy administrations not only grasped the immediate, critical petroleum requirements of their European and Asian allies, but they also understood the long-term implications of growing oil consumption in the United States.
The British played the more immediate and significant role in the equation.
British oil interests in the region provided petroleum products to European markets and, at the same time, propped up INTRODUCTION 7 the British economy.
European, Japanese, and British willingness to partner with the United States in the global containment of the Soviet Union depended on oil.
With the exception of post-1958 Iraq, states ruled by traditional regimes possessed most of the petroleum resources of the region.
Advocating reformoriented modernization as the corollary of containment in those oil-producing states carried risks.
Reform could bring instability and even collapse; therefore, while theoretically committed to reform, both the Eisenhower and Kennedy administrations were reluctant to push reforms that might threaten the flow of crude.
Oil was a thread periodically pushed to the forefront as Washington attempted to deal with crises in Iran, Iraq, and Saudi Arabia.
These themes, taken in ageregate, underscore the fundamental connectivity between the Eisenhower and Kennedy policies of containment and modernization in the Greater Middle East.
They also demonstrate United States susceptibility at any given time to the influences of indigenous forces, the British, oil, and Israel.
By taking an initial short digression, we will see how Kennedy’s administration attempted to reinvent Eisenhowet’s failed policies of 1953-1954 and found itself limping back to what remained of Eisenhowet’s bequest.
In the mid-1950s, Eisenhower and Dulles learned the pitfalls of an ideologically motivated activist policy.
Failing to appreciate adequately the experience of his predecessors, Kennedy repeated many of those same mistakes in the early 1960s.
In these two experiences, we will hear a warning echoed against well-intentioned policy activism that presumes to impose simplistic foreign solutions on very complex, well-established political, economic, and social structures.
From the United States perspective, the end results of such policies in the Middle East have rarely been predictable, with the exception that they have almost always created unpleasant situations that complicated relations.
While this study focuses on the period from 1958 to 1963, the seeds of these events were sown between 1953 and 1955.
In 1953, Joseph Stalin died, the Korean War ended, the French were preparing a knockout blow against the Viet Minh in Indochina, the situation in Europe was improving, and a new administration took office.
In 1953, events in Iran seemed to offer a reassuring model for dealing with regional nationalism run amuck.
In Iran, Muhammad Musaddiq, Time magazine’s Man of the Year in 1951 and the man who nationalized British oil interests, symbolized the threat that secular nationalism posed to Western interests if it was not managed correctly.
Although he was thoroughly Westernized and a reformer, Musaddiq’s nationalism threatened the British-dominated status quo in Iran and encouraged other potentially antiWestern nationalist elements in the region.
More problematically, Musaddiq’s tolerance of leftist political groups seemed to promise increased Soviet influence, or the potential for a neutral Iran.
As will be seen, this increased Iranian political ferment, and instability initially provoked distinctly different reactions from Whitehall and the White House.
In 1952, the collapse of the regime of King Farouk I at the hands of a group of largely British-trained military officers was hardly a national tragedy.
The emergence of General Muhammad Neguib and the Revolutionary Command Council under the control of Colonel Gamal Abd-al-Nasser held both risks and promise.
It looked as though American influence and aid might protect British interests, and at the same time enlist Egypt in a pro-Western mutual security arrangement.
Washington hoped that the withdrawal of British forces from Suez would dampen political unrest and anti-Western, if not anti-British, agitation.
Despite periodically tense relations with the West, Nehru understood that the economic development of India depended on Western aid and his relationship with the United States and Britain.
To that end, India continued its participation in the British Commonwealth.
The Baghdad government began various projects designed to raise the standard of living for the general population.
Problems in the region appeared manageable, and while thete were clouds on the horizon, most expected that the Western allies would maintain their ascendancy.
Given that only the Suez Canal treaty negotiations with Egypt were a serious point of contention, it appeared that Macmillan’s observation would hold true in the 1950s as well.
Eisenhower wanted to create a new paradigm for relationships with emerging nations, particularly in the Middle East and Asia.
Eisenhower viewed Truman’s close association with the British as a major mistake.
The new president was absolutely certain that he could better manage the mess created by Truman.
Eight years later, Kennedy and his set of advisors held the same negative view of Eisenhower.
In fact, both Eisenhower and Kennedy were acting well within the policy parameters of containment and economic development.
To understand this parallel experience, this study first looks at how the Middle East dynamic, complicated by the necessity of cooperation with London, unstrung the policy plans of the Eisenhower administration between 1953 and 1955.
Then, in the series of chapters that follow, the study will explore Eisenhowet’s 1958-1960 accommodation with the new Middle Eastern political reality, as well as Britain’s deft adjustment to its own receding power and influence.
Subsequent sections will examine Kennedy’s policies and INTRODUCTION 9 highlight the remarkable similarities and nuanced differences that existed between the policies pursued by the two presidents.
By tracing and examining the similarities and differences between their two administrations during this critical period in the context of the dynamics created by regional leaders, revolution, non-alignment, the British, Israel, and oil, the study will analyze the degree to which Eisenhower and Kennedy operated within the same fundamental set of policy parameters.
The Greater Middle East 1953-1958 Placing United States policy in the late 1950s and early 1960s in historical context requires an analysis of the policy initiatives and attitudes in the early Eisenhower administration.
This anti-colonial bent put them at cross-purposes with long-established British interests.
Despite the realities of post-war empire, London had intended to preserve its system of political influence and economic interests, and no-one was more committed to the preservation of this system than Winston Churchill.
The economic benefits of the remnants of empire provided Churchill with all the incentive necessaty to press Eisenhower to acquiesce to British policies and interests in the Middle East.
The critical first meeting between the President-elect and Prime Minister proved a harbinger of things to come.
The discussions coveted a range of topics — the Communist threat, European economic and defense issues, and trade with the Communist bloc.
Eventually, the conversation turned to the situation in the Middle East.
The Labor government of Clement Atlee had attempted to create a MEDO but the stench of colonial domination had effectively undermined every attempt.
Given the Arab states’ lack of ‘THE GREATER MIDDLE EAST, 1953-1958 11 Courtesy of National Archives Eisenhower and Dulles discussing Suez, 1956 Eisenhower with John Foster Dulles discussing the Suez Crisis.
The British opposed Dulles’ appointment as Secretary of State, but Eisenhower saw Dulles as a loyal instrument whom he could use to execute his foreign policy and a lightningrod to divert criticism from the Oval Office.
The Truman administration had toyed with the idea, but Secretary of State Dean Acheson left it to the incoming administration to decide how to proceed.
The mere fact that the new administration in Washington might attempt to directly insert itself into the region was disquieting enough, but the lectures on the necessity of respecting regional nationalisms were nothing short of alarming.
During the campaign, both Eisenhower and Dulles had made numerous pronouncements on the passing of empire and the rise of nationalism in the developing world.
In the meeting with Churchill, Eisenhower made it clear that they were very serious about supporting the emerging states and their national aspirations.
When Churchill raised the issue of joint action in the Middle East, Eisenhower reacted negatively and quickly pointed out to the Prime Minister that his joint proposals with Truman on Iran had backfired and only served to taint Washington with British colonialism.
Despite his concern about ‘immediate independence’, the message was clear.
The new administration intended to chart its own course, and clearly viewed British opposition to emerging national movements and association with London’s colonial past as a liability.
Eisenhower also told Churchill that he viewed persuasion and the more ageressive use of United States economic and military aid as the basic levers of foreign policy in the region.
The heavy emphasis on economic aid reflected the influence of advisors, including Walt Rostow and other technocrats, who believed that through economic aid the United States could bring developing nations to the point of economic self-sufficiency and thereby foster proWestern democratic institutions and societies.
The meeting also heightened Eisenhower’s concerns about the British and his old comrade-in-atms, Churchill.
He believed that Churchill was ‘trying to relive the days of World War II ... sitting on some rather Olympian platform with respect to the rest of world, and directing world affairs’ with another American president.
Winston does not by any means propose to resort to power politics and to disregard legitimate aspirations among weaker peoples.
But he does take the rather old-fashioned, paternalistic, approach that since we, with out experience and power, will be required to support and carry the heavy burdens of decent international plans, as well as to aid infant nations towards self-dependence, other nations should recognize the wisdom of our suggestions, and follow them.
Eisenhower commented that while Churchill’s view might be ‘true — in the abstract’, the reality of the situation dictated the use of ‘persuasion and example’, ‘patient negotiation, understanding and equality of treatment’, and not a ‘take it or leave it’ approach.
Strategic cooperation with London was critical, but Washington had every intention of avoiding the baggage of British colonialism, while promoting a ‘slower and more orderly progress towards independence’ for the developing world.
On 10 Januaty 1953, Eisenhower and Dulles confirmed that the priorities for United States policy in the Middle East would be containment of the Soviet Union and of Communist influence through economic development, covert assistance to pro-Western elements, and, if necessary, military assistance.
The similarities, in terms of both policy planning and practical application, between Eisenhower’s intended policies in 1953 and those of the Kennedy administration in 1961 were uncanny.
In 1953, the Suez Crisis and the Iraq Coup had yet to undermine the aura of London’s expertise and dominance in the Middle East; yet the new administration was leery of Britain’s colonial baggage and particularly reluctant to support Churchill in the disputes with Iran and Egypt.
In contrast, Churchill viewed the Middle East as traditionally a British sphere of influence, and its oil as a necessity for continued British influence in the world and for prosperity at home.
The thought of a concerted Yankee intrusion on behalf of emerging progressive regimes and the potential threat that such a move posed to British interests was to say the least distressing.
Preemption and Iran 1953 In early 1953, and ironically again in 1961, Iran constituted a serious immediate concern.
The policy of containment tequired the maintenance of a pro-Western Iran tied to the United States through Western security arrangements.
In 1953, the Iranian crisis drove a series of United States policy decisions that made a Middle East collective security arrangement based on the ‘northern tier’ increasingly attractive.
Musaddiq’s political roller-coaster and his confrontation with London over the Anglo-Persian Oil Company substantially increased Iranian instability.
Dulles underlined the word ‘any’ indicating that he clearly understood the Iranian prime minister’s lack of political options.
Nevertheless, with British whispers about the Communist threat and prodding, Washington began increasingly to fear that a dictatorship under Musaddiq could bring the Communists to power through his assassination or a coup.
In contrast, Eisenhower’s cabinet, and in particular Secretary Dulles, believed that the oil issue could be managed with the Musaddiq government in power.
Despite tising concern about what might happen, the Eisenhower administration preferred an alternative to intervention.
The British took a dim view of any United States plans to strengthen Musaddiq.
With the pro-Western propaganda campaien failing, direct aid blocked by British protests, increasing instability, and the exaggerated specter of a Communist takeover, London’s arguments that the Musaddiq government had to be replaced gained traction with Eisenhower.
With the support of most of the Shi’a religious establishment, military elements led by General Fazlullah Zahedi overthrew the Musaddiq government.
Zahedi restored the Shah to the throne, crushed the Communist Tudeh, suppressed the National Front, and handed Iranian petroleum to an Anglo-American consortium.
From the perspective of the Eisenhower administration, the coup may have defused the immediate crisis, but it hardly solved the problem of Iranian stability.
The administration continued to view economic development and social and political reform as the only real insurance against instability and Communist subversion.
At the 30 December 1953 NSC meeting, Dulles’ comments continued to reflect the administration’s desire for fundamental reform in Iran.
The Secretary complained that the Shah and Zahedi had accomplished little in the way of ‘critical’ economic and social reform.
While a solution to the dispute over oil appeared to be in the offing, none of the problems that brought on the instability had been addressed.
Dulles went on to say that the only bright spot was the suppression of the opposition.
The reform policies of nationalist politicians in the Middle East tended to create political instability, which, in turn, opened the door for Communist and Soviet inroads.
Regimes that relied on conservative military officers appeared to provide a lower-risk path to economic development and political and social ‘THE GREATER MIDDLE EAST, 1953-1958 15 reform.
Despite later protestations to the contrary, the administration’s faith lay in General Zahedi, not the Shah.
As a result, the Eisenhower administration pointedly maintained a degree of separation between its policies and personal support for the Shah.
For good reason, the administration supported the territorial integrity of a pro-Western independent Iran, not the Pahlavi dynasty.
Real faith lay in the conservative military and security services, not only as the foundation for stability, but also as the potential instrument for controlled reform.
Finally, Islam and the religious establishment across the region constituted a natural enemy of Communism, and thus another potential ally in the Cold War.
The Iranian coup also moved Washington toward a view of Western interests in the region that was more closely aligned with British views.
Eisenhower and Secretary Dulles now had confidence that, when necessary, the United States had the capability to control the political situation through covert action.
Defusing a crisis and sparking another — Egypt, 1953-1954 Unfortunately for Churchill and the British government, Egypt was not Iran.
Initially, Eisenhower considered the Anglo-Egyptian dispute over the presence of British troops in the Suez Canal zone as a more acute problem than either the Arab-Israeli dispute or Musaddiq’s rogue government in Iran.
The Egyptians demanded British withdrawal from the Canal zone and threatened guerrilla war if London refused.
Given the administration view that Egypt was the key to Western fortunes in the Middle East, Washington made it clear that the British presence was an impediment to United States interests.
Eisenhower and Dulles wanted to pursue a policy of economic assistance, including support for the Egyptian plans to dam the Nile at Aswan.
In 1961, Kennedy’s assessment and plans with regard to Egypt were virtually identical to those of Eisenhower.
In May 1953, Eisenhower characterized the Anglo-Eeyptian crisis over the Suez Canal as the ‘most dangerous’ situation in the Middle East and dispatched Dulles to assess the situation.
Churchill’s government fumed over pressure to come to terms with the Egyptians.
In a bid to moderate this pressure, Churchill threatened an Anglo-Israeli alliance to intimidate Egypt.
Both the United States embassy and the CIA had consistently reported that Nasser was the real power in the RCC and thus, the de facto leader of Egypt.
Hoping to gain a new hearing for MEDO, Dulles promised additional pressure on the British and mote economic aid.
Dulles broached the idea of MEDO, and Nasser asked against whom the defense pact was aimed.
Nasser also believed that despite his refusal on MEDO, the United States would provide modern arms for the Egyptian army, allowing unofficial cooperation between Washington and Cairo.
The Secretary then concluded that MEDO as envisioned was ‘impracticable’ due to ‘recurrent’ tensions and British pressure against economic and political aid.
Concluding that an Eeyptian-based MEDO might constitute a ‘future rather than an immediate possibility’, Dulles stated ‘the northern tier of nations shows awareness of the danger’ of Soviet expansion and thus, the Secretary breathed new life into the an idea first floated during the Truman administration, namely a defensive alliance based on the ‘northern tier’.2® He also concluded that Arab patticipation in a Western military alliance would create problems in the Arab ‘THE GREATER MIDDLE EAST, 1953-1958 17 world that ran directly counter to United States interests.
Warning that United States pressure threatened his government, Churchill hinted that a Labor government might suspend United States basing rights in Britain.
At boiling point, Churchill muttered about setting up high-level talks with the Soviets on the Egyptian situation, and blamed Dulles and Ambassador Caffery for the lack of progress on the new Canal treaty.
The Eisenhower administration walked a tightrope in attempting to avoid a break with London or with Egypt that would benefit the Soviets.
I am very much wotried at the idea of the grant of American economic aid to Egypt at a time when our differences with them are so acute.
It would, I am sure, have a grave effect in this country on Anglo-American telations.
The Socialist opposition would use it to urge us to press for the inclusion of Red China in U.N.O. and might class it with trade to that country upon which subject McCarthy’s unjust charges are already much resented.
The frontier of the Suez Canal zone shows very much the same conditions of unrest and potential warfare, as does the frontier in Korea.
Annoyed by the ‘somber tone’ of Churchill’s letter, Eisenhower responded that recognizing ‘Red China’ was hardly a threat since the British were already trading with them.
The President wanted Churchill to commit that if the United States withheld aid and Eeypt agreed to the terms discussed by the Prime Minister and President at their earlier meeting in Bermuda, Britain would then settle its differences with Egypt.
In 1954, the AngloEgyptian treaty over the Canal allowed a British military presence until 1956, and the right of reoccupation if the Canal were threatened.
In reality, the British, no longer able to to maintain large forces in Egypt, were willing to settle for the right of reentry.
Eventually, the Egyptians grudgingly accepted the tight of reentry in the event of a war that included an attack on Turkey.
Finalized in October 1954, the treaty seemed to resolve the Anglo-Egyptian impasse and cleared the way for closer Egyptian ties with the West.
In November 1954, Nasser removed Neguib and took direct control of the government.
In reality, the treaty, coupled with Dulles’ alternate strategy for containment along the ‘northern tier’ unintentionally undermined the administration’s early hopes for Western gains.
Nasser and the RCC had needed United States help in getting an agreement with Britain; thus the completion of the treaty reduced Cairo’s dependence on Washington.
The treaty also provoked a revolt by the Muslim Brotherhood, forcing Nasser to take a public anti-Western stance.
The fact that the propaganda campaign was largely orchestrated with CIA assistance was beside the point; Nasser could not openly pursue pro-Western policies after the treaty than before it.
Nasser believed that Dulles had promised massive United States economic and military aid in return for comptomises with the British.
From Nasset’s point of view, the utility of a relationship with Washington was rapidly decreasing.
Washington alluded to economic aid, and military aid was limited to security assistance for internal purposes, not modern arms for the Egyptian army.
At this point, Dulles’ ‘northern tier’ substitute for the Egyptian-based MEDO crashed head-on into US-Egyptian relations.
At the eastern end of the region, the arming of Pakistan would galvanize Nehru into a frenzy of opposition to United States policies, but the response in the Arab Middle East was muted on the condition of nonparticipation by Arab states.
On 1 August, at Egyptian prodding, the Arab League issued a statement opposing the inclusion of any Arab states in a nonArab defensive alliance.
Iraq adhered to the Arab League declaration only when speculation about membership in the Turkish-Pakistani pact resulted in nationalist rioting in Baghdad, and the British supported the Iraqi decision.
The THE GREATER MIDDLE EAST, 1953-1958 19 British government feared that United States influence in Iraq would increase as it had in post-coup Iran and post-revolutionary Egypt.
At this juncture, the terms of the Anglo-Egyptian treaty altered the course of events in the Arab Middle East.
The treaty linked Egypt to Turkey and the British defense of the Canal by stating that British forces could reenter the Suez Canal zone in the event of an attack on Turkey.
The fact that the Egyptians had strongly opposed this clause was lost on the Iraqis.
Nuri Sa’id interpreted the treaty as a tripartite defensive arrangement between Turkey, Egypt, and Britain, with Iraq effectively out in the cold.
To recoup Itaq’s position, he moved to form his own alliance with Turkey.
In early January, Iraq and Turkey announced their intention to enter into a defensive alliance.
Viewing the Iraqi move as a direct challenge to Egypt’s leadership and an indication of the continued British divide-and-conquer policy, Nasser moved to form an Arab defense arrangement that isolated Iraq.
Only Yemen and Saudi Arabia supported Egypt, while Syria, Jordan, and Lebanon refused to condemn Iraq.
It caused Washington to reconsider support for Iraq’s inclusion in any Western defense scheme.
Having specifically warned the United States about the inclusion of Arab states in its defensive alliances, Cairo began to view the United States role with greater suspicion.
Nuri Pasha had managed to place the Eisenhower administration’s security plan on a collision course with the very country that Washington viewed as the ‘key’ to the region.
Recognizing an opportunity to separate the United States from Egypt, the British now supported the inclusion of Iraq and other Arab states into the defense alliance.
London threw caution to the winds in its Iraqi policy by undermining the Arab nationalist credentials of the Hashemite regime.
Still hoping for United States economic aid, support for the Aswan project, and United States arms, Nasser wanted to preserve his relationship with Washington; however, the potential for Iraq’s inclusion in a Western military alliance raised serious questions about the potential threat that Eisenhower’s containment policy posed to Egyptian interests in the region.
In Washington, Eisenhower and his advisors were beginning to grasp the limitations that the political realities of the Middle East placed on the influence to be gained through economic assistance and on local participation in its plans to contain the Soviet Union.
Largely in deference to Cairo’s negative reaction to Iraq’s inclusion in what became the Baghdad Pact, Washington provided support but refused to join, while still hoping to gain something positive from its courtship of Nasser.
A peace for the Arab-Israeli conflict Eisenhower and Dulles, in essence, agreed with Secretary of State George C Marshall’s assessment that the recognition of Israel had fundamentally been a 20 GREATER MIDDLE EAST AND THE COLD WAR policy made for emotional and political reasons during the presidential campaien of 1948.
By 1953, the creation of Israel was so much spilt milk, but it threatened to sour relations with the Arab and Muslim worlds.
The problem now centered on how to neutralize Israel as a stumbling block to US-Arab relations.
There is no doubt that American initiative in the establishment of the Israeli State and the resulting Arab refugee problem has led to increased anti-Western feeling throughout the Arab countries and has embittered, in particular, Arab-American relations.
It may be, too, that the aid which Israel has received from the United States has delayed the possibility of a settlement by enabling Israel to avoid facing the issue that, unless she trades with the Arab countries, she cannot be a viable State.
With regard to the situation in Egypt, the President viewed the Arab-Israeli dispute as a distraction from the proper focus on economic progtess.
Against the backdrop of the Anglo-Egyptian negotiations over the Suez Canal, the administration attempted to leverage the Egyptian regime into breaking the impasse over an Arab-Israeli peace settlement.
Eisenhower had repeatedly stated that his administration intended to ‘do what it thought was right’ and not, as Vice-President Richard M Nixon put it, ‘kowtow’ to domestic Jewish political pressure.
Washington believed that it could use economic leverage and manipulate the valve on foreign aid to control Israel.
It included compensation for Palestinian refugees and the right of return for refugees.
Lastly, it called for a settlement of the Jordan River water-usage issues and a joint program to develop water ‘THE GREATER MIDDLE EAST, 1953-1958 21 resoutces in the region.
During his Middle East trip in May 1953, Dulles broached the topic of refugees with Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion.
Ben-Gurion quickly disabused Dulles of any hopes of Israeli cooperation.
Dulles quickly drew the only conclusion possible, namely that any hope for peace rested on the success of a step-by-step apptoach.
The administration recognized the ploy for what it was and pressured the Israelis to withhold any initiative.
Concluding that the refugee problem was a dead issue, Washington then focused on the Jordan waters issue as a first step in getting an agreement between the two sides.
In point of fact, Johnston obtained an agreement ftom the Arabs, but the Israelis changed their position, jeopardizing the entire negotiation.
On 28 February, Israeli forces mounted a raid into Gaza, in retaliation for minor border incidents.
From Nasset’s perspective, the Iraqi issue and the Gaza raid made it appear that the West intended to strengthen Egypt’s enemies and undermine his prestige throughout the region.
Nuri Sa’id and Ben Gurion had succeeded in undermining the lynchpin in Washington’s Arab policy.
None of the patties involved were interested in a compromise settlement.
The Israelis in particular viewed any compromise as a threat to their goal of creating a Jewish 22 GREATER MIDDLE EAST AND THE COLD WAR state and excluding the Arab population.
Flow Gently Sweet Afton Come quickly Sweet Arabs Let’s meet while we can We’ve something enticing “Tis Johnston’s own Plan We only entreat you Be ready to sign We'll furnish the paper And the dotted line.
Now all that we ask you Is simple and sweet Just have full authority Whenever we meet So you all may sign up And then we will tell Those waters of Jordan To steam heat all Hell.
The British had never the liked the project, United States officials ascribing this to London’s ‘pique’ at not being ‘sufficiently’ consulted before Johnston undertook his mission.
Eisenhower and Dulles had a plan, but no-one was willing to participate in it.
With the failure of the Jordanwaters effort, the Eisenhower administrations efforts to establish a peace process effectively ground to a halt.
Economic incentives were simply insufficient inducements to outweigh the associated political risks.
This was not only true in the Arab world, but in Israel as well, where the Arab ‘threat’ became the criticalinternal political issue.
Fear politics and exaggerating that threat became the political bread-and-butter that paid off in Knesset seats.
Thus, Arab and Israeli fear of a settlement trumped any gain that might accrue from increased economic aid.
This clearly demonstrated the limitations that economic aid could play as an inducement to an Arab-Israeli settlement.
Running afoul of non-alignment In late 1954, the Eisenhower administration looked with justifiable satisfaction on its overall Middle East policies.
The situation in Iran, while THE GREATER MIDDLE EAST, 1953-1958 23 leaving much to be desired in the way of political reform and economic development, was stable.
However grudgingly, Egypt and Britain had signed a new treaty that would remove British forces from the Suez Canal zone.
Economic pressure and incentives showed promise as the first steps toward a possible Arab-Israeli peace.
At the same time, a rudimentary alliance system to contain the Soviet Union seemed to be emerging.
In reality, these tactical successes had begun the process that would turn United States relations with the ‘progressive’ regimes in the Middle East on their ear.
Just as the linkage between Turkey and Egypt in the Anglo-Egyptian treaty of 1954 had unintended consequences, the inclusion of Pakistan in the Western defense structure alienated India.
At the same time, it made New Delhi an integral part of the Middle Eastern power struggle.
Ironically, Nehru’s matriage of political democracy and economic development in India largely followed the model that Eisenhower and his advisors saw as so central to proWestern development in Asia, and yet the requirements of containment would foster an increasingly problematic relationship between the world’s two largest democracies.
These problems also contributed to growing political and diplomatic synergy between India and Egypt; neither Nehru nor Nasser were willing to trade national interests for arms or economic assistance from the West.
Given their deep-seated distrust of Great Power machinations stemming from their colonial experiences, India and Egypt absolutely refused to enter a Western military alliance.
Nehru had made it clear that he envisioned a new political order for Asia that rejected the traditions of Rea/politik.
In India during the early 1950s, Nehru began to reverse the trend toward diffusion of political power following independence.
The power of regional political chiefs threatened to fracture the unity of the republic.
Non-alignment, or ‘neutrality’ in Washington’s parlance, had a clear anti-American, almost pro-Communist tint.
It flew in the face of the ‘with us or against us’ attitudes that framed the Cold War diplomatic and security mentality.
Despite this, Nehru’s India was too important to ignore or totally to alienate.
India was the largest democracy in the world, a potential Asian counterbalance to Communist China, and Nehru had innumerable admirers, including key members of the United States Congress.
Eisenhower and his advisors recognized the necessity of a working relationship 24 GREATER MIDDLE EAST AND THE COLD WAR with New Delhi.
In addition, India had played a key role in Korea, and chaired the International Control Commission on Indochina.
Having carefully monitored US-Pakistani bilateral developments, New Delhi expressed immediate concern when Dulles, following his Middle East tour in May 1953, referred to an alternative defensive alliance on the northern tier and explained that this meant Turkey, Iran, and Pakistan.
No-one in Washington had any illusions about the desirability of avoiding involvement in the Kashmir dispute.
In between these two extremes is a vast center group, which in basic beliefs has much in common, and, for this reason, should be a closely-knit organization.
In point of fact this vast center or ‘Middle of the Road’ group prefers to shut its eyes to the dangers represented in the extremes — in the current state of affairs, the only threatening extreme is Communism.
The group of nations of which this center is constituted constantly indulges in all kinds of divisive arguments and name-calling that grow so important in their cumulative effect as to nullify any attempt toward unity in working against the common enemy.
Anticipating New Delhi’s reaction, the administration pinned its hopes of managing India on the importance of massive United States aid.
The United States was the largest contributor of economic ‘THE GREATER MIDDLE EAST, 1953-1958 25 assistance, by a wide margin, and Nehru’s plans for economic development were totally dependent on that aid.
Viewing this economic leverage as insurance against a radical Indian reaction, the Eisenhower administration encouraged the formation of a defensive alliance between Turkey and Pakistan.
In December 1953, Nehru expressed his opposition to arms for Pakistan to Vice-President Richard Nixon during the latter’s visit to India.
Arguably, Nixon’s assessment tipped the balance in favor of providing arms to Pakistan.
By March 1954, Eisenhower had tired of trying to mollify India and made it clear that the security requirements of the United States would determine the status of military aid to Pakistan.
Again, he reassured New Delhi that the United States would take ‘appropriate action’ in the event that Pakistan attempted to direct this military aid toward India.
Rostow’s evaluation of containment and Communist China underscored the consensus existing in Cold War Washington.
Nehru reacted with a vehemence that surprised all but the most experienced India hands in the foreign policy community.
The Indian Prime Minister claimed that the United States had completely altered the ‘roots and foundations’ of any proposed settlement on Kashmir.
From Eisenhower’s perspective, Indian neutrality had become ‘neutrality against the West’, as Nehru increasingly refused to differentiate between the Soviet and United States political systems.
Despite his pique, Nehru resisted more radical action against United States interests.
He understood that the loss of United States economic aid would have disastrous consequences for Indian economic growth.
Nehru’s ‘socialist’ leanings notwithstanding, his vision appealed to Washington’s belief in economic prosperity and reform as the surest counterbalance to Communist expansionist.
He would find other ways to vent his unhappiness with United States policy.
The arming of Pakistan contributed directly to a ‘THE GREATER MIDDLE EAST, 1953-1958 27 vigorous Indian campaign to assett its prerogatives and emphasize its independence from Washington, and to show its overall displeasure with Western military alliances.
Coincidentally, Nehru had at his disposal the perfect instrument for harassing the Americans.
This instrument left no doubt as to the origin of the message but provided Nehru with a fig leaf of deniability.
An avowed leftist, inspired by the Hindu radical Lokmanaya Bal Gangadhar Tilak and the Bolshevik Revolution, Menon had served as Nehru’s friend, publicist, and personal representative in Britain during the 1930s and 1940s, where he became the self-styled ‘Ambassador of St.
By claiming that he had authored the term ‘non-aligned’ and by his uncompromising hostility to the West, he managed to further taint nonalignment as pro-Soviet.
Understanding full well the implications and probable outcome, Nehru placed Menon in the Indian delegation at the conference, where he managed to severely antagonize Washington.
He consciously and conspicuously played to audiences well beyond the confines of the Palais des Nations.
Despite differences in style, Menon was, in fact, the more tadical and strident expression of Nehru’s positions.
United States assistance to Pakistan aside, Nehru abhorred Eisenhower’s commitment to Asian leaders like Chiang Kai-Shek and Sygmund Rhee.
In non-policy areas, Nehru increasingly resented what he viewed as the attitude of ‘American superiority’, and pushed for limiting United States influence.
Nehru and Bandung Nehru’s commitment to non-alignment accelerated and intensified the deterioration of Indian relations with the West.
The geopolitical and military aspects of United States containment policy began to overshadow the initial commitment 28 GREATER MIDDLE EAST AND THE COLD WAR to economic development as the initial central theme in combating Soviet, Chinese, and indigenous Communist influence.
In much of the developing world, Washington’s linkage of military and economic policies under the containment umbrella transformed perceptions of the US, from the champion of emerging nationalism to a neo-colonialist interloper tied to a very Britishlike policy of indirect colonialism.
Non-alignment not only came to symbolize independence and freedom of action to Nehru, but it also provided a means to indirectly tweak the Eisenhower administration for its policies.
Nehru’s unhappiness also placed a greater emphasis on pressing forward with a major non-aligned initiative.
The 1954 Colombo and 1955 Bandung conferences were directly stimulated by Nehru’s objections to the system of Western alliances.
The 28 April to 2 May 1954 Colombo conference was a trelatively limited affair; however, it quickly took on broader overtones.
Key participants quickly recognized it as a path to greater stature and independence of action.
The Indians and Pakistanis disagreed on everything, from condemnations of Communism and anti-Communist movements to the order in which the ‘US, the UK, China, and USSR,’ or “China, the UK, the US, and USSR’ were to be listed in the call for non-intervention in Indochina.
Apparently, Nehru’s experience at the Colombo conference created something of a quandary for him.
Already leery of a followTHE GREATER MIDDLE EAST, 1953-1958 29 on Afro-Asian conference the next year, Nehru set about finding additional international support to counteract Pakistan before he committed to attend.
Nehru’s lukewarm support for an Afro-Asian conference in 1955 raised doubts that it would occur.
Initially, the Eisenhower administration believed that the effort would likely collapse; however, by late 1954, it had become apparent that Nehru intended to proceed and on a clearly anti-American note.
Taking the diplomatic initiative by inviting Beijing to attend, Nehru sent Britain and the United States scrambling for a response.
In fact, the potential diplomatic and _ political ramifications were so broad that the Eisenhower administration had great difficulty in formulating a strategy at all.
On 14 January 1955, Dulles called a meeting of key State Department and CIA officials in an attempt to come to some resolution concerning the proper course of action for Washington.
His younger brother, Allen Dulles, Director of the CIA, expressed serious concern about the purpose of the Bandung meetings.
Suggestions for dealing with the ‘rigged conference’ ran the gamut from delaying it to organizing a boycott to supporting the attendance of solidly proWestern nations in the region.
Washington worried about the potential for an anti-Western tone and increased acceptability for Communist China in the world community.
The conference also highlighted the differences between the non-aligned and proWestern camps in Asia and the Middle East.
Secretary Dulles concluded that, given the exclusion of Israel from the conference, Atab attendance would determine its success or failure.
Instead, Dulles proposed that should the conference actually take place, the United States, working with Britain, should use attending friendly states to ‘propose courses of action which would embarrass Communist China’ and minimize the possibility of the formation of an Asian-African bloc.
Washington viewed the participation of the countries in the Arab Middle East as the litmus test of success.
Initially, the United States subjected Egypt to the ‘strongest pressure’ not to attend.
Unfortunately for the Eisenhower administration, United States influence in Cairo had taken a downward turn, and Nehru’s courtship of Nasser seemed to pay off.
It was no accident that Nasser decided to attend Bandung on the eve of the Cairo conference on the TurkeyIraq agreement.
In Nasser’s mind, Western aid for Israel and Iraq created a similar reaction to that Nehru’s view of weapons for Pakistan.
In an attempt to compromise with Nasset’s opposition to Arab participation in Western political alliances, the British promised a ‘moratorium’ on the entry of other Arab states, with the exception of Iraq.
India and Egypt now faced a British-led, Ametican-sponsored and -financed anti-Soviet alliance that was arming theit principal regional adversaries.
Realizing that the conference would, in fact, occur, the Eisenhower administration encouraged pro-Western states in Africa and Asia to attend in an attempt to transform the conference into a pro-Western display of solidarity.
Fearing that Pakistan would attempt to assume ‘the self appointed role of spokesman of the Arab countries — or rather the Muslim World,’ the Indian government needed the presence of a staunchly neutral Egypt.
At Bandung, Nasser found himself feted and flattered by Nehru and by Achmad Sukarno of Indonesia.
Initially, Eisenhower and Dulles were not overly concerned with the results of Bandung; it appeared that the pro-Western states 32 GREATER MIDDLE EAST AND THE COLD WAR Corbis Nasser and Nehru Post-Bandung Nasser and Nehru following the Bandung conference in April 1955.
The caption read ‘Please You First’ referring to their decision to simultaneously recognize Communist China, much to the chargin of the Eisenhower administration.
This relationship would come to symbolize ‘positive neutrality’ and non-alignment in the Greater Middle East. had held their own.
Charles Habib Malik, who attended as a member of the Lebanese delegation and later became Lebanese foreign minister, warned the Dulles brothers’ special envoy, Wilbur Eveland, that Tito, Sukarno, and Nehru would unite the developing nations of Africa and Asia to oppose the Western alliance systems and create a potentially antiWestern bloc in the United Nations.
Malik also described Nasser as ‘mesmerized’ by non-alignment and beguiled by the attention showered on him.
To the annoyance of the White House, Malik’s concern took concrete ‘THE GREATER MIDDLE EAST, 1953-1958 33 form when Nasser proclaimed Egyptian adherence to non-alignment.
The ageravation caused by this move paled in comparison to the announcement that would follow.
Shortly after Nasser’s return from Indonesia, the Soviet Ambassador to Egypt, Daniel Solod, offered not only modern weapons on generous payment terms but also help with the Aswan Dam project.
Initially suspicious, Nasser held back, hoping for an American counteroffer.
In the minds of many in Washington, it irretrievably linked ‘non-aligned’ and proCommunist policies, but perhaps more importantly, it directly affected USSoviet relations.
Eisenhower believed that at the Geneva conference 1955, he had achieved an ‘understanding’ and ‘basis for a working relationship’ with the Soviet Union with regard to spheres of influence.
Perhaps Nasser would have found his way to Moscow without Nehru’s help, but Nehru certainly paved the way.
He provided Nasser with an ideological justification and international support for his actions.
The Indian Prime Minister also facilitated a diplomatic imbroglio between the United States and the Soviet Union.
The Soviet arms agreement with Cairo had other troubling repercussions.
The Shah and his ‘pro-Western’ advisors revised their assessment of Iran’s value to American interests in the region.
They found the threat of neutralism or non-alignment to be an effective shield against pressure to reform and useful leverage for additional economic and military aid.
On 13 September 1955, John D Jernegan, Deputy Secretary of State for NEA, and Norman B Hannah, Desk Officer for Iranian Affairs, met with Sir Robert Scott and Willie Mortis of the British Embassy in Washington.
In a ‘gloomy’ summary of affairs, they discussed the ‘internal drift’ in Iranian domestic programs.
The British wanted the United States to intervene with additional aid and pressure on the Shah to reform his government.
It would be a mistake to think that this Government, unless it drastically changes its character, can or will provide the firm leadership for the successful execution of important reforms — political, economic or administrative.
But from all reports and from a study of his moves, the Shah does not have the capacity to make a sustained effort in the ditection of basic social reforms, and an attempt by him to embark on such a program would probably have chaotic results.
Two months later, news of a Soviet ‘good neighborly’ visit by the Shah to the Soviet Union filtered in from Tehran.
In addition, the Soviets were now openly supporting historic Iranian claims to Bahrain, and comparing it to Nikita Khrushchev’s support for India over Kashmir and the Afghan Pushtuns in their territorial disputes with Pakistan.
With the memory of Nasser’s accommodation with the Soviet Union painfully fresh, Washington worried that Iran might also seek its own version of an arrangement with Moscow.
Despite differences over policy matters, at a personal level both leaders seemed to share great respect for each other, in contrast to the icy relationship between Nehru and Kennedy.
In pursuing a policy of containment, the Eisenhower administration had linked economic development, political reform, and military assistance to prevent Soviet expansion and Communist influence in the region.
Economic development was the key to bringing long-term, pro-Western stability to the region.
In 1953, Eisenhower and his advisors borrowed the ideas and terminology from the progressive economic development theories of American academia that would dominate a generation of United States policy makers.
They believed in creating ‘take-off points’ and in the ability of the United States to use economic and development aid to make emerging national states, even those with revolutionary regimes, ‘look inward’ and focus on domestic development instead of regional rivalries.
The Eisenhower foreign policy establishment was nigegardly in its provision of military assistance, attempting to limit military aid to security assistance and to 36 GREATER MIDDLE EAST AND THE COLD WAR support internal security without providing offensive capabilities.
While Washington viewed economic development as the best means of assuring proWestern stability and preventing Communist expansion, economic reform metely represented the preferred path to containment.
Eisenhowet’s administration, like that of Truman before and of Kennedy after, was committed to containment by any means necessary.
When Washington believed that the tactical situation dictated short-term methods, then the administration was absolutely willing to use military aid, security assistance, covert assistance, and, in rare cases, direct intervention to maintain repressive regimes.
To the policy makers, political expediency demanded the immediate maintenance of pro-Western political reliability, even at the expense of longterm stability.
Eisenhower came to Washington believing that colonialism was dead and that the West had to make accommodations with growing nationalism in the developing world.
On the one hand, the United States recognized the importance of good relations with their traditional European allies, but on the other wanted to distance themselves ftom the heritage of colonialism in the developing world.
From the very beginning, Eisenhower made it clear to Churchill and the British that he believed their focus should be on European affairs and that they should give up the trappings of empire in places like Egypt and Iran.
The administration initially resisted British calls for intervention in both Iran and Egypt.
In the case of Egypt, the administration infuriated London by consistently taking the Egyptian side and pressuring Britain to compromise with the new revolutionary regime.
Eisenhower and Dulles viewed the traditional regimes supported by the British as anachronisms soon to succumb to the rising tide of nationalism.
Despite this preference for progressive regimes, Eisenhower’s lack of success in using economic incentives and the promise of future military aid to induce key states, like Egypt and India, to enter Western defensive alliances created frictions that over time boded well for increased British influence in Washington.
Eisenhower found that the traditional regimes and a British presence provided the only real basis for Western alliance systems in the region.
It also provided a screen behind which the United States could support pro-Western elements and avoid overt participation.
Obviously, this system fooled no one, and increased United States friction with various nationalist movements.
The White House understood that United States support for the 1954 Turkish-Pakistani ‘THE GREATER MIDDLE EAST, 1953-1958 37 defense arrangements would evoke a negative reaction in New Delhi, but they failed to gage the intensity.
Even had they predicted the extent of Nehru’s unhappiness, they most likely would have proceeded with arms for Pakistan anyway.
Later that year, the move by Hashemite Iraq to join, and British support for Iraq’s inclusion in the defensive alliance with Turkey surprised and annoyed Washington.
It further strained the relationship between Washington and Cairo, but friction or not, Washington supported the combining of the various bilateral agreements and the enticement of Itan into a defense alliance.
At the same time, the administration did not back away from supporting the British lead in the alliance, thus firmly identifying ever-increasing American involvement in the region with Britain’s colonial past.
The creation of the ‘northern tier’ alliance, known as the Baghdad Pact, firmly attached the very neo-colonial label that Eisenhower and Dulles had so assiduously attempted to avoid, and it alienated Nehru and Nasser.
From the very beginning, in words to be echoed eight years later when the Kennedy administration took office, Eisenhower and Dulles had believed in the seemingly irresistible logic that economic development and the benefits of improved standards of living would entice the states of the Greater Middle East to abandon their internecine disputes and focus inwardly on creating prosperity for their people.
The Holy Grail of economic development would bring pro-Western, political stability.
Having reduced regional tensions, this inward turn would eliminate the need for massive arms buildups, allowing member states to rely on the United States defense umbrella for protection against the Soviets and for security assistance to protect against Communist subversion.
This long-term strategy for pro-Western stability in the region ran counter to short-term political reality.
The experiences of 1953-1955 basically turned the administration’s containment policy on its head.53 to 1955 shattered Eisenhower’s faith in economic development as the cure-all for Western influence.
Increasingly, political stability rested on the loyalty and pro-Western orientation of the military and security forces.
Even in the case of traditional monarchies, the loyalty of the military became the primary issue associated with pro-Western governments.
To the contrary, political and economic reform remained highly desirable, but rather than being the lead elements of containment policy, political reform and economic development would now only be pursued within the context of a stable, pro-Western envitonment.
When economic or political reform threatened to destabilize a Western ally, the focus immediately returned 38 GREATER MIDDLE EAST AND THE COLD WAR to the loyalty of the security forces, the maintenance of order, and the suppression of threats to the particular regime.
Controlled, top-down reform became the only acceptable model for the region.
In addition, consummation of the Czech arms deal in late 1955 undermined confidence in United States policy in the Middle East, and led to broad criticism of Eisenhower and Dulles.
It also underscored the limitations of economic aid as a ptimary bargaining tool.
Nasser’s discussion with Chou En-lai at Bandung and the subsequent Czech arms deal happened as a result of internal Egyptian political requirements, even with United States support for the massive Aswan Dam project hanging in the balance.
Nasser determined, and correctly, that the Gaza taid and repeated provocations by Israel required the acquisition of modern arms for the Egyptian army.
At the other end of the Greater Middle East, economic aid for non-aligned India had not prevented Nehru’s attacks on United States policy or Indian acceptance of Soviet economic assistance.
Containment of the Soviet Union and its fellow traveler, Nasser, now rested on the survival of pro-Western regimes, no matter what their internal political system, state of economic development, or social structure.
Pakistan insisted on dragging up the issue of Kashmir in the United Nations, against United States and British wishes.
The resulting marathon speech by Krishna Menon attacking Pakistan and its colonial backers, Britain, and the United States, created another low point in relations with India.
Developments in Cairo and Damascus sent shock waves across the Arab world, ultimately bringing down the Hashemite monarchy in Baghdad.
The collapse of the pro-Western regime in Iraq in turn rippled through Tehran, Karachi, and New Delhi, as well as the Arab Middle East, causing a series of reactions and counter-reactions that laid the foundation for more than four decades of friction and conflict.
For that reason, 1958 stands as the pivotal year in American foreign policy across the Greater Middle East.
Nasser and Nehru stood at the apogee of non-alignment and positive neutrality, representing a ‘third way’ between competing superpowers.
Their policies demonstrated that charting an independent course had political and material benefits.
Increasingly, non-aligned and aligned states borrowed their tactics to extract aid and support from their power-bloc sponsors.
In addition, 1958, more than 1956, heralded the end of colonial power and the beginning of the contemporary era.
British attempts to indirectly control the Arab Middle East following World War II had failed.
The Arab League as an instrument of British foreign policy had backfired and, as feared, turned into ‘Dr.
The Canal treaty of 1954, a shotgun wedding with Uncle Sam presiding, further demonstrated the inability of Britain to control events.
Regardless of the success or failure of Anthony Eden’s adventure with his friends in France and Israel, the British were going to have to get out of Egypt.
Suez also affirmed the close connection between the political and regional aspirations of the primary non-aligned powers, Egypt and India.
The political institutions of Nehru’s India and Nasset’s Egypt diverged widely, but their style of charismatic leadership, the jealous protection of THE NEW ORDER AND RECONSIDERATIONS 41 independence, the obsession with national honor, and the shared colonial experience created a synergy that was real.
Despite their very different temperaments and backgrounds, Nehru and Nasser were pragmatic politicians, motivated by revolutionary idealism and a belief in their leadership roles in the Greater Middle East.
At the time, many blamed the failure of the Suez on Washington, 1958 exposed for all to see Britain’s weakened stature and circumscribed options in the Middle East.
By 1958, both Nehru and Nasser had amply demonstrated their determinatrion to pursue policies tailored to what they saw as their own political priorities.
Nehru’s expulsion of United States observers attached to the United Nations contingent in Kashmir, the harangues of Krishna Menon against Pakistan and the West, and Nehru’s sponsorship of Communist China left little doubt about Indian willingness or ability to act independently.
Nevertheless, Nehru’s position on everything from Indochina to military alliances in Asia and Africa may have been problematic to the West, but he opposed the Communist party in India and led the largest democracy in the world.
In short, he was a useful window on the non-aligned and developing world and a Western-educated leader to be cultivated and tolerated.
Far more impatient and insecure, Nasser demonstrated his independence and non-alignment in his reaction to the ‘northern tier’, to Western support for Israel, and in attending the Bandung conference.
He turned to the Soviet Union for arms, and when the United States refused to support the Aswan Dam project, he nationalized the Canal, sparking the Suez imbroglio.
Nasser demonstrated that he had to be taken seriously, because failure to do so invited unanticipated and often unpleasant developments.
Since Eisenhowet’s declaration of January 1957, relations with Egypt had been particularly strained; however, at a fundamental level, the Eisenhower administration continued to view Egypt as the key to the Arab Middle East and desired a working relationship with the Egyptian leader.
The developments of early 1958 forced the Eisenhower administration to accelerate plans for a new formula for United States policy in the Greater Middle East.
Containment required the preservation of pro-Western states and the encouragement of truly neutralist policies on the part of the non-aligned.
In dealing with the latter, Eisenhower and his advisors turned again to economic assistance as the most effective lever for maintaining some semblance of normal relations with the radical nationalist states of the region and as a vehicle to find an accommodation with Nasser.
To some extent, long-standing United States policies toward Nehru and India served as the model for this accommodation.
Despite problems, the relationship with New Delhi had proven useful, and a tactical case-by-case approach to issues had maintained ties and influence in New Delhi.
Economic aid had also prevented a total breach with India over military aid to their neighboring rival, Pakistan.
A similar approach to Egypt, based on renewed economic incentives, appeared to hold the potential for like results.
Decreased tensions with Egypt also might to some degtee undermine 42 GREATER MIDDLE EAST AND THE COLD WAR Soviet influence and perhaps aleviate Nasserist pressure on the ‘northern tier’ alliance, particularly on Iraq and other pro-Western Arab states and Iran.
United States policy evolved in a less ambitious, less ideological, and more pragmatic approach.
Between 1953 and 1955, Washington had set its goals high, too high, hoping to solve long-standing Middle East disputes over Kashmir and Palestine while coaxing Egypt and India into defensive alliances against the Soviet Union and China.
The policy approach of 1958 were more modest and aimed at reducing Egyptian and Indian opposition to the Baghdad Pact and SEATO and at undermining Soviet influence.
As this policy adjustment got underway events in Baghdad struck Cairo, Tehran, Karachi, New Delhi, London, and Washington like a bolt from the blue.
The varying reactions would have repercussions that would carry into the 21st century.
In addition, despite this hostility, policy makers continued to view Nasser as the key to United States influence in the region.
His ‘victory’ at Suez had made him the standard by which Arabs judged their leaders.
The confluence of Nasset’s simplistic ideas on revolutionary Arab nationalism and his pronouncements on non-alignment and positive neutralism formed an ill-defined ideological potpourti.
This very lack of definition and systematic ideological structure worked in Nasset’s favor.
Nassetism promised something to everyone, while challenging the traditional ruling elites, many of whom were aligned with the West.
By 1958, Nasser had not only navigated Egypt into the post-colonial period, but had also become the symbol of radical change in the Arab world.
In one sense, Nasser’s success confirmed the accuracy of State Department and CIA assessments.
Both had predicted that Egypt was the most important Arab state and that Nasser alone determined the course of Egyptian policy.
Unfortunately, the relationship with Nasser and thus Egypt had not gone well.
In Washington, ideological prejudices had made the relationship virtually unworkable.
The White House believed that Nasser had become a Soviet proxy during the preceding five years.
Still, Washington faced the conundrum of coming up with a policy for the future.
Given Nasset’s arms relationship with the Soviet Union, Eisenhower reverted to economic aid and financial incentives as the basis for regenerating normalized contacts with Cairo.
In London, the Macmillan government also wanted an accommodation with Nasser and a settlement of claims resulting from the Suez crisis that would allow for the reopening of the Canal.
Wary, London believed that the West would have to confront and thwart Nasser’s more aggressive policies, but wanted to see the chapter on Suez closed.
Improved relations or not, neither Britain nor the United States had any illusions about Nasset’s intentions to undermine Iraq, Jordan, the Gulf emirates, and the Aden Protectorate.
For the British, their oil concessions in Iraq and the Gulf were critical.
London believed that any further erosion of its position and prestige in the Arab Middle East, whether in oil-barren Jordan or in Aden, would threaten its position in the Gulf states, but the British also understood that in the post-1956 order any action against Nasser required the clear agreement of the United States.
Thus, British confrontations with the Egyptian leader became indirect affairs carried out by proxies and colored by the cynical British view of Nasset’s intentions. 1958 witnessed an unusual situation in which Nasser, Eisenhower, and Macmillan wete all attempting to define Nasserism.
In the face of right-wing Republican opposition, Eisenhower needed a definition that would justify a working relationship with Cairo.
London wanted a definition that would, when necessaty, gatner American support in containing revolutionary Arab nationalism.
Given that so much trode on this exercise, a brief examination of Nasset’s accumulated ideological baggage as of 1958 is in order.
Nasser may have lacked a structured, clearly articulated framework for ruling, but he possessed a crude set of ideologically-based principles.
These simplistic ideas, expressed in his 1952 manifesto, resonated with the Egyptian people, radical Arab nationalists, and with many emerging nation states.
Nasser’s successes between 1955 and 1958 meant that the serious pursuit of these goals resulted in varying degrees of trouble for the Western powers.
For the United States, Nasser’s successes were largely an annoyance; for the British, Nasser’s success could mean catastrophe.
Nasset’s success confirmed the United States administration’s long-held assumption that Egypt and its leader were the batometer of the Arab world for the foreseeable future.
For two years, United States policy in the Middle East had gone into free fall; the ‘vacuum’ that resulted in the Eisenhower Doctrine now resembled a policy ‘black hole’ stretching from North Africa to Pakistan.
Although not apparent until much later, this would mark the hightide of Nasser’s pan-Arab ambitions.
The union added a sense of urgency to United States plans to reconstruct a working relationship with Nasser. largely at the expense of the West, now pushed Washington toward an accommodation.
The Egyptian-Syrian Union, and saving the Middle East from Communism In early 1958, Nasser’s growing influence combined with United States domestic criticism of the administration forced Eisenhower to reexamine its policies toward Nasser.
Looking for areas of potential cooperation, Eisenhower and Dulles focused on Nasser’s shared antipathy for Arab Communism.
This 46 GREATER MIDDLE EAST AND THE COLD WAR initiative received a boost when talk of Arab unification under Egyptian leadership began to take concrete form.
Popular agitation in other Arab capitals added weight to the view that Nasserist influence might actually culminate in some form of broadly unified Arab state.
In addition, the weakness of pro-Western Arab regimes lent an air of inevitability to the Nasserist triumph and placed additional pressure on the administration to come up with new policies.
This reevaluation of United States policy also required an assessment of the problem presented by US-Israeli ties.
In a January 1958 review of United States policy, Secretary Dulles pointed out that both the State and Defense Departments had opposed the establishment of Israel because they had envisioned the very situation that now confronted the United States.
Dulles bluntly stated that because of the ‘potency of international Jewry’, not even the Soviet Union advocated an end to the Jewish state.
He concluded that ‘no greater danger to United States security’ existed than that posed by the Arab-Israeli dispute, viewing it as the means by which the Soviet Union might eventually gain control of the Middle East.
Thus, moves toward improved relations were already under consideration when, in January 1958, the Syrians agreed to unification on Nasser’s terms.
In fact, the details of the agreement surprised even the Syrian Ba’thists, army officers, politicians, and also Egyptian officials.
Nasser believed that Syrian acquiescence to his demands for a centralized state on the Egyptian model, including the dissolution of all political parties, would overcome the potential for problems.
Of course, Nasser had no intention of sharing power with the fractious Syrian politicians.
Nevertheless, on 1 February 1958, from the balcony of the Abdin Palace, Nasser and Quwatli, the President of the Syrian Republic, proclaimed the creation of the United Arab Republic, announcing that Nasser would be its first president.
Seeing the handwriting on the wall, Washington took a positive position to avoid being criticized for opposing the sacred cow of Arab unity.
In the confusion, Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, and Saudi Arabia publicly welcomed the union despite that they might create an opposition group.
Although pessimistic, the Eisenhower administration wanted to keep its options open.
Jordan’s efforts to interest Iraq and Saudi Arabia in a closer association of the three Kings to which Lebanon could adhere have so far fallen on barren ground.
However, in order to be ready in the unlikely event that the four Arab states come up with a common position of opposition, which is feasible and acceptable to us, we ate giving urgent consideration to appropriate ways in which we could assist those states in the implementation of their common action.
Playing the reluctant suitor, he argued that he had been forced to accept union to prevent a Communist takeover.
He asked Washington for a three-month moratorium on criticism in order to allow him a free hand in dealing with the Communist threat.
Suppression of the Communists resurrected, albeit in more modest form, plans in Washington to provide Egypt with economic aid and financial incentives.
This list included trade, cultural exchanges, economic assistance, military training, CARE programs, and grain under Public Law 480.72 Only a matter of weeks before, Nasser had been reviled as a Soviet agent in the Middle East; now he was to be the recipient of United States economic aid.
Using the thin veil of the ‘schedule’, the United States moved quickly to take advantage of Nasset’s promise to do something about the Communists in Sytia.
The administration began immediate preparations to ease relations, provide him with aid, and normalize the relationship, even as a crisis in Lebanon loomed on the horizon.
Ironically, the administration had so thoroughly vilified Nasser that some saw the anti-Communist campaign as a ruse approved by Moscow to further Soviet interests.
As the The Nation put it, ‘Officials in Washington are straining their eyes to find advantages for the United States in the fusion of Egypt and Syria into a single nation.
The display of Arab unity in Damascus and Cairo upstaged talks between Jordan, Iraq, and Saudi Arabia.
At the Baghdad Pact conference in Ankara, the United States again refused to join, and offered only $10 million in military aid, a miserly sum in comparison with the military aid from the Soviet Union to Syria and Egypt.
In the Arab world, both supporters and opponents of the Egyptian-Syrian union criticized Dulles and the administration for their ‘negative, unimaginative THE WAVE OF THE FUTURE 49 and contradictory’ policies.
Pro-Western Arabs bitterly blamed Dulles’ handling of the Aswan Dam project, the denial of arms to the Egyptians, and United States support for Israel for causing Nasset’s turn toward the Soviet Union.
There was also considerable criticism for pressuring countries into defensive pacts.
The Secretary then provided a detailed list of policy positions to be given to Ghalib, knowing full well that he would immediately forward them to Cairo, and probably to Sarraj.
The Beirut channel attended to the negative policy chores vis-a-vis Nasser so that embassy contacts in Cairo could be mote positive.
Dulles’ ‘instructions’ to the United States Embassy in Beirut laid out the United States position in detail.
The instructions expressed a desire to focus on the ‘broader issues’ in the relationship and argued that the real United States position on ‘neutrality and nationalism’ had been either misrepresented or misunderstood in Egypt.
Ghalib was told that Egypt had not been neutral and had attacked independent countries which had merely banded together to protect themselves from Communism.
The instructions asserted that the Eisenhower Doctrine merely supported the ‘very integrity and independence, which Egypt has sought and treasured’, and denied plans for United States economic dominance in the region.
Washington then offered to unblock Egyptian assets in return for a settlement of the Suez Canal Company’s claims.
Preditably, they had considerably more misgivings about the union than Washington.
First, they feared increased pressure on Hashemite Iraq and Jordan, and second, they questioned the competence of the Secretary of State by expressing concern that he would be hoodwinked by Nasset’s antiCommunist rhetoric.
The British agreed with the United States position that the current position should be neither support nor condemnation.
At the Baghdad Pact meeting, Nuri Sa’id, the Prime Minister of Iraq, suggested that the majority of the Syrian people in a ‘free election’ would elect for union with Iraq and not Eeypt.
He then sounded out the council about support for Iraq’s claims to the districts in the ‘Mosul vilayet’ ceded to Syria but belonging historically to Iraq.
Iraq was simply too weak, even with Jordanian help, to challenge Syria and Egypt.
The British believed that, left to its own devices, the union would generate its own set of disruptive forces in Sytia and create serious problems for the Egyptians and their Syrian supporters.
From London’s perspective, the principal aim was containment of the union.
With Iraq discouraged from adventures, Lebanon came to center stage as the most immediate crisis confronting the West.
Lebanese President Camille Nimur Chamoun, a Maronite Christian, had, with Western assistance, rigged the election of 1957, paving the way for his reelection to the presidency in 1958.
Under the National Pact of 1943, a president could not succeed himself, and the next president had to be a Sunni Muslim.
Frightened by the EgyptianSytian union, Chamoun plotted to retain power, and at the same time to embroil the West in supporting him with troops, if need be.
Their youth underscores Western fears that they were no match for Nasser and the rising tide of revolutionary Arab nationalism.
Feisal’s death in the Baghdad coup of July 1958 put an exclamation point on those fears. and retain the presidency for another term.
Chamoun’s Foreign Minister, Charles Malik, believed that unification between Syria and Egypt meant the end of Lebanese independence unless the West, meaning principally the United States, actively opposed Nasser.
He argued that the union would increase antiWestern Arab nationalist ‘intransigence’, and create new balance of power in the Middle East that favored the Soviet Union and increased pressure on Jordan, Lebanon, and Iraq.
The British recognized the threat posed by a true union, but realistically, they also saw an upside.
A union, which resulted in any real 52 GREATER MIDDLE EAST AND THE COLD WAR unification of Egyptian/Syrian administrative and diplomatic services etc., would leave a good many Syrians out of a job.
Resentment in Syria is likely to be exacerbated by the Egyptian tendency to treat their smaller allies in a cavalier fashion, and Syrians find it hard to work harmoniously for any length of time with other Syrians let alone Egyptians.
London dismissed Malik and the Lebanese as unduly alarmist, but sought out American views on the Lebanese request for ‘military assistance’ just the same.
After some discussions, the British finally agreed with the fundamentals of the American position laid down by Dulles in Ankara.
Only another Arab state could initiate intervention, which precluded moves by Turkey, Iran, and Pakistan.
Finally, the United States would buttress any Arab initiative, but if that failed, Washington would take no action.
While Syrian resistance should be discreetly encouraged, neither the British nor the Americans would take the lead.
In addition, at London’s urging, Washington agreed that it would encoutage Baghdad to refrain from unilateral opposition.
The preferred course of action would be for Iraq, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, and Lebanon to actively pursue an “alternative expression of Arab unity’, with Baghdad Pact support.
In very short order, Washington realized that no effective opposition to the union existed in Syria and that only King Saud of Saudi Arabia showed any inclination to oppose it.
The teaction of other Arab leaders to the union underscored the potency of Nasset’s message.
While publicly supporting the union and discussing the possibility of an alliance with Nasser, the Saudis plotted to permanently curtail Nasset’s activities.
At King Saud’s urging, Saudi officials attempted to bribe Satraj, the Syrian intelligence chief, to assassinate Nasser and stop the union.
Sartaj accepted the money, but unfortunately for Riyadh, King Saud had misjudged his man.
Nasser had made Sarraj and his associates in the security apparatus the basis for centralized control in Syria because of their loyalty.
Nasser used the attempted compromise of Sarraj to embarrass Saud and his advisors.
The UAR propaganda attacks on Saud sparked pro-Nasser unrest in the Kingdom and placing Saudi vulnerability on public display.
Tunisia, claimed that his security services had uncovered a Nasserist plot to assassinate Bourgiba and take over the government.
In Iraq, an alarmed King Feisal II reappointed Nuri Sa’id as Prime Minister and announced the federation, with British backing, of Jordan and Iraq in an Arab Union.
Nasser labeled the Union as nothing more than a belated attempt to shore up feudal regimes.
In Saudi Arabia, Crown Prince Feisal Ibn-Abd-Al-Aziz forced King Saud to give up responsibility for defense, foreign affairs, and finance.
Nothing if not shrewd, Feisal placated domestic unrest by supporting an accommodation with Nasser while he sought to ‘clean up the Augean stables of Saudi finances’ and save the monarchy.
Because the educated classes viewed Nasser as the ‘only Arab leader worth following’, Feisal charted a policy that followed Nasset’s lead in non-Arab affairs while avoiding confrontations on Arab matters.
As a gesture to Nasser, Feisal criticized the United States position on free passage for Israel in the Gulf of Aqaba, calling it ‘aggression against Egypt’ and contrary to international law.
In the face of Egyptian demands that Saudi Arabia end United States ‘basing tights’ at 54 GREATER MIDDLE EAST AND THE COLD WAR Dhahran, Feisal demurred, stating the status of United States ‘transit rights’ would not be changed.
The administration considered King Saud a pro-Western stalwart, and, President Eisenhower had hoped that Saud’s influence might one day rival that of Nasser.
Describing the situation as ‘very grave indeed’, Dulles lamented that instability in Riyadh also undermined the Iraqi and Jordanian regimes.
The administration feared a collapse, or perhaps a formal alliance with Cairo on the Syrian model.
Now, two years after Suez, the British government was attempting to conclude negotiations with the UAR to settle outstanding claims from the Suez crisis and resume diplomatic relations with Caito.
Nevertheless, Macmillan and his advisors still viewed Nasser as a teal threat to Iraq and Kuwait.
British oil interests in these two states determined to a great extent the economic health of Britain itself.
Aden, Jordan, and the Gulf emirates also played an important role for British interests.
Whitehall believed that should any of these states succumb to Nasser’s Arab nationalist agitation, the damage to British prestige THE WAVE OF THE FUTURE 55 would encourage nationalist elements in Iraq and Kuwait and might well presage a collapse of the entire British position in the Middle East.
Although less acutely, the British also feared Nasserist agitation in Lebanon and Sudan.
The inclusion of Sudan in Arab Union might very well reverse hard-won Egyptian recognition of Sudanese independence, and further enhance Nasset’s prestige.
Fearing any increased stature for their nemesis on the Nile, the British lamented the United States decision to resume aid and worked assiduously to minimize it.
As noted in the immediate aftermath of the formation of the UAR, the first British priority was to prevent Nuri Said, encouraged by promises of United States support, from leading Iraq into militarily debacle by opposing Nasser.
Fearing that Dulles would court disaster and leave the Iragis out on a limb, London cautioned Sa’id in the strongest possible terms not to follow Dulles’ lead.
Sa’id wanted London to pressure the Kuwaitis to join the proposed Itaq-Jordan union.
The British, for a number of reasons, were horrified by any Iraqi mention of a union with Kuwait, and moved to quash that idea.
By the spring of 1958, it appeared that London had managed to get the Iraqi situation in hand.
In contrast to Iraq, Yemeni scheming and UAR-sponsored subversion directly threatened British control in Aden.
Yemen and Egypt had had an onagain off-again relationship since 1955, based on various treaties of friendship and cooperation.
Yemen’s ruler, Imam Ahmad, and his heir apparent, Crown Prince Muhammad al-Badr, saw Arab nationalism as a vehicle to press Yemeni claims over Aden and the Protectorate.
In return for ‘federating’ with the UAR, Nasset ended the ‘vitriolic’ attacks from the Caito-based Voice of the Arabs Radio, and curbed Muhammad Mahmud al-Zubayri’s anti-Imamate Free Yemeni movement.
The British were of two minds about this down-turn in US-Yemeni relations.
Seeing an opportunity to enlist United States support against the Imam and Crown Prince, British Colonial Office officials in Aden and diplomats in Yemen wanted the United States to participate in an ‘anti-Communist’ propaganda campaien.
Unwilling or unable to provide its own aid, the Foreign Office wanted the United States to increase economic and development assistance to Yemen as leverage to force the Yemenis to moderate their policies toward Aden.
The British took exception to United States indifference to the prospect of a long-term Egyptian-style economic and military relationship with the Soviets and Chinese.
They were extremely concerned that Soviet and Egyptian penetration of southern Arabia would bring increasing pressure on Aden and the Protectorate.
In fact, resigned to chronic problems in Yemen and a long-term Soviet and Chinese presence, the Eisenhower administration preferred to use aid to gain some influence at the source of the problem, in Cairo.
Riches, explained to Sir William Hayter that it was no longer that simple.
The Canadians, who chaired the UN Secutity Council, had to be on board.
There is some tendency in Canada to think that it is no longer necessary ot possible for us to maintain our special position in the Middle East, and this is not less true when it comes to defending a colonial position in Aden by means of attacks on foreign soil, than in defending the kind of arrangement we have with the Persian Gulf states and Muscat.
We are engaged in an exercise to try to bring Canada round THE WAVE OF THE FUTURE 57 towards our point of view on Middle East policy generally; but it will take time.
These tasks completed, the British launched a vigorous spring campaign against rebellious tribes and military units along the border with Yemen.
By late spring 1958, the Yemenis began to shelter artillery in populated areas along the border, increasing the possibility of escalation, civilian casualties, and serious political fallout.
Believing that the Imam wanted a way out, that Badr was in disgrace, and that Soviet influence was waning, Washington told the British to bring in the UN and negotiate.
If Whitehall was skeptical, the Colonial Office was apoplectic; they believed that ‘the tide in the Yemen over the last 18 months flowed steadily in the direction of more Soviet and Egyptian influence’ and adamantly opposed UN involvement or bilateral talks with Yemen.
London hoped to ‘satisfy the Americans and Mr Hammerskjold and ease the pressure in Parliament for a time.
The Soviets had followed up their military and economic aid by inviting Nasser to visit Moscow; he accepted.
Although the United States Ambassador in Cairo, Raymond A Hare, prophetically pointed out that Nasset’s greatest successes had come while he was ‘the irresponsible champion of Arab nationalism’, and that ‘disenchantment’ in Syria might result in the ‘possible deflation of Nasset’s ego’, the White House was less certain.
The administration attempted to enlist West Germany in a plan to offer ad hoc economic development aid.
This statement was the first public acknowledgement that something ‘new’ was afoot between the United States and Egypt.
In light of the growing power of Egypt since the formation of the United Arab Republic, I am sure that our country is giving the utmost thought and consideration to what should be our future relationships.
THE WAVE OF THE FUTURE 59 The Democrats saw an opportunity to emphasize Republican foreign policy setbacks in the fall elections.
He pointed out that the release of frozen assets awaited only the formal acceptance of the Suez canal settlement.
Many Middle East observers argued that the Eisenhower administration lacked the key ingredients for success, namely a respect for ‘neutrality’ and non-interference in the region.
On 9 April 1958, Washington had approached London about its planned first stage to free frozen funds and resume limited aid programs.
The Foreign Office informed the State Department that while they did not mind the licensing of quasi-military items and other items like radios and civilian aircraft, they objected to $400,000 worth of road building and communications equipment.
They reasoned that a resumption of the United States aid program to Egypt would have an ‘adverse’ effect on the Iraqi-Jordanian Arab Union.
We have decided that effort should be made to place US-UAR relations on more normal basis.
Although under no illusion that Nasser’s basic philosophy or objectives can thereby be effectively altered to reflect proWestern orientation, we nonetheless believe that removal of certain points of friction and minor irritants might help achieve this purpose and that it might place us in position to exert more effective influence over UAR policies.
The embassies were to stress that Nasset’s behavior toward Iraq and Jordan would be a major factor in determining the course of Egypt’s future relationship with Washington.
The Egyptian President wanted assurances that the United States would not attempt to remove his regime.
Nasser pointedly told Hare that the Soviets had always been more receptive to non-alignment, and that therefore he did not anticipate any problems with Moscow.
Hare reported to Washington that Nasser’s confidence during the meeting made him uneasy.
Nasser was the first non-Communist to receive the ‘guest of honor’ salute in Red Square.
Perhaps mote telling was the total lack of official criticism from the West.
Although well awate of Egypt’s weaknesses, in May 1958 Nasser undoubtedly felt that he controlled his destiny and the destiny of the Arab world.
Many in the Arab world shared his vision and enthusiastically embraced it, while the leaders of traditional regimes feared its effect on their restive populations.
Both the Chamoun government and the Hashemite monarchy faced growing instability.
Both Radio Cairo and Radio Damascus broadcast open invitations to revolt.
Egyptian arms shipments to the rebels, and the patticipation of Syrian military personnel as instigators in Lebanese riots, fueled the instability.
Noting Eeyptian-inspired attacks in the ‘venal press of Beirut’ and on Damascus Radio, as well as Syrian arms-smuggling, he stated that he saw ‘no evidence of a concerted UAR plan’ to topple his regime.
As if Lebanon were not enough, the situation in Jordan took an unexpected turn for the worst.
There was widespread unrest, and Jordanian security arrested a number of officers and enlisted men for plotting to overthrow the monarchy by assassinating both the King and Samir al-Rifai, the Prime Minister.
The regime in Amman made a compelling case that the plot originated with UAR agents in Syria, and emphasized the similarities between UAR subversion in Jordan and in Lebanon.
Such an eventuality would encourage every ‘malcontent’ in the region ‘with definite probability entire Middle East will be lost free world.
On 17 May, following his return from Moscow, Nasser met with Ambassador Hare in one of their now regular exchanges of views.
Claiming the he had been ‘out of touch’, Nasser stated that he had instructed UAR officials in Cairo and Damascus to take no action regarding Lebanon during his absence.
At the same time, he areued that Washington was ‘ignoring the facts’ in Lebanon.
Nasser wanted turmoil, but not Western intervention; it was a fine line.
In preventing intervention, he hoped once again to take credit for saving the Arab world from imperialism.
Hare responded by telling Nasser the United States had the records of THE WAVE OF THE FUTURE 63 organizational and financial plans to prove direct Syrian military involvement.
Nasser believed that without such support, Lebanon, Jordan, and even Iraq would succumb.
His prominence in the nonaligned movement provided him with a legitimacy unthinkable only three years before.
The Syrian union, coupled with pro-Nasserist agitation against his Arab opponents, appeared to portend the inevitable collapse of traditional Arab regimes and the continued spread of his influence.
It was in this atmosphere that Washington dusted off its policies of 1953-1955, modified them, and basing them on carrot-and-stick economics attempted to build a realistic working relationship with Nasser.
This renewed effort to improve relations with Cairo reaffirmed Washington’s long-held view that Egypt, for better or worse, was indeed the most important country in the Arab Middle East, and that the tottering traditional regimes would likely come under the influence of Cairo or fall to pro-Nasserist elements.
Given the Cold War patadigm that viewed Communism, albeit incorrectly, as monolithic, the White House tendency to view revolutionary Arab nationalism and Nasserism as also monolithic was consistent, if similarly flawed.
Despite rapprochement with Nasser, United States concerns about Lebanon and the potential for UAR expansion left the impression in London that Eisenhower actually regretted his decision not to back the British at Suez in 1956.
Eisenhower no doubt had second thoughts from time to time but fundamentally believed that the British had mishandled the crisis from start to finish; this reality was lost on Whitehall.
London convinced itself that the United States now clearly recognized Britain’s superior Middle East expertise.
Because of our greater experience in the Middle East, the suggestions must often come from us.
The British believed that the Eisenhower Doctrine and the United States reaction to the Lebanese situation represented the precise policies that they had advocated at the time of Suez.
At the same time, having just initiated a new policy based on economic incentives with Nasser, the possibility of Cairo engineering the collapse of an independent Lebanon through their Syrian partners presented an equally unappealing and embarrassing possibility.
The British government was split, with some supporting and others opposing intervention.
Beirut was quiet but the standoff between government troops and rebels continued around Tripoli.
Washington equivocated, stating that any intervention would be to protect American lives and property and to preserve the independence of Lebanon, not to support any particular faction.
Given the presence of UN observers, Washington sought to avoid the appearance of conflict with UN Security Council peace initiatives.
Out idea is that the Lebanese should ask for an emergency meeting of the Security Council at which they would appeal for the despatch of a United Nations military force.
We and the United States would support this suggestion and offer contingents.
In a reversal of policy, the British now attempted to arrange quietly for Jordanian and Iraqi participation in any potential Lebanese intervention.
Perpetually annoyed with Dulles, London became increasingly frustrated with the Secretary’s desire for French participation.
London was certain that a French ‘gate-crash’ as they put it, meant that neither Iraq nor Jordan would participate.
As things would turn out, London would have been far better off had the Hashemites stayed out of it.
London also opposed Dulles’ nearfixation on ‘extending’ Chamoun’s tenure beyond the 24 July date for new elections.
The White House vacillated between apprehensive optimism about Chamoun’s chances for sutvival and the hope that Nasser, heeding United States warnings, would end support to the rebels.
When asked about Washington’s position, United States Ambassador Robert Mills McClintock informed Chamoun that the United States was committed to the preservation of Lebanon’s integrity predicated upon Chamoun’s earlier statements that he would not seek a second term.
Apparently the representations made at the meeting had exceeded a previous agreement.
The US, France, and Britain may have been somewhat at odds over the meeting, but there were indications that Chamoun had gotten the message and was lining up his replacement, General Fuad Chehab, the Chief of Staff of the Lebanese Army.
It appeared that the crisis might dissipate and the intervention could be avoided.
The British had maintained their position in Iraq, come what may, for over 30 years.
Iraq stood as the bulwark of the British political, economic, and military position in the Middle East.
When Nasser announced the creation of the UAR, the British assessed the situation in Baghdad, dividing the Iraqis 68 GREATER MIDDLE EAST AND THE COLD WAR into three groups.
Second, there were the ‘active politicians’ who were largely suspicious and resented his claims to Arab leadership.
To provide an alternative to Nasser’s vision for Arab unity, the Iraqi government immediately began to explore union with Jordan, Kuwait, and Saudi Arabia.
Nuri Sa’id expected King Saud to ‘sit on the fence’.24+ London quickly blocked Kuwait’s participation, fearing that it would ‘probably backfire’ and make Kuwait a target for Nasserist agitation.
The Foreign Office observed that the Ruler of Kuwait, by maintaining ‘a delicate balance’ had prevented a ‘collision with Arab nationalists’ and the younger generation in Kuwait.
Nuri Said also had his eye on incorporating Kuwait into Iraq, and in conversations with the United States Ambassador to Iraq he demanded ‘money and Kuwait’, threatening to resign if he did not get both.
In February 1958, wanting more United States economic and military aid for Baghdad, Sir Michael Wright warned London that the long-term prognosis was problematic.
This means that the Government and the many in Iraq who believe in the Western alliance look to Britain and America for leadership and help. ... if the West cannot give at least some of the help that is needed, it will be extremely difficult in the long term for the present regime to maintain itself in the face of the challenge I have described.
London wanted more support from Washington, both financially and militarily, in propping up the Baghdad regime.
Ironically, the British and Iraqi fixation on the UAR would prove their undoing.
Brigadier Abd-al-Karim al-Qasim and_ his cohorts had learned from the short-lived Rashid Ali coup of 1941.
Taking no chances, the plotters decapitated the regime, removing any figure around which a cohesive opposition might coalesce.
Adding insult to injury, the British had arguably shot themselves in the foot.
They had encouraged the Iraqi government to move military formations to the Sytian border in an attempt to divert UAR attention from Lebanon.
Unfortunately, the Iraqi high command issued ammunition and arranged for brigades commanded by rebel plotters to pass through, rather than around, the capital.
Proper security precautions were not taken, and no other loyal army units were in the city.
Rebel brigades detouring to besiege the palace, occupying Radio Baghdad, and taking over the telephone exchange were the first sign that something was amiss.
The ease of the takeover, the liquidation of government officials, and the murder of the royal family also surprised the conspirators.
They had expected a protracted struggle, and when rioting broke out, they lacked an immediate plan to deal with the situation.
The new regime realized that excessive rioting and damage to foreign interests would damage its credibility, bring a departure of foreign technicians and invite intervention.
Downing Street concluded that a ‘small body of troops ... tan amok’, murdering Nuri Sa’id, the King, the Crown Prince and other key officials.
There had been no inkling of a real nature of the threat from the military.
Facing harsh criticism ftom all quarters, the administration was under pressure to act.
Just as the failure to form MEDO in 1954 had provided the impetus for the formation of a defense alliance based on the ‘northern tier’, the Iraqi coup revitalized and inextricably linked containment policy to the survival of that alliance.
It was with Turkey, Iran, and Pakistan in mind that Washington considered taking action in Lebanon.
Both the State Department and the CIA concluded that inaction would result in three probable outcomes; these conclusions went far beyond the Arab Middle East.
First, Nasser, who they believed was behind the coup, would take over the entire region.
Second, the United States would lose influence and probably critical bases, including Wheelus Air Force Base in Libya and last, the United States could lose someparticularly sensitive intelligence sites in Iran and Pakistan that directly affected the strategic defense of the continental United States.
This assessment directly linked the outcome of the situation in Lebanon to United States global credibility.
On 14 July, at a tense and hastily convened NSC meeting, Allen Dulles briefed the CIA’s sketchy intelligence on the situation in Iraq.
Director Dulles confirmed that the Crown Prince was dead and a ‘Leftist government’ headed by pro-Nasserist army elements had taken over.
As for Lebanon, he stated that Chamoun had frantically asked for US, British, and French intervention in Lebanon within 48 hours.
Murphy’s association with Eisenhower dated back to the North African campaign in World War H He was a trusted trouble-shooter for the administration. drowned out the Embassy’s even-keeled evaluation, and Eisenhower ordered troops into Lebanon.
After the decision was made, Eisenhower telephoned Macmillan, who offered his complete agreement and cooperation.
In a follow-up telegram, Macmillan promised Britain’s support and called for ‘urgent action’, but he quickly made a point of London’s main concern.
On 18 July, Eisenhower cabled Macmillan with a review of the situation, including his thoughts on the situations in Lebanon, Jordan, Iraq, Turkey, Iran, Pakistan, the Persian Gulf, and Saudi Arabia.
In addition, both agreed that the United States and Britain had to mount coordinated and effective propaganda campaigns at the UN and against the Communists in the Middle East who had appropriated Arab nationalism.
Revolution in Iraq and a second honeymoon with Cairo Ironically, Nasser, who had worked diligently for the overthrow of the Hashemite regime and Nuti Sa’id in Iraq, knew little more about what had actually happened than Washington or London.
Naturally, he assumed that the coup was good news, and Egypt immediately recognized the new regime in Baghdad.
In Yugoslavia, when the revolution occurred and the British and Americans announced their interventions in Jordan and Lebanon, Nasset believed that Iraq was next.
The Soviets offered unlimited bluster and moral support, but risking a nuclear war with the United States over some Arab revolution in Iraq was not on their agenda.
On 18 July, he flew to Damascus and met with Sarraj, the UAR Syrian security chief, and an emissary from Baghdad, Abd-al-Salam al-Aref, Qasim’s pro-Egyptian deputy.
It would prove to be the first and last agreement between Nasser and the new Iraqi regime.
Convinced that Nasser was behind the coup in Baghdad and having little insight into the political dynamic between Baghdad and Cairo, Robert Murphy, Eisenhower’s special envoy, went to the Middle East on a fact-finding mission shortly after the Iraqi coup.
Murphy met with Nasser, who denied rumors of an impending UAR move against Amman.
Qasim had no intention of joining Egypt and Syria, primarily because he had every intention of preserving Iraq’s oil wealth for Irag.
While Qasim paid lip service to Arab unity, Kurdish groups in the north and the large Shi'a population in southern Iraq opposed submersion in a super state dominated by Sunni Arabs.
As a result, Nassetists, like Qasim’s deputy, Colonel Abd-al-Salaam al-Aref, found themselves increasingly isolated and alienated from the new regime.
The arrest of Aref was a clear ‘slap in the face’, and placed Nasser in uncharted territory.
Attacking the ‘feudal’ Hashemites or Saudis was one thing, but dealing with an Arab nationalist rival with solid revolutionary credentials was another.
In addition, to counter Nasserist and Ba’thist influence, Qasim opted for greater reliance on Communist support.
From Washington’s perspective, this reliance made Qasim vulnerable to a Communist coup, the very reasoning that had prompted Eisenhower to take action in Iran in 1953.50 From Nasset’s perspective, Qasim’s alliance with the Communists not only deprived him of Itaq’s potential membership of the UAR, but it also raised concerns about the geographical and ideological proximity of the Syrian and the Iraqi Communists and their mutual loathing of the UAR President.
This situation did not bode well for stability in an already restive Syria.
Qasim’s courtship of the ICP also enhanced his standing in Moscow, cooling the Kremlin’s relationship with Cairo.
This growing coziness between Iraq and the Soviet Union created friction between the Egyptians and their Russian benefactors.
Jordan no longer appeared to be easy pickings, since Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion had made it ominously clear that any change of regime in Amman would result in decisive Israeli action to occupy the West Bank and to ‘make provision’ for the Palestinian population there.
With the less desirable ‘revolutionary’ outcome in Iraq and the Soviet tilt toward Baghdad, he, like Washington, needed a new ally.
Coming to terms with revolutionary Iraq As for Lebanon and intervention, Washington, by now, was beginning to understand what had really happened in Baghdad and how Lebanon fit into the picture.
At the 18 July Cabinet meeting, Secretary Dulles pointed out that the United States had opposed the British folly of including Iraq in the Baghdad Pact.
With some justification, he stated that the strain placed on the Hashemite regime by its membership of the Pact brought about its collapse.
He concluded that oil supplies would be stable so long as threats to Kuwait, Iran, and Saudi Arabia were quashed.
A calmer and more collected Secretary explained that the President’s decision to send in troops was based on the ‘frightened’ appeals of Chamoun and Hussein.
He stated that it would maintain United States credibility with ‘smaller nations’ but solve nothing.
In something of a soul-searching self-indictment, Eisenhower concluded that the United States had not done enough to protect and aid their friends in the region or to combat their enemies.
Eisenhower stated that the United States position had to be ‘rehabilitated’ in the region and that would require money.
Facing a storm of criticism, the United States and Britain now attempted to sort out what had actually happened.
On 16 July, John Hay ‘Jock’ Whitney, the United States Ambassador to London, reported that the landings in Lebanon had heartened Prime Minister Macmillan.
At an 18 July dinner with the ambassadors of the ‘Old’ Commonwealth, Lloyd tried to put the best face on the situation and deflect Dulles’ criticism of British policy.
Lloyd also pointed out that Eisenhower had made the decision to intervene in Lebanon on an ad hoc basis.
Riches, the Chief of the Arabian Department, minuted his superior, Sir William Hayter, with a note of reason.
If the revolution in Iraq succeeds, when the smoke clears we shall presumably be left with a military dictatorship on the Nasser model.
This government will certainly express emotional solidarity with pan-Arabism and therefore with Egypt; but it is likely to wish to preserve Iraqi oil revenues for itself and therefore to maintain its separate identity.
It seems unlikely that it would even join the United Arab States — except perhaps as a desperate last fling if it felt its position severely threatened.
With considerable prescience, he argued that in such a case, Egyptian would likely support a Kuwait free of Iraqi control, either as an independent state or as a part of the UAR, and he predicted that Saudi Arabia would have the same goal.
The Colonial Office and British authorities in Aden took a narrow, hard line, and a thoroughly alarmist view of events.
The events in Iraq, Lebanon and Jordan constitute a crisis of the greatest magnitude both for the future of the Arab world and for the West’s relations with it.
Unless there is swift and effective intervention by Western powers to contain the expansion of Russian influence and to cutb Nasser’s ambitions, the Arabs would soon be united in bondage and not in freedom as so many of them desire.
They clearly regarded supptession of the Iraq rebellion as an essential part of intervention.
Still trying to understand the situation and offer some constructive observations, Dulles concluded that Iraq needed to maintain good relations with the West because of oil revenue and Nasser.
In something of a contradiction, he stated that he still believed that Nasser was the teal ‘authority’ behind the Qasim regime and that the authority behind Nasser was the Soviet Union.
In contrast, the CIA believed that the Iraqi regime had no effective opposition but would probably disappear within six months in a Nasserist coup.
The Agency also made it clear that they thought the long-term British position in Jordan and Iraq was untenable, thus contributing to the view that Jordan was a bad bet for United States support.
Washington could then take a direct role in protecting its regional interests.
The meeting also reinforced the Secretary’s view that time might take care of Nasset’s prestige if the UAR’s energy could be ‘channeled’ and allowed to dissipate.
Disenchantment with the Eisenhower administration’s UAR tilt also affected British views of the situation in Jordan.
The State Department view ... reflects that defeatist ‘Rountreeist’ philosophy, which has always seemed to me unworthy of a great country like the United States It assumes what I call the double standard.
Nasser is against us, therefore we must kowtow to him and regard his triumph as inevitable.
Jordan is for us, therefore the task of preserving it is utterly hopeless and we must see how we can hand it over to Nasser as gracefully as possible.
This theory blandly overlooks the fact that Nasset’s “THE TEMPEST” 77 regime is now at least as unpopular in Syria, and perhaps also in Egypt itself, as Samir Rifai’s is in Jordan.
The administration had no illusions about Nasser, but it simply did not think Jordan’s survival was worth the cost.
Accepting Arab nationalism and anti-Western policies as a fact of life, Dulles intended to buy time until the flood subsidied.
Choices had to be made, and the administration believed that Jordan, in the direct path of the flood, had little chance of sutvival.
Washington feared that a violent collapse in Jordan would bring the calamitous consequences of Israeli intervention.
For this reason, Washington wanted the British to leave voluntarily, believing that failure to do so invited another Iraq and Israeli intervention.
While London and Washington struggled with the situation, it become more apparent that unification with the UAR did not fit Qasim’s agenda, and triangular friction developed between Cairo, Baghdad, and Moscow.
Even in the worst of times, Eisenhowet’s policies reflected a conflicted relationship with Nasser.
Washington erred in ideologically linking Nasser’s Arab nationalism and need for arms from the Soviet Union to pro-Communist sympathies, but Nasset’s suppression of the Communists in Egypt and Syria brought a more sophisticated White House view.
In addition, Iragi opposition to Nasser relieved many of the concerns about UAR regional hegemony.
When proNasserist elements, led by Colonel Aref, prominent Ba’thists, and Rashid Ali alGaylani, fell from power in Baghdad, United States concern about Nassetism receded even more.
The developing ties between Washington and Cairo and growing United States concern about ICP influence in Iraq complicated the British campaign to normalize relations with Baghdad and protect their interests in Iraqi oil.
The United States clearly intended to use Nasser to counterbalance increasing Communist influence.
With regard to Iraq, the administration concluded that while Qasim might want to curtail Communist influence in Iraq, he was unable or unwilling to do so because of the Ba’thist and Nasserist threat.
This clear focus on the Qasim regime and its Communist supporters promised nothing but complications for British attempts to keep the lid on its relationship with the Baghdad regime.
They pervaded the Communist-inspired riot that greeted Assistant Secretary Rountree on his December 1958 visit to Baghdad.
The riot also provided additional impetus to the increasingly pro-Nasserist United States tilt.
For Washington, Communism posed a global problem; for Nasser, the revolutionary apostates in Baghdad threatened his view of Arab nationalism and unity.
For very different reasons, Nasser and Eisenhower agreed on Qasim’s Iraq.
Cooperation with Nasser put the United States in bad stead in Baghdad, and complicated relations with the Macmillan government on issues ranging from Yemen to Jordan to Iraqi oil.
By December 1958, the British concluded that, “THE TEMPEST” 79 despite Communist influence, Qasim represented the best guarantee against an overt Communist takeover.
Qasim had followed through on_ his commitments vis-a-vis the British-controlled IPC, an important if not ‘vital’ British interest.
Wanting to avoid this extremity, the British sought to keep US-Iraqi relations on even keel.
Eisenhower intended to take Macmillan’s concerns into consideration and coordinate with London to extent possible, but the President’s perception of United States interests would be the driving force.
The Baghdad coup meant that the Qasim regime with its Communist supporters would face United States hostility and encouragement to Nasser.
It also meant that the Eisenhower administration intended to revitalize containment policy with increased for military, security, and economicsupport Iran and Pakistan.
The ‘Center of All Problems’ — Iran and 1958 The coup in Iraq not only confirmed the fractious uncertainties of Arab politics and the downward slide of British influence in the Middle East, but it clearly demonstrated the interconnectivity of Cold War politics across the Greater Middle East.
The Iraqi coup had far-reaching consequences for United States policy in the region.
Nowhere were these consequences more obvious than in United States relations with Iran and Pakistan.
Qasim’s coup set in motion a series of changes in United States policy that complicated United States relations for almost five decades.
While policies toward Pakistan and Iran had similarities, each had its own unique characteristics.
To understand these changes, one must examine the pre-1958 political context, the immediate reaction to the Baghdad coup, and how the coup fundamentally altered the relationship between Washington and Tehran.
Washington had always viewed Iran as geopolitically critical to United States interests in the Middle East, but by the mid-1950s sites in Iran had become strategic assets in the Cold War directly affecting United States security.
In the mountains of northeastern Iran, United States installations literally overlooked the Soviet missile development and test facilities at Turatom and Baiknour.
These sites provided direct signals and telemetry intelligence on Soviet missile tests and capabilities.
Given the technologies of the 1950s and 1960s, they were irreplaceable.
This situation dictated that the United States had to do everything in its power to maintain a pro-Western government in Tehran.
Prior to 1958, this meant that the Shah received military assistance and economic aid, and was put under considerable pressure to enact fundamental reforms designed to stabilize and broaden the base of his regime.
The Eisenhower administration emphasized economic development and reform while resolutely resisting the Shah’s demands for massive military aid.
Washington adhered to the premise that only economic development could lay the foundation for the fundamental political, social, and economic reform which would produce long-term stability in Iran.
IRAN AND 1958 81 This dictated limited military and security assistance to provide the Shah’s regime with the ability to maintain internal order and suppress any indigenous Communist or anti-Western threats to the regime.
This policy ran directly counter to the Shah’s priority of making Iran the dominant military power in the Persian Gulf and the military equal of Turkey.
The history of the Shah’s relationship with the Eisenhower administration is one of Iranian demands for more military aid and Washington’s attempts to push the Peacock Throne toward economic growth and reform.
Containment through reform and economic development From the Shah’s 1953 restoration, the Eisenhower administration pressed and chided the regime repeatedly about the lack of progress toward political, economic, and social reform.
This is not to say that Iranian military and secutity services did not receive their share of funding and aid.
Containment strategy in its Iranian context required the maintenance of a stable political and civil environment and sufficient military capability to maintain the border and deter internal threats.
Stability also required an efficient security apparatus to protect the regime.
The United States plan never envisioned an Iranian military capable of stopping, or even significantly delaying, a full-scale Soviet invasion.
Unfortunately, the Shah convinced himself that the latter was possible and that the Eisenhower administration had promised exactly that as a quid pro quo for joining the Baghdad Pact.
This differing view between Washington and Tehran spawned a periodically contentious relationship.
Early on, the United States desite for reform focused on land reform and redistribution as a method of solidifying the Shah’s rule.
What seemed like a good idea on the Potomac was a two-edged sword in Persia.
Land reform attacked the prerogatives and livelihoods of the large landowners who supported the Shah against nationalist groups like the National Front and Musaddigists, and potentially undermined that support.
At some level, he wanted to free himself from reliance on the traditional landowners and their influence.
The Shah believed that this traditional source of political support also curbed his ability to create a new, modern Iran in the image of Atattirk’s Turkey.
Stubbornly opposed to reform, the conservative landowners, who tended to be linked by blood and marriage ties to the bazarri and cherical classes, blamed United States pressure on the Shah for his attempts to liberalize.
In addition, the landowners saw no practical difference between US-backed liberal land reform and a Communist revolution and collectivization.
This created a state of near political war between the Iranian patliament, the Majlis, and the throne.
Mote likely, this political maneuvering reflected growing self-confidence, and new-found leverage in resisting calls for reform by his foreign benefactors, Britain and America.
The Shah’s move coincided with the Soviet arms deal for Egypt, and with entreaties by the United States and Britain for Iran to join the Baghdad Pact.
Having no illusions about the fate of the monarchy should reformists or Communists come to power, the Shah threw his political lot in with the West; however, the Shah used the tactics employed by neutralists like Nasser and Nehru to improve his situation.
Pointing out that he had options, the Shah mixed professions of loyalty and friendship with the West with grousing about the paucity of United States aid and comments about the rewards of neutralism.
As for Iranian participation in the Baghdad Pact, the Shah had his price, harping on his point that the pro-Western Middle East could not be defended without Iran.
Knowing that London considered Iranian participation in the Baghdad Pact critical, the Shah exerted pressure to gain British assistance in acquiring the maximum American aid.
US, military and also budgetary aid in order that he might go ahead and adhere to Baghdad pact.
Using the specter of the Soviet threat and membership in the Baghdad Pact as leverage, the Shah believed he would get the aid he demanded.
However, he did receive copious amounts of free advice from Washington about how funds for direct budgetary and economic development should be employed.
In 1956, against the advice of the Eisenhower administration, the Shah centralized economic development in a Central Plan Organization under a Shah loyalist, Abol Hassan Ebtehaj.
Rejecting United States advice to pursue broad economic development objectives aimed at raising the standard of living of the Iranian people, he used the CPO to concentrate on infrastructure.
Tehran presented the CPO as a means to avoid graft and inefficiency by fostering foreign investment and development in Iran.
In effect, Ebtehaj became the father of what would become massive foreign involvement in Iranian development.
CPO policies, coupled with foreign oil concessions and membership in the Baghdad Pact, intensified xenophobic Iranian nationalism and magnified public perceptions that the Shah had perpetrated a ‘sell out’ to Western interests.
They argued that the Shah gave the West cheap oil, supported the Baghdad Pact, and then handed more than 60 pet cent of Itran’s oil revenues back to Western firms by favoring them for large-scale development projects.
These groups felt betrayed by the lack of opportunities for Iranians to participate in the new economy, but fortunately for the Shah, the opposition groups distrusted each other more than the regime.
The Eisenhower administration preferred a different approach, but the Iranian monarch made it clear that he had his own ideas about the approach to modernization.
Decisions about Iranian aid did not center solely upon a simple binary question of support for the military versus support for economic development; they became a more complex equation in which support for the military translated into the stability needed for economic development.
Pursuit of the ‘heavy model’ for industrial development generated a need to strengthen the coercive power of the state.
In the administration’s view, the pay-off from the ‘heavy base’ approach would not come soon enough to prevent destabilization in Iran.
The Shah’s ‘despair’, no doubt sometimes teal, also developed into an artform for extracting more military and economic aid.
Politically, the United States pressured the Shah to ‘broaden’ his base through controlled initiatives designed to foster political pluralism.
Political projects du jour, coupled with increasingly exorbitant demands for aid, raised questions about the Shah’s political sophistication and, periodically, his hold on reality.
As a result, serious questions arose concerning the viability of the regime.
In a certain sense, the Shah lies at the center of all problems in Iran and certainly is an extremely important factor in their solution.
Most Iranians recognize that the Shah has decided to rule personally as well as reign.
This giving up of a mere constitutional role in favor of the exercise of power to make policy decisions for Iran has rather far reaching effects for the Shah as a national symbol.
He has deliberately removed himself from the apolitical tole of the constitutional monarch and put himself in the scales of political survival in this country.
The Shah’s non-Iranian origins and close association with the United States and Britain fueled this xenophobia.
It was strongest among the educated elite, who believed that in a meritocracy they would rule in place of the Shah’s entourage of sycophants.
By 1957, predictions of chaos and severe damage to United States policy interests were the order of the day.
Washington guaranteed the survival of an independent Iran and its territorial integrity, but pointedly refused to extend that promise to the Pahlavi dynasty, a point not lost on the Shah.
Seeing the potential for the Shah’s collapse, Washington viewed the Iranian military as the most reliable pro-Western center of power.
The military became the guarantor of the Shah’s rule and the alternative to it.
As for the Shah, he had no illusions about his ability to rule without a loyal, coercive military, and security apparatus at his disposal.
Requests for military aid had as much to do with ensuring loyalthy as with actual need.
Believing that the Shah’s regime faced a growing and perhaps insurmountable crisis, the Eisenhower administration pressed for reform, even reforms that incurred potentially serious risks to what remained of the Shah’s popularity.
Actions along the lines of his remarks will certainly be unpopular in Iran, but they will be good for Iran.
Since the Shah is already unpopular among his people, it is most advisable for him to stop worrying about temporary political reactions, carry on as a strong man with military support, and give the nation the bitter medicine it needs.
If he is to fall, this line might hasten his fall, but it also opens up the possibility that if he lasts a few years more, he will not fall at all.
Given this kind of support, it is litthe wonder that the Shah wanted more weapons for the army and worried about United States commitment to his regime.
Despite the Shah’s predisposition to paranoia and his inability to accept responsibility for his own actions, he had real problems.
Playing the Soviet card In December 1957, concerns about ‘growing’ Soviet influence in Tehran came to the fore.
Coming at the same time as rumors concerning a union between Egypt and Syria, it placed additional pressure on Eisenhower and Dulles.
The British Ambassador to Iran, Sir Roger Bentham Stevens, reported to both the Foreign Office and his American counterpart in Tehran on ‘excellent progress’ by the new Soviet Ambassador, Nikolai Mikhailovitch Pegov, in improving Iranian-Soviet relations.
Labeling it a Soviet ‘good neighbor policy’, the British ambassador pointed to increased exchanges in trade and cultural delegations and in discussions about Soviet technical assistance.
The British argued that given the ‘sensitive and suspicious’ nature of the Iranian people and the perceived lack of tangible results from Iran’s relationship with the West, significant Soviet gains were a real possibility.
The Soviet propaganda machine compared social and economic gains in the Soviet Central Asian republics to the relative lack thereof in Iran.
While the Soviets were making inroads, Sir Roger and the British had an ulterior motive.
They were pressing the United States to either join the Baghdad Pact or significantly increase military and economic aid to its members.
Moscow, of course, wanted Iran to withdraw from the Pact, to support Soviet policies in the Middle East, and to declare neutrality.
To achieve these goals, the Soviets had altered their tactics from the stick to the carrot, with what the British termed ‘impressive’ results.
In late January 1958, on the eve of the formation of the UAR, a concerned Dulles visited Tehran for talks with the Shah.
In meetings with Dulles, Prime Minister Manuchehr Eqbal and Minister of Court Husain Ala raised the Soviet offers of aid and better relations.
The Iranian leadership pointed out that Soviet largesse in Syria, Egypt, and Afghanistan had created a public, negative comparison with United States aid to Iran.
They complained that the United States had given $250 million to non-aligned India and wondered aloud why Washington could not help its ally.
Eqbal told Dulles that the Soviets had offered to assist Iran in meeting its budget crisis.
He then argued that given the Soviet danger, the United States needed to join and actively participate in the Baghdad Pact.
On the defensive, Dulles blamed Congress for limiting aid to Iran and for barring United States entry into the Baghdad Pact.
At one point, in a meeting with CPO Director Ebtehaj, Dulles point-blank refused to provide $100 million to balance the Iranian budget and $100 million in loans.
Noon, of course, claimed that only his personal intervention had prevented it.
Despite the threats and pressure, Dulles steadfastly pushed economic development as the primary means of maintaining Iranian stability and containing the Soviet Union.
Despite his best intentions, Eisenhower felt obliged to put together another ‘limited’ military aid package in an attempt to appease the Shah and hopefully get him to focus on economic development; the risks of cutting the Shah off from military aid were too great.
In April 1958, British Foreign Secretary 88 GREATER MIDDLE EAST AND THE COLD WAR Selwyn Lloyd, an advocate of more United States aid, accurately described the importance that the West attached to maintaining the Shah’s regime, stating that it was ‘largely benevolent and ... more beneficial to Iran and to Western interests than that of any conceivable alternative’>” During this period, the Shah took a proactive hand in his quest for additional military aid.
Just prior to his July 1958 trip to Washington, rumors began to appear that the formation of a new Itanian cabinet, more friendly to the Soviet Union, might be in the offing.
Although a transparent threat, any mention of improved relations between Iran and the Soviet Union caused concern.
Dulles warned Eisenhower that the Shah, unhappy with repeated rejections for military aid, might attempt to get a commitment in their one-on-one meetings.
The fundamental objective was to convince the Shah that regional security rested not on Iranian military power but on the United States military deterrent.
Shrewdly, the Shah addressed military matters only in generalities, allowing officials in his entourage to badger the State and Defense departments about specific Iranian requirements.
Had he been clairvoyant, the Shah could not have better timed his visit or his requests for additional military aid.
The Baghdad coup and Iran Iranians of all political persuasions had accepted the possibility, if not the probability, of a coup in Baghdad.
These views of Iraqi instability and rumors of plots against the Baghdad regime had mirrored similar rumblings in Iran.
Nevertheless, the ferocity and rapidity of the coup in Baghdad stunned everyone.
Though truly frightened, the Shah recognized opportunity when it knocked.
Arguing that the Egyptians and the Russians now had Baghdad Pact defense plans, the Shah predicted its collapse, leaving Iran ‘alone’ to face the Soviets and their allies.
IRAN AND 1958 89 emphasized the need for additional support in the field of internal security.
The coup in Iraq also brought disturbing reactions on the street in Iran.
The coup shook what little shaky confidence existed in the Pahlavi regime.
Middleclass elements opposed to the regime were buoyed by the collapse of the Hashemites, while pro-Western supporters of the Shah feared the worst.
On the news of American and British intervention in Lebanon and Jordan, pro-Western elements optimistically awaited Western action to ‘reverse the situation in Iraq’.42 When it became apparent that there would no moves against the Baghdad regime, political supporters of the Shah predicted worsened relations with Iraq, in the expectation of a Nassetistor an increasingly Communist-dominated, proSoviet regime.
Opponents of the Shah’s tule, classified as ‘Mosadeqist intellectuals and other representatives of the militant side of the urban middle class’, agreed that relations with Iraq would worsen significantly, but they welcomed such increased hostility.
Sophisticated observers in official Iranian circles had expected the Hashemite regime’s collapse for some time, and despite some private misgivings, they recognized the new Iraqi government in relatively short order — much to the consternation of many Iranian conservatives.
Time seemed to increase the ‘concern and uncertainty’ of pro-Shah elements, while anti-Shah groups appeared increasingly confident.
Comments about the assassination of the Shah could be heard in street conversations.
Palace security had been strengthened and arrests of army officers heightened tensions.
The lack of immediate substantive reforms made ‘the overthrow of the monarchy likely’4> Washington redoubled its efforts to force the Shah to enact reforms.
In December 1958, Ebtehaj, the Director of the CPO, began to argue for more economic and budgetary assistance because of the ‘ United States military’s pressing upon the Shah’s armed forces in excess of Iran’s needs’.47 The Iranians had obtained the military assistance that Shah had sought for over five years, and now blamed it for Iranian 90 GREATER MIDDLE EAST AND THE COLD WAR budgetary problems and demanded incteased economic aid.
The British analysis of the post-Baghdad-coup situation in Iran did nothing to alleviate the general alarm.
Stevens made the interesting observation that the Shah had less in common with King Feisal II than with the hated Crown Prince, Abd-al-""[ah, the de facto Iraqi ruler.
Abd-al‘Ilah’s lack of contact with the people of Iraq and corruption made him an unsympathetic figure.
There is every reason why what happened in Iraq should also happen in Iran.
In practical terms the Iranian regime is more oppressive, less enlightened, and less efficient than its Iraqi counterpart.
If this regime does survive, it will not be due to its merits but to defects in the otganization of the opposition, to the absence of any explosive force quite corresponding to Arab nationalism, and perhaps to greater vigilance on the part of the authorities induced to some extent by the Iraqi example.
The Embassy stated that the events in Iraq had ‘palpably increased’ the danger to the Shah’s regime and encouraged more tadical opposition to his rule.
It quickly became apparent that any competition for influence between Tehran and the new regime in Baghdad would occur in Kurdistan.
The turmoil in Baghdad generated intensified interest in the Kurdish areas along the Iranian-Iraqi frontier.
With an estimated 1. million Kurds in Iran, two million in Turkey, and another 800,000 in Iraq, the Kurds became a source of concern.
On the positive side, Kurdish unrest in Iraq constituted a potential lever to pressure good behavior from the Qasim government; on the negative, Soviet support and the strong leftist influence among Kurdish groups potentially threatened Iranian territorial integrity.
Fortunately for Washington and Tehran, the Kurds in Iraq and Syria were far more affected by events than those in Iran.
Despite leftist tendencies among some Kurdish groups, they generally viewed pan-Arab nationalism as a threat to Kurdish autonomy, making Kurdistan a more potent lever against Baghdad than Tehran.
That said, the Eisenhower administration discouraged Tehran from attempting to use Kurdish nationalism against Baghdad, fearing that such a policy might backfire in both Iran and Turkey.
To counter Iraqi efforts to co-opt the Kurds, the Iranian government sent General Timur Bakhtiar, Director of SAVAK, to Kurdistan.
The palace argued that these improvements served the dual purpose of providing tangible benefits to the local population while allowing better access to the region for Iranian security forces.
In Iraq, Washington’s Kurdish efforts resulted in the closing of the United States Consulate in Kirkuk.
A new relationship with Tehran Late 1958 found the Shah more dependent than ever on Western suppott, but ironically more in control of the relationship that at any previous point.
The ‘Bastille Day coup’ in Baghdad, as Sir Roger Stevens called it, created new realities in the Shah’s relationship with the West.
Ever manipulative, the Shah had learned that utterances about withdrawing from defensive agreements and proposed trips to Moscow netted much more than quiet cooperation.
Thanks to Qasim, from 1958 onwards the Shah’s leverage in his relationship with the United States would steadily increase.
Iraq irrevocably changed the nature of the AngloAmerican relationship with and over Iran.
As a result, British diplomatic efforts focused heavily on influencing Washington’s Iranian policy.
United States political and military support for the Pahlavi regime became the guarantor of British commercial and economic interests, not only in Iran but throughout the Gulf as well.
A symbiotic relationship developed between British policy recommendations to Washington and the Shah’s requests for economic and military aid.
London wanted to keep the Shah happy and in power, and they wanted Washington to pay for it.
The British took the attitude that pushing reform in Persia was a waste of time and usually counter-productive as well.
In contrast, Washington would not give up pursuit of a long-term solution to Iran’s problems through reform and some form of political liberalization.
The Eisenhower administration truly believed that it not only had an obligation to push reform, but that reform would work in the long run to stabilize Iran.
Shaken by Iraq and fearing the same in Iran, London encouraged Washington to desist from its reform campaigns and to focus instead on specific policies that affected Iranian relations with the West.
The shaken British believed that, just as liberalization may have played a role in the collapse in Iraq, in Iran liberalization would let the ‘Djinn ... out of the bottle’ and invite a Bastille Day in Tehran.
Controlled Democracy — Pakistan and 1958 As in Iran, the Baghdad coup altered the United States relationship with Pakistan.
Pakistan formed the lynchpin connecting Western defense organizations in Southeast Asia to those in the Middle East.
A member of both SEATO and the Baghdad Pact, Pakistan’s adherence to a pro-Western orientation constituted a critical element in containment policy.
As in Iran, United States intelligence sites, located near Peshawar, provided critical data on Soviet military activities, including missile development and deployment.
It also served as a base for U-2 flight operations over the Soviet Union.
This reliance on Pakistan had grown steadily during the 1950s to the point where the Eisenhower administration could not, under any circumstances, contemplate the loss of Pakistan, either as a member of the Western containment structure or as a physical platform for intelligence operations targeted against the Soviet Union.
To a considerable degree, Pakistan’s policies vis-a-vis the United States mirrored those of Iran.
Karachi’s primary bartering chip was its willingness to support Western strategic interests vis-a-vis the Soviet Union in return for military and economic aid.
Karachi then used United States aid to compete with nonaligned India, its real regional rival.
Using its leverage, Pakistan extracted not only aid but also Western political and diplomatic support in its struggle with India over Kashmir.
As in Iran, so in Pakistan government officials speculated and debated the benefits and drawbacks of non-alignment or improved relations with Beijing or Moscow.
Where Iran was a relatively isolated issue, United States support for Pakistan complicated relations with India.
As the interdependency of the United States and Pakistan grew, Nehru became increasingly antagonistic toward both.
Short of placing United States economic aid for India at risk, Nehru strongly advocated non-alignment and UN membership for Beijing to goad the Eisenhower administration.
During 1956 and 1957, increasing tensions between New Delhi and Karachi placed Washington in the increasingly difficult position of maintaining good relations with the world’s 94 GREATER MIDDLE EAST AND THE COLD WAR largest democracy on the one hand, and with an ally critical to containing Communism on the other.
These frictions not withstanding, relations improved somewhat in 1956 as a result of the Suez crisis.
The Eisenhower administration sought Nehru’s assistance in attempting to settle the Suez controversy, and although this assistance was unsuccessful, due in large part to Krishna Menon’s diplomatic shortcomings, Eisenhower and Nehru both opposed Israeli, British, and French intervention.
The administration wanted to explore futute areas of cooperation in the Middle East and Asia with Nehru.
Nehru was clearly concerned about the safety of the canal, given its importance as the principle trade route from India to Europe.
He downplayed concerns about Arab nationalists ‘responding to the whims of a Nasser’ and the need for a counterbalance like King Saud.
Nehru argued that Nasser actually represented the lesser evil and served as a ‘brake’ on the more radical elements in the Egyptian military.
He also proposed the idea that the United States should consider supporting the Egyptian ruler, with the goal of strengthening his internal position.
Raising the issue of the Baghdad Pact, Nehru underscored Indian concerns about the potential for a Pakistani attack using United States supplied weapons.
Arguing that Pakistan and its stability were critical to the Western defensive posture in the Middle East, Eisenhower attempted to find some basis for a mutually acceptable settlement of the issue.
Nehru simply refused to discuss any solution except the status quo;> this unwillingness to entertain any compromise did not bode well for the future.
For internal political reasons, neither Pakistan nor India could afford to compromise.
For Nehru, the risk of surrendering any Indian territory in a plebiscite invited demands from untold numbers of groups wanting to assert their own regional prerogatives.
The Indians interpreted the Pakistani move as a British-inspired attempt to embarrass the Indian government in retaliation for India’s support of Nasser during the Suez crisis in 1956.
Wanting to avoid a fight at the UN, the United States and Britain obtained a temporary compromise by getting Security Council support for sending the President of the Security Council, Gunar V Jarring, on a fact-finding mission to the region.
Jatring had been the Swedish ambassador in New Delhi and knew Nehru well.
The report called on Pakistan and India to adhere to the decisions of August 1948 and January 1949.
A ‘no war declaration’ by both governments was to be followed by a UN force in Pakistani Kashmir and the withdrawal of all but 6,000 of Azad Kashmir militia from the region.
Knowing that the outcome would be a Soviet veto, Washington and London delayed.
Now, as Pakistan made veiled threats about its relations with the US, India rejected calls for a plebiscite and labeled the Jarring report a pro-Pakistani document created by the British, Americans, and their allies.
In the end, Pakistan agreed to delay until Jarring submitted his final report.
In October 1957, Jarring formally reported to the UN, stating that he had made no progress on a settlement over Kashmir because of the Indian argument that Pakistan was in violation of the ‘cease-fire’ agreement.
Pakistani Foreign Minister Firoz Khan Noon then presented the Pakistani position, and a proposed compromise resolution.
During 1956 and 1957, the Indian central government faced an increasingly strong challenge from separatist groups, particularly in the south of the country.
In a report to the American Universities Field Staff in May 1957, Executive Director Phillips Talbot discussed Indian issues in a state-by-state format.
PAKISTAN AND 1958 97 in free India’ showed just how far India and Nehru had to go.
In an article entitled Raising A Cry for Secession, he analyzed the ‘Ambitions of the Political Dravidians’ in South India.
While noting the differences in context, Talbot compared the Tamil DMK to the Muslim League of the 1930s.
The political platform, a potential political bombshell, included ‘full freedom to secede from the Indian Union’, nationalization of industry, readjustment of the five-year plans to industrialize South India, reductions in defense spending, and the inclusion of all Tamil-speaking areas under the same political organization, to be renamed Tamilnad.
These help feed the fire of regionalism under our new democratic system.
This simultaneous threat from the DMK merely reinforced the determination of Congtess and its leadership to resist any notion of a plebiscite on Kashmir and Jammu.
Under pressure from Pakistan, the United States and Britain supported the Pakistani position on the plebiscite only to see it fall as predicted to Indian intransigence and the Soviet veto.
Pakistan and the search for stability In October 1957, Suhrawardy’s government fell, in part because of the machinations of Pakistani President Iskander Mirza, a major-general, who had never been particularly happy with Suhrawardy and his policies.
The collapse of Suhrawardy’s government created a chaotic political situation as a multitude of political parties vied for advantage.
In this environment, Foreign Minister Firoz Khan Noon became Prime Minister, leading what the United States Embassy described as a ‘wobbly’ ruling coalition with ‘yet another political crisis’ in the wings.
In Washington and London, a consensus existed on at least one aspect of Pakistan’s future, namely that the only real unifying factor was Pakistani fear of India.
The split between East Pakistan, the Pashtun-Afghan areas, and West Pakistan created a significant hurdle for the government in Karachi.
London also worried that all the historical good will between Pakistan and Britain was potentially at risk due to instability and a lack of progress on Kashmir.
In April 1958, the CRO official in Karachi, Sir Alexander Symon, stated that the perceived lack of clear-cut Anglo-American support for Pakistani with regard to Kashmir undermined relations.
He worried that faltering economic development would combine with estrangement from the Muslim world and further aggravate these problems.
This rejection of UN efforts led directly to the personal involvement of President Eisenhower.
On 17 April, Dulles sent a memorandum to Eisenhower suggesting that the United States attempt to facilitate a solution to the problem of Kashmir.
The Secretary recognized that friction between Pakistan and India over Kashmir undermined the United States and opened the door for Soviet advances.
In this we would, in sttict secrecy and without prejudice to our present position if the new approach were unsuccessful, offer our good offices to assist them to reach agreement on all three questions.
Eisenhower believed that a solution to Kashmir would put United States relations with India and Pakistan on a sound footing, bring a focus to economic development, maintain Pakistan in the Western defense alliances, and, most of all, preserve United States intelligence bases in Pakistan.
On 14 May 1958, Eisenhower wrote to Nehru, proposing that the United States send a ‘special representative’ to facilitate talks on Kashmir.
The President argued that perhaps the United States might be well-placed to provide ‘good offices’ because of its extensive aid and its good relations with both New Delhi and Karachi.
He stated that while he had problems with certain aspects of the proposal, it was interesting and that he would discuss it with his cabinet.
Bunker believed that the Indians saw that the ‘negotiations would be a long-range operation’ and wanted to wait for the outcome of the Pakistani elections.
As early as May 1958, General Mirza indicated to United States Ambassador Langley that the military were discussing a takeover to deal with the political instability.
The generals wanted to suspend parliamentary elections scheduled for the fall.
Officially, Langley informed the generals that such a step should only be taken as a last resort, but that ultimately it was a Pakistani decision.
Pakistani newspapers routinely published the list of visitors and Langley’s visits were drawing attention.
Langley’s access also became a conduit for Pakistani politicians to deliver messages to Mirza.
In May 1958, the United States Consul in Dacca, the capital of East Pakistan, commented that Mirza had created a stir with talk of postponing the elections and cautioned strongly against supporting a coup.
The fear of Communist gains in staunchly Muslim Pakistan seemed overblown, but the fear of a weak government opting for some form of non-aligned neutrality was a serious possibility.
Washington concluded that Pakistan needed at least temporary political stability as a basis for economic development, the key to long-term stability.
The internal political situation, coupled with the Kashmir dispute, undermined both.
There was also talk that the Karachi government might negotiate with the Soviet Union for economic assistance in the form of a steel mill.
This combination of events created enormous alarm on the Potomac, that Soviet economic aid combined with the collapse of Iraq might undermine the commitment of the Pakistani government to the Western defense alliances and thus threaten containment.
The inability of the Pakistani political parties to act responsibly and work together to alleviate the economic crisis and political chaos heightened concerns in Washington.
Rather than increasing stability, the upcoming Pakistani elections loomed as a source of even gteatet political instability.
Eisenhower and his advisors concluded that the benefits of a stable, pro-Western Pakistan took precedence over other considerations, including political democracy.
In early October, President Mirza informed Ambassador Langley that the Pakistani military had decided to take over the government.
Mirza wanted Langley to give him an idea of the United States reaction.
Having had more than enough of Pakistan’s chronic instability, Washington instructed Langley to tell Mirza that countries had the right to determine their own form of government based on what was best for the welfate of its peoples.
In early October 1958, Mirza and the Army Chief of Staff, General Muhammad Ayub Khan, took over the government and _ canceled patliamentary elections.
An audible sigh of relief was heard in Washington following the Mirza-Ayub 7 October takeover.
The lack of violence, the few arrests, and a crack-down on corruption boded well for the military regime.
The apparent contradiction between supporting a military dictatorship under General Ayub and official support for democracy and representative government created a real dilemma for the Eisenhower administration.
Viewed in the context of Iraq, no one in Washington wanted to take a chance with Pakistani instability.
Still, officials at the State Department and the White House had hoped for a better option.
In essence, security issues had dictated a compromise of fundamental principles.
When the takeover took place so soon after the Iraq and Burmese ‘incidents’, I was very dispirited.
It seemed to me that the takeover meant that in one more country, and a country which was a good friend of the United States, the light of the democratic ideal had been snuffed out.
What made it worse, in my personal opinion, was that because of the larger issue of national freedom versus Kremlin hegemony, we were not in any position to protest.
Because the Indians viewed the Communist threat to Pakistani as a ‘hoax’ to acquite arms for its confrontation with India, New Delhi saw United States support for a military dictatorship as the height of hypocrisy.
In New Delhi, Ambassador Bunker questioned the efficacy of new aid to the Pakistani regime shortly after Mirza and Ayub overthrew the parliamentary system.
Bunker also feared that support for Ayub’s dictatorship might strengthen the hand of Communists and leftists who were arguing for a nondemocratic solution to India’s political problems.
The Indians viewed United States support of a military dictatorship as a continuing trend to preserve authoritarian regimes that supported containment.
The embrace of Ayub and military rule in Pakistan increased Indian disappointment that improved US-Indian relations lacked a higher priority.
This competition had existed from the moment India and Pakistan emerged as independent nations.
Cold War imperatives and Indian insistence on non-alignment forced trade-offs between what the Eisenhower administration viewed as its immediate security interests and its long-term goal of economic development and stable, pro-Western, democratic governments in the region.
In New Delhi, Ambassador Bunker stressed accommodation and economic development, the cornerstone of democratic development, a view shared by both Eisenhower and Dulles.
Massive military aid to countries with a weak economic base is not in the long run a genuinely effective course of action, even from a military point of view.
The tone of the exchanges between the Indian and United States governments was that of political equals.
While acknowledging the efforts of President Eisenhower on behalf of world peace, Nehru made it clear that he believed the United States misread the events in Iraq and Lebanon, and reacted in a manner that threatened the gains made by Washington since the Suez crisis of 1956.
Just as he disagreed with United States actions in Lebanon and the evaluation of Nasser and Iraq, Nehru saw no linkage between the coup in Iraq and any necessity to arm or support a Pakastani military dictatorship.
One of the strengths of the United States throughout the world and also here in India has been that, while many question our judgment, on the whole they have not questioned our motives or our basic principles.
Eisenhowet viewed support for the military government in Pakistan as an expediency necessitated by containment.
As for India, the administration pursued its preferred long-term strategy for stability, namely economic development and support for political democracy as a bulwark against Communism.
There were debates in Washington over the amount of aid and financial policies for India, but the focus remained on economic development.
This contrasted sharply with the situation in Pakistan, highlighting the fundamental contradiction between support for economic development through democratic means in India and that for the expediency of stability through military rule in Pakistan.
Pakistan’s ‘Byzantine’ political milieu threatened vital United States interests; therefore, the pragmatic requirement for pro-Western stability took precedence.
If it required ‘temporary’ military rule to deliver these preconditions for success, then so be it.
Revising Containment, 1959-1960 1959 marked the beginning of a significant shift in emphasis for United States foreign policy in the Greater Middle East.
The Eisenhower administration moved toward more pragmatic policies driven by situational requirements.
The goal was still containment, aimed at undermining Soviet influence and the potential for Communist gains in the region.
United States policy continued to utilize military assistance, economic aid, and support for controlled reform, but the application became significantly more sophisticated.
The change reflected the Eisenhower administration’s improved apprehension of the regional situation.
The Baghdad coup also served to simplify, and to focus Washington on, its pragmatic interests in the region.
To prevent a repetition of the Iraq disaster, Eisenhower and his advisors were far more willing to provide military and security assistance than they had been prior to July 1958.
Security aid had now become a prerequisite for economic development and reform.
At the same time, Washington had become mote cautious in advocating reform.
John Foster Dulles, the implementer of and lightning rod for Eisenhower’s foreign policy, was increasingly incapacitated by cancer and would die by early spring.
With Dulles’ passing, Eisenhower decided to enter the Cold War fray with his own brand of personal diplomacy.
In addition, the picture in the Middle East had altered radically for the British.
With pretensions of imperial prerogatives now gone, the British, girding to defend what was left of their influence and economic interests in the region, played second fiddle to Washington and always sought Washington’s concurrence on important policy issues.
On the fringes of the Middle East, increasing competition and conflict between China and India placed Nehru on the diplomatic and ideological defensive.
The emergence of an alternate center for Arab revolutionaty agitation in Baghdad, backed by Iraqi Communists, renewed the old courtship between Washington and Cairo.
At the same time, Nasset’s attempts to teassert his authority as a revolutionary leader created strains between the UAR and much of the Arab world.
Washington no longer feared monolithic Nasserism because it had encountered something worse — Communist-backed Iraq.
For Nasser, Qasim’s dependence on the Communists created a different sort of ageravation.
Communist support allowed Qasim to curb pro-Nasserist and pro-Ba’thist elements and effectively rejected Nasser’s leadership.
In a nutshell, Washington and Caito now had a common problem, which overshadowed their chronic conflicts.
The negative reverberations of Washington’s anti-Iraqi, anti-Communist, and pro-Nasser stance were particularly strong in London and New Delhi.
Lubricated by Iraqi oil, the British government, with some alacrity, put the unpleasantness of July 1958 behind it and came to a working agreement with the Qasim government.
Qdasim’s Communist connection, although problematic, was secondary to securing the future of British oil interests in Iraq.
In this regard, the United States had become a liability, as growing hostility from Cairo, with the appearance of American backing, threatened the British arrangement.
The British, with some justification, viewed strengthening ties between Washington and Cairo as the latest round in the Eisenhower administration’s aggravating infatuation with Nasser.
Just as in 1954 and 1956, what the British viewed as a misbegotten relationship again reared its ugly head and threatened important interests in the region.
The British argued vehemently that Qasim was not a Communist and that pro-Nasserist and proBa’thist pressure metely increased his reliance on CPI support.
Again ageravating, the Americans appeared willing to accept the inevitability of the collapse of traditionally pro-Western Arab regimes with ones headed by more radical nationalists or by Nasserists.
The Hashemite collapse in Baghdad made the survival of the Pahlavi regime in Iran critical to United States interests in the region — a reality not lost on the Shah.
The demands from Tehran escalated, accompanied by the Shah’s comments about the benefits of neutrality.
Although the administration’s push for reform continued, placating the Shah and enlisting his support became the priority.
The size of the military assistance group in Tehran increased dramatically, as did United States support for internal Iranian security organs.
At the same time, the Eisenhower administration intermittently urged the Shah to give up direct rule, hoping to broaden his political support.
Washington continued to view the government in Tehran as critically unstable, and began a systematic program to shore it up.
To the British, Iran was simply Iran; any change in government in Tehran would be detrimental to Western interests.
The British consistently warned Washington that attempts to tinker with reforming the Iranian system had the potential to bring about its collapse.
In addition, the United States had to maintain its intelligence facilities at Peshawar.
Thus, Pakistan, with its new military government under General Ayub Khan, had to be courted, even at the expense of relations with India.
To deal with the aggravation that was sure to follow in New Delhi, the administration proposed to offer additional economic aid to encoutage an ‘inward focus’ away from the rivalry with Pakistan.
Washington worked with India in policy areas on which they agreed, but anticipated areas of sharp disagreement and minimal Indian support for United States diplomatic initiatives.
This period constitutes one of the most important and least examined periods of the history of the Arab Middle East.
The United States, Britain, and the Soviet Union found their regional interests and strategic goals subordinated and often frustrated by the parochial interests of political leaders and states in the region.
They also discovered that the more their policies took regional issues into account, the greater their potential for some success.
During this period, the Eisenhower administration displayed, comparatively speaking, a great deal of flexibility in adjusting containment policy to this reality.
In terms of proWestern allied states, containment policy continued to focus on military assistance, economic aid, and reform, but in dealing with non-aligned and at times hostile neutrals, it added a new dimension.
United States policy took an increasingly pragmatic view of the regional political situation and then calibrated how to employ aid or pressure to moderate anti-Western policies.
Eisenhower and his advisors learned that small amounts of economic aid, coupled with United States political support for Cairo in the Arab Cold War netted more for United States containment strategy and influence in Cairo than all the threats and boycotts of the past.
Nasser could not be bought, but to some degree he could be temporarily leased or enlisted for tactical political gain.
It was not a strategic solution to United States problems in the region, but it was far superior to what had transpired between 1955 and 1958.
Nasser and the revolution in Iraq In late 1958, Nasser’s stature in the Greater Middle East and the non108 GREATER MIDDLE EAST AND THE COLD WAR Corbis Iraqi coup leaders Aref and Qasim Abd-al-Salaam al-Aref and Abd-al-Karim al-Qasim shortly after their successful 14 July 1958 coup in Baghdad.
Within months, Aref would be in prison, senternced to death for plotting with Nasser against Qasim.
Ironically, his sentence commuted, Aref would lead the February 1963 coup against Qasim, who was captured, tried and executed within the first 48 hours. aligned world symbolized and, to a large extent, defined the dynamic for change in the Middle East; however, the emergence of an alternate revolutionary power center in Iraq forced a policy reevaluation in Cairo.
Initially, Nasser worked cautiously and patiently to maintain the facade of Arab unity and civility as the Qasim regime adjusted to its new responsibilities.
Nasset’s patience stemmed at least in part from the confidence generated by his phenomenal run of political good fortune.
Undoubtedly, Nasser had jumped to the same conclusion as everyone else, namely that the strong pto-Nasserist elements in the Qasim regime and broad support for Nasser in Iraq would translate into an alliance, or perhaps union.
Qasim’s intentions were unclear but nevertheless, the Egyptian leader, his advisors, and his Syrian allies believed that Qasim would ultimately embrace the Nasserist formula or succumb to those who did.
It reflected what would turn out to be a misplaced confidence that the ultimate outcome was a foregone conclusion.
Nasser believed that he could afford to wait, and thus focused on his more immediate concern with Lebanon.
That same month, Qasim claimed that his security forces had uncovered a conspiracy against the revolutionary government instigated by Rashid Ali al-Gaylani.
Gaylani was the former Iraqi colonel who had led the 1941 coup against the monarchy and British.
Simultaneously, the pro-Nasserist Abd-al-Salaam Aref, who had been shipped off to Bonn as Iraqi Ambassador because of his Nasserist leanings, returned to Baghdad without permission.
He was summarily thrown into prison, and after a brief trial received a death sentence as well.
Nasser began to have second thoughts about his theory that patience with Qasim would pay off.
Qasim clearly had his own ideas about the future of Iraq, and the discipline and organizational skills of his Communist allies now appeared to be a real threat to Nasset’s brand of Arab unity.
The United States Embassy shared Nasset’s concern about Communist discipline.
Communist Arabs cannot be fit into the molds, which have become the clichés to describe Arabs.
They are not lazy, are not lacking in ability to cooperate, coordinate, and they obviously are willing to follow directions.
Their performance in action on an increasing number of newsworthy occasions is timely, doctrinaire and impressive.
Public attention is drawn to their rallies, parades, speeches and petitions whenever they occur.
In Washington, officials became increasingly convinced that Qasim, in order to maintain power, had grown too reliant on the Iraqi Communists and was now unable to control them.
The Communists became the focus of Egyptian ire and Western concern for two somewhat different reasons.
Nasser’s hostility stemmed from the fact that ICP support for Qasim allowed him to pursue a course independent of the UAR, and encouraged Communist and anti-UAR elements in Syria.
This clash between Cairo and Baghdad produced another festering issue as well.
Nasser’s neutralism and relations with the Soviet Union had made Egypt the center of diplomatic and non-aligned activity in Africa and the Arab Middle East.
All roads in the Arab and non-aligned world seemed to wind their way through Cairo.
Be that as it may, the situation between Nasser and Qasim complicated UAR relations with Moscow.
Qasim’s refusal to come to terms with Nasser threatened Cairo’s newfound political and diplomatic prominence, and potentially undermined Nasset’s position with his Soviet benefactors.
First, the Kremlin believed that a large, unified Arab and largely Muslim super-state in the Middle East might excite similar aspirations among the Soviet Union’s Muslim minorities.
Second, Qasim relied on the ICP for his grip on power, and the ICP had close ties with Moscow.
For the Russians, this situation translated into more potential influence in Baghdad than in Cairo.
Conflict with the Soviet Union On 23 December 1958, the simmering disagreements between Nasser and Qasim developed into an open conflict with the Soviet Union.
In a speech at Port Said, Nasser charged that the Syrian Communists had ‘rejected Arab nationalism and Arab unity’ and ‘called for separation’ of Syria from Egypt.
Nasser also pointed out that the Arabs had resisted not only the crusaders from the West, but also the “Tartars’ from the East — a comparison not lost on the Soviets.
But we do not want this to be the cause of a quarrel with the Soviet Union.
For added emphasis, Muhammad Husayn Heikal launched a broadside in ALAhbram the next day.
In addition, Qasim had oil, and an economic alliance with his old enemy, the British; he had the support of the ICP and increasingly of the Soviet Union.
Qasim was positioned to threaten Caito’s Syrian adventure with Moscow’s apparent blessing.
Those evil agents on the Potomac were increasingly pleased with the developments.
Iraq and the Syrian connection In retaliation for UAR propaganda attacks, Qasim encouraged anti-Nasser agitation in Syria.
He provided moral and material support to the Syrian Communists and fanned anti-UAR sentiment.
Baghdad called for Syria to sever its ties with Cairo and enter into a union with Iraq.
This agitation took advantage of the rising discontent in Syria over Egyptian domination of the UAR governing apparatus.
Dissatisfied Syrian groups became progtessively more than receptive to anti-Egyptian machinations.
The Ba’thists, disappointed in Nasser’s refusal to adopt their Arab socialist principles, had a final falling-out with the Egyptian leader, and were eliminated from power.
He failed to understand that a strong, stubborn middle class, tied to every facet of Syrian life, including the military, existed in Syria.
Sarraj, undoubtedly with Nasser’s strategic if not tactical approval, set about planning the overthrow of Qasim’s regime.
He recruited pro-Nasserist and pro-Ba’thist elements within the Iraqi military and government.
Whether or not Sarraj exceeded his mandate from Caito, he certainly had clearance from Nasser for a destabilization campaign against Qasim.
Fearing just such a coup, Qasim spent February and March removing nationalist and pro-Nasserist ministers and officers from the government and army.
Communists called for a rally in Mosul, which sparked the premature revolt; fighting broke out between Communists and local nationalists on 7 Match.
On 8 Match, prominent leftists and proQasim elements in Mosul were arrested, and the coup was underway.
Sartaj had not only supplied the Mosul coup leadership, headed by Iraqi Colonel Abd-al-Wahhab al-Shawwaf, with material support, but also with Syrian and UAR manpower.
The Iraqi plotters had radio equipment that still bore their Syrian markings and some of the infiltrators wore their Syrian uniforms.
The Communist organizations in Baghdad published a list of eight demands following the failed coup.
Those who proclaim pan-Arabism and raise Abdel Nasser to the rank of prophet have been exposed.
The Iraqis asserted that they wanted to maintain ‘the most friendly relations’ with the members of the Pact, but without participation.
Privately holding Sarraj responsible for the failed coup, Nasser launched a violent campaign in the UAR press and tadio against Qasim and redoubled his efforts to overthrow the Itaqi leader.
The Egyptian leader also saw the hand of the British at work in Baghdad.
By attacking Qasim for his Communist support and the Russians for providing it, Nasser put the British in the position of having to maintain its position in Iraq with the IPC without coming into conflict with the anti-Communist positions of the United States.
Cairo partially succeeded in portraying the British as lukewarm anti-Communists.
London even continued to supply the Iraqi army with weaponry and support.
In response, he lashed out first at the Communists and then at the enemies of Arab unity, while simultaneously seeking more support from the United States.
This was dtiven to a large degree by the steady flow in intelligence reports about growing Communist influence.
Some government circles, particularly those around Vice-President Richard Nixon, were openly discussing and advocating either overt or covert military intervention.
The report cast doubt on Qasim himself being a Communist, but offered a bleak picture of continued Communist successes.
It noted that, fortunately, the security services and Ministry of the Interior had remained in the hands of non-Communists.
Seeing a ‘grave danger’ that in ‘the short run’ Iraq would ‘come under pteponderantly Communist control, Washington searched for a stopgap solution.
William Lakeland, the same petson who had served as liaison between Nasser and the British in 1954, had become the head of the Iraqi desk at the State Department.
Lakeland had had a close relationship with Nasser and Heikal the early 1950s and he strongly believed Nasser to be far preferable to Qasim.
As a result, he was receptive and supportive of policy based on fears of a Communist takeover in Iraq.
Eisenhower grumbled at one point that making a choice between Qasim and Nasser was like a ‘choice between Al Capone and John Dillinger’.4° The consistent reports supporting the position that a Communist takeover was likely sprang, at least in part, from three other issues that had arisen in the intelligence community.
The failure to predict the Iraqi coup in July 1958 and the subsequent criticism of the intelligence agencies created an impetus at the CIA not to be wrong again.
To report that a Communist coup was possible or even probable and have it not occur was fat more acceptable than to report the opposite and then witness a Communist takeover.
Also there was a very high degree of interest in the Iraq situation among policy-makers.
This translated into a desire for as much information as possible on the situation there.
Lastly, and this is more difficult to assess, there was the issue of John Foster Dulles’ illness and the personal and professional effect that this had on his brother, CIA Director Allen Dulles.
In early 1959, his brother Foster was dying of cancer and would resign his position as Secretary of State.
In addition to the personal loss, Allen Dulles faced the professional uncertainty of a world without Foster as Eisenhower’s ptincipal foreign policy advisor.
Reporting on Iraq that emphasized the threat of a Communist takeover served two purposes.
First, it protected the Director from the charge of an intelligence failure, and second, it made him a useful ally for those within the administration, particularly Vice-President Nixon, who advocated a more aggressive response to the Iraqi situation.
In short, the message that key administration officials wanted to hear also offered political protection to the Director.
Fortunately, an experienced President would choose the ultimate course of action.
Initially Washington believed that London shared a similar concern about the situation.
In reality, the British were more concerned about United States and UAR actions undermining the British IPC or the interruption of Iraqi oil flowing through UAR-controlled pipelines.
United States mutterings about intervention in Iraq made London very nervous.
On 22 March 1959, Macmillan and Eisenhower met and discussed the Iraqi situation.
Eisenhower pushed for the formation of a joint workine-group to study contingencies for Iraq in the event of a civil war ot a Communist takeover.
London actually welcomed the working-group because it provided a window on United States plans and an opportunity to influence United States policy.
In the event that Wasington decided to intervene, London would then decide whether or not to try to dissuade them.
So long as Qasim remains in power and continues to give evidence of his intention to maintain the independence of Iraq we should not countenance, still less encourage, any designs against him from any quatter.
The Eisenhower administration had not categorically endorsed non116 GREATER MIDDLE EAST AND THE COLD WAR Courtesy of National Archives Meeting of British and Americans over Middle East, 1959 British Foreign Secretary Selwyn Lloyd, President Eisenhower, Prime Minister Harold Macmillan, and Secretary of State John Foster Dulles meeting in February 1959 on the Middle East situation in general and Iraq in particular.
The cabinet recommended that the British and United States ‘clandestine services’ develop ‘contingency plans’ in the event of a civil war.
The paper directed that Israel, Iran, Turkey, and Jordan be warned not to act against Iraq or the UAR without consulting the United States and Britain.
The British warned Washington that the ‘Iraqi charge that Nasser acting as cat’s-paw for imperialist’ had gained wide acceptance in the Arab world.
Selwyn Lloyd had already met with the Acting Secretary of State Christian A Herter at the British Embassy in Washington and requested United States pressure on Nasser to restrain his current attacks on Qasim.
Herter demurred, stating that Nasser might misinterpret such action as siding with Qasim, thus undermining the UAR’s current antiCommunist campaign.
We think it would be serious error if UAR cut oil pipelines at this time.
Step would immeasurably exacerbate UAR/Itaq feud and would strengthen rather than weaken Qassim regime.
Iraq would no doubt demand large loan from IPC to tide it over fiscal emergency, under threat of nationalization.
Jernegan was getting a reputation for being too much under British influence.
Awate that his recommendations might not sit well, he apologized that his ‘cogitation’ resulted in a ‘generally negative reaction’ to Washington’s queries about what proactive action could be taken.
Aware of the proximity of his position to that of the British, Jernegan acknowledged London’s ‘deep aversion to Nasser’, and tried to distance himself from their views by commenting that the British ‘declare somewhat greater confidence’ in Qasim than was warranted.
The policy statement concluded that the United States should coordinate closely with the British and jointly examine the steps that might be required, if military intervention became unavoidable.
Nixon believed that the State Department position was too passive and that Iraq could not be allowed to go Communist.
Nixon wanted a “Mossadegh type operation’ to overthrow Qasim and put pro-Western military officers in power.
The failure of the Mosul coup and the resulting Communist gains had markedly increased fears of a Communist takeover.
He questioned Assistant Secretary Rountree at length on the State Department suggestion that the United States wait and see what would happen in Iraq before taking any aggressive action of a military nature in that country.
The revulsion against any government set up under aegis would be so gteat that it would probably be swept away and its replacement would in all likelihood be a Communist government.
Thus for this reason alone we cannot advocate this course, apart from the long standing United States principles which would be violated by what would in effect be unprovoked United States aggression and apart from the catastrophic psychological reaction throughout Africa and Asia which would inevitably portray us as being worse aggressors than the Communists.
The 1960 election was only 16 months away and he was trying to build his image as a substantive decision maker in the administration.
John Foster Dulles was terminally ill with cancer and had just resigned, and Eisenhower was in Georgia playing golf.
Nixon was making a play for a bigger role in the administration by pushing an ageressive policy.
Nixon also made it clear that he believed the traditional foreign-policy apparatus would never recommend military or covert action, no matter how grave the situation.
As a result, he made it plain to those present that he wanted to see more aggressive options, both covert and overt, to potentially deal with the problem in Baghdad.
Nixon’s effort to assert himself notwithstanding, the majority of those present at the meeting would only agree that plans might be necessary but that the situation required no immediate action.
On his return to Washington, Eisenhower sided with Rountree’s assessment, which reasoned that intervention would undermine other United States relationships in the region and that when United States forces departed from Iraq the government it had put in place would be shortlived.
Nasser responded with a predictable request for more aid to enable his program to continue.
While the United States and UAR attempted to undermine Qasim, London pursued an accommodation with him, lubricated by the flow of Iraqi oil.
To justify this policy, London took the position that ‘Iraq will preserve an attitude of independence and neutrality’, and offered to continue arms shipments to Baghdad.
London explained that arms for Qasim and the army made both less dependent on the Communists and their Soviet sponsors.
It might indeed have the effect of just pushing Qasim himself over the communist brink.
The Ambassador also pressed London for assistance in reducing the level of UAR attacks on Qasim by having a third party, perhaps Tito, go to Nasser with the suggestion.
The British were absolutely convinced that the UAR attacks coupled with internal agitation was in fact dangerously increasing the leverage of the Communists over the regime.
This obsession with improving US-Iraqi relations constituted an on-going project for the British in Baghdad.
Deciding that the Eisenhower administration and Qasim regime lacked ‘practical issues to deal with’ together, Sir Humphrey seized upon dates.
Soviet problems with their clients The failed coup in Mosul also reignited UAR-Soviet disagreements.
From Cairo, Nasser continued his attack on the threat that Communism presented to Arab unity, reopening the row with the Soviet Union.
On 15 March 1959, from Damascus, Nasser delivered a speech accusing Qasim of handing Iraq over to Communists.
His allusion to the ‘subservience’ of Qasim to the Communists in Iraq got a quick reaction from Moscow.
Khrushchev stated that the Soviet Union would not be ‘indifferent’ to the ‘situation emerging’ in Iraq, and he chided Nasser for having put his personal view of Arab unity and the interests of the UAR above those of the people.
Nasser also accused the Communists in Iraq of allying themselves with British agents.
They are like wounded wolves out for revenge against me for having taken Suez away from them.
Additionally, British want to continue flow of their petroleum company in Iraq and influence Kassem in favor of their vested interests.
Nasser’s emphasis may have been slightly off, but he certainly grasped the basics of Russian and British policy.
Thus, the spring of 1959 found Moscow pressuring its erstwhile client in Cairo to cease and desist from its attacks on the Qasim regime, and it found London attempting to convince Washington to do the same thing.
Nixon was on the mark when he commented that the British seemed to prefer working with Iraqi Communists to dealing with Nasser.
Nasser understood the Eisenhower administration’s fixation on Communism.
The UAR position on Iraq, Communism, and, at that moment, Soviet influence in the Middle East, complemented United States containment policy.
Nasser’s suppression of Communists in Egypt and Syria resonated positively in Washington.
While the administration did not believe that Nasser had had a total change of heart, the friction between Cairo, on the one hand, and Baghdad and Moscow on the other was for the United States the first positive news out of the Arab Middle East in years.
The next important question is whether Mr Khrushchev is willing to acknowledge the challenge implied in Nasser’s recent speeches and if so how he will respond.
It provided leverage against the Soviet Union, in his dealings with the British and with various Arab states, particularly Jordan and Saudi Arabia.
He probably recognized them all along, leaving control of the security services and army in the hands of non-Communist nationalists who were loyal to him.
On 1 May 1959, massive Communist rallies in Baghdad called for the appointment of Communists to the government and for an elected representative assembly.
Then, he directly attacked the Communists for demanding positions in the government.
When a Communist rally in Kirkuk, on 14 May 1959, exploded into two days of ethnic and class violence, Qasim arrested Communists and removed them from key positions in the peasants’ and trade unions.
Nutting stated that Qasim’s suspension of all political activity was a real attempt to curb the power of the Communists.
Nutting also reported that the Iraqi regime was highly suspicious of American activity.
Communist demands for a purge of the foreign ministry had failed in the face of determined resistance by Foreign Minister Jawad.
Perhaps most significantly the rumors of a split in the Communist party over tactics and support for Qasim promised more problems for the leftists.
The Communists were predictably vocal, hoping to recapture their lost political momentum.
Communist influence had been clearly on the decline since its height at the time of the March coup attempt in Mosul.
They also faced a bettet-organized, more active anti-Communist movement.
As further evidence of slipping Communist fortunes, the Baghdad newspaper A/Thawra had called for the establishment of new political party headed by Qasim himself.
The logic of the trial was that because some Ba’thists had plotted against the regime, then all Ba’thists were guilty of plotting against the regime.
Disaffection with the trials and the regime spread, but there was no outspoken opposition.
By early January 1960, the Communist influence and ministers in the Iraqi government brought open concern.
The Shah of Iran stated that he did not believe that Qasim was a Communist but that Communist influence was certainly on the rise.
No-one seemed able to adequately analyze the situation or provide accurate analysis of the future.
If Qassim is a split personality, so is Iraq and it is difficult to decide which affects the other more in the present circumstances.
The Indians were obviously operating slightly behind the actual course of events.
On 1 January 1960, Qasim ended the ban on political parties, giving the appearance of making good on his promise to allow the resumption of political-party life in Iraq.
In February, unfortunately for the Communists, Qasim decided that they had become too powerful and set about redressing the situation.
For months, two rival wings of the Communist party had struggled for control.
Now, both groups applied for licenses to operate as the sole Communist political party in Iraq.
This move diluted the power of the Communists in Iraq by creating a leadership crisis within its ranks.
In sentencing 76 of the 78 defendants, the court showed surprising leniency.
The Qasim government presented itself as having curbed Communist influence.
More Iraqi students were attending United States universities and technical schools, and there seemed to an increase in attempts to acquire Western technical assistance.
While the regime, bolstered by oil revenue, looked stable in the short term, the longer view was an entirely different matter.
Qasim was increasingly isolated and unable to deal with Iraq’s mounting economic and political difficulties.
His only salvation appeared to be the weakness of any opposition and the lack of an alternative leadership.
As a result, the Qasim regime found itself, in the words of The Guardian, ‘losing its gtip’ on the political and economic levers of power.
Observers saw the lack of direction and focus of the once infamous Baghdad mobs as another indication of the malaise in the government.
Nasser’s Syrian labyrinth Any Schadenfreude Nasset may have felt with regard to Qasim’s predicament was no doubt tempered by his own problems in Syria.
In October 1959, Nasser sent his old confidant Marshal Amer to Damascus to function as viceroy.
In December 1959, after returning to Damascus, they resigned in protest from the government.
He concluded that Syrian politicians could not be trusted and removed them from key positions in the UAR government, further undermining the UAR administration in Syria.
At this juncture, Nasser appointed Sarraj, his chosen head of the muhabbarat , to head the Syrian executive.
The very Syrians who were planning a revolt against the Egyptians began to complain to Amer about Sarraj and his programs of suppression.
Annoyed with Sarraj, Amer sought to quell the unrest by ordering an end to the arrests and interrogations.
In London and Washington, most observers doubted, despite the ‘mounting wave of discontent’, that the Syrians would either significantly assist or rise up to expel the Egyptians.
Having resisted the temptation to intervene in Iraq, the Eisenhower administration had allowed the fractious nature of Iraqi politics to take its toll on the Qasim regime.
Concerns about Communist influence were mitigated to a significant degree by Qasim’s astute maneuver that split the party.
In addition, Nasser’s problems in Syria now seemed to portend limitations on UAR expansion.
The fundamental conservatism of the Eisenhower administration’s approach to the region was netting the same results that Vice-President Nixon and the more radical advocates of a more aggressive policy had touted as the benefits of intervention, and Eisenhower had done so without the potential expense in lives and dollars or the immeasurable damage to the United States reputation in the region.
In addition, increased aid to Cairo had temporarily improved United States influence with Nasser and encouraged him to pursue the blatantly antiCommunist policies long sought by the Eisenhower administration.
Despite the fact that the fear of monolithic Nasserism had subsided, Washington continued to worty about the survivability of traditional regimes in the region, but now it appeared that whatever nationalist regime might replace the Hashemites in Jordan or the Saudis would most likely pursue a course on the Iraqi mode of independence from Cairo.
Washington had also come to the realization that the United States government lacked the ability to engineer or impose a ‘strategic’ solution to the problems in the region or for that matter to implement a ‘strategic plan’ to protect its own interests there; however, it could, and at times very effectively, take advantage of the inherent regional conflicts and political dynamics to further and protect the longer-term interests of the United States government.
Jordan, Saudi Arabia, and Israel — the Bystanders The Arab Cold War held clear benefits for three relative bystanders in the Arab Middle East.
Nasser’s frustration and obsession with Qasim’s Iraq and the resulting fall-out in the Syrian UAR and with the Soviet Union diluted the Egyptian leader’s ability to focus on other revolutionary opportunities.
For Jordan, Saudi Arabia, and Israel, the Arab Cold War brought a relative respite from political and subversive pressure that would further serve to ensure their sutvival.
From 1958 through 1960, the two Arab monarchies, Jordan and Saudi Arabia, faced increasing political instability and financial problems which, coupled with focused subversion from the UAR, might have toppled both regimes.
Because of the hostile relations between the UAR and Itaq, Jordan and Saudi Arabia were able to navigate this critical period of internal crisis and emerge stronger and more stable than at any time in the past.
This did not mean that anyone in Washington, or for that matter London, would describe either monarchy as stable, but in a relative sense the regimes in Amman and Riyadh were clearly less vulnerable and better led than they had been in a decade.
Even mote critical, by the early 1960s the United States was committed to their survival.
For Israelis, the Arab Cold War provided a diversion behind which they developed what Ben Gurion believed would be the ultimate assutance of survival — nucleat weapons.
Each of the bystanders took advantage of the conflict between the UAR and Iraq in their own way, and in the end they would find their positions enhanced and those of Nasser and Qasim significantly diminished.
King Hussein faced Palestinian and pro-Nasserist plots in the government and military.
There was little enthusiasm in the Eisenhower administration for supporting Jordan, which was not even a part of the United States scheme for containment in the region.
This aid did in fact represent an investment in containment, but only an indirect and somewhat unwilling one.
United States support for King Hussein was, in large part, a contribution to relations with London.
The Eisenhower administration supported Jordan because the British viewed the collapse of the Amman regime as potentially disastrous to their remaining position in the Middle East.
Wanting to avoid further damage to the British position and needing London’s cooperation on a variety of other issues, Washington supported a regime that it believed would soon succumb to radical Arab nationalism.
How this arrangement matured is instructive in understanding the British approach to protecting its regional interests by enlisting United States financial and political support.
As the conflict with Qasim intensified, Nasser’s frustration with King Hussein increased, and Jordan became a major test of Nasset’s influence and a major affront to his prestige.
Jordan’s struggle to survive also highlighted a new level of complexity in telations between the Atlantic cousins.
Eisenhower’s pro-Nasserist tilt and Macmillan’s continued antipathy toward the Egyptian leader created debate over Anglo-American policy toward Jordan.
Without a doubt, Johnston was the most colorful participant in this policy tug-of-war.
Fighting to preserve Britain’s commitment to the last Hashemite, Sir Charles had an unabashed admiration for desert royalty and absolute disdain for Arab nationalists and their supporters.
Jordan became something of a test case for AngloAmerican cooperation and compromise in the post-1958 Arab world.
The Arab Cold War also benefited the Middle East odd couple — Saudi Arabia and Israel.
Nasser’s feud with Qasim, his problems with the Soviet Union, his difficulties in Syria, and the war of words with King Hussein necessitated good relations with other key Arab states in the region.
One could argue that the conflict with Qasim caused Nasser to miss his best opportunity of undermining the Saudi regime.
In the middle of a dynastic crisis, Saudi Arabia found an anti-Communist alliance with Nasser useful as well.
The alliance reduced the potential for Nasserist agitation and increased the Kingdom’s influence with Washington.
Shrewdly, Crown Prince Feisal used the respite to improve relations with the UAR, while introducing reforms and undermining revolutionary groups at home.
Economic aid was less an issue with the Saudis, but reform constituted a major issue, if Saudi Arabia were to develop a stable economy and society.
As for Israel, with Nasser finally involved in an anti-Communist crusade, Washington avoided actions that might stir up the Arab-Israeli conflict and damage its anti-Communist campaign.
The Eisenhower administration used economic aid as leverage to prevent Israeli schemes that might derail Nasset’s anti-Communist campaign, but as a by-product of minimizing potential disagreements with Israel, the administration failed to confront signs of a growing nuclear weapons program.
As a result, the distractions of the Arab Cold War and United States preoccupation with maintaining UAR pressure on Iraq allowed the Israelis to divert aid into a nuclear weapons program.
These issues and circumstances converged in 1959 and 1960 to form a critical chapter in the Cold War politics of the Greater Middle East.
Jordan’s premature obituary Predictably, Nasser’s attempt to bring Jordan to heel involved the operational skullduggery of the Syrian intelligence service and its chief, Colonel Satraj.
The collapse of Hashemite Iraq, in July 1958, raised expectations that King Hussein was next.
Although the young King had survived riots, plots, and assassination attempts, it appeared that his luck had run out.
After the crisis-tidden 1958, New Year in Jordan began on a shaky note.
The warning added that United States aid should not be interpreted as an endorsement of a defiant Jordanian policy toward its more powerful neighbors.
Although convinced that Hussein’s regime would most likely fall, Eisenhower met with the King to offer his encouragement if not the material support that the King wanted.
Eisenhower encouraged and offered to assist Jordan in improving its relations with Cairo.
Whitehall strongly opposed any suggestion of ‘détente’ between Kine Hussein and Nasser.
The subject gave Sir Charles Johnston, British Ambassador in Amman, near apoplectic seizures.
Given what the British viewed as their interests, London had reason fot concern.
While King Hussein was away, the Jordanian security service uncovered a plot against him that implicated Shara.
At one point, Rifai’ even argued that a Nasserist takeover in Iraq was mote serious than a Communist one.
In a cable to London, Johnston howled that United States policy ‘seemed to mean’ that Jordan would keep its independence for a while but under a ‘Nasserist prime minister’, and then at some point King Hussein would oversee the transition of Jordan into a republic.
Never shy about expressing his views, Johnston lambasted American Chareé Edwin M Wright, and blasted anyone in London who might be thinking about acquiescing to what he viewed as the American scheme.
Unlike Mr Wright, I had seen a pro-Nasserite Prime Minister in operation here.
His regime had simply opened the door to chaos and Communism, and I saw no reason to think that the result would be different if the experiment was repeated again now.
If the American are in effect, letting Nasser take over Jordan while trying to build him up as an anti-Communist champion, they will have to pay him a subsidy comparable to what they pay the present Jordan Government, if they want to prevent him from being sunk by the Jordanian millstone.
That being so, it seemed far more sensible to pay the subsidy directly to a regime which, whatever its shortcomings, is at least robustly pro-western, rather than to an untrustworthy opportunist like Nasser.
Although still grousing, Johnston was somewhat mollified by this response, and the fact that his close relations with the new Jordanian Prime Minister, Hazza al-Majali, euaranteed him the leverage of political access in both Jordan and London, and vis-a-vis the Americans.
Hussein dangles the Nasser card In September 1959, Nasser and Saud met in Cairo and announced a decision to put past differences aside and form a united Arab front against Zionism and Communism.
Saud then suggested another meeting in Riyadh or Jidda, and wanted to include King Hussein.
Relating to Hussein the gist of his recent visit to Cairo, Saud invited Hussein to participate.
Speaking to Johnston first, Hussein stated that, given his history with Nasser, he would not consider a trip to Cairo, but that a meeting in Saudi Arabia was a different matter.
Johnston made the obligatory statement that it was a Jordanian matter and then listed the negatives.
Johnston told the King that his attendance would place him in the anti-Qasim camp, and Jordan should seek neutrality in the IraqiUAR dispute.
He suggested that the King ‘temporize and avoid meeting Nasser for the time being’.2° While British concerns about King Hussein’s safety might have been real, a Jordanian alliance with Saudi Arabia and Egypt, with which latter London lacked diplomatic relations, would have damaged British influence.
It also had the potential to lead to a breach with Iraq, and thus threatened petroleum revenues.
Then on 18 September, to his chagrin, Johnston learned that King Hussein had asked the United States Ambassador Sheldon T Mills for advice on the meeting with Saud and Nasser.
The British approach worked, and Hussein informed Saud that he could not attend.
The Iraqi reaction to the mere rumor of Hussein’s participation in a meeting with Saud and Nasser underscored the importance that the British attached to preventing the meeting.
Domestic perceptions of the political situation in Jordan did not help matters.
Squabbling between key political figures reinforced the impression that the King could not keep his house in order.
In public comments, former Prime Minister Rifai’ stated that the Jordanian attacks on the UAR were a sign of weakness.
In January 1960, he convened a ‘secret parliamentary session’ to discuss whether or not Nasser was serious in his expressed desire to have better relations with Jordan.
Majali believed that conflicts between UAR officials in Syria and the remaining Ba’thist ministers and politicians there had alienated the Ba’th in Jordan to the point that their cooperation in a conspiracy against King Hussein was highly unlikely.
The possibility of better relations with the UAR predictably came to naught.
In the spring of 1960, the frustrated Jordanian regime embarked yet again on an anti-Nasser propaganda campaign.
London raised the issue in Washington, but reported that the United States ‘showed no special enthusiasm’ about getting involved.
He concluded that Jordanian meddling in Syria would only convince Nasser that Hussein had to go.
Hussein named Bahjat Talhouni to replace Majali, paving the way for the security forces and the army to increase their role in Jordanian political life.
The assassination also highlighted the differences in United States and British political preferences for Jordan.
Considerably less upset, American officials surmised that the British lament reflected the fact that Talhouni was close to Rifai’, an Ametican favorite.
Talhouni was also more ‘closed mouthed’ and less friendly toward the British.
Showing a studied lack of concern, Washington viewed the Jordanian situation as an expensive aggravation and Majali as London’s man.
Additionally, the Eisenhower administration had tired of King Hussein and his political entourage contributing to their own troubles by baiting Nasser and then crying wolf.
Many believed that the Jordanians had gotten what they should have expected, if not deserved.
In Washington, there was an additional incentive to downplay any UAR responsibility for the assassination.
Nasser planned to attend the UNGA at the end of September, and efforts were underway to arrange a meeting between Nasser and President Eisenhower.
Jordan had become a nuisance that threatened to get in the way of the United States’ real goal, namely using Cairo as a counterbalance to Communist influence in the region, thereby enhancing the effectiveness of containment policy.
As a result, United States officials argued that Majali’s assassination was a tragic ‘act of terrorism’ with only limited tactical consequences.
In point of fact, Washington was more apprehensive that increased influence of the military would bring demands for more aid.
The Americans seemed almost pleased with Majali’s abrupt departure from the Jordanian political scene, because it held the promise of better American access to and influence with the Jordanian government.
London and Washington agreed on one thing, namely that the Jordanians could not afford to overreact.
The British feared that Jordanian demands for the extradition from Syria of the two Jordanians involved in the assassination might spark an open conflict.
King Hussein stated that he had no intention of sending Jordanian forces into Syria unless the UN failed to ‘obtain any redress’ or if they were invited in by Sytia to ‘support an appropriately constituted new regime’.4” Since no one expected the UN to achieve ‘redress’ and the Jordanians had convinced themselves that ‘Sytia ripe for revolt’, the possibility that Bedouin elements in the Jordanian army might take direct action against Syria presented a sobering, if not terrifying, prospect to the British.
The cousin of the slain Prime Minister was General Habis al-Majali, who happened to be Commander-in-Chief of the Jordanian armed forces.
General Majali had convinced himself that Jordan could take on the UAR militarily, despite the deficiencies of the Jordanian air force and the limited capability of the army.
He believed that Jordan would win any war within 24 hours, through surprise coupled with an ‘imminent revolt’ in Syria.
Majali had by-passed key officers who held mote ‘realistic’ views of military operations to push his aggressive plans with the King.
Prime Minister Macmillan reacted to Johnston’s message by sending a message to King Hussein advising caution.
The British were skeptical of the United States contention that even if UAR agents had assassinated Majali, Nasser may not have had any direct knowledge of either the planning or execution.
The fact that the Cairo press and Sawt al-Arab radio continued a ‘violent campaign’ against Jordan did little to convince anyone that Nasser was not directly involved in Majali’s demise.
The local Egyptian press ran articles stating that ‘the son of Talal’ was mad and listed British officers serving in Jordan by name on Cairo Radio and Sawt al-Arab.
Damascus Radio warned Hussein that the people of Jordan would kill him, and called for an uprising.
In Amman, Johnston complained that the ‘tone of UAR Press and broadcasting ... have reached a peak of violence never achieved in 1958.54 Although certain that the UAR government was involved, accusing Nasser of arranging the assassination would only damage Britain’s efforts at rapprochement with the UAR, further inflame the Jordanians, and perhaps provoke a border war between Syria and Jordan.
Jordan and aid President Eisenhowet’s meetings at the UNGA underscored the fact that the administration viewed Jordan as adding an unwanted complication to higher priority objectives in the Middle East.
Secretary of State Herter had recommended that Eisenhower take the opportunity to meet with key AfroAsian leaders.
On 7 October Eisenhower had a half-hour meeting with King Hussein at the White House.
The President explained that he had raised the assassination of Majali with Nasser and that Nasser had denied any role.
The President also told Hussein that Nasser had taken the position that if Israel wanted free passage through Suez, then they would have to recognize the right of return for all Palestinian refugees.
Hussein expressed hope for more UN involvement and enhanced ‘peace prospects’ in the region and, with that, the meeting ended.
The Indians saw nothing to be gained by getting involved and said as much.
The Indians surmised that more pressing problems in other parts of the world, including the fact that ‘the British government wants to go nearer Nasser’, had created a strong desire to see “détente’ between Amman and Cairo.
Officials in the MEA questioned whether or not London and Washington had teally exercised any ‘restraining influence’ over the Jordanians.
While the British certainly did not want the Jordanian government to collapse, it simply could not afford the bill associated with maintaining its stability.
The United States had confronted the British on the issue, stating that a fifty-fifty split on Jordan appeared mote realistic to Washington.
In addition, the United States provided 70 per cent of the funding for UNRWA to support the Palestinian refugees.
There was a feeling in Washington that, if the British saw Jordan as strategically important, then they should be willing to foot more of the bill.
In London, Under Secretary of State Douglas Dillon told Selwyn Lloyd, now Chancellor of the Exchequer, that the United States would only provide budgetary support for Jordan through March 1961.
Dillon then flatly informed the British that they would have to increase their contribution.
In short, Britain did not want to see Jordan collapse, and they now believed that Washington was on the hook to prevent it.
London argued that because of commitments in Oman, parts of Africa, and the sub-continent, no additional money was available for Jordan.
At that point, Dillon stated that as of 1 April 1961 direct budgetary aid to Jordan would have a shortfall of $6. million and that Washington expected London to pick up the tab or to come up with another source of funding; whereupon the West Germans became the focus of that alternate source of funding.
As the Eisenhower administration came to a close, the Jordanian situation remained very much up in the air.
Neither London nor Washington wanted to pay the bill to float the Hashemite regime.
The United States favored a Jordanian policy of working with Egypt and Nasser against Communist inroads in the region.
In effect, Nasser had become the more desirable active partner in Washington’s containment strategy.
Only British allusions to the negative effect of a Jordanian collapse on their position in the Gulf prevented the Eisenhower administration from leaving the Hashemites to their own devices.
In effect, London had made the case that further damage to its position in the Middle East would hutt its ability to support the United States in other areas.
From London’s point of view, the logic followed that the United States should pay the lion’s share of aid support to Jordan in order to protect broader Western interests in the region.
Nasser viewed Saudi Arabia as the epitomy of a feudal state, and he was, in fact, not far from the mark.
Slavery was still legal there, and the traditional Saudi institutions could not manage a modern state.
From Nasser’s perch in Cairo, the Saudi Kingdom looked like a rotten apple about to fall.
King Saud, who had voiced his support for the Eisenhower Doctrine in eatly 1957, brought the full-brunt of UAR propaganda down on the Kingdom in March 1958 by bungling an attempt to subvert Colonel Sarraj, the Syrian security chief.
Led by Crown Prince Feisal, members of the royal family pressured Saud to step down as ruler and to embrace a program of fundamental reforms.
Knowing that he needed time, the shrewd Feisal moved to neutralize Nasser.
Nasser no doubt believed that this development, at the least, neutralized Saudi Arabia, and perhaps constituted the first step toward the end of the monarchy.
The Kingdom sat on an ocean of oil but was virtually bankrupt due to the mismanagement, corruption, and incompetence of King Saud.
Feisal understood that if the dynasty was to survive, he needed to buy time by following Nasser’s lead in pan-Arab affairs.
In addition, attempting to regain power, King Saud waged a dynastic and bureaucratic battle with Feisal, when the latter refused to recognize King Saud’s debts.
As the struggle intensified, the almost total lack of visibility into the inner workings of the royal family, and Feisal’s poor health, created rumors that sent shudders through the Washington foreign policy establishment.
Chafing under Feisal’s fiscal restraints, Saud cast about for political allies, temporarily embracing a discontented group of young princes that had formed around Tallal ibn Abd-al-Aziz.
They believed that Feisal’s assumption of power in 1958 would bring constitutional government to the kingdom.
Feisal soon proved that he had no intention of creating a constitutional monarchy, and Tallal’s group went into open opposition.
Historically, King Saud had opposed Tallal and his reformers, but now, with Feisal controlling the purse strings, Saud courted the reformist opposition.
In December 1960, the reformers supported Saud’s successful bid to retake control of the Council of Ministers.
Radio Riyadh announced on 25 December 1960 that a new constitution for Saudi Arabia would be written and accompanied by other liberalizing reforms.
Four days later, the King ordered Radio Riyadh to announce that a constitution would not in fact be forthcoming.
When Saud returned to his old ways, clashes ensued between him and the reformers.
Eventually, the King forced Tallal from office, leaving the Kingdom mote vulnerable and divided than ever before.
Between 1958 and 1961, a serious attempt by Nasser to topple the regime might well have succeeded, but Saudi Arabia’s window of vulnerability, like that of Jordan’s, coincided with Nasser’s attempts to deal with problems in Syria and with Qasim in Iraq.
In Washington, Feisal gained a reputation as a proto-Nasserist, not by making pronouncements, but by spreading rumors about his adherence to the Nasserist line.
Feisal also possessed solid anti142 GREATER MIDDLE EAST AND THE COLD WAR British credentials, having refused oil supplies for Jordan at the time of the British intervention in 1958.68 Saudi Arabia also had no diplomatic relations with Britain because of the Buraimi Oasis dispute.
As the Buraimi dispute simmered on, the Saudis began to make claims vis-avis Oman, which the Egyptians and even the Iraqis supported.
The Saudis sincerely sided with Nasser in his anti-Communist campaiens in Egypt and Syria, and against Iraq.
While obviously wary of the ultimate intentions of Cairo, the Saudis actively opposed the Communists.
Feisal’s pro-Nasser policies, coupled with improved United States relations with Cairo, opened the way to even better relations between Riyadh and Washington.
On 19 April 1959, the United States issued an intelligence estimate for Saudi Arabia.
Israel and the Arab Cold War Ironically, the other great beneficiary of the Arab Cold War was Israel.
Eisenhower had demonstrated his willingness to put real pressure on Israel.
Recognizing that there would be a political price to pay because of Zionists groups pressuring a Democratic Congress, the administration relaxed its pressure on Israel, when it might have forced a comptehensive peace plan for the region.
This essentially precluded pressuring Egypt as well, and diverted Washineton’s attention away from the issue of an ArabIsraeli peace.
Admitting that for the ‘time being’, Nasser had left Israel alone and put the ‘Arab countries at the head of his list’, the Israelis warned that any attempt to work with Nasser and ‘providing him the benefit of a truce’ was folly.
While useful at times, there was always a high price associated with relations with Israel.
During the Lebanese and Jordanian crises, overflights of Israel, by United States aircraft moving British troops and supplies to Jordan, had been critical in maintaining the Hashemites on the throne.
In return, the Israelis obtained something approaching a security guarantee from the Eisenhower administration.
When the press picked up the story, which the Israeli government may have planted, the Soviets felt that they had to react.
When Dulles charged that Israel was caving in to Soviet blackmail, the Israelis pointed out that a long list of countries had received United States guarantees in the event of an attack by Moscow.
Dulles replied that after discussions at the White House, President Eisenhower had decided that the Eisenhower Doctrine for the Middle East covered Israel as well.
In early 1959, the British began one of their periodic evaluations of the pros and cons of good relations between Jordan and Israel.
The British Embassies in Tel Aviv and Amman argued that good relations between Jordan and Israel served to dampen down problems in the region in general and on their borders in particular.
United States aid and relations with Israel No matter what London’s position, Israel’s fortunes were tied to the United States.
Almost every Israeli policy decision included a discussion of how the United States would react.
Strangely enough, in the early months of 1959 John Foster Dulles’ illness, resignation, and death highlighted the trepidation with which the Israeli government viewed changes in Washington.
Byroade attempted to make Egypt the principal United States partner in the region.
The United States is not always popular here, but whatever happens it remains the rich uncle, and the imagined prospect of Israel’s worst enemy becoming the new favourite nephew is not, from any point of view, a welcome one.
This turmoil occurred simultaneously with negotiations to end its grant-in-aid program for Israel.
Golda Meir stood up in the Knesset and criticized the ‘insanity’ of the State Department’s pro-Nasser policies.
This speech resulted in a routine rebuke from Washington and copious amounts of hand-wringing in Israel.
The State Department viewed the commotion as the price for doing business with Israel.
From a State Department perspective, relations with Israel were proceeding much more smoothly than they had for some time.
In 1955, David Ben-Gurion made the secret acquisition of nuclear weapons an absolute priority.
United States intelligence resources focused on France and other industrialized states, placing Israel in the “Third Category Priority’ list of those countties not considered a proliferation risk.
In 1957, Israel shifted from a pool-type research reactor to a ‘real’ production reactor.
This triggered no alarms, and Washington approved technology transfers and monetary grants for research.
Hiding behind what seemed to be a sensible move toward nuclear power, the Israelis quietly proceeded with a baseline weapons program.
Israeli shifts in priorities appeared to reflect inexperience and budgetary concerns more than an ulterior motive.
Herter’s relationship with Chester Bowles, both of whom were Connecticut polticians, eased the transition from the Eisenhower to the Kennedy administration. provided the Israeli government with the perfect screen for its weapons program.
In early 1958, at the time of the Soreq deal, the National Photographic Intelligence Center discovered largescale construction in the Negev desert during a routine U-2 flight.
The CIA Program Director, Arthur C Lundahl, and his deputy, Dino A Brugioni, briefed President Eisenhower and Atomic Energy Commission Chaitman Lewis Strauss on the facility.
The lack of questions from either Eisenhower or Strauss led Lundahl and Brugioni to conclude that the administration wanted Israel to acquite nuclear weapons.
In fact, Eisenhower immediately sent a list of specific questions to the Ambassador in Tel Aviv, who in turn, presented them to Ernst David Bergmann, the head of Israel’s nuclear program.
Somewhat disconcerted, Bergmann admitted that Israel had decided to build a reactor but no firm decision had been taken on exactly what kind it would be.
Evidence of French-Israeli cooperation in the nuclear weapons field led to the May 1959 resignation of Dan Tolkovsky as head of the Development Department in Israeli defense.
In June, there were rumored heavy-water agreements with Norway, indicating that something beyond research and peaceful development might be going on.
The Eisenhower administration had shown a particular commitment to the creation of an international agency dedicated to non-proliferation of nuclear weapons.
The IAEA was slated to take over monitoring and safeguarding functions.
The United States wanted to change its nuclear agreements such that non-compliance with IAEA regulations would be grounds for terminating cooperation with that nation on nuclear energy.
The administration had no intention of undermining, through making an exception of Israel, the very agency whose creation it had sponsored.
They argued that if the IAEA center were in Caito then the Israelis would not be allowed access.
In addition, the IAEA might give the Egyptians access to the Israeli reactors.
Israel provided another hint about their real objective, stating that they could not comply with the IAEA strictures because they wanted 90-per-cent enriched uranium-235 as opposed to the 20-per-cent enriched allowed under IAEA guidelines.
Israel wanted reassurances that the United States would not terminate bilateral agreements based on IAEA findings.
Washington also insisted that the agreements be modified to include the termination clause, but offered to study the matter further.
Whether intentional or inadvertent, this resumption of business-as-usual requests for aid and arms further screened the nuclear program.
In a meeting with Secretary Herter, Golda Meir, the Israeli Foreign Minister, introduced a new request for conventional weapons.
Citing recent shipments of Soviet arms to Nasset as the justification, the Israelis argued that they had to keep up, in ‘quality if not in quantity’, with Cairo.
In the same breath, she mentioned to Herter that Israel was out of money.
Officials at the State Department called the new weapons requests “depressing to face’, since another round of Israeli security demands had been completed only four months before.
In June 1960, the United States Embassy in Tel Aviv reported rumors that the French wete assisting the Israelis in the construction of a major nuclear facility neat Beersheba in the Negev.
Under renewed pressure, the Israelis called it a metallurgical research facility and offered no additional information.
Then in October 1960, the British informed Washington that the Beersheba site was indeed a nuclear installation.
Both British and American Military Attachés got pictures of it, and confirmed that it was a nuclear reactor site.
When confronted, the French denied assisting the Israelis with the reactor or even knowing anything about it.
Two weeks after John Kennedy won the presidential election, the Eisenhower administration concluded that Israel was building a nuclear reactor capable of producing weapons-grade plutonium.
United States intelligence sources now believed that the site was definitely a nuclear weapons facility and that it would be operational within a year.
The United States strongly suggested that, in addition to Ben-Gurion’s promise not to develop nuclear weapons, Israel should open the facility to IAEA inspection.
On 12 January 1961, President Eisenhower held a senior level conference to discuss the Istreali nuclear issue.
The outgoing administration decided to take the position that the United States government did not know the source of the funding for the facility and to issue a statement calling for complete IAEA inspection and monitoring of the facility.
It would take the new administration time to organize itself to deal with the nuclear issue, and John Kennedy had been heavily dependent on the Jewish votes to get elected.
Israel expected some questioning, but, quite correctly, did not expect any action from Washington on this issue.
Iran and Pakistan Cash in on Iraq In 1959 and 1960, Iran and Pakistan adjusted to new teality in the Greater Middle East by first recognizing and then utilizing their new-found leverage with the United States.
The collapse of the Baghdad regime had severely shaken Washington and London and placed a premium on preventing the fall of mote allied regimes in the region.
In fact, as Secretary Dulles pointed out in the days immediately following the Baghdad coup, Iraq was not even a part of his original concept of the ‘northern tier’, but Iran and Pakistan were keys.
Be that as it may, the collapse in Baghdad frightened the Eisnehower administration because a repeat in either Iran or Pakistan would undo its containment or encirclement of the Soviet Union.
Only five years early, a nationalist leader in Iran, Musaddiq, had forced the Shah to flee the country, and the United States and Britain by the narrowest of margins had overthrown Musaddiq and placed the Shah back on the throne.
In the intervening time, the Shah had not led Iran’s government, economy, or society to anything that approached the level of stability that Washington desired.
At the beginning of 1959, Eisenhower feared, and with justification, that the situation in Iran might bring about a repeat of that in Iraq the year before.
Unstable perhaps, but the Shah recognized the opportunity presented by Washington’s concern, and he pressed for aid, particularly military aid, arguing that had the United States been less nigeardly prior to July 1958, the coup in Baghdad might never have happened.
With regard to Pakistan, the administration believed that instability and possible collapse had only been averted in October 1958 by the military takeover led by General Ayub Khan.
Because of Ayub’s firm grip on power and personal aura of no-nonsense competence, Washington was concerned about Pakistan, but not on edge as it was about Iran.
Always a soutce of concern, Iran’s stability following the Baghdad coup emerged as a major preoccupation in Washington.
With increasing sophistication, the Shah employed Washington’s fears of a neutral Iran and an accommodation with the Soviet Union to transform demands for aid into tangible results.
At the same time, the Shah blunted attempts by the Eisenhower administration to pressure his regime toward political and economic reform.
The Eisenhower administration consistently pressed for reform and economic development as the only sure path to Iranian stability, but after the Baghdad coup, Washington feared that rapid reform could destabilize the regime.
Reform could not be undertaken at the risk of a Pahlavi collapse; therefore, it had to be controlled reform.
The stability and survival of a friendly regime in Tehran was the first priority.
Pakistan found itself in a very similar position, and undoubtedly General Ayub Khan, the President of Pakistan, and the Shah of Iran frequently compared notes on the status of aid and support coming from the United States.
Just as Nasset’s 1953 rebuff of MEDO led to US-sponsored defense alliances in the ‘northern tier’, the Iraqi coup and the prominent Communist influence in Baghdad brought renewed efforts to ensure the containment of the Soviet Union.
In Pakistan, this led to United States support for military rule, which in turn further strained ties with India.
By early 1959, the Eisenhower administration came to view Pakistan’s government as the most stable since independence.
General Ayub Khan, now President, had Washington’s confidence and particularly that of President Eisenhower.
Ayub’s government had transformed a chaotic political and economic situation into something that was reasonably stable and efficient.
By curbing corruption and instilling order, Ayub impressed the White House.
Pakistan was the lone bright spot in the Western alliance system in the entire Greater Middle East.
Now, with the United States reeling from Iraq, Ayub renewed his demands for modern weapons.
To demonstrate his options, Ayub began to explore the possibility of better relations with Beijing.
With Krishna Menon at the helm in the Ministry of Defense, the answer was obvious — call Moscow — and so began India’s efforts to establish an indigenous, modern, weapons program.
Ironically, neutral India pursued the focus on economic development and reform most advocated by the Eisenhower administration, but United States military aid to Pakistan, in reaction to the Iraqi coup, forced a reappraisal.
In the 1959 to 1960 timeframe, Washington viewed Iran as more unstable than Pakistan; therefore, its role is examined first.
United States aid and the Persian bazaar Appropriately, this new period in US-Iranian relations began with Iranian requests for more military and security aid to combat growing threats from the Soviet Union.
The annual budgetary cycle for Tehran began in March; therefore, pleas for additional military and economic aid started appearing in November and December.
These aid requests usually touched off a series of United States national security assessments of Iran and the Shah.
The 1959 budget cycle differed only because of an increased sense of urgency generated by the Iraqi coup.
In addition, Iran was the only nonCommunist country in the world which shared a long border with the Soviet Union but with which the United States had no defensive alliance.
The Eisenhower administration recognized that the problems of corruption, incompetence, and the personal instability of the Shah contributed to the instability in Iran, but saw no alternative to continued support for his regime.
Washington would have preferred an alternative to the Shah, but no acceptable option existed.
Washington feared that under pressure the Shah might lose control of the ‘precarious’ political situation or stampede into an accommodation with the Soviet Union.
They believed that ‘meaningful political, social, and economic reforms designed to increase popular support’ were in the best interests of the Shah and the West, but that possibilities for reform were tied to the Shah’s personal sense of security.
Despite misgivings, Eisenhower concluded that military aid was required to get the Shah to reform his regime.
The Shah assumed, and probably correctly so, that he understood Iran better than experts in Washington.
Making this assumption, the progression of events in 1959 and 1960 takes on a significantly different interpretation.
From his reinstatement in 1953, the Shah had a set of reasonably clearly-defined goals.
He wanted to transform Iran into the primary strategic partner for the West in the region, thus attaining regional political, military, and economic preeminence.
The Shah believed that with United States assistance, he could emulate Mustafa Kemal — Atatiirk — and transform Iran into a modern, secular society.
The Shah immediately understood and acted on his newly-acquited leverage.
On 6 December 1958, Washington got its first real taste of what the future would hold for Iranian-American relations.
Citing the threat to Iran from the Soviet Union and Soviet-supplied Afghanistan, Abol Hassan Ebtehaj, CPO Director, appealed for dramatically-expanded military aid.
Then on 9 December, displaying amazing cheek, Ebtehaj complained that new military requirements levied by the United States had resulted in financial difficulties and that Iran required additional economic aid to compensate.
Seeing a looming financial pit, the administration tried to defer the Iranian requests.
Washington explained that Tehran needed better accounting practices and a better distribution of oil revenues.
Twining, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, who visited Tehran and then sent a letter to the Secretary of Defense Neil McElroy on 23 December 1958, strongly recommending that the United States join the Baghdad Pact and shift aid programs to support Pact members.
The Shah argued that Washington had not lived up to its Baghdad Pact commitments and had shown a decided insensitivity to Iran’s security situation.
Neither was particularly happy with the situation, but neither could afford the consequences of a messy divorce.
On 16 January, the State Department informed the Department of Defense that, while it supported the military-assistance goals of Iran, military support for the Baghdad Pact could not undermine aid to other critical nations in the region.
It seems evident that in his frustration as to how to strengthen his position he has grossly underestimated United States contribution to Iranian security and indeed to stability of his own regime.
While we realize that Shah no doubt has taken this line in belief it would precipitate grater United States willingness to accede to his desites, we cannot discount possibility that in his present apparent frame of mind he might take some action, which he and we would later deeply regret.
Rountree described the scale of the United States commitment to Iran and pointed to the London Declaration of July 1958 and the United States Congress’s Joint Resolution on the Middle East as examples of security commitments.
Playing on the Shah’s antipathy toward the Soviet Union, Rountree told Wailes to remind the monarch that Soviet ‘multi-lateral guarantees’, based on the adoption of a ‘neutralist foreign policy’, had proven unteliable in the past.
Facing the Shah’s spiraling demands, Secretary Dulles told the NSC on 22 January that the Shah’s demand for a bilateral agreement that promised United States intervention against all enemies, including domestic ones, was simply unacceptable to the administration and certainly to the United States Senate.
The ailing Secretary of State warned that the Shah, in frustration, might actually resort to a ‘flirtation’ with the Soviet Union.
The Ambassador reiterated that the Shah’s problems were internal, not external, and that emphasis on military aid merely exacerbated the domestic situation.
The situation in Iran had begun to affect other sensitive relationships as well.
In Iran, the United States Embassy believed that it might push the Shah over the brink in his negotiations with the Soviets.
The collapse of the negotiations was so acrimonious that watning flags once again sutfaced vis-a-vis the possibility of Soviet retaliation against Iran.
Foy D Kohler, in the European Bureau at State, warned Rountree in NEA that the Soviets were doubly chagrined because not only did the talks go badly, but also the Shah almost immediately announced his intention to sign a bilateral security agreement with the United States.
The London Embassy reported that Moscow’s reaction would be ‘surcharged by their indignation and resentment of the Iranian conduct of the talks with them.
The Soviet experts at the State Department believed that the Soviets saw the potential for a repeat of the Iraqi coup, only this time in Iran, as the natural progression following a Communist consolidation of power in Iraq.
They also predicted new personal attacks on the Shah and trouble in Kurdistan and Azerbaijan.
Because the Soviet Premier had authorized the negotiations at the personal instigation of the Shah, the report expressed concern that the Soviet reaction might include a Soviet occupation of Azerbaijan.
We cannot know the extent to which the Soviet statements ate bluff, and thus cannot be certain that they will not take action vis-a-vis Iran which would pose a serious dilemma for us.
Herter went to state that despite the dangers, the failure to consummate the bilateral agreements would constitute a major setback for the United States.
Fears of the worst proved unfounded, but the incessant attacks of the Soviet propaganda machine on the Shah had their effect.
The Shah could now point to his sacrifice for the Western alliance and complain that he had not been properly rewarded.
He now had a bilateral security agreement, albeit one not totally to his satisfaction.
Iranian military and economic aid had increased, although not to the levels that the Shah desired.
Within a matter of months, he would renew, more forcefully than ever, the battle for dramaticallyincreased military and economic aid.
United States aid and complications Despite increases, the Shah’s dissatisfaction with the amount of United States aid mounted over the summer and fall of 1959.
Since the collapse of the talks with the Soviet Union early in the year, the Soviets had brought considerable propaganda and economic pressure to bear on the regime.
By clamping down on cross-border transit and stopping trade in foodstuffs to border regions in Iran, the Soviets forced Tehran to make up the difference.
Soviet radio stations beamed into Iran more than 70 hours per week of Persian-language broadcasts.
Additional broadcasts alluded to the fate of the ‘tyrant’ and ‘traitor’.2” From the Shah’s point of view, he had maintained his relationship with the West despite the considerable tisk that it entailed.
As the Shah exerted more pressure, Washington received all manner of advice.
He stated that without a command structure and mote economic aid the Pact would wither on the vine.
In the past Ayub had ridiculed the Shah, but now the collapse of Iraq and the instability in Iran bolstered Pakistan’s importance to United States containment policy, and he wanted to take full advantage.
Ben-Gurion suggested that more military assistance and ‘psychological’ support to Iran might also influence the government of Afghanistan to ‘turn away more from Russia, more towatd the West’.3° Even Dag Hammerskjold, UN Secretary General, expressed concern about the situation in Iran.
He informed Washington that Khrushchev and Andrei Gromyko had both made it clear that propaganda attacks on Iran would not cease unless the Shah concluded a non-ageression treaty with the Soviets and renounced its bilateral defense agreement with the United States.
Hammserskjold added that the Shah really felt that both the United States and Britain had let Iran down in the propaganda war.
Alaa bombarded Russell with a long list of complaints about everything from Britain’s ‘pro-Iraqi policies’ to the lack of substantive support for the Tehran regime.
Two days later the Shah summoned Russell to the palace for a discussion.
The Shah exuded confidence and requested that the British and Americans provide mote open-handed support to his regime.
The Shah thanked the British Ambassador for the ‘moral and diplomatic support’, but then inquired directly about ‘what practical support’ would be forthcoming.
The Shah raised his concerns about the lack of a clear statement on the defense of Iran in the event of a Soviet attack, the lack of a teal command structure within the Baghdad Pact, and the paucity of military assistance to Iran.
The Shah confidently added that he ‘attached not the slightest importance to the Soviet propaganda campaign’ against him.
In the area of reform, he stated that he was carefully studying the issue of land reform and, despite its unpopularity with many of his ‘friends’, he intended to pursue it.
Political instability and increased Soviet pressure Facing upcoming Majlis elections, Iranian politicians repeated their gloomy views on the political situation.
Sardar Fakher Hekmat, the Speaker of the Majlis, complained about rampant corruption in the government and army and noted rising dissatisfaction among the population.
Inflation put enormous pressure on the working classes, and the government had refused to invoke price controls.
Inflation also drove corruption, as government officials, the police, and the military turned to graft to maintain their standard of living.
Hekmat argued that the Shah hesitated to deal with the problem because of the fear induced by the current Soviet propaganda campaign.
With Iraq fresh on their minds, Washington feared that the Shah might lose control of the armed forces.
Although not very comforting, the increased military funding provided new weapons and created an additional soutce of graft that tied the key army officers more closely to the regime.
To get some relief, on 2 September 1959 the Iranian Ambassador in Moscow, Masud Ansati, met with Chaitman Khrushchev to discuss the propaganda campaign.
Not in a charitable mood, Khrushchev bluntly stated that propaganda attacks on the Shah would cease only when Iran embarked on a neutralist foreign policy and sharply reduced its cooperation with the United States.
The Soviet leader went on to say that, given his personal involvement, the Shah should not anticipate any changes until these conditions were met.
Khrushchev then pointed out the benefits of neutralism, citing the UAR, Afghanistan, and India as examples.
In an interesting twist, Soviet Ambassador Pegov, with ‘all sweetness and light’, met with the Shah prior to the Camp David meeting and expressed his hope that Iran would see that the advantages of ‘neutralism’, convincing the Shah that the worst had passed.
As a result, the Shah took the lack of a discussion at Camp David with surprising equanimity.
To further mollify the Shah, President Eisenhower scheduled a December 1959 visit to Tehran on his world peace tour.
On 14 December, in a meeting with President Eisenhower, the Shah launched into his plans for a major military buildup.
This included five new air bases, one a medium-bomber base, and a Nike missile system to defend Iran against a Soviet-inspited invasion from Afghanistan and Iraq.
The President told the Iranian ruler that he would have his people look at the issue.
Eisenhower focused on economic concerns, and suggested that a better relationship with Afghanistan might be in the offing if a solution to the Helman River issue could be found.
The Shah agreed, and promised to have the Iranian Foreign Minister look into it.
After Eisenhower’s departure, the Shah tasked the American military assistance group to begin formalizing the planning for the bases.
To head off a real problem, Secretary of State Herter requested that the President write a letter to the Shah to ‘make clear’ that local warts, ie. with Afghanistan and Iraq, were not included under the mutual defense agreement.
Herter also suggested that the letter point out that Iran’s real problems lay in economic development, not the military field.
It pointed out that while the goal of modernizing Iran’s forces was laudable, excessive spending on the military could be catastrophic for the country’s economy.
The Iranian government had mote revenues than expected to meet its budgetary requirements.
The United States administration hoped that this would reduce demands from Tehran for assistance.
If either the government or the parliament failed to carry out its duties, it would be dismissed and the Shah would resume direct rule.
On the surface, the formation of political parties and elections looked like political reform.
The parties were designed to function as safety valves, not political institutions.
The actual possibility that the parties might survive as popular, independent political entities was remote; however, the Shah now pointed to them as examples of political liberalization and representative government.
Amini, the former Ambassador to Washington, stated that until the parties, the Majlis, and the Shah dealt with inflation and corruption, all would lack credibility.
In addition, the Shah’s land reform, in its final form, was meaningless, due to concessions to the large landowners; its only value was as propaganda.
The CIA believed that army and security forces might join an uprising if there were election irregularities.
The ‘fiasco’ of the 1960 Majlis elections dealt political liberalization a critical blow.
The situation was so severe that the Shah intervened and voided the election; this action bought some time to reassess the situation and come up with an alternate plan, but there was little hope that a real solution to the situation could be found.
In addition, both of the approved political parties, the Mardom and the Melliyn, had participated in the political shenanigans and were discredited.
The Shah publicly blamed Prime Minister Manuchehr Eqbal for the election mess, and Eqbal resigned with his cabinet on 29 August 1960.
Jafar Sharif Emami replaced Eqbal and formed a new cabinet on 31 August.
The Shah instructed the new cabinet to conduct new ‘free’ Majlis elections, improve relations with the Soviet Union, and implement an economic stabilization program.
Despite the removal of all of the recognized pro-American ministers, the Emami government looked much like that of Eqbal.
Despite increased military and security aid, Eisenhower continued to press the Shah on the issuse of political, economic, and social reform.
The President was firmly convinced that only real reform could bring stability to Iran.
Alavi-Moghadam, the new Interior Minister and member of the Shah’s inner circle, maintained palace control of the police.
The Shah made certain that the security apparatus reported directly to him.
In addition, the NSC report pointed out that the Shah tended to react badly to criticism.
If pressured too strongly, he might seek an accommodation with the Soviet Union.
Washington concluded that if the regime appeared to face problems of setious instability, the United States would have to ‘dissociate itself to the extent feasible’.5> The Shah may have lacked Reza Shah’s forcefulness and perhaps intelligence, but he certainly understood his situation and Iran better than Washington.
Any precipitous move toward reform would alienate his supporters and place his rule in jeopardy.
In a policy assessment, the United States concluded that most Iranians probably did not aspire to a truly democratic political system based on a Western model.
Instead, they wanted their economic and social grievances addressed by the government.
Once in power, the ‘reformers’ themselves would not permit political freedom because in the fractured cultural and ethnic environment of Iran, true political freedom constituted a recipe for chaos.
No clear alternatives existed, and the Shah’s departure would create a huge unknown.
In addition, the second Seven-Year Plan projected a deficit of over $130 million by 1962.
The dual problem of an increased deficit, coupled with the balance of payments problems, raised the possibility of economic collapse.
In Washington, analysts determined that by delaying IMF loan repayments and providing a $70 million United States loan, both the economic and potential political crisis could ‘probably’ be averted.
The Soviet move offered the Shah another opportunity to use Soviet leverage.
In September, the Iranian monarch let it be known that he was once again reexamining his relations with the Soviet Union, due to the lack of material support from his allies.
The Western allies were so concerned about the Shah’s reaction that they chose not to present him with assessments of Iran’s military needs that ran counter to his views.
No doubt someone in Washington noticed the correlation between the Shah’s bouts of insecurity and his pique at not getting what he wanted, but no-one wanted to challenge him either.
Washington restated its support for the regime, and amended the military arms package with regard to specific requests from Tehran.
To what degree the Shah’s perceived insecurity and instability were real is impossible to tell, but clearly the perception alone paid off.
In fact, the Eisenhower administration had allowed the Shah to believe that he would receive massive amounts of military aid.
A key factor in his decision to join the Baghdad Pact had been Turkish persuasion that membership would mean military parity between Turkey and Iran.
Washington knew about the ‘misunderstanding’ and had not bothered to correct it.
Following the Iraqi coup, President Eisenhower himself had offered to bring 95 per cent of the units in the Iranian Army up to full strength, to consider the activation of additional units, and to compensate for the strain on the economy with more financial aid.
This resulted in continued commitments to the military and security services totaling 55 per cent of Iranian oil revenues.
As a result, the rising educated middle class felt woefully short-changed.
Several memoranda from the Iran Desk circulated on the eve of the Kennedy administration taking power.
These revisionist views stated that United States policy to date had made it possible for the Shah to ‘resist Soviet pressures’, but that any relief was temporary.
The United States now faced the challenges of Soviet influence, the Shah’s resentment over his alleged lack of Western support, and Washington’s growing identification with the increasingly unpopular Pahlavi regime.
The proposal stated that if the new administration did not give into to the ‘importuning’ by the Iranians, they could probably get the ‘Shah’s grumbling’ agreement on the fundamental points.
These points included a commitment to the ‘trip line’ defensive approach, increased internal security assistance, and ‘improved morale and reliability’ in the military.
The theory was that the Kennedy administration could then obtain an agreement on the strategies to improve the political and economic situations.
Pakistan’s ‘controlled democracy’ In contrast to the continued instability in Tehran, Ayub Khan appeared to have found an approach that worked so efficiently that the system imposed in Karachi emerged as Washington’s preferred model for the region.
Although the Eisenhower administration supported democracy in theory, the practical exigencies of the security situation in Pakistan made strong pro-Western military rule a very attractive ‘temporary’ option.
The White House came to view a petiod of authoritarian rule as the only realistic path to stable, responsible, pro-Western democracy.
From independence, Pakistan survived as a result of economic aid and its important strategic position within the United States concept of containment.
American Ambassador Langley’s contradictory description illustrated Washington’s conflicted attitude.
By 1957, chronic political instability and corruption had undermined confidence in civilian democratic rule.
Despite significant economic and military support, political and economic paralysis threatened total collapse.
While Communism was not a teal threat (Pakistan was 98 per cent Muslim), Washington feared non-alignment and an accommodation with the Soviet Union or China.
Key United States officials privately recognized that requests for arms were in fact a ‘hoax’ to acquire arms to control the Pashtun tribes and to confront India, but the need for a continued pro-Western political stance in Karachi forced them to look the other way.
To provide additional justification for its ‘wink and nod’ toward Ayub’s coup, Washington employed some creative logic.
Through the ascendancy of Ayub, the military would feel politically secure enough to reduce its budgetary share.
One fundamental problem remained, namely squaring a military coup and thinly veiled dictatorship, albeit benevolent, with traditional United States principles of support for democracy and economic development.
Blending various elements of containment theory, the Eisenhower administration constructed a model in which stability, rather than a chaotic democracy, created the conditions for economic development, social progress, and finally stable democratic political reform.
It was a question of whether Washington wanted to deal with hostile or friendly authoritarian governments.
Stable democratic governments aligned with the West did not appear to be viable; therefore, if there was a choice between authoritarian regimes, Washington naturally preferred pro-Western ones.
Ayub’s ‘temporary bridge’ on Pakistan’s road to democracy provided a realistic way to avoid chaos.
In February 1959 Muhammad Khurshid chaired a meeting of the Pakistani general staff and senior United States military and State Department officials.
Economic assistance, military aid, and budgetary expenditures were at issue.
First, the Pakistanis wanted new weapons to replace the ‘old junk’ from World War I, some of which was still in the United States inventory.
For example, the Pakistanis wanted ‘395 jet airplanes’, but mentioned that they would settle for ‘35 high performance fighters’ armed with advanced missiles.
Containment and United States intelligence installations provided Pakistan with a trump card.
First, they hit United States officials over Kashmir, knowing that Washington wanted to stay out of the Pakistani-Indian dispute.
Knowing United States officials’ hands were tied on that issue, the Pakistanis argued that the alliance with the United States netted nothing on the critical issue of Kashmir; therefore, at least, Washington could provide more aid.
Charmed by General Ayub’s personality, Sandhurst education, and manners, the Eisenhower administration campaigned to make the Pakistani dictator democratically presentable.
Washington parlayed these statements into a rehabilitation program for Ayub, which included press and academic coverage of the new regime in Karachi.
The first intelligence estimate published after the coup stated that the political and economic situation in Pakistan had improved and, for the next year or two, no threat to military rule appeared likely.
Washington continued to push for more economic development and reduced tensions with India.
Ayub could hardly minimize calls for military hardware since this would undermine the support of the military who put him in power.
To preserve an air of reasonableness, Ayub stated that he only wanted to modernize the forces currently under arms; he was well aware that this clever position echoed the very advice being giving to Iran.
He also offered to make these troops available for joint duty with the United States in the region.
Knowing what Washington wanted, Ayub accompanied every request for weapons with an emphasis on the need for Pakistan’s economic development.
In May 1959, Ayub proposed that India and Pakistan create a common defensive policy.
Ayub in particular seemed to believe that some common ground might be found with Nehru.
The Pakistani leader attempted to enlist the Australians to broach the topic of bilateral talks.
In part, Nehru’s sensitivity stemmed from an ‘extraordinarily stupid and apparently quite incorrect’ article written by Ayub’s personal secretary, Qudratullah Shahab, concerning the Ayub-Nehru meeting in New Delhi.
The article indicated that Nehru wanted to compromise on Kashmir, and it drew harsh criticism in Nehru’s speech on 12 September in the Indian Parliament.
This article, coupled with the ‘considerable strain’ resulting from the failure of Nehtu’s goodwill policy toward China, left the Indian Prime Minister in no mood for compromise with anyone, much less Ayub.
In response, Nehru only indicated an interest in the Indus waters issue.
Ayub knew that if he played his cards correctly military aid, perhaps including advanced fighters, would be forthcoming.
In a sweeping effort at personal diplomacy focused on developing countries, President Eisenhower embarked on a world ‘peace mission’ in December 1959.
The trip included a four-day visit to India, the ‘leading non-committed country of the world’, and 36 hours in Pakistan, ‘a stalwart ally’ of the US.8’ The trip also provided an opportunity to stress to both nations the importance of economic development and the need for a Kashmir settlement.
Eisenhower wanted both Pakistan and India to turn away from their confrontation over Kashmir and focus on economic development, social reform, and the Communist threat.
He also reiterated that until the Kashmir issue was resolved, relations with India would continue to fester.
Ayub complained about United States Congressional support for India and opposition to military aid to Pakistan, pointedly naming Senator Kennedy, Senator J William Fulbright, and Congressman Chester Bowles as culprits.
When Eisenhower pressed Ayub over Indo-Pakistani relations, Ayub repeatedly redirected the conversation to new military hardware for Pakistan — F-104 Starfighters, Sidewinder missiles, and Nike-Hercules anti-aircraft missiles.
Ayub relegated discussions of economic development to Minister of Finance Muhammad Shoaib in another meeting.
Ayub’s anti-Communist stance impressed the President, and he accepted Ayub’s view that ‘in some decades’ the improvement in education would allow the Pakistani people to vote for their leaders.
Upon returning to Washington, Eisenhower summoned Walt Rostow to the White House to discuss the need for greater United States efforts in the developing world.
The trip solidified a policy direction that emphasized the Communist Chinese threat against India and the need for both India and Pakistan to focus on economic development, as opposed to their long-simmering territorial disputes.
Ayub obtained much of what he wanted, including an extension of military aid beyond the levels of the 1954 agreement.
The package included Sidewinder missiles, B-57 aircraft, and an evaluation of an F-104 purchase.
On 3 March 1960, Eisenhower’s personal intervention gained approval for the Starfighter sale.
Eisenhower had concluded that no real alternative existed but to provide Ayub with the weapons he had requested.
Pakistan was a key member of CENTO and SEATO, and hosted critical United States intelligence sites.
At the Badaber site, Pakistan monitored Soviet missile tests in Central Asia, while Peshawar supported U-2 operations.
He had avoided political compromise over Kashmir on Nehru’s terms without angering Eisenhower.
Ayub had increased his value to the United States as well, and yet he continued to support Arab issues, like Algeria and Palestine, in return for Arab support on Kashmir.
Ayub also appeared to be on the way to a successful implementation of land reform, something long advocated by Washington.
The collapse of Iraq, the weaknesses of Iran, and Soviet influence in Afghanistan had played into his hands, and Washington happily embraced him.
Following the United States presidential election in November 1960, the only question that remained was whether ot not a new administration would honor the Eisenhowet commitments.
For this reason, Ayub and the Pakistani leadership preferred the election of Vice-President Nixon.
Following MKennedy’s November victory, Ayub summoned Ambassador Rountree to his office.
He wanted reassurance that the defense atrangements with the United States would continue under the new administration, and he took the opportunity to impress upon Washington that his rule had brought stability to Pakistan.
Pakistan and China When President Eisenhower arrived in New Delhi on his good-will trip, he received a hero’s welcome.
Beset by chronic domestic political and economic problems and the nagging dispute over Kashmir, the Indian Prime Minister now faced a direct military and diplomatic challenge from the Chinese.
In his first meeting with Nehtu on 10 December, discussions focused on Pakistan.
Nehru was circumspect in his criticisms of Pakistan, but he wanted United States assurances that they would control Ayub.
He told Eisenhower that he feared a Pakistani ‘stab in the back’ while India confronted the Chinese on the border.
On 13 December, after touring India, Eisenhower returned to New Delhi and held additional meetings with Nehru.
In an effort to secure the Pakistani front, the Prime Minister wanted Eisenhower to pressure Ayub into an agreement renouncing military force.
Nehru argued that it would reduce Indian fears of Paksitani military modernization.
Hoping that an agreement might be possible, he instructed the United States Embassy in Karachi to explore the possibility with Ayub.
Rountree warned that Nehru had proposed this approach in the past, beginning with Pakistani Prime Minister Liaquat Ali Khan in New Delhi on 22 December 1949, and gave little chance for it to succeed.
Predictably, when presented with the suggestion, Ayub stated that this was an old Indian ploy that would commit New Delhi to nothing and allow them to consolidate their position in Kashmir.
Ayub stated that Pakistan could only agree to such a proposition if the process for a Kashmir agreement were firmly established and adhered to by both parties.
New Delhi believed that the United States would continue to be India’s principal economic partner, and treated aid as a virtual entitlement.
The Indians saw it as an obligation of a rich country like the United States, and thus the aid failed to garner much pro-US sentiment in India.
The lack of a clearly-agreed-upon border between China and India had been a potential problem for some time.
These patrols found Chinese sutvey parties penetrating deep into the disputed areas.
Additional patrols in 1957 confirmed a Chinese presence as much as 70 miles inside the disputed zone.
From November 1956 to February 1957, the Dalai Lama, Tenzin Gyatso, visited India.
Apparently encouraged by the visit, Dalai Lama ‘showed some independence’ vis-a-vis the Chinese on his return.
Tibet reached a flashpoint, and the angry Chinese cancelled a visit Nehru had planned to make there.
Beijing feared that Nehru would encoutage calls for greater independence.
A conflict with China also ran counter to the spirit of his commitment to bring China into the world community.
Worse, it would prove the Americans right and justify the Pakistani adherence to defensive military pacts.
Nehru ignored growing warnings from the West and rejected Ayub’s call for a joint India-Pakistan approach to defense in facing the Chinese.
Developing the Soviet option Following the meetings with Eisenhower, Nehru began to cultivate a Soviet relationship.
In February 1960, Khrushchev stopped in New Delhi twice on his trip to Indonesia.
Although the Soviet leader did not specifically mention the dispute with China, he assured India of support.
Perhaps encouraged by Khrushchev’s presence, Nehru gave a speech in the Lok Sabha flatly rejecting any compromise with China.
At this point, the Indians decided to establish permanent military posts in the border region to prevent further Chinese encroachments.
As the situation with China grew more intractable, New Delhi learned that the United States had indeed included advanced supersonic aircraft in its modernization of the Pakistani armed forces.
Nehru had believed that the shipment of supersonic aircraft to Pakistan would not materialize.
As a result, the actual announcement of the agreement came as more of a shock than it should have.
They quickly followed this with a request to purchase Sidewinders and F-104 aircraft.
Washington dodged the request and referred the Indians to the British for a ‘similar’ weapon.
In August 1960, India began to negotiate not only for the purchase of transport aircraft and helicopters from the Soviet Union, but also for a manufacturing agreement.
In a 26 September 1960 meeting with Eisenhower at the UNGA, Nehru stated that he saw little hope for resolution of the border issue with China.
The non-Arab Middle East and the end of the Eisenhower era By the end of the Eisenhower administration, United States foreign policy in Iran and Pakistan retained a decided preference for economic development as the basis for creating stable pro-Western states and potentially lasting democratic institutions, but the realities of the security situation dictated support for authoritarian or military regimes and the aid programs necessary to support them.
Washington feared that a failure to act in this way or too much pressure to reform would result in the adoption of neutralist policies that would undermine the strategic interests of the United States.
Those interests included intelligence assets in Iran and Pakistan that were of increasing importance to the strategic defense of the United States.
In the case of Pakistan, these sites had to be maintained, at the tisk of alienating India.
Fundamentally, military aid programs ran counter to Eisenhower’s own best judgment about how best to serve the long-term interests of their allies, but immediate strategic security interests took precedence.
In the case of Iran, the administraton saw little option but to placate the Shah with military assistance while pressing for economic and political reform.
At the end of the Eisenhower administration, containment strategy and Iran’s role in it resembled the situation of December 1954.
The Shah was still obsessed with acquiring military hardware at the expense of economic development and modernization.
Washington continued to fear the Shah’s moods and his vacillating leadership.
Eisenhower was convinced that only economic development and social and political reform could ultimately save Iran for the West, but he and his advisors feared that pressure to reform and almost certainly rapid reform might very well set in motion events that would mirror Baghdad in 1958.
Eisenhower wanted a stable alternative to the Shah’s regime, but one simply did not exist.
Ayub Khan had stabilized the regime and appeared to be making headway in pursuing controlled reform.
The fact remained that India had refused to commit to Western defense arrangements and was pursuing a new military-assistance relationship with the Soviet Union.
Ayub gave every appearance of being a stable, solid ally, and as such had to be valued.
The Eisenhower administration, quite simply, saw no real alternative to supporting the Shah and Ayub and their demands.
The experience of Iraq and the fragility and instability of democratic and proWestern regimes in the region dictated a decided preference for authoritarian control, and if necessary iron-fisted stability.
The Kennedy administration now had to decide if it would follow Eisenhower’s lead.
Chester Bowles, former Ambassador to India and a critic of both the Shah and Ayub, was a Kennedy advisor.
Nixon, and the Greater Middle East Predictably, the events in the Middle East and South Asia found their way into domestic United States politics.
The candidates in the 1960 presidential election used the turmoil in the region in an attempt to gain political advantage, in what would turn out to be a very close election.
The Democrats pointed to the gains that the Soviet Union had made in the region, and the Republicans argued that because of their experience they had been able to manage a complex, difficult situation, and the country could not risk the inexperienced leadership of the junior senator from Massachusetts.
These events were invariably cast in terms of the Cold War and the effectiveness of the containment policy under Eisenhower.
The Kennedy campaign played on the uncertainty and chaos of the 1955-1958 period, and attempted to define Eisenhower foreign policy in those terms.
The Democratic challenger made Dulles’ foreign policy a major negative campaign issue.
The Suez crisis, problems with Nasser, strained ties with India, the coup in Iraq, and Soviet regional influence contributed to the view that the Eisenhower administration represented the moribund policies of the past.
It added to a growing sense that the United States had fallen behind the Communist bloc in the contest for world influence.
It also provided a rallying point for much of the intellectual and academic community.
The Democrats gained valuable and articulate allies among those with whom Dulles had had a long and prickly relationship.
Kennedy tapped into both the hostility toward policies and the personal animosity of those who had viewed Eisenhowet’s policy under Dulles as simplistic and moralizing.
Additionally, the election appeared to have the potential to become a political watershed.
The consensus view assumed that the election of VicePresident Nixon would see the continuation of conservative, anti-Communist policies that favored traditional Western allies in the Middle East.
We will use our economic resources, public and private, to assist others in their quest for progress with freedom and for national selfdetermination, free of all outside domination.
The Vice-President’s advisors, like Attorney General William P Rogers, reinforced the conservative, anti-Communist bent of his campaign.
Countries like India and Egypt saw signs that fundamental change might result from a Democratic administration.
The 1960 presidential campaign began in earnest for the Kennedy camp in 1958.
Kennedy and his advisors focused on the series of setbacks associated with Soviet gains in the developing and non-aligned world, and systematically created ‘facts’ to differentiate his party from the Republicans.
They accused the Eisenhower administration of ignoring the necessity of economic development, despite the fact that Eisenhower had repeatedly tried to pursue modernization policies recommended by advisors like Walt Rostow.
The Democrats took every opportunity to emphasize the forward-looking nature of their programs and Moscow’s successes.
In effect, the Kennedy campaign transformed the Eisenhower administration’s own focus on Communism into a political opportunity.
Wedded to anti-Communist rhetoric, Kennedy found himself using the domino theory to attack Republican policy.
Kennedy’s pronouncements, particularly those in the fall of 1960, reflected a growing sense of urgency in the campaign.
His polling numbers were sliding, and the opposition attacked his lack of experience in foreign affairs.
He was doing everything possible to distance himself from Eisenhower policies and present his candidacy as something fresh and with new ideas.
First, almost all the issues and ideas concerning aid and economic development focused on the competition between the United States and the Communist bloc.
Kennedy exaggerated the level of neglect on the part of Eisenhower, and ignored the fact that the Democrats’ arguments had been the basis for Eisenhowet’s policies in India since 1953.
Pakistan received little or no attention from Kennedy during the campaign.
He ignored the coup in Pakistan, and did not criticize Eisenhower over Ayub because he, like Eisenhower and Dulles, saw no alternative to supporting the Pakistani regime.
Lastly, the presence of Rostow, Bowles, and John K Galbraith on the Kennedy foreign policy team made economic development the focus of Kennedy campaign rhetoric.
The press and others viewed this as new policy when, in reality, the Eisenhower administration had consistently pursued this type of effort, not only in India and Pakistan but also in Iran and Egypt, since 1953.
The Kennedy team also had another subtle advantage in playing the India card.
Prior to1958, maintaining economic funding for India had been a difficult task because of India’s non-aligned stance.
Nehru found it politically more useful to assign Menon abroad rather than have him create political problems for the Prime Minister in New Delhi.
Unfortunately, Menon went out of his way to antagonize the United States and to praise the Soviet Union and Communist bloc.
Moscow could not have hoped for more consistent support had Menon been an agent of influence.
His attacks on the West and his obvious pro-Soviet leanings, coupled with a love of the limelight, made Krishna Menon ‘Mr India’ in the eyes of the media and consetvative political groups in the US.2° His close and well-publicized telationship with Nehru tainted the India Prime Minister.
With respect to United States domestic politics, this process had two salient effects on the Eisenhower administration, both of which made their way into the presidential campaign.
First, the Eisenhower administration found it difficult to maintain the current level of aid to India, let alone to increase it.
Second, the considerable aid that was forthcoming served as a lightning tod for right-wing criticism of ‘foreign aid’ in general, and of India in particular.
By bringing Menon back to India, Nehru might as well have sent him to the moon; Menon had no understanding of or real backing within the Indian political structure.
With Menon gone and aid to India understated, the Kennedy campaign pounced on the political opportunity.
Pakistan was mote important than ever to United States interests in the Middle East and to containment.
Ayub had scored a major victory in obtaining new advanced weapons from the Eisenhower administration.
Basking in his new-found importance in Washington, President Ayub had serious misgivings about the possibility of a Kennedy victory.
Judging from campaign rhetoric, the Pakistanis concluded that a Kennedy win might reverse their gains and jeopardize both their economic and mnilitary-aid packages.
Pakistan was a key United States ally, and perhaps with Ayub in control, the most stable in the region.
Averell Harriman, a key Kennedy advisor, exacerbated concerns when he told The Times of India.
Unhappily United States policies have aggravated rather than eased the situation, and contributed to an arms trace detrimental to both countries.
The coup in Iraq and rising Communist influence had shifted the nature of Iranian-US relations, and placed Tehran in a much stronger position.
Feat of a coup in Tehran or a declaration of neutrality from the Shah had their desired effect on Washington.
The growing United States association with the Shah and his authoritarian regime was unfortunate but, at least for now, unavoidable.
With the loss of Iraq, stabilizing and strengthening the Shah’s regime had become a priority.
Reduced pressure from Washington for political and economic reform in turn reduced internal pressure on the Shah’s regime.
The Iraqi tegime had fallen during a period when reform and economic development appeared to be transforming Iraq into a more open, pluralistic society.
As for the Shah, he enjoyed more leverage in Washington than at any previous time.
Understandably, the Shah supported the status quo in the form of a Nixon victory.
The situation in Iran was considered so volatile that, like the Arab-Israeli dispute, both campaigns adopted a virtual hands-off policy.
Such a debate could well have encouraged the Shah’s opponents and further threatened the regime.
It might also have pushed the Shah toward an arrangement with the Soviet Union.
In addition, the Eisenhower administration and the foreign-policy experts of the Kennedy campaign were united in their desire to see a program of controlled reform from above, backed by a strong, loyal military and security apparatus.
Only by splitting hairs could any observer discern a real difference between the policies of the Eisenhower administration and those proposed by Kennedy toward Iran.
JFK and peace in the Arab Middle East With regard to the Arab Middle East, Kennedy also developed a campaign to differentiate himself from the Eisenhower administration, by employing a thoroughly jaundiced interpretation of the events of 1956-1960.
Between 1955 and 1958, President Eisenhower and his Secretary of State, John Foster Dulles, faced a series of foreign-policy crises in the Middle East unlike anything experienced before by an American administration.
Even the Iranian crisis of 1953 paled in comparison with the turbulence and fluidity of the Arab world during those years, whose ups and downs gave the impression that the West had completely lost the initiative in the region.
Eisenhower’s demand that the British and French withdraw from Suez caused a serious rift with America’s closest allies, just as forcing the Israelis to withdraw from the Sinai infuriated Israel and the Zionist lobby.
Arguably, the Eisenhower administration performed decently in dealing with this series of changes, but political reality and perception diverged more significantly than usual.
As a result, the Aswan imbroglio, the Suez crisis, the Iraqi coup, problems in Syria, and the intervention in Lebanon gave the appearance of a rudderless policy, benefiting the Soviet Union and radical Arab regimes.
The ensuing cacophony of criticism from the Democrats, the Zionist community, Israel, and allies reinforced the notion that United States policy was badly mismanaged.
Political and media criticism further reinforced this image by portraying the Soviets as controlling the initiative through their radical Arab clients.
In a ‘what went wrong’ environment, the Arab Middle East became a campaign issue in which Kennedy’s style triumphed over both substance and reality.
Kennedy’s confident manner served him well, as he depicted himself as having the ability to control Middle East events through a new policy.
The evidence suggests that Kennedy and his advisors actually managed to convince themselves that they could control and influence events by applying hardheaded policy-planning and by focusing on economic development and personal presidential diplomatic approaches.
The Arab Cold War of 1959-1960 also assisted Kennedy by ushering in a lull in the Arab-Israeli dispute.
Ironically, Eisenhowet’s and Dulles’ initiatives to improve relations with Nasser allowed Kennedy to advocate economic aid without fear of political backlash.
The manner in which the Kennedy campaign employed the situation in the Arab Middle East is a lesson in style and communication skills.
Reassessments now criticized Eisenhower for having a simplistic view of Communism and Arab nationalism.
Kennedy had begun to build this cause in closed sessions of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee in 1957, when he grilled Admiral Arthur W Radford, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, on the issue of Nasser.
In countering Radford’s view of Nasser’s Communist leanings, Kennedy pointed out that it was likely that Egypt’s relationship was simply a ‘matter of convenience’ ‘when he could not receive arms from us [the US)’ after the Gaza raid of 1955.
After Admiral Radford’s statement that the Russians were ‘much more apt to take Itaq by internal coup than by ... overt military action,’ Kennedy raised questions about Iraq, stating that in fact the guarantee proposed by the President had the potential to make Iraq more vulnerable.
Of course, by the following year, the Eisenhower administration had come to this conclusion about Nasser and Communism, and had understood the risks and vulnerabilities in Iraq, but the Kennedy campaign ignored these aggravating details.
Kennedy claimed that the unenlightened policies of the Eisenhower administration had driven the nonaligned world, including Nasser, toward the Soviet Union.
A vote against it would have undermined the United States position abroad.
Kennedy got credit for supporting the President, and put himself in a position to criticize the administration if things did not go well.
Thus Kennedy’s policies reflected the same optimism as Eisenhower’s had in the 1953-1955 period, and ignored the hardlearned lessons of 1955-1958.
Kennedy’s ideas were a reversion to the economically-driven policies in which Eisenhower and Dulles originally had so much faith and of which Rostow had been a part.
At this juncture, economic development would replace militarism and confrontation, reducing Soviet influence and enhancing that of the West.
The fact that this policy substantially mirrored the early policies of Eisenhower, Dulles, and Herter was ignored.
In addition, Chester Bowles, Averell Harriman, and Rostow believed that under Dulles foreign policy in respect of non-alignment had been seriously mishandled.
They managed to conveniently overlook the fact that Israel and the American Zionists, Kennedy’s steadfast supporters, had more than a little to do with the Egyptian request for arms and with the subsequent United States rebuff.
These ideas also meshed well with Kennedy’s view of himself and of what kind of an administration he would head.
He wanted to shake up the foreign-policy community with new blood and ideas.
Nasser cut a much more progressive and impressive figure than the Jordanian or Saudi monarchies.
The message of secular nationalism and social and economic development roughly paralleled Kennedy’s view of himself.
Finally, and most importantly, Kennedy believed that these elements, combined with the ideas of economic development, offered the promise of a comprehensive settlement of the ArabIsraeli dispute.
On the one hand, the Kennedy campaign attacked the Eisenhower administration for its poor handling of the situation with Egypt; on the other, it assiduously sought and received support from Jewish and pro-Zionist groups.
During the 1960 presidential campaign, these policy elements appeared repeatedly in Kennedy speeches, particularly those addressed to Jewish groups.
Kennedy focused on the Israeli and Zionist unhappiness with Eisenhower over his even-handed policy in the Middle East.
Myer Feldman, a Washington lawyer, became Kennedy’s ‘de facto ambassador to American Jewry’, a position that did not exist in Eisenhower’s White House.
Despite a tacit agreement with the Nixon campaign to avoid the Arab-Israeli dispute as a campaign issue, Kennedy pressed the boundaries by focusing on the Cold War and the issue of Soviet influence.
This vote not only funded the Eisenhower plan, but also allowed significant discretion to the administration on how the money would be used.
Feldman was disliked by some senior administration officials who felt that advocacy of Israeli interests and warnings about electoral consequences of pursuing pro-Arab policies prevented a balanced Middle East policy. speeches, but they gave the impression that Kennedy had a new policy for the region.
He outlined a plan that called for the United States to reaffirm its friendship to nations in the region regardless of race, religion, or politics.
He went on to say that his administration would focus American diplomacy on ending the ‘state of war’ between Israel and the Arab states.
All the authority and prestige of the White House be used to call into conference the leaders of Istael and the Arab States to consider privately their common problems, assuring them that we support in full their aspirations for peace, unity, independence, and a better life — and that we are prepared to back up this moral support with economic and technical assistance.
The speech presented an overview of his goal for his administration — a comptehensive peace and the use of economic development to achieve it.
Both the British and Americans had failed since 1918 to achieve an ArabIsraeli settlement, and now Kennedy not only believed that he could make it happen but also made this aspiration the centerpiece of his policies for the region.
Despite all the similarities, including the advisors in some cases, the Kennedy foreign-policy team believed that their approach was different from that of Eisenhower.
In the Arab Middle East, Kennedy believed that personal diplomacy, in effect his charm and style, would allay Nasser’s concerns about United States intentions and remove the personal animosities that had poisoned Egyptian-American relations.
Phillips Talbot, head of the NEA Bureau, shared this view to 1960 JFK vs.
In effect, the primacy of Nasser and the ultimate goal of a comprehensive peace created a policy troika, with Komer, Talbot, and Ambassador Badeau working together, coordinating information for the President.
He believed that by focusing on Nasset’s self esteem, he could improve the chances for US-UAR cooperation, undermine the Soviets, and advance the cause of a peace settlement with Israel.
Second, like the previous administration, Kennedy intended to use economic aid as a lever to influence Egyptian policy.
He believed that the technocrats in his administration were more sophisticated than those in Eisenhowet’s, and would be able to place aid more precisely in order to bring Egypt to the ‘take-off point.
Interestingly enough, there was relatively little additional funding, and yet the new administration believed that it would succeed where Eisenhower had failed.
Finally, Kennedy brought specialists from outside the government into the policy-making tent.
This gave the White House the option of excluding all but a few professional Foreign Service officers from the process when desired.
These two appointments go a long way towards explaining Kennedy’s thought processes in relation to the Greater Middle East in general and to the UAR and the Arab-Israeli dispute in particular.
Talbot had been the executive director of the American Universities Field Staff for ten years.
AUFS consisted of a loose collection of academics who wete expected to spend about half their time in a particular region and half in the US, teaching or lecturing.
Although Talbot’s field had been India and Pakistan, under his direction AUFS had produced a number of studies of Arab nationalism and the non-aligned movement.
He understood the issues, but was not tainted by either the proZionist or the Arabist label.
Given the state of relations between India and Pakistan, and Nasset’s connections with the non-aligned movement and with India, Talbot possessed solid academic-type expertise in the region.
In addition, many of the opinions expressed in the various AUFS reports agreed with notions that Kennedy held about the situation in the Middle East.
With regard to the United States embassy in Cairo, administration officials thought that John Badeau’s appointment would send a message of sensitivity to Nasser.
It represented another manifestation of this idea that US-UAR difficulties were rooted in an unfortunate misunderstanding and that once it had been rectified, partially through personal contacts between Kennedy and Nasser, there would follow numerous possibilities, including an Arab-Israeli peace.
The President had stated his policy priorities, the economic experts were in place, and he had taken control of the diplomatic process by placing appointees like Talbot and Badeau, who depended on his patronage, in key positions.
Viewed through the Middle Eastern prism, Kennedy’s plan to engage the UAR appeared ill-conceived at best.
The idea that Nasser and the UAR leadership were merely expressing nationalist sentiments in terms of revolutionary ideology constituted a basic tenet of the Kennedy Middle East plan, whose proponents believed that Nasser’s commitment to revolutionary ideals was largely rhetorical, and that his actions rarely matched his words.
In reality, Nasser had for decades been a revolutionary driven by ideas of class struggle and anti-colonialism in any form.
It was not a theoretically structured, clearly articulated approach; instead, he believed in a loose collection of ideas and theories.
Viewed in terms of a longer chronological frame of reference, Nasset’s early attempts to express this ideological bent would have alerted Kennedy to the more revolutionary aspects of his thought and to the Egyptian leader’s tendency to pursue less than well conceived policies, which made him somewhat unpredictable.
A vague, metaphysical rambling about the ‘permanent revolutionary struggle’, it nevertheless gives an insight into Nasset’s attempt to express an ideological basis for his views and actions.
The result was an eclectic Egyptian political, social, and economic ideology.
Even Nasset’s insistence that all political parties disband at the time of the Sytian-Eeyptian unification in 1958 constituted an ideological motivation to create a society with one creed and no organized political parties.
Nasset’s ideas were crude and lacked clear articulation, but they were real.
The Kennedy administration missed the significance of this component in the situation, for two basic reasons.
First, the new administration understood ideological motivations largely in terms of materialist economic factors.
Kennedy’s view of economic development followed virtually the same paradigm as that of Eisenhower and Dulles when they arrived in office in 1953.
Second, key Kennedy advisors who were dealing with Nasser, particularly Badeau, believed that apparent ideological differences expressed frustration with the West and nationalist rhetoric, and not differences of substance.
The idea that Nasser held some fundamental revolutionary views was foreign to the Kennedy establishment.
Third, pragmatically, Nasser intended to benefit no matter which patty won the election.
The Eisenhower administration understood and applauded Nasser’s consistent anti-Communist stand, but they also understood that he was a revolutionary with his own vision for the Middle East.
The degree of revolutionary and ideological motivations within the Egyptian regime would only become undeniably apparent well after the new administration had taken office.
Kennedy and his advisors believed that the region had stabilized and that the Arab-Israeli situation had improved.
They failed to understand that the union with Syria and the conflict with Iraq had monopolized Nasset’s attention.
From Nasset’s point of view, the misunderstanding served an important purpose.
Closer ties with the United States proved useful; he projected himself as a nationalist and anti-Communist by suppressing the Communist parties in the UAR and by working with the United States on Iraq.
Also, his improved relationship with the United States gave him added respectability with the conservative Arab states.
The messages coning out of the United States presidential election sounded positive on the subject of ‘North-South’ divisions and the efficacy of non-alignment.
When considering the chase for Arab-Israeli peace, Kennedy failed to consider the broader context.
The leverage of economic aid constituted another area in which the Kennedy administration appeared threadbare.
The United States had attempted to use economic leverage to influence Nasser from as eatly as 1954.
With a little more reflection, the Kennedy advisors would have realized that funding for the Aswan Dam, a huge sum, did not deflect Nasser from arms deals with the Soviets or attacks on those Western policies with which he disagreed.
Finally, the prospects for an Arab-Israeli peace as laid out in the campaign appeared to lack any basis in reality.
Had Nasser been personally predisposed to such a possibility, and in 1960 he was not, he would not have survived the preliminary discussions.
United States aid, political support, and goodwill counted for very little in the internecine wars for leadership in the Arab world.
Nasser understood that he had come to power at least in part because of the preceding regime’s total impotence during the 1948 war.
More fundamentally, Nasser had become the embodiment of Arab nationalism and unity for most of the Arab world — he believed that Israel represented the last physical vestige of colonialism in the region.
Any economic aid and political accommodation was better than none, but to actually participate in a peace discussion was not possible.
At the highest levels, the administration failed to view the issue from Nasset’s perspective, and, more importantly, failed to draw on the experience and caution of the Eisenhower State Department.
In a way, it was Eisenhowet’s success in weathering the events of the mid-1950s that enabled Kennedy to selectively use those issues to advantage.
It contributed to the view that the Eisenhower administration had unnecessarily alienated the leaders of the non-aligned world, Nehru and Nasser.
At the same time, Indian complaints about arms for Pakistan, coupled with the lack of publicity for pre-1958 economic aid to New Delhi, served to lend credibility to Democratic assertions that Eisenhower had done nothing in India’s capitalist competition with its Communist neighbors.
These issues allowed Kennedy to ‘muddy the water’ with regard to Eisenhower foreign policy.
They also united change-oriented elements in the American foreign-policy community on the side of the Democratic challenger.
They brought the support of key media elements, many of which had long criticized the Eisenhower-Dulles foreign-policy goals and tactics.
This combination contributed to the perception that something was fundamentally wrong with the direction in which the United States was headed.
By focusing on the trials and tribulations of 1955-1958, Kennedy managed to get the public to overlook the overwhelming consistencies between his proposed policies and those of Eisenhower.
His assessment of problems has been, in most instances, moderate; his criticisms have concerned American methods and diplomatic inadequacies 1960 JFK vs.
As the new Kennedy administration relearned the lessons taught to Eisenhower and Dulles during the early and mid-1950s, we will see just how accurate this observation was.
Lessons from the Past — the Middle East 1961-1962 As 1961 began, one interpretation of the situation in the Middle East appeared to bode well for the non-aligned states; however, another perspective indicated that traditional and authoritarian regimes were holding their own, or in some cases learning to manage the revolutionary climate of the region.
In particular, conservative military elements were taking an increasing proactive role in the political life of the Greater Middle East.
Turkey underwent a coup in 1960, and although the military stated that they had no desire for a permanent governing role, the generals made it clear that they intended to be the guardians of political stability.
Iran seemed to be headed for another of its periodic convulsions, with unforeseeable results.
Whatever stability existed in Pakistan was due to a military dictatorship.
India refused to deal with Pakistan on Kashmir, and faced a growing Chinese threat in the north.
In the Arab Middle East, Jordan and Saudi Arabia had survived the deluge of 1958, and, while their respective situations had improved, the prognosis for both regimes remained uncertain.
Sudan and Yemen had maintained their independence but charted courses decidedly accommodating to Nasser.
Istael appeared unwilling to make any real compromises with the Arabs, even in return for security guarantees and sophisticated arms.
Then there was the problem of Tel Aviv’s ‘peaceful’ nuclear program, which the CIA believed was a weapons facility.
Despite all of this, Kennedy and his advisors sincerely believed that they were poised to make great diplomatic gains where Eisenhower, Dulles, and Herter had failed.
Given the fact that leaders like Nasser, Nehru, and Qasim, with more to lose, had problems assessing future developments, it is little wonder that the incoming Kennedy administration had difficulty in calibrating the political climate and coming up with a more progressive strategy for United States foreign policy.
In Washington, several contradictory views existed concerning the potential for United States and Western gains in the Middle East.
This group focused on the events of 1954 to 1957 the Czech arms deal, Suez, and hostility toward the Eisenhower Doctrine.
They argued that by treating emerging nationalist regimes with respect and by providing non-military aid, revolutionary fervor would continue to diminish as they increasingly focused on economic development.
They failed to grasp, or ignored, the simple fact that their proposed solution reflected not only the spirit but also the exact wording of the policy pronouncements of the incoming Eisenhower administration in 1953.
It was precisely the policy that Eisenhower and Dulles had pursued from 1953 to 1954 in their quest to correct what they viewed as the bungling of the Truman administration.
The policy myopia that afflicted Kennedy and his advisors when it came to the Greater Middle East resulted from the fact that these more proactive policy advisors, who wanted to see dramatic change, initially held the upper hand in the administration.
Because of this, the Kennedy administration would take a somewhat contradictory position on the legacy of the Eisenhower administration.
On the one hand, they would argue that Eisenhower and his team had bungled policy from 1954 through 1957, and on the other, they viewed administration policy as having ‘improved situation’ in the region since 1958.
They also used their often skewed perceptions of Eisenhower, to heavily influence their projections of what new policy initiatives might work in the future.
Strikingly, they believed that US-UAR cooperation heralded the end of the UAR’s revolutionary phase and portended progress toward better relations in the future.
The UAR, as it had in the Eisenhower administration, remained the centerpiece of United States policy, including renewed optimism with respect to a possible settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
In South Asia, increasing problems between India and China appeared to promise progress on multiple fronts.
Kennedy believed that the Chinese threat could mutate into Indian support for United States policies in Southeast Asia, and held out hope of a major proWestern reorientation of Indian foreign policy.
Washington hoped that India would reconsider its neutralist stance and move into a pro-Western and antiCommunist alignment.
The new administration believed that friction with China would shift the focus of Indian foreign policy concerns away from Pakistan and allow a compromise settlement on Kashmit.
In parallel, Kennedy and his more proactive advisors hoped to push traditional regimes toward more liberal, if not democratic, policies.
They believed that the gradual introduction of reforms would result in a pro-Western political stance.
These reforms were intended to co-opt dissident elements and broaden the base of popular support for the regimes.
In theory, this process would allow traditional regimes to develop more representative political institutions.
An important part of encouraging and providing an atmosphere conducive to reform was to reinforce the progressive but non-tevolutionary model in those regimes that had already dispatched, in one way or another, traditional rule.
By incentivizing moderate policies in states like the UAR and solving key regional conflicts over Palestine and Kashmir, Kennedy and his advisors believed that they could reduce the threat posed to the traditional regimes, making political reform a significantly less risky proposition.
A move to the political center would also increase the influence of the West and lessen the opportunity for Soviet meddling in the region.
The new President concluded that the only way to achieve these goals was through aggressive activism and his own personal involvement in diplomacy.
During 1961 and 1962, a series of situations unfolded that completely undermined these plans.
What emerged in 1961 and 1962 was the education of the Kennedy administration about the limitations of United States power and influence in the Greater Middle East.
In January 1961, the new administration made improving relations with Nasser an immediate priority.
Like Eisenhower before him, Kennedy and his advisors believed that the UAR lay at the heart of almost every issue in the Arab Middle East.
It threatened the traditional and pro-Western regimes across the region, played an increasingly important role in Africa, was a ranking member of the non-aligned movement, and confronted Israel.
There was also the belief that Nasser had entered a post-revolutionary stage and was progressing toward a more consetvative stance on several key issues.
Unfortunately, the new United States administration could not have been more mistaken.
He still believed in the ‘permanent revolutionary struggle’ described in Philosophy of Revolution.
Nasser still thought that Egypt belonged to, and had an obligation to bring revolutionary progress to, ‘three circles’ — the Arab, the African and the Islamic.
By 1955, the Eisenhower administration had become very familiar with the troubling ideological element in Nasserist thought and actions and recognized that the United States could only successfully work with Nasser on a case-bycase basis.
In reality, Nasser was simply busy, consumed by problems with Iraq and in Syria, as well as the continuing confrontation with Israel and disputes with traditional Arab regimes.
Initially, for Nasser, Kennedy’s misunderstanding served a useful purpose.
His stature in Washington made him respectable in the view of some conservative Arab states, mainly Saudi Arabia, and provided leverage against others.
By 1961, political, economic, and regional problems brought new pressures to bear on Nasser’s regime.
The failure to subdue Iraq, Habib Bourgiba’s defiance in Tunisia, and King Hussein’s survival in Jordan had tarnished Nasset’s revolutionary vision for the Arab world.
Many believed that Nasser’s focus on Africa and the Congo conflict reflected the failure of his Arab policies, an attempt to maintain Egypt’s revolutionary impetus.
The stage appeared set for a radicalization of UAR foreign policy and greater cooperation with the Soviet Union.
Simultaneously, the Egyptian lower middle classes began to examine the benefits of Nasser’s revolution, creating additional pressure for internal change.
This trend was particularly pronounced in economic ateas long dominated by the minorities.
The Egyptian government nationalized the National Bank of Egypt and the pharmaceutical industry; both moves were a blow to foreign and traditional Egyptian commercial interests.
With their foreign commercial ties, minorities felt more economic pressure, backed up by the ever-present security services.
In addition, the UAR government used the Congo situation as a pretext for the expropriation of Belgian property and commercial interests.
Nationalization provided some short-term political gains and relief from acute economic problems, but it created long-term problems.
Capital flight further constricted the availability of foreign exchange.
UAR foreign exchange, already low, faced further depletion from the economic situation in Syria.
Three years of drought and crop failure had drained the coffers in Damascus and left Syria unable to feed itself.
This, in turn, would open the door to a peace treaty with Israel, closer United States economic ties, the further development of an anti-Communist front, and perhaps an end to Soviet influence.
In the State Department, the Middle East experts took note of Kennedy’s ideas.
Jones underlined that Kennedy intended to focus on ‘helping people instead of regimes’ in the region.
The memo also signaled the beginning of the traditional dance between a new administration, with its own foreign-policy agenda, and the professionals in the foreign-policy establishment.
To a significant degree, this bulk mailing was a screen for sending a very focused letter to Nasser.
After commenting on the ‘rich contributions’ of the Middle East and invoking the ‘concepts’ of independence and non-interference expressed by Americans from George Washington to Franklin Roosevelt, Kennedy listed American contributions to Egypt.
Ironically, all were attributable to the Eisenhower administration, including support during the Suez crisis of 1956, the Food for Peace Program, and other forms of assistance.
According to Heikal, Chancellor Konrad Adenauer told Nasser that West Germany had come under pressure from the Kennedy administration to sell arms to Israel, so that the United States could avoid the stigma of doing so.
Without a doubt, he knew more about Kennedy than Kennedy knew about him.
Nasser believed that Eisenhower had a stature and political independence that Kennedy did not, and his cautious response reflected that belief.
Nasser reviewed the history of US-UAR telations and pointed to the improvement since 1958.
But the Egyptian President also made his position plain on the Palestinian issue.
The Kennedy administration missed the significance of this trend for two basic reasons.
Badeau, for example, recognized the ‘schizophrenic fears of neocolonialism’, but he thought that this was manageable.
Both wanted improved relations and cooperation on issues of mutual agreement.
Talbot, Komer, and Badeau worked to control and coordinate information that would place much of the tactical decision-making in President Kennedy’s hands.
With relatively little additional funding, the new administration believed that it would succeed where Eisenhower had failed.
Last, Kennedy believed that the traditional Foreign Service was an obstacle to progress, and that he could avoid the bureaucracy by bringing specialists and technocrats from outside the government into the policy-making tent.
Nasser fails in Jordan Just as Kennedy began the process of courting Nasser, the situation became morte complicated.
Ironically, because of his anti-Communist campaign and Iraqi propaganda, Nasser found himself being closely identified with the US; as a result, he found his revolutionary credentials coming into question.
In April 1961, the United States and Britain had to make some critical decisions about the extent to which they would continue to prop up the Hashemite monarchy.
Reduced aid and support would weaken King Hussein and likely lead to collapse.
Washington had either to support King Hussein or to allow events to take their course.
Both courses of actions had supporters, but the pro-Hussein element had gained an edge.
Even the financially-strapped British, came up with additional funding.
In effect, Washington had dealt a serious blow to Nasserist ambitions in Jordan.
From this point on, every spring the British and American would negotiate a new aid arrangement for Jordan.
With Jordan more or less secure, British interests in Jordan had waned as London focused on the Gulf.
As a result, on 3 February, King Hussein and the new Prime Minister called United States Ambassador Macomber to the palace to make an ‘urgent appeal for full restoration’ of United States budget support.
On 6 March, Macomber learned that the British would not teverse their decision about support for Jordan.
If one considers what happened in Baghdad in 1958 as a 12thhour situation and what is going on in Iran at this time as an 11th-hour effort to stave off such a situation, I have felt we were roughly at the 8th ot 9th hour of a similar trend in Jordan.
Reforms in the vatious ministries and the civil service reduced corruption but seriously alienated many of his supporters, including to some degtee the army.
General Habis Majali, the Jordanian Chief of Staff and brother of slain Prime Minister Hazza Majali, in the ‘cleansing’ program.
In Cairo, Nasser understood that the lack of an appropriate accommodation from Hussein was linked directly to United States policy.
Thus the UAR propaganda campaign against Jordan continued unabated, and Amman tetaliated in a way that undermined Kennedy’s initiatives with Nasser.
Siding with feudalism and colonialism Also, in 1961 the UAR feud with Iraq took an unusual turn.
Facing escalating political and economic difficulties, Qasim revived Nuri Sa’id’s claim to Kuwait.
Iraq’s IPC negotiations with the British had become increasingly difficult.
The British used their oil interests in Kuwait to leverage new concessions from Baghdad.
Qasim had made periodic threats that he would launch an anti-imperialist campaign over Oman, Palestine, and Arab oil.
From left to right, Charles Bohlen, Kennedy, McGeorge Bundy, Harold Caccia, British Ambassador, and Macmillan.
Although the exact decision-making process remains a mystery, in late June Qasim began moving troops and tanks to the Kuwaiti border.
Following a request for support from the Kuwaiti ruling family, the British immediately dispatched marines and air units from Bahrain.
Once again, Qasim’s unpredictability placed Nasser in a very difficult position.
As the self-appointed leader of Arab nationalism and unity, Nasser could either support the ‘feudal’ Kuwaiti regime, or stand by and allow the colonial British to do it.
Nasser simply could not countenance his Iraqi nemesis taking control of Kuwait, be it through occupation or intimidation.
The UAR had systematically opposed the admission of Kuwait to the Arab League, arguing that it was a British colonial possession.
Now, not only had Qasim threatened Kuwait, but the British, followed closely by Saudi Arabia, had also moved troops to the Kuwaiti-Iragi border.
If the Egyptian leader wanted to have any pretense of leadership in the Arab world, a quick response was in order.
Cairo now feared that ‘feudal’ Saudi Arabia might actually grab part of the mantel of Arab leadership.
Nasser cast his lot with ‘feudalism’ and ‘colonialism’ to protect another ‘feudal’ Arab state against revolutionary Iraq.
Nasser, of course, made every effort to give the appearance of having a key role in the defense of Kuwait and of making the defense an Arab affair.
To this end, Cairo blustered and made threats about UAR moves from Syria against Qasim.
Nasser also improved the UAR relationship with Saudi Arabia and even acquired Riyadh’s contingency approval to base fighter aircraft at Dhahran in the event of another Iraqi move toward Kuwait.
The British predicted the long-term reliance of the Kuwaiti ruling family on British arms, a dependency that protected British oil interests in Kuwait and counterbalanced IPC problems in Iraq.
In no small measure, this explains Cairo’s shift in focus from the Middle East to Africa.
Nasser believed that Africa, the last bastion of colonialism, presented an alternative to the stalemate on the Arab front.
Nasser supported the Algerian liberation movement, but in places like Guinea, Mali, Somalia, and the Congo, the Egyptian leader saw the potential for political and economic gain in supporting anti-Western nationalist elements.
The UAR also needed markets for the manufactured goods of its developing industry.
Then, in the Congo, the assassination of leftist Prime Minister Patrice Lumumba by pro-Western elements became a specific rallying point.
Nasset’s African thrust may have been ideologically consistent, but it carried little domestic weight, increasing his need for an Arab success.
At the same time, the Kennedy administration was becoming more aware that its obligation to proZionist voting blocs made improved relations with the UAR problematic.
The new potential political reality that it represented was part of the Eisenhower legacy, and formed a key element in Kennedy’s perception of and policy toward the region.
It drove the President’s personal focus on the relationship with Nasser.
The UAR meant that Nasser controlled two of the three confrontation states, and the third, Jordan, was expected to fall under UAR direct or indirect control.
Given the competition with Qasim in Iraq and his uneasy relationships with the more conservative Arab states, the Syrian coup was a bitter disappointment.
The Syrians and Ba’thists countered, stating Nasser had caused the split by threatening Arab unity, nationalism, and socialism.
Nasser correctly identified the principal opposition to his socialization of Sytia as the entrenched middle class and the wealthy.
He believed that they had organized and financed the coup, and that he should have dealt harshly with them from the beginning.
He concluded that the only way to preserve the revolution in Egypt was to follow a policy of ‘no appeasement’ in dealing with reactionary elements.
He ordered the ‘socialist measures’ passed during the previous summer to be put into full effect.
The various newspapers began printing lists of wealthy individuals, along with editorials describing the impact that these ‘parasitic’ elements had on society.
On 22 October, Zakariya Mohieddin, Vice-President and Minister of the Interior, made additional arrests and initiated the sequestration of property and assets belonging to the wealthy.
While the internal radicalization had no doubt been long considered by Nasser, the Syrian situation made it serve the dual purposes of neutralizing the rich and diverting the attention of the masses.
The British took some delight in Nasser’s Syrian come-uppance but could not fully savor the moment.
London fretted that any attempt by the Egyptians to recoup theit position in Syria might involve Jordanian intervention.
Such a move would create great risks for King Hussein, and would necessitate the removal of Jordanian troops from Kuwait, where they were serving as a deterrent to possible Iraqi adventures.
In Washington, this Arab eruption came as a surprise, and presented the Kennedy administration with a problem.
The administration faced the delicate problem of preserving the ‘personal relationship’ with Nasser while dealing with the new government of Syria.
To soften the blow, Badeau met with Nasser, prior to United States recognition of Syria, to deliver a personal message from the President and to explain the United States position.
In response, INR at State warned that Nasser would continue ‘building up his own position’ vis-a-vis East and West and providing little or no guid pro quo.
Meetings in October with Senator Hubert Humphrey offered some encouragement to this view.
He also strongly defended African socialist leaders whom the United States had branded as Communist.
Borrowed almost in its entirety from Talbot’s memorandum of 3 January, it argued that systematic aid to the UAR should continue in order to ‘encourage orderly economic development’ and to ‘provide significant Western alternatives’ to prevent the UAR’s economic and political dependence on the Soviet bloc.
Among other points, Ball believed that the visit would modify Nasset’s ‘radical domestic policies directed toward “social justice’ and his belief that the Zionist lobby directed United States policy.
Almost simultaneously, the Kennedy administration received another warning that it had misjudged the fundamentally revolutionary nature of Nassetist politics.
The White House was not yet ready to acknowledge the ideological warning implicit in Bowles’ telegram.
He supported the Nasser visit and agreed with the chiefs of missions from around the Arab world, but as a political appointee, he discreetly put the best face on an embarrassing situation.
Seeing little to be lost, Nasser decided to use President Kennedy’s correspondence to counter Arab criticism over his cooperation with Washington.
On 10 September 1962, Muhammad Heikal informed Ambassador Badeau that Nasser had decided to publish portions of his letters to President Kennedy in the newspaper the following day.
Heikal explained that this resulted from attempts by Jordan, Saudi Arabia, and Syria to undermine Egypt by claiming that Nasser had sold out the Palestinians in return for United States aid.
On 22 September “The Voice of the Arab Nation’, a clandestine UAR radio station, used parts of the Kennedy cotrespondence, not previously published in A/-Ahram, to criticize Kennedy personally.
Nasser would shortly make the independence of his policies even more apparent.
Israeli complications Nasser’s frustrations with the Kennedy administration increased in other areas.
During the later years of the Eisenhower administration, Israel had attempted to obtain Hawk anti-aircraft missiles.
Tel Aviv always received the standard answer that the United States government did not want to contribute to an arms race in the region by supplying advanced weapons to anyone.
In the spring of 1962, Kennedy offered, via Shimon Peres, to provide the Hawks to Israel.
In this case, Kennedy’s offer was to demonstrate support for Israel with one eye on the upcoming presidential campaign in 1964.
In addition, Secretary Rusk argued that the United States should not be the first to introduce such sophisticated weaponry into the region.
A week later, Bill Bundy at Defense undermined State by taking the position that the Hawk would not ‘shift the balance of military power’ in the region.
In August, Secretary of State Rusk changed his position and recommended that the Hawks be sold to Israel after getting Nasser’s reaction, with the intention of increasing Israel’s security and thus its flexibility in its current policies.
That same day Rusk submitted the Johnson Plan for an Arab-Israeli peace to Kennedy.
On 9 August, writing to Myer Feldman, Kennedy’s counselor for Israeli and Jewish affairs, Talbot argued that the Hawk offer should only be made with the proviso that Ben-Gurion made progress on disarmament issues with Nasser and supported the Johnson Plan.
Ben-Gurion undoubtedly knew the specifics of the Feldman mission well before the latter arrived in Tel Aviv, given Feldman’s contacts at the Israeli Embassy.
From Nasset’s perspective, the United States decision to supply Hawks showed growing Israeli influence with Kennedy and served to remove yet another inhibition on the part of the UAR leadership to resume its export of revolutionary Arab nationalism.
Revolutionary Arab nationalism reborn Egyptian ties to Yemen dated from the 19th century and Muhammad Ali’s campaign.
By the mid-20th century, various Yemeni Imams had made some half-hearted attempts to modernize theit country.
One of these efforts was to introduce new educational opportunities, and most of the teachers were Egyptian.
The Egyptians were providing military advisors and training, and the Soviet Union had also begun to supply arms and some advisors.
Soviet aid programs had ‘earned much greater good will’ in the Imamate than American aid, and Nasserist support for Yemeni claims to Aden and the Protectorate was popular.
At odds with Saudi Arabia and the British in Aden, the Mutawakkalites needed friends.
Recognizing the tie, the Eisenhower administration even changed representational responsibility for Yemen from the Embassy in Saudi Arabia to that in Cairo.
The Kennedy administration believed that Nasser and Egypt represented a progressive, anti-Communist middle way between the ‘feudal’ despotism of the Imam and Communist penetration.
Both administrations came down squately on the side of reform and change.
Neither wanted significant commitments in southern Arabia, nor direct involvement.
Badeau summed up this policy, stating that United States policy support for monarchies has ‘played into the Russian hands as they ... depict to the Middle East as the supporters of the vanishing order’ while they support revolution.
When Nasser talked about feudalist states supported by Western impetialism, the Saudis undoubtedly ranked highest on the list.
Most cotrespondence with Feisal was left to the White House staff, while JFK handled Nasset’s personally.
By 1961, the power struggle between King Saud, who was supported by his sons; Crown Prince Feisal, who was supported by his half brothers, also known as the ‘Sudayri Seven’; and a group of young reformers aligned with Prince Tallal ibn Abd-al-Aziz al-Saud was neating its conclusion.
He also stated that the United States needed to force the implementation of various UN resolutions on the Palestinian problem and to oppose more openly British and French colonialism in Aden and Algeria.
In contrast, Talbot and Ambassador Hart met with Crown Prince Feisal in Riyadh on 17 February and discussed in detail the relationship between Nasser’s destabilizing effect and the need for reform in the Kingdom.
He also pushed for attacks on Nasset, accusing the Egyptian President of selling out to Israel in return for United States aid.
This served to underscore the United States position vis-a-vis the inter-Arab struggles.
The United States gave aid to Nasser to leverage a peace settlement with Israel.
Nasser attempted to undermine the Saudis, who complained to the United States about aid to Nasser.
The United States reassured the Saudis, who attacked Nasser for trading the interests of Palestine and the Palestinians to the United States for aid.
This made it impossible for Nasser to seriously consider a settlement with Israel even if he had been inclined to do so.
The new administration was slowly beginning to appreciate the lack of any real desire on the part of the Arab states to find a solution to their differences with Israel or, for that matter, each other.
At the time, Saud was in a power struggle with Crown Prince Feisal for control, and Kennedy, uncertain of the outcome, was attempting to maintain good relations with both. problems in the Middle East.
Politically, the Kennedy administration could not push for concessions from Israel.
Political and economic instability also contributed to Israeli intransigence.
Concern over its growing isolation fostered more intensive efforts to apply political pressure on the White House for support.
On 30 March, President Kennedy inquired about the status of the visit to Dimona and was told that the Lavon Affair crisis had delayed the visit.
The United States could then confidentially reassure the Atab states of the peaceful nature of the facility.
The Foreign Office pointed out that the United States had ‘no evidence’ that would convince the Arabs that the facility was anything other than a nuclear weapons center.
Support in the new administration for the Johnson Plan created serious concern in Israel.
Naively, Kennedy appeared to believe that the Israelis sincerely wanted a reasonable settlement with the Arabs, and would compromise.
The White House failed to understand that Israeli opposition to Arab repatriation was absolute.
At their May meeting, Ben-Gurion told Kennedy that the UN Palestinian Conciliation Commission would fail because the Arab states merely wanted to use the Palestinian refugees to destroy Israel.
The President nevertheless pressed ahead, asking Ben-Gurion to consider options for a solution.
In contrast, Kennedy had significantly compromised Washington’s position.
United States government contacts with the Israelis would bring a predictable list of military and economic aid requests, accompanied by a litany of complaints about American aid to Nasser.
To support their argument, the Israelis would then list the military items that the United States had refused to provide.
The Arabs were showing a decided reluctance to agree to the refugee plan, and Dr.
Johnson himself believed that only an extraordinary level of involvement on the part of the President had any hope of bringing results.
Kennedy, unlike Eisenhower, could not point to a single concrete issue where he had supported an Arab cause vis-a-vis Israel.
Neither the Arabs nor the Israelis were interested in realistic compromise.
The Israelis had newfound political leverage in Washington, via a natrowly-elected Democratic president who needed Jewish votes.
They had no reason to compromise, because ultimately the resident at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue was in no position to keep them honest.
The Arabs still saw little to be gained from an administration that desperately needed domestic Jewish political support.
Nasser saw less reason to pursue strengthening his ties with Washington.
The imbroglio over Kuwait eliminated disagreements with the United States over how to deal with Iraq.
Now largely out of Iraq, tied by treaty to an independent Kuwait, lacking substantial relations with Egypt and Saudi Arabia, British influence clearly rode United States coattails in the Arab world.
For the Arabs, the Syrian secession increased Jordan’s chances of survival.
The two most powerful Arab states and their respective revolutionary regimes wete struggling.
In Saudi Arabia, the struggle for power between Crown Prince Feisal and King Saud continued, but there were indications that Feisal might be gaining the upper hand.
In addition, Washington had once again been sensitized to the United States interests in Saudi oil.
As the fall of 1962 approached, most of the tendencies pointed to the return of the Kennedy administration to the fundamentals of past policies, but a catalyst for making them coalesce was lacking.
Iran at ‘the Eleventh Hout’ The situation in Iran best illustrated the degree to which Kennedy’s White House inherited the policies of Eisenhower, and conversely how subsequent historical interpretations have focused on minor differences in order to build a case that Kennedy policy was more progressive and reform-minded.
For both administrations, Iran was a critical, if problematic, part of their commitment to confront and contain the Soviet Union through defense alliances.
Both wanted to eliminate the sources of instability through economic development and social and political reform.
While the short-term results of these policies were almost identical, Kennedy’s divergence from Eisenhower on the key issue of support for the Pahlavi dynasty had significant long-term repercussions.
The Kennedy administration, in seeking to free itself from the Shah and find an alternative to his rule, miscalculated and ultimately bound itself and the United States even mote tightly to the fortunes of the Pahlavi dynasty.
This temporary situation resulted in a misunderstanding of the nature of Iranian political instability in May 1961, which ultimately led to the situation where United States fortunes and those of the Shah were one and the same.
Kennedy’s direct support for and endorsement of Prime Minister Ali Amini, followed by a belated realization that Amini had no real political backing, left Kennedy no option but to offer the same level of support to the Shah.
The new administration believed that it faced an imminent crisis tequiting special focus.
Because of the Shah’s apparent instability, Kennedy and his advisors concluded that the Pahlavi rule and a pro-Western Iran were on the verge of collapse.
Probably not, but in defense of Kennedy’s foreign policy team, the situation was frightening.
Taking an alarmist view, the Kennedy administration believed that only immediate and extensive reform could save the regime.
Instead of viewing the latest Kremlin pronouncement in the context of Khrushchev’s 1959 diplomatic embarrassment in Iran, the White House took the Soviet leader’s statement as a ditect challenge to its ‘pay any price, bear any burden’ pronouncements.
Kennedy also believed that Iran could become the model for the growth of democracy and Western economic ideals in the Middle East and the Islamic world, a case study in economic development and reform.
With regard to reform, Eisenhower’s and Kennedy’s tactics were similar, as was the Shah’s reaction.
Three yeats had passed since the turmoil of 1958, and yet the ability to influence the Shah’s rule proved as elusive for Kennedy as it had for Eisenhower.
Like the previous administration, Kennedy and his advisors recognized that the United States needed Iranian telemetry sites and an anti-Communist Iran.
The question centered on what was the best Iranian political vehicle to support United States interests.
The Shah’s perspective on US-Iranian relations Immediately after the inauguration, the Shah sent Kennedy a letter addressing Iran’s potentially ‘bright future’ and citing its natural resources and lack of overpopulation.
The Shah wanted more military assistance in return for his support of containment.
He pointed out that the emergence of urban middle class leadership with political power might bring class war and retribution against the wealthy.
The report also saw no ‘competent’ leadership emerging from the urban middle class, the military, or the traditional leaders, including the clergy, landlords, and very large merchants.
Just to make certain that the message was clear, the Shah sent General Teymour Bakhtiar, chief of SAVAK, to Washington to emphasize that the Shah was concerned about the sincerity of the United States.
Just to make his point, in late February 1961 the Shah announced that the Soviet Union had agreed to accept a high-level Iranian delegation headed by the Prime Minister to explore avenues for lessening tensions between the two countries.
Doing something about Iran Thoroughly alarmed, the President dispatched Special Presidential Envoy Averell Harriman to Iran in March 1961.
Harriman explained to the Shah the budgetary constraints facing the new administration.
The Ambassador’s conclusions vis-a-vis the situation in Iran decisively affected the new administration and reflected Eisenhowet’s views.
Harriman wrote the President saying that he was impressed with the improved standards of housing, the ‘appearance of the people’, the level of education, and ‘substantially’ reduced unemployment.
The Ambassador’s message mirrored the Shah’s own arguments in the 26 January letter to Kennedy and the views of the previous administration.
At the NSC, Komer reacted to the Harriman report by fuming at George McGhee about the ‘old refrain’ from the State Department.
Sure the Shah is a vacillating weakling who cannot be pressed too hard.
Sure we must still rely on him as our chosen instrument until we get something better.
Morgan added that the United States needed to monitor the Shah’s dealings with the Soviet Union closely.
Worse, he feared that the inability of the Shah to control the situation might result in another 1953, something the new administration wanted to avoid at all costs.
For Rostow and the administration, the notion that a solution to social and economic problems could not be engineered in a pro-Western country with ample natural resources was simply unacceptable.
The possibility flew in the face of everything that Rostow believed about economics and nation-building.
He wanted the Shah to liberalize and give the urban middle class, who hated him, a stake in the government.
The professor called this list his ‘top ten suggestions’ for change in Iran, Soviet aid and neutralism being the tenth.
Iranian control of the oil industry and pro-Western neutrality were unacceptable.
Rostow wanted to believe that the Iranian cloud had a silver lining but, like it or not, he and the president faced the same policy impasse that had plagued Eisenhower.
Doing something about Iran might alienate or unseat the Shah, for whom they had no alternative.
May 1961 brought a conclusive demonstration that the Shah responded only to Iranian necessity, and not to pressure from the United States.
On 4 May, Washington learned that a teachers’ strike in Tehran involving more than 50,000 demonstrators had ended in a violent confrontation with security forces, with perhaps hundreds of casualties.
The following day, Iranian Prime Minister Jafar Sharif Emami and his cabinet resigned.
Talbot’s realistic support for Pakistan caused Bowles, a former and future Ambassador to India, regret Talbot’s appointment.
Bowles had wanted to be Secretary of State but lost a power struggle with Dean Rusk and became Under Secretary.
Amini accepted the position on the condition that the Shah dissolve the Majlis, not exactly a democratic move, create a special court to try cases of corruption, and give him the right to name the cabinet, with the exception of Minister of Defense.
The Shah agreed, and on 9 May Amini presented his new government to the Shah.
Concerned, Kennedy instructed Secretary Rusk to set up a crisis task force on Iran.
Rostow and Komer, among others in the White House, wanted to take the policy formulation portfolio for Iran out of the State Department.
It was Rusk’s tice bowl, and he was an experienced Washington bureaucrat.
To head off the power play, Rusk appointed Talbot to head the Task Force.
Rusk could not be certain how the Talbot move would work, but the tisk with Talbot was preferable to the certain knowledge of trouble if someone like Komer took over.
By appointing Talbot, Rusk appeased the White House staff with an ‘outsider’, while maintaining control through a State Department official that he knew.
On 7 May, Talbot responded with a lengthy document that included the plan for a task force and a series of options and recommendations for dealing with Iran.
Talbot, in effect, saw what would happen 18 years later, minus the Communist takeover he had envisaged.
Talbot and the Task Force dismissed military leadership as a dead-end, arguing that no military leader had sufficient stature to replace the Shah.
Talbot and his group recommended ‘Limited Support for the Shah’, the same position taken over eight years by the Eisenhower administration.
The report went on to state that while the ‘Middle ground between the regime and the Mosadeqists is narrow and shaky’, the Task Force believed that Amini’s emergence as Prime Minister improved the chances of a successful compromise.
In the end, Talbot concluded that the Shah’s view of United States support was so closely tied to military aid that it had to continue.
The hope existed that as only a potential goal, the other forms of aid might eventually lessen the Shah’s focus on the military.
The key foreign-policy makers in the Kennedy administration concluded that the Shah was a temporary alternative for American interests in Iran and that his collapse would be viewed as an United States failure.
Support for Amini The tenure of the Amini government would be inextricably tied to the White House’s hopes and support for reform in Iran.
The program’s survival would be a litmus test for liberalization within a pro-Western framework.
The United States Embassy in Tehran had a different take on the Amini government.
The Embassy argued that it did not see Musaddigists as an immediate threat and believed that the United States should refrain from offering ‘advice’ where there was no chance that the advice would be taken.
Ambassador Wailes absolutely opposed support for local government, arguing that it would cause political chaos.
He obviously had a different take on the gravity of the situation at home.
On 13 May, the Shah stated that Amini was only popular due to the fact that he had been out of the public eye.
As for neutralism, the Shah stated that he would rather abdicate than countenance a neutralist policy on the part of the new government.
Amini was an American favorite with the image of a pragmatic reformer, but the Shah knew his man.
Quasi-liberal reformist sentiments were one thing; ruling in Tehran was quite another.
By saddling him with the problems of government, the Shah undermined him as an alternative power center.
No head of government in Tehran could please the competing factions; Amini would prove no different.
The new Prime Minister would have to pursue a balancing act that would isolate him politically and make him increasingly dependent on the Shah for support.
The Shah could claim to be supporting a reform candidate, and Amini could take the lead in demanding more military and economic aid.
As things would develop, Amini’s appointment gave the Shah even more leverage than he could have hoped for.
Against the advice of Ambassador Wailes and the Iran experts in the State Department, the Kennedy administration, urged on by Komer and others, moved to directly support the Amini government.
Komer and others in the administration simply could not get it through their collective heads that the National Front was not the primary threat to the Shah and that Amini was not the key to controlling the National Front.
They could not grasp, or perhaps admit, that the Shah, not Amini, was the ultimate arbiter of things Persian, and that Amini was merely the Shah’s latest creature.
Ambassador Julius Holmes, Kennedy’s appointment to replace Wailes and his umwelcome advice, understood this almost immediately and focused his attention on the Shah, but the White House staff continued attempting to solve the problem of Iran by using a flawed set of assumptions.
Amini’s anti-corruption campaign even included the arrest of a handful of generals.
Amini managed to negotiate a settlement of the teachers’ strike by giving in to the strikers’ demands, which eventually put additional stress on the government budget.
As the financial crisis continued, the United States provided a series of grants and loans to alleviate the immediate fiscal pressure.
United States support for Amini created a ‘breathing space’, and the Shah’s support for the time being appeared genuine.
The immediate budgetary crisis passed, and the long-discussed land-reform programs got underway.
Along with improvement came signs that the Shah might reassert himself.
In August 1961, frustration in the White House once again approached boiling point.
Washington had made an unprecedented commitment to Amini’s success, and there was nothing dramatic to show for it.
The Iranian Task Force bombarded Amini with a plethora of well-meaning but often confusing or useless advice.
When Arsanjani’s ideas found their way into law, the British argued that it was basically ‘illegal’ and only succeeded in alienating most of the landowning class.
In a contradictory approach, Washington overtly pushed for land reform, and simultaneously counseled Ambassador Holmes to talk to Amini about putting the brakes on his program.
The fact that Amini and Arsanjani were leading the effort also provided an opportunity for the Shah to shift the blame, if things did not go well.
Despite all the initial concern and trepidation about the instability in Iran, by August 1961, the Kennedy administration realized that a lack of progress on reform had not brought a collapse.
It had become apparent that Kennedy and his advisors had underestimated the resiliency of the Shah and his ability to deal with the situation.
Just as former Ambassador Wailes had predicted, instead of Amini pushing the Shah toward the National Front and political reform, the Shah actually pulled Amini into his camp.
To maintain power, Amini now had to accommodate the Shah and suppress the National Front, the very group whose support Washington had believed Amini would attract.
In short, the Shah had subverted the ‘American’ Prime Minister and engineered his isolation from alternate power bases, simply by making Amini the instrument of the regime’s escalating attacks on the National Front.
This transformed Amini into just another political creature of the palace dependent on the Shah for support.
Amini, reform, and the reaction in Washington The reaction in Washington to the lack of progress by Amini was as entertaining as it was instructive.
At the NSC, ‘Blowtorch’ Bob Komer, in a 4 Match memorandum to the President, pointed out that since the administration’s anointment on 19 May of the Amini government ‘as the best. and perhaps last chance of averting political chaos and possible loss of Iran to the West ... the situation has gotten worse instead of better.
Amazingly, Komer concluded that should Amini fail, the United States should prepare a contingency plan for a military or National Front government.
The Iranian Task Force forwarded a memo with the analysis from its 2 August meeting.
The report also pointed out that the threat of mass unemployment loomed larger, and the Shah continued to press for more military assistance and support.
Reacting to the discouraging news, Kennedy pressed the bureaucracy for action.
Through Bundy, Kennedy expressed his concern that the Amini regime had ‘lost much of its initial momentum’ and lacked a political base.
The President was also concerned about the additional costs associated with propping up the Amini government.
The memo included the usual questions about whether or not the Iran situation was a crisis that should be given the same ‘treatment’ as South Vietnam.
He wanted to know how the United States could help Amini ‘generate a political base’, ‘get a more competent cabinet’, ‘split the National Front’, or get more support from the Shah.
It appeared that the President had signed up to support Amini’s sinking ship.
The option paper went back for a more palatable vetsion, namely one that agreed with Komer’s preconceived notions.
Komer stated that he had reassured State that the White House was not going to ‘push the panic button’ and potentially make things worse.
The letter discussed ‘anxiety at the highest levels’ and requested an assessment and prognosis of the political situation.
In short, they wanted Holmes’ view on Amini’s survivability and their theory about creating a ‘bridge’ between the Shah and his National Front opposition.
Holmes argued in effect for institutionalizing the primacy of the Shah in United States foreign policy.
He hammered home the point that there wete no current or foreseeable alternatives to the Shah and that he deserved the full support of the United States.
Holmes sought to educate the administration to the fact that no government survived without the blessing of the Shah.
I do not now fully share the apparent deep concern reflected in your letter.
I strongly believe that it is unreasonable to expect notable progress towards so difficult a future.
NEA had a far better grasp of the situation than the Kennedy brains trust.
Holmes argued that for this reason the National Front, or ‘neo-Mosadegist elements’ as he termed them, should not be included in the government.
He minimized anti-American agitation, stating that it fluctuated wildly and could not be used as a barometer of United States relations.
He dismissed fear of Iranian neutralist sentiment, believing that it was overstated.
Talbot chooses sides During this period, in one of the most important internal developments, Talbot began to support Holmes.
Talbot noted that the National Front opposition was disorganized and unable to mount an effective challenge to the Shah or the Amini government.
The evaluation of the economy was dismal, with ‘no panaceas’ or ‘grand slam solutions’ to Iran’s ‘deeply rooted problems’ in sight.
Talbot also stated that he saw no immediate threat to either the Shah or to Amini’s government as long as Amini maintained good relations with the monarch.
The Talbot trip and report squelched talk of an immediate emergency and reoriented Washington’s focus to the coming financial crisis.
Ambassador Holmes also emerged as the least pessimistic United States senior official on the future of Shah and as his greatest supporter.
Tied to a policy of direct support for Amini, but believing that the Shah was the real power in Iran, Holmes gradually transitioned United States policy toward direct support of the Shah.
The catalyst for this transition would be the failure of the Amini government.
Having publicly supported Amini, the United States government could hardly revert to an Hisenhower-like distancing vis-a-vis the Shah.
It was now abundantly clear that the only means of reform that included a pro-Western government lay through the Shah’s rule.
Playing a key role, Holmes increasingly took the Shah’s side on military assistance, in part to maintain his own relationship with the monarch and to some degree in hopes of furthering reform.
Thus the Kennedy administration would not only fail to establish an alternative to the Shah or to improve his relationship with the National Front, but it would, in fact, permanently establish the personal rule of the Shah as the only real option for United States policy.
The outcome of the August ‘mini-crisis’ in Washington enhanced Holmes’ influence.
On 13 September, Holmes responded with what would become his standard position.
He argued that without modernization, a disgruntled military might be tempted to stage a coup, bringing any benefits accruing from Amini’s reform programs to naught.
Holmes then laid out his military-assistance plan for Iran; this called for a reduction in Iranian standing forces, but a significant upgrade in equipment and training for the remaining units.
Holmes estimated the cost saving at $50 million, and he believed that the modernization would bring the Shah around to Washington’s views on reducing military manpower.
When the Pentagon balked at supplying modern IRAN AT “THE ELEVENTH HOUR” 22} arms, Holmes countered that the United States ‘must back the Shah to the hilt as out ‘chosen instrument” in Iran.
Komer and Bundy, of course, opposed this move, but their recent, somewhat unfounded alarms about Iran had undermined their credibility.
The White House had begun to wonder whether the Task Force was worth the effort, and whether it should just be reconstituted for the next crisis.
Courtesy of National Archives Chester Bowles and Julius Holmes Chester Bowles and the new Ambassador to Iran, Julius Holmes.
Bowles had saved Holmes’ State Department career by securing him this post, but later regretted it because of Holmes’ stalwart support of the Shah’s ambitions over reform in Iran.
The Shah knew that Holmes and the MAP officers in Iran supported a program that reduced the Iranian military from 200,000 to 150,000 men over thtee—five years, while substantially increasing the number of modern weapons and amount of training.
The Defense Department opposed the plan, and wanted a more severe teduction.
The Shah let Holmes know that he would not agree to reductions without significant modernization.
At the Shah’s insistence, Holmes raised the issue of an official visit to Washington.
The White House was concerned about the reception that the Shah might receive and about the potential political fallout from a visit in which the Iranian monarch made exorbitant demands for military aid.
Holmes argued that the Shah had committed himself to reform and to the support of the Amini government, and to let the opportunity pass for President Kennedy to reinforce that progress would be a mistake.
Holmes then asked why no one questioned a visit by Nehru or Sukarno, and yet a visit by a ‘proven friend’ came under scrutiny.
The Shah Ascendant 1962 introduced a new phase in US-Iranian relations.
In 1961, although supporting the Shah, the Kennedy administration introduced the new element of American ‘personal support’ for an Iranian politician, Prime Minister Amini.
During that same period, the Shah concluded that to preserve his position against Iranian and foreign detractors, including those in Washington, he needed to cultivate advocates to further his goals.
The United States Ambassador in Tehran, Julius C Holmes, became one of these advocates.
By January 1962, the Shah had become mote sophisticated about getting his message through to Washington.
Because Prime Minister Amini had become the Kennedy administration’s ‘chosen instrument’ for reform, the Shah steadily increased Amini’s dependence on the palace for support, thoroughly co-opting the Prime Minister.
By December 1961, the Shah had enough control over Amini to use the Prime Minister to advocate both his military and his economic priorities with Washington.
On 3 January 1962, in a meeting with Deputy Chief of Mission Stuart W Rockwell, Amini raised the Shah’s unhappiness with the levels of military aid.
These politicians wanted Iran to move toward a neutralist stance as quickly as possible to avoid being diplomatically abandoned.
Because of United States overtures to the Soviet Union, Amini argued that Washington sought improved relations with Moscow and that inadequate funding of economic and military aid to Iran had been the price.
Rockwell defended the United States position, pointing to past aid and to the military aid currently under consideration.
Now Amini, the Kennedy administration’s chosen instrument for creating an alternate political power center to the Shah and for driving a program of social and economic reform, was lobbying for the Shah’s agenda.
The Shah, military assistance, and Julius Holmes The developing alliance between the palace and the United States Embassy in Tehran became more apparent in a letter from Holmes to Secretary Rusk on 22 January 1962 about proposed defense aid for Iran.
Although the key to drastic reduction in military aid without serious political repercussion is to persuade the Shah that US. forces will help him in Iran if he gets into difficulties, we know he knows, and the report likewise asserts, that this is not possible.
It is the judgment of all of us here that the Shah will not cut his forces from 205,000 to 150,000 if offered no mote modernization than envisaged in the Steering Group’s recommended level of aid.
A further probability is that such a level of aid will impel the Shah to draw more heavily on Iran’s oil revenues for his armed forces — to the detriment of the country’s development programs.
There is a further problem involved in talking to the Shah about additional economic aid accompanying reduced military aid in that our own procedures make advance commitments of greater economic aid extremely difficult.
Holmes stated that since the Steering Group admitted that ‘it has not been able to obtain a clear cut picture of what the long tern shape of economic programs is likely to be’, it would be less than ‘realistic’ to expect the Iranian to put much faith in it.
Labeling the Steering Group report ‘a retrograde course’, Holmes contended that ‘the risks entailed by such a course would be too great’, and he implored Washington to adopt his recommendations on military aid to Iran for the fiscal years 19621967.
The administration’s plan to ‘personally’ support Amini and reform had now dissolved into Holmes’ all-out support for the Shah.
These visits stroked, or stoked as the case may have been, the Shah’s ego and subjected key policy-makers to the pomp and armtwisting of the palace and the Embassy.
In the meantime, much to Komet’s frustration, Holmes won his argument for the Shah’s official visit.
On 10 February, Chester Bowles, the Under Secretary of State, arrived in Tehran for a four-day visit to evaluate the situation in Iran and to invite the Shah to Washington on a visit to be arranged for September.
As a result, Ambassador Holmes sent an evaluation of the visit to Washington on 13 February, before the Under Secretary had even departed Tehran.
Holmes’ report was to pteempt any criticism of the Shah that might emanate from Bowles’ report.
At the same time, Bowles argued that the MAP package for military modernization should follow the recommendations of the ‘MAP Steering Group’ and not that of the Ambassador.
He then quickly added that while pleased with the decision to invite the Shah, the late September date was disappointing.
Then came the ‘however’, and a long argument that the Embassy program was the minimum that the Shah would accept in order for him to seriously contemplate a reduction in his armed forces.
Lucius Battle, Executive Secretary to Dean Rusk, wrote Bundy at the White House, restating the contents of Holmes’ letter.
Since the decision had been made to offer only the lower amount of assistance, approved by the MAP Steering Group, State sought ways to soften the blow.
Battle strongly suggested to the White House that the date of the Shah’s official visit be moved forward in an attempt to limit his ‘brooding’ over the military aid.
They reasoned that prompt notification would allow the Shah to ‘absorb’ the blow before arriving in Washington.
Talbot told Holmes that $290 million was all the Shah would get, and that he was lucky to get that.
The President also wanted the Shah to implement a force reduction plan as well, or face ‘a flat nagative ’on assistance in the coming year.
The letter went on to say that Holmes could expect instructions to break this news to the Shah as quickly as possible, in light of plans to advance the Shah’s official visit to April or June.
Amini told Rusk that the Shah would only agree to reduce the size of the armed forces if they were substantially modernized.
Amini stated that he could not finish the planning for the development and economic programs until he knew the answer to the military-aid situation.
The Prime Minister also warned that in order to support the military the Shah had in the past transferred civilian funds.
Thus, the first objective was to ‘calm the Shah’s concerns’, Uncontrolled, Washington believed that these ‘concerns’ might lead to the Shah’s sacking of Ali Amini.
At the same time, the White House feared, as bizarre as this may seem, that the Shah might, in a fit of pique, resign.
The Kennedy administration, even the ardent Shah-bashers like Komer, now realized that the Shah was the essential element of stability in Iran, and that an alternate power center around Amini had simply not materialized.
The second point was to convince the Shah that economic development should be the Iranian priority over military aid.
He had successfully wrested control of Iranian policy from Talbot’s Iran Task Force and limited the NSC’s options to grousing.
The Ambassador had made a cogent argument that the National Front was a grossly overstated threat and, thereby, had laid the foundation for discrediting the NSC view of impending doom.
He had managed to co-opt several major administration figures to his view that the Shah was indispensable to the proWestern futute of Iran.
The fact that Chester Bowles, an official with a typically jaundiced view of the Shah, announced that the Shah was the key to Iranian stability was just one of the conversions for which Holmes could take credit.
In Washington, fear of the Shah’s instability drove much of the planning for the visit.
In daily Embassy reports, the fluctuating mood of the monarch had become the major policy issue.
It resembled a weather forecast as Holmes contrived to make the royal humor a critical issue for decision-making.
The Shah took the position that the MAP appropriation was still open for the discussion.
Fearing that Kennedy would be caught flat-footed by one of the Shah’s recitations of shabby treatment, administration officials subjected the President to a barrage of advice and briefing papers.
The White House staff wanted to avoid the potential for a personal confrontation between Kennedy and the Shah.
Also on 10 April, Bowles weighed in with a memorandum about Shah’s fixation on military aid.
Arguing for the $330million cap, Bowles urged the President to ‘resist pressures to increase’ military assistance.
Given the similarities in language and views, Komer and Bowles undoubtedly coordinated their appeals.
In meetings with President Kennedy, the Shah made his arguments for increased military aid to Iran.
In response, President Kennedy presented the United States case for reduced Iranian military expenditures and increased focus on economic development.
As expected, the Shah presented Kennedy with an extensive shopping list.
In addition to the military assistance, the Iranian ruler raised the possibility of ‘Civic Action’ programs for the military, increased shipments of surplus grains, and additional aid to assist in reorganizing the Iranian military.
The Iranian monarch also took the opportunity to raise the issue of Nassetist agitation against his regime.
Stymied in one area, the Shah merely shifted to another, resembling a day in an Iranian bazaar.
The Shah also raised the issue of two frigates that had been deleted from the assistance plan, and insisted that those be reinstated.
The mobility, mechanization, and frigate requests were the difference between the $330 million budget and the $424 million supported by himself and Ambassador Holmes.
During the visit, the Shah showed a reasonable amount of interest in economic development and reform, no doubt to offset his focus on the military.
On 13 April, he told Averell Harriman that he was most unhappy with the outcome of his talks at the Pentagon.
The end of the Amini era The official visit to Washington and the commitments made during that visit effectively started the clock ticking on the Amini government.
Amini had served his purpose; the Shah had wrung every possible advantage from his tenure.
Amini had delivered on emergency economic aid in 1961, and his appointment had cleared the way for the Shah’s visit to Washington.
American support for Amini had also exceeded historical boundaries in that the Kennedy administration had thrown its weight openly behind his government.
As long as Washington was willing to contribute materially to Amini’s survival, then the Shah supported the Prime Minister; and the benefits of material support determined the length of Amini’s tenure.
Following his talks with President Kennedy, the Shah hoped that the additional aid requested might yet materialize.
This constituted, in effect, his trump card in dealing with Washington over military assistance, budgetary support, and development aid.
The United States refusal to fund above $330 million, plus the possibility of two patrol frigates, disappointed the Iranian monarch.
Necessary or not, the Shah was determined to have his modernized military, even at the cost of starving development programs and reform.
The Shah could also divert more financial resources from increasing oil revenues.
Kennedy and other administration officials mistakenly assumed that the Shah, with his ego massaged, having been wined and dined at the White House and charmed by the President, would accept the United States view of the military aid package.
The Shah acted as if the larger MAP amount, or something approximating it, had been agreed upon.
True to form, Holmes expressed his doubts that the situation was really that serious.
These claims sent official Washington scurrying to determine what exactly had been promised.
It was now clear that the deficit would total between $100 and $200 million.
In fact, the reform programs contributed significantly to the renewed financial crisis.
The series of contributing factors included problems in tax collection, resumption of building programs, an economic depression that lowered the tax base, the military budget, salary-rises for teachers, land reform, large allocations to the Plan Organization, and finally, unpaid bills from the previous budget year.
In effect, the pressures of modernization and reform, bad luck, and reduced direct financial support in both the military and civilian areas caused a chain reaction that ballooned the budget, and Amini was left holding the bag.
The high expectations for increased administrative efficiency and improving tax collection had gone unrealized.
The zealous supporters of reform in the Kennedy administration had failed to reckon with the problems associated with the arcane Iranian tax system and with Persian creativity in avoiding the government collectors.
In addition, the IMF, with the blessing of both the Eisenhower and Kennedy administrations, had imposed stabilization program on Iran to fight inflation.
As a result, the tax base degenerated, further reducing government revenues.
Increasing taxes or implementing “quick-return new taxation measures’ was not an option.
Neither the Shah nor Amini could face the political fallout associated with raising taxes in the middle of a depression.
The possibility of floating bonds offered little promise of raising any significant amount of revenue.
It was unlikely that the IMF would have approved a credit expansion with the necessary scope to offset the deficit and, even in the event of approval, Washington speculated that it ‘would start a wild inflationary spiral’ with totally unpredictable political and economic consequences.
The pay increases that Amini had given to teachers in order to end the riots of May 1961 had contributed significantly to budget growth.
To delay, reduce, or renege on them would alienate ‘Amini’s last beachhead among the intellectuals’ and cause the Minister of Education, Mohammad Derakhshesh, to resign.
Amini had also approved the completion of all construction projects that were 80 per cent finished.
This created critical jobs during a depression, but it also added to the government deficit.
Strongly supported by both the Eisenhower and Kennedy administrations, it reduced tax revenues, damaged agricultural production, and undermined traditional support for the regime.
Because of United States reductions in direct budgetary support, just to maintain the military budget at the previous year’s level required an additional expenditure of $15 million.
While Komer and others had argued that the United States had intended for the Iranians to reduce the military budget, such a move was unlikely even had the Shah been predisposed to do it.
The Embassy in Tehran, the Iranian Desk at State, and the CIA recognized that rising discontent and serious ‘rumblings’ in the army over housing, facilities, and pay posed a threat not only to reform but also to the regime itself.
The situation really had only one possible solution, namely, grants in emergency aid from the United States.
Emergency grants and budgetary support were simply no longer available.
Kennedy gave everything that he could to the Shah, but the fact was that United States commitments wete outstripping the ability to pay, and cuts had to be made somewhere.
The administration had made it clear that additional budgetary support for Iran would not be forthcoming.
Contrary to other interpretations that argue that the Kennedy administration used cuts in the military-assistance program to push the Shah toward reform, the cuts were across the board and included civilian subsidies.
The reductions in support of the civilian government and its related reform efforts were in fact much more severe.
The cumulative effect of cuts in civilian and military budget support created a situation in which Amini could not achieve his promised goals.
Washington cajoled, prodded, and pushed the Shah and Amini regime toward reform, but balked at the bill.
The very reform efforts that were to transform Iran into a modern, progressive state had created a financial drain that threatened Iran’s political stability.
The Prime Minister listed the measures that he had taken to increase revenues and reduce expenditures.
The government had tried to cut the ministry budget by at least 15 per cent, but Amini explained that the military budget would not be cut given the regional political and security issues.
He followed with a special plea to restore the $15 million cut from the military assistance.
Holmes reminded Amini that both he and the Shah had received notification months before that they could depend on continued support.
Amini did not appear to be contemplating resignation, and although tired and harassed, he believed that the Shah would support him.
Amini’s efforts, aimed at gradual change in Iranian social and economic processes, had created more resentment than results.
Land reform, anti-corruption campaigns, and the economic stabilization-program had managed to alienate large segments of the most influential political groups in Iran.
Reform had garnered little support from more radical nationalists in the National Front.
The landlord-merchant classes saw his reforms as a political and economic threat to their position of influence.
His refusal to hold parliamentary elections and his ‘gradual’ approach to reform undermined any potential support from the radical nationalists.
Amini’s controls over credit and the money supply, while temporarily stabilizing Iran’s finances and foreign-exchange crisis, brought on an economic depression.
He obviously supported the military budget and, like Washington, feared growing unhappiness in the army.
At the same time, cuts in education threatened a renewal of the teachers’ strikes and student rioting that had originally brought Amini to power.
Both he and Amini believed that Washington’s personal commitment to the Amini government would translate into a belated reversal of the United States decision not to supply the required budgetary aid.
To Amini, Kennedy and his advisors were heaving his regime overboard to lighten Washington’s financial and political load.
Kennedy had done this despite the fact that the very programs advocated by Washington had significantly contributed to the problems Iran now faced.
Realizing that the Amini effort had run its course, the President ignored Komer.
Holmes and the traditional foreign-policy establishment had wrested control of Iranian policy from the activism of the New Frontier.
Believing that the Shah and Amini might yet attempt to get the United States to make up the difference, estimated by one Iranian official at $80 million for the civilian government and $20 million for the military, Holmes suggested that Washington wait for the dust to settle before contemplating any action.
Holmes had now passed Amini’s reformist mantel to the Shah, making him not only the undisputed Iranian political focal point, but also the only vehicle through which the Kennedy administration might hope to see reform.
The appointment of Alam left little doubt that the Shah would actively run the government and Iranians would hold him directly responsible for the outcome.
In speaking to Holmes, the Shah insisted that the program of reforms and the anti-corruption campaign would continue, as would the pro-Western orientation of Iran.
The Shah then took occasion to raise the issue of ‘loans’ to help the Iranian budget crisis in lieu of the grant program that had ended.
There was also a realization that the ‘stabilization program’ had done more damage than good and that ‘less consetvative economic policies’ might be required.
From Washington, it appeared that Alam, and thus the Shah, would not aggressively pursue reform, leaving them vulnerable to National Front elements.
Holmes argued that Amini became a prisoner of men like Derakshesh, and did not insist on putting the best available men in his cabinet.
In addition, the Shah had believed that, contrary to what he was repeatedly told, Washington would ultimately bail him out of his predicament.
Talbot counseled that, despite the problems, the United States government needed to see the current course through.
At the White House, Brubeck wrote to Bundy stating that Amini, ‘on whom we had pinned great hopes for economic and social reform in Iran’, resigned because of problems with the Iranian budget.
As a result, Washington had to retain the Shah’s ‘confidence and goodwill’.48 In an intelligence estimate on 17 August 1962, the CIA reported no apparent immediate threats to the Shah’s rule.
The agency stated that his return to the position of ‘single focal point’ in Iranian politics meant that future unrest would be directed at him.
The fact that the Shah would have to face the mounting problems alone created the possibility that instability might lead to his overthrow or abdication.
Playing on tried and proven methods of getting Washington’s attention, the Shah made certain that the Kennedy administration heard that if the Alam government failed and there was little chance of a similar government succeeding, he would abdicate and leave Iran.
These warnings gave added importance to Vice-President Lyndon Johnson’s upcoming visit to Tehran.
It warned against getting into any discussion with the Shah on specifics issues of budgetary support or military aid, pointing out that the conversation would undoubtedly be ‘misinterpreted’ as commitments.
This was obviously an oblique reference to the President’s ‘personal diplomacy’ during the Shah’s official visit to Washington and the claims that the Shah made with regard to promised military aid.
He pressed the Shah on reforms, the economy, and reductions in the military.
The Vice-President made it clear to the Shah exactly where the administration stood.
Almost on the eve of the presentation, Holmes cabled Washington and asked to be allowed to include the two frigates eliminated from in the plan.
He argued that aside from whatever military benefits might accrue, it would reassure the Shah of United States good intentions and support.
For Komer, the struggle with the State Department had now become as important as the issues with the Shah.
The Secretaries of Defense and State obtained permission to include the two frigates, as a personal gesture from the President, with the understanding that Washington had nothing else to give.
After some discussion, the Shah accepted, leaving the door open for more military assistance.
Crisis over — almost Despite unhappiness at the NSC, the collapse of Amini, and rumors of continued instability, Tehran’s ‘acceptance’ of the MAP ended hopes that an alternative to the Shah might exist.
NEA and CIA representatives on the Iran Task Force recommended that Iran be removed from the ‘Critical Country List’, and the other Task Force members agreed.
Iran continued to be unstable, and the situation ‘could change completely tomorrow’; however, the overall situation had improved.
Those charged with policy in NEA now wanted these outside irritants removed; they wanted to manage relations with the Shah and Iran in a traditional manner, as they had been managed under Eisenhower.
The subsiding crisis mentality also allowed the State Department to focus on more mundane issues that had languished during the tumultuous Amini period.
One of those issues, the ‘status of forces’ agreement, would evolve into something far more serious than anyone anticipated.
Congress wanted an agreement on United States jurisdiction over United States military personnel in Iran.
The Embassy was attempting to explore some reciprocal agreement with the Iranians that would keep United States servicemen out of Iranian courts, while allowing the Iranians to save face.
Aram gave some indication of sympathy for the United States concern and added that Amini had ‘forbidden him to give sympathetic consideration’ to the United States position.
Fouthi’s warning foreshadowed the controversy that would grow into a hurricane over immunity for United States servicemen in Iran.
This issue would ultimately become the principal catalyst around which opposition to the Shah and the United States role in Iran would coalesce, but that lay in the future.
By the end of 1962, despite all the effort and the creation of a special task force, Kennedy and his advisors found themselves tethered to Eisenhower’s approach and enduring the carping about military assistance not only from the Shah but also from their own Ambassador in Tehran.
Pakistan, India, and Priorities The outcome of the United States presidential election of 1960 raised several questions about the future direction of United States policy toward Pakistan and India.
It appeared that Kennedy’s election might shift United States containment policy toward an economic posture as opposed to military aid.
Kennedy, as a candidate, took the position that the US’s commitment to ‘northern tier’ defense — Turkey, Iran, and Pakistan — had undermined the possibility of a more balanced policy across the Greater Middle East.
The Indians and the Pakistanis concluded that a Kennedy administration might in fact be serious about reducing military aid and pressing forward with a greater focus on economic aid and development aid in the region.
It also appeared that a new emphasis on democratic government and reform might emerge, and favor democratic India over authoritarian Pakistan.
Also troubling for Karachi wete indications of a more positive and tolerant United States approach to nonalignment.
As if to emphasize the point, Kennedy appointed Chester Bowles, the former United States Ambassador to India during the Truman administration, as one of his principle foreign-policy advisors.
The fact that Bowles had once written ‘Jawaharlal Nehru 7s the politics of Asia’ was not lost on Ayub Khan.
Bowles made no secret of his desire to see a major United States policy reorientation and a more pro-Indian stance.
His presence as a Kennedy advisor, coupled with the Senatotr’s statements, was disquieting.
Ayub, like the Shah, had discreetly supported Nixon’s candidacy and looked with foreboding on Kennedy’s election.
In New Delhi, a cautiously optimistic Nehru viewed with interest the arrival of the Kennedy administration.
Kennedy’s intention to reduce tensions with the Soviet Union might also bring a commensurate reduction in the value of the United States relationship with Karachi.
In addition, Kennedy had fought for ‘massive economic aid’ for India and gone out of his way to flatter Nehru.
In his inaugural address, Kennedy referred to the ‘soaring idealism’ of Nehru.
Nehru probably hoped that Washington would renege on its arms commitments to Ayub.
Shrewd, well-educated, and perceptive, Ayub also took note of how candidate Kennedy’s ideas on foreign policy might affect US-Pakistan relations and specifically arms shipments to Pakistan.
He was sensitive to arguments that arms for Pakistan forced India to divert much-needed funds for economic development into arms purchases.
Ayub feared that the new American administration might not be as enamored of ‘controlled democracy’ as the old had been.
Ayub concluded that just in case the new administration actually contemplated serious shifts, he needed to reeducate Kennedy and his advisors about the realities of United States defense needs and containment policy in the Greater Middle East and Asia.
Pakistan was the lynch-pin in both CENTO and SEATO, making it imperative that a pro-Western and pro-US regime maintained control in Karachi.
Given the coup in Iraq and the perceived instability of Iran, Pakistan under Ayub had become the most stable of the critical ‘northern tier’ states.
In Pakistan, Ayub appeared to have stabilized both the political and the economic situation.
Pakistani Foreign Minister Bhutto advocated conclusion of an oiland gas-exploration agreement with the Soviet Union.
Arguing that the agreement was not a change in policy, Bhutto believed that Western oil companies ‘left to themselves, will not allow themselves to find oil in Pakistan ... because of the world glut in that commodity’ and that the Soviets lacked ‘inhibitions’ in that regard.
Simultaneously, editorials appeared in several Pakistani newspapers comparing the merits of alignment and non-alignment.
Harriman told him that he had been asked to go to Europe, Iran, Pakistan, and New Delhi to consult with the various leaders.
The foreign policy of the new administration would ... present a sharp break from that of its predecessors.
Due to the narrowness of electoral victory and lack of support by the Southern Democrats, the President could not afford to offend the Republican vote in Congress by announcing in words a drastic change in foreign policy.
His deeds would gradually show in which direction he was going and they had to date been cleat.
He visited Karachi in hopes of putting Ayub’s concerns about Kennedy to rest.
Harriman reaffirmed United States commitments to Pakistan and delivered personal letters from the President.
He also reconfirmed Ayub’s state visit to Washington scheduled for November 1963.
In a cordial but straightforward manner, Ayub stated that he knew that the ‘US needed Pakistan as Pakistan needed the US’ because the only way to combat Communism was for the ‘free world’ to remain united.
On 22 March, Harriman faced a grueling news conference in which he was bombarded with questions on foreign aid, Kashmir, and non-alignment.
Harriman tried to explain that he had emphasized the importance of CENTO and SEATO, but justified Western support for neutrals, stating that the United States needed to assist them in maintaining their independence.
The Indians also emphasized that since the signing of the Indus Waters agreement Ayub had exhibited a ‘hostile’ attitude.
In addition, Pakistan now seemed intent on negotiating its northern border with China, an area occupied by Pakistan but claimed by India.
The Harriman visit produced a cleat picture of what Eisenhower had dealt with from 1953 onwards.
Many in Washington believed that the resolution of the Indus dispute would be a first step toward the settlement of other outstanding issues, including the impasse over Kashmir.
Of course, everything depended on the willingness of India and Nehru to compromise.
To show sensitivity to the India position, Kennedy appointed officials with well-known Indian sympathies to key positions.
In Chester Bowles, the Under Secretary of State, and John Kenneth Galbraith, the new United States Ambassador to New Delhi, the administration had two staunch advocates of a pro-India point of view.
Kennedy found himself forced to wink at the dictatorship in Pakistan and the ‘hoax’ of a Communist threat to justify military aid clearly aimed at India.
Following Eisenhowet’s example, Kennedy tried to divert attention away from the confrontation with India toward economic development.
Johnson asked Nehru to speak out ‘in stirring and ringing tones against the Communist tactics’ in Southeast Asia, and pointed to Laos as an example of the ‘moral force’ that India could exert.
Nehru stated that he understood the United States desire for him to take a position, but refused to do so In a pointed reference to Southeast Asia and Pakistan, Nehru told Johnson that he agreed that economic development was the principal guarantee against totalitarianism, not arms.
Johnson came away from these meetings optimistic that Nehru would consider taking a more pro-American stance on the situation in Southeast Asia.
Ayub made it clear that he believed that United States economic aid, the refusal of Washington to put real pressure on Nehru, and the pro-Indian sentiments emanating from the administration were the primary impediments to a settlement on Kashmir.
Ayub argued that the dangerous situation with China left Nehru with no choice but to listen.
In contrast to Nehru’s cautionary advice on Southeast Asia, Ayub wholeheartedly supported the United States position and offered Pakistani troops to confront the Laotian Communists and their North Vietnamese masters.
The Vice-President argued that while it was ‘impossible’ and ‘probably unnecessary’ to convince India to drop its non-aligned status, Pakistan’s strategic position deserved full consideration for military and economic modernization.
Ayub’s views that ‘open fepresentative’ government would invite chaos and ‘Communist infiltration’ making it impossible to ‘eradicate poverty, ignorance, and disease’ resonated with the administration.
Nehru apparently hoped that improved US-Soviet relations would help India.
As Krishna Menon stated, Nehru wanted the ‘Kennedy regime’ to respond favorably to Russia’s new ‘liberalized’ outlook.
The Indian Prime Minister may also have viewed the meetings between Khrushchev and Kennedy as something of test for the new American administration.
The fact that Kennedy reaffirmed Eisenechower’s and Truman’s position on access to West Berlin served notice on Nehru that the new administration would be much like the old in its approach to the Soviet Union and Communism.
Mending fences with Ayub As Ayub increased his complaints about United States policy, fears grew in Washington that relations with Pakistan were slipping dangerously.
In reaction, Washington advanced President Ayub’s official visit to July 1961 from its original date in November 1963.47 To counter the impression of being ‘enamored with non-alignment’, the White House added an ‘unrivalled occasion’, a dinner at Mount Vernon.
The change in dates moved Ayub’s visit ahead of one planned for Nehru in November.
On his way to Washington, Ayub gave Kennedy a preview of what was to come.
He stopped in London and told British Prime Minister Macmillan that the inability of the United States to bring stability to the subcontinent called into question Pakistan’s decision to join the Western alliance system.
Ayub pointed out that the proposed new constitution of 1962 might force a neutralist course.
Ayub knew that Macmillan would pass the substance of the conversation to Kennedy.
Like Eisenhower, Kennedy wanted to avoid the Kashmir issue and to discourage Pakistani action in the UN Security Council.
The official United States position argued that only bilateral contacts could resolve the issue and that Pakistan should cultivate broad relations with India as a starting-point in settling the dispute.
Washington needed Pakistan for its collective security alliances, CENTO and SEATO; and the relationship required arms.
These Corbis Ayub, Eisenhower, and Kennedy Ayub Khan, President of Pakistan, Eisenhower, and Kennedy at a state dinner during Ayub’s official visit to Washington in July 1961.
This picture symbolizes the close relationship between Eisenhower and Kennedy policy.
Pro-Indian pronouncements raised fears of Pakistan’s defection to the neutral camp, prompting Kennedy to advance the date of Ayub’s visit by more than two years and resulting in an outpouring of reassurances to Pakistan.
During the July 1961 visit, despite efforts to the contrary, discussions with Ayub always found their way back to Kashmir.
Ayub used Soviet involvement in Afghanistan to highlight Pakistan’s lack of military capability to defend itself.
Ayub disagreed with United States aid to India, stating that the purpose of United States aid to India was ‘not with the expectation that India would support United States policies’ but to prevent an Indian economic collapse.
Ayub maintained that this approach only made India more difficult to deal with on Kashmir, and freed other funds for military use.
Ayub asked for American help with Nehru and told Kennedy that the Kashmir situation had reached a point where the ‘Pakistani people’ had to see some sort of progress, which contributed to demands for a closer relationship between Beijing and Karachi.
Ayub believed that he and President Kennedy saw eye-to-eye on most issues.
Ayub had obtained Kennedy’s promise to support the Pakistani position on UN resolutions on Kashmir, should it come to that.
Nehru called them ‘aggressive and even offensive’ with regard to Kashmir.
The trip also had significant long-term ramifications for US-Pakistani relations.
Pressed on Kashmir, President Kennedy made some injudiciously vague statements.
At the conclusion of the meeting, Kennedy reaffirmed that the United States would continue economic aid to India to stave off economic collapse and the resulting political chaos, but that Pakistan was the principal United States ally in the region.
Kennedy also agreed to talk to Ayub prior to any change in that policy.
United States officials knew that they had misled Ayub about the nature of the ‘talk’ that would occur between Pakistan and the United States.
Personal diplomacy tended to leave a trail of misunderstandings, and President Kennedy certainly left Ayub with the wrong impression.
During the meetings, to everyone’s surprise, the issue of India-Pakistan relations never came up.
For example, Galbraith in New Delhi requested that Washington allow him to notify Nehru of the type and number of F-104s to be delivered to Pakistan.
Karachi objected, and Washington ordered the New Delhi Embassy not to inform the Indians.
If the State Department drives you crazy you might calm yourself by contemplating its effect on me.
The other night I woke with a blissful feeling and discovered I had been dreaming that the whole Goddamn place had burned down.
The touchiest issue here is the shipment of military hardware to Pakistan — arming the present rival and foe and the ancient enemy and rulers of the Hindus.
A few weeks ago one of our aircraft carriers brought twelve supersonic jets to Karachi where they were unloaded in all the secrecy that would attend mass sodomy on the B.M.T. at rush hour.
Galbraith complained that in placating the Pakistanis, the United States allowed the Indian intelligence service to report the unloading of between 50 and 75 aircraft.
The Ambassador ‘threatened physical violence’ to get permission to explain the transfer to the Indians, causing Pakistan to complain that the United States had not kept it a secret.
Galbraith was beginning to understand what he viewed as the unpleasant realities of Kennedy policy.
Problems with India Between Ayub’s visit in July and Nehru’s in November, events placed additional strain on US-Indian relations.
From 1 to 6 September 1961, a NonAligned Conference met in Belgrade, Yugoslavia, with Nehru in attendance.
As a result of a meeting on 26 August with Galbraith, Desai suggested to Nehru that ‘there is a lot of justification for the attitude taken by the United States’ on nuclear testing and promised to recommend a modification.
Galbraith, who thought that he had an understanding with the Indians, was perturbed.
Averell Harriman, who was responsible for the Geneva negotiations over Laos, detested Arthur Lall, who headed the India contingent.
In the United States view, the Indians were ‘more interested in discussing broad international profundities’ than in making the ICC work effectively.
On 8 September, Galbraith informed Desai that Lall continued to be an impediment.
Washington gave all the appearance of preferring that India be embroiled in a conflict with China.
The United States suggestion that Lall be removed certainly did not sit well; Nehru reacted negatively to any hint of external coercion.
Finally, there was the issue of Galbraith’s use of the American right-wing bogey man in an attempt to apply leverage to India policy.
It raised doubts about the administration’s ability to conduct pro-India policies championed by Galbraith and Bowles.
From the Indian perspective, either the administration was too weak to change Eisenhowet’s policies, or too duplicitous to be trusted.
Nehru countered that weak regimes propped up by outside military forces merely resulted in ‘weaker’ dependent regimes and invited outside subversion.
The exchanges were friendly, but the Kennedy charm was getting nowhere.
At this point, as he had promised Ayub, Kennedy brought up the issue of Kashmir.
Kennedy observed that this flashpoint issue hindered the ability of both Pakistan and India to focus resources on economic development.
Nehru pointedly countered that India could only consider a settlement based on the status quo.
Nehru stated that a plebiscite recognized the efficacy of communalism, something that he had long rejected, and thus the possibility of partition threatened the fundamental basis of the Indian secular state.
To recognize the Pakistani claim and their communal argument would invite a never-ending cycle of agitation among minorities and threaten the existence of the state itself.
Nehtu’s attitude was that of a senior statesman advising a young, inexperienced American President.
Nehru had gotten along well with Eisenhower, in part because he viewed him as an equal.
Menon was broadly despised, and his irascibility and rudeness were legendary.
On 21 November, the President met with Menon, who, while staying on what was for him his very best behavior, still managed to disagree with Kennedy on every point of substance in the conversation.
Menon was blind to North Vietnamese infiltration and violations of Laotian neutrality.
He lectured Kennedy on Washington’s need to get along with the Soviets.
Three weeks later, on 17 December 1961, Nehru gave Menon the green light to occupy the Portuguese enclave of Goa.
Founded in 1510, it was the last vestige of colonial presence in India.
Nevertheless, it brought a stinging condemnation from Britain, France, and the United States.
Pakistan reacts to Goa Reacting to the Indian occupation of Goa, Ayub Khan demanded UN action on Kashmir, something Washington and London wanted to avoid.
Kennedy’s letter made acceptance of the United States proposal for bilateral talks contingent upon the suspension of the Pakistani action in the United Nations.
When Galbraith interpreted a non-committal Nehru response as a commitment to talks, Kennedy was encoutaged.
Instead, the Indians responded with a vague invitation that did not meet the Pakistani criteria for real talks on Kashmir.
He added that Nehru would ‘wriggle’ and ‘wheedle’ in an attempt to escape his tight situation.
The root of Ayub’s position was his fundamental distrust of the Nehru-Menon axis and his fear that Menon might actually manage to succeed the ailing Nehru.
The provision in the treaty could be interpreted to include an attack on Pakistani forces in Kashmir.
Within the administration, the pro-India optimists, Komer, Bowles, and Galbraith, believed that improved relations with India coupled with Chinese pressure had created an opportunity to reassess United States policy on the subcontinent.
In addition, the Pakistani démarches of January 1962 had ruffled feathers.
India carried more weight in international affairs, but the relationship with Pakistan directly affected United States security.
During early 1962, the Kennedy administration attempted to produce alternatives to Pakistani efforts to bring the Kashmir dispute to the UN Security Council.
The United States continued to hope that the parties might yet be amenable to ‘bilateral talks’ or a mediation effort.
Pakistan’s 1959 land-reform program attempted to reduce the influence of the ‘landed gentry’ while increasing the support of the mid-sized landowners for the government.
On 12 April, Talbot met with Sir Zafrullah Khan, the Pakistani UN Representative, and Aziz Ahmad, Karachi’s Ambassador in Washington.
They accused the Kennedy administration of dragging its feet on pressing India for negotiations, the Black mission, Kashmir, and Goa.
Ayub became mote disenchanted with Kennedy, and India now decided to pursue closer ties with Moscow.
Nehru explores the Soviet option In May 1962, the Indians concluded that they needed modern arms for protection against the Pakistanis and Chinese.
Krishna Menon, the architect of the Soviet deal, would get credit for having forced Washington’s hand.
Simultaneously, Ambassador Galbraith confronted Krishna Menon about the possibility of United States aid subsidizing Soviet arms; Menon denied this, and claimed that India was paying cash for them.
Galbraith, who detested Menon, retorted that given the state of the rupee, it was military aid pure and simple.
Having temporarily delayed significant Soviet military assistance, Galbraith, Bowles, and to a lesser degree, Komer argued that the lack of meaningful United States military assistance for India had opened the door to the Soviets and undermined pro-Western elements in the Indian military.
Galbraith further pointed out Nehru’s poor health and the fact that the Soviet arms deal enhanced the reputation and influence of Krishna Menon, the pro-Soviet and anti-American Minister of Defense.
At a minimum, Galbraith wanted to offer India C-130 transports to stave off the MIG transaction.
He visited Hammersmith Farm, Jacqueline Kennedy’s family farm at Newport, Rhode Island.
He argued doggedly that large-scale United States economic aid allowed India to divert resources into the purchase of increasingly sophisticated weapons systems.
Ayub made it clear that he viewed the United States reluctance to use economic aid to pressure India as the principal obstruction to progress on Kashmir.
When it came to the fundamental United States policy of containment, Pakistan, not India, was more important.
In this environment of distrust and dissatisfaction, the Chinese provided a catalyst that permanently altered the dynamic of United States relations with both New Delhi and Karachi.
Frustrations of the Fall — JFK and 1963 In the fall of 1962, the Cuban missile crisis and its potential for Armageddon with the Soviet Union consumed the Kennedy administration.
Nevertheless, two smaller crises, the beginning of the Yemen civil war and the Sino-Indian border war, significantly altered the direction of the administration’s policy in the Greater Middle East.
These two events complicated United States relations with pro-Western states and Britain, and chilled relations with the UAR and India.
The Kennedy administration brought to Washington an intellectual acceptance of the principle of non-alignment.
Implicit in this acceptance was a belief that the Eisenhower administration had mismanaged relations with the developing world and that a more sophisticated application of ‘personal diplomacy’ and economic aid could bring the nonaligned countries to a more pro-Western orientation.
As with Eisenhower, the Kennedy administration viewed Nasset’s Egypt as the key to the Arab world and to any Arab-Israeli peace.
By the late 1950s, Nehru’s India had become a potential counterbalance to growing Chinese power.
While Eisenhower had shied away from encouraging this competition, many in the new administation, including President Kennedy, believed that if the dispute with Pakistan over Kashmir could be solved, non-aligned India would move into a mote proWestern posture and potentially counterbalance Chinese influence in Asia.
Like Eisenhower, Kennedy’s ultimate goal was the containment of Soviet and Chinese Communism, and, if anything, Kennedy was even more aggressive and less risk-averse in pursuing that goal.
During 1961 and 1962, cooperation and building a working relationship with Nasset and Nehru had not gone well, and the attempt to cultivate better relations with these non-aligned states, to one degree or another, had antagonized United States allies in the region.
To grasp the complexity of events during the fall of 1962, one need only examine a single page in the Melbourne, Australia, newspaper The Age.
The 28 October edition provided a snapshot of the chaotic fall of 1962.
The next column described fresh Indian troops moving up to stem the Chinese attack along the northern border.
In retrospect, Cuba was the beginning of the end for Khrushchev’s regime, and in the same vein, the Yemen civil war and the Sino-Indian border conflict would crush Kennedy’s hopes for improved relations with the two key non-aligned states in the Greater Middle East.
Given the pressures of the Cuban situation, of necessity the handling of Yemen and India devolved to mote traditional channels within the foreign-policy establishment, but Kennedy still played an active role in policy formulation.
He wanted personal credit for any breakthroughs on the non-aligned diplomatic front.
Unfortunately, by December 1962 events forced President Kennedy to conclude that his ‘personal diplomacy’ had done little to alter the situation.
In fact, the inability of the President to affect substantive changes in the Arab-Israeli dispute or the Indo-Pakistani conflict over Kashmir placed the onus of failure squarely on the White House.
In terms of diplomacy, presidential correspondence, personal statements, and initiatives often diminished Kennedy’s stature, while at the same time compromising his goals.
As 1963 began, the Kennedy administration faced a growing number of frustrations and disappointments in the Middle East.
The White House had attempted to juggle traditional United States security interests and simultaneously broaden relations with key non-aligned states.
Kennedy found that he faced the same constraints confronted almost a decade earlier by the Eisenhower administration.
Kennedy also learned that these constraints were less a matter of choice and more a matter of necessity dictated by the requirements of containment.
Kennedy, like Eisenhower, had no choice but to support United States regional allies.
Also like Eisenhower, the Kennedy administration believed that economic development and reform were the best long-term guarantors of containment, but reality often made security and stability for the traditional allies the more immediate priority.
As a result, Kennedy, the erstwhile progressive, drove the UAR and India into closer cooperation with the Soviet Union, the absolute opposite of what he had originally intended.
He also alienated Pakistan, and left the United States unambiguously dependent on the fortunes of the Pahlavi dynasty in Iran, a goal diametrically opposed to what the administration had planned in 1961.
The United States found itself tied to Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Libya, and other traditional or conservative authoritarian states.
Labeled as imperialist, the White House found itself alienated from most secular revolutionary states.
In addition, policy toward Israel set Washington on a path toward massive arms and economic subsidies to the Jewish state.
Ultimately, Kennedy bet the future of the United States in the Greater Middle East on Iran, Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, and Israel.
Nehru stoutly refused to consider the ‘Black mediation plan’ for Kashmir, pointedly citing ‘confidence’ in Black but a lack thereof in President Kennedy’s proposal.
Nasser publicly rebuffed Kennedy over the Johnson Plan, much to the relief of the Israelis, who were only too happy to lay the onus for failure on Cairo.
Kennedy and his advisors had adopted Eisenhower’s view that Nasser was the key to the Arab Middle East and to a solution of the Arab-Israeli dispute, yet they had no more progress to show for their efforts than Dulles had had.
The difference was that Kennedy believed that he could succeed on the Nile where Eisenhower and Dulles had failed.
Kennedy believed that he was different because initially he had failed to understand the complexity of the situation; it was lack of experience, pure and simple.
On the whole, the Kennedy administration had a faulty understanding of what had occurred between 1953 and 1956.
Eisenhower and his advisors had five brutal yeats of policy experience that tempered their views.
Kennedy and his advisors really believed that the situation in the Middle East was due to ineptitude on the part of Eisenhower and John Foster Dulles.
In addition, they believed their own high-minded rhetoric about managing change.
They tended to see developmental stages in economics and politics, and they believed that Nasser had already passed through his revolutionary stage.
The administration believed that with the proper incentives and handling ‘radical change’ would occur in terms of economic development and cooperation in the region.
This change would relegate political differences to history’s dustbin, as economic development drove the dynamic in the region.
Egypt and the Yemen coup Policy differences had always existed between Washington and Cairo, but the Syrian coup and dissolution of the union with Egypt further complicated the relationship.
Now Nasser faced the combined verbal abuse of Damascus and Baghdad, and rather then helping, Washington’s attempt to move closer to Nasser merely added to the voices assailing him.
Nasser could not afford to act in concert with the United States for fear of further damaging his revolutionary Arab nationalist credentials.
To the contrary, the Egyptians needed to openly challenge the United States on some key issues to demonstrate their independence.
Cairo decided that accusations from various Arab capitals, particularly Baghdad and Damascus, suggesting that the UAR would sell out to Israel over Palestine in return for United States economic aid needed to be demonstrably discredited.
Kennedy’s personal correspondence with Nasser proved too tempting to pass up.
Kennedy had proposed a settlement with Israel in return for increased economic aid and development assistance.
Referring to Kennedy’s proposals as ‘foolish’, the Egyptian government published the contents of the President’s cotrespondence with Nasser.
On 18 September 1962 in Sanaa, Imam Ahmad died and Crown Prince Badr declared himself Imam.
The Crown Prince had supported close ties with Cairo and had long been viewed as pro-Nasserist and pro-Soviet.
Badr had no sooner taken the reins than Egyptian-trained army officers staged a coup.
The coup began in the early hours of 26 September 1962, led by a group of Yemeni army officers headed by Colonel Abdullah al-Sallal.
Using Soviet-supplied tanks, the tebels surrounded key government installations, and after a pitched battle in Sanaa’s ‘Old City’ around the Imam’s palace, the coup leaders announced the death of the Imam and the creation of the Yemen Arab Republic.
Unfortunately for the plotters and the UAR, to paraphrase Samuel Clemens, rumors of the Imam’s demise had been greatly exaggerated.
In Iraq, despite early suspicions to the contrary, homegrown fevolutionaries overthrew the Hashemite government.
In December 1961, Nasser asserted control over the opposition movement by replacing both Numan and Zubayri with a new leader, Abd-al-Rahman Baydani.
Apparently Numan and Zubayri had displeased Nasser by conferring too closely with Ba’thist party elements and by refusing to work with Baydani.
As fate would have it, before the coup could be mounted, Imam Ahmad conveniently died, more or less of natural causes.
Initially, the Kennedy administration was positively predisposed to the plotters.
Working with the Imam and Crown Prince had always been difficult, and Yemen was one of the most backward places on the planet.
Sadat also informed Badeau that Free Yemeni officials wanted to meet with him in Cairo, and asked Badeau to oblige them.
The Egyptians obviously had a vested interest in the new Yemeni regime.
Given the vagaries of Yemeni planning, Nasser might not have known the coup’s exact timing, but his involvement was clear.
Be that as it may, the United States carefully avoided pointing the finger at Nasser while attempting to understand what was going on and what position the United States should take.
Badeau argued that the Imamate was a ‘paragon of anachronism’ and that the United States needed to identify with progressive forces.
The Cuban missile crisis also reduced the role of the White House in the early stages of the Yemen affair.
Preoccupation with Cuba, the Soviet Union, and the possibility of nuclear war allowed the handling of the Yemen coup to revert to Talbot, Badeau, and the foreign-policy apparatus.
When the coup occurred, Crown Prince Feisal happened to be in Washington.
Feisal told Phillips Talbot that United States aid to Nasser did not moderate the UAR’s activities, but rather freed other funds for propaganda and subversion.
If its UAR policies were to be salvaged then recognition was unavoidable, but such a course now appeared to have repercussions for United States relations with the British and other traditional United States allies in the region.
While the White House viewed the coup as a minor event in an insignificant place, the British in Aden, the Jordanians, and the Saudis saw the coup as evidence of resurgent aggressive revolutionary nationalism.
Then, just to add chaos to confusion, rumors spread that the Imam was very much alive and organizing the northern tribes of the Bakil confederation to retake the capital and destroy the YAR government.
Despite the long list of outstanding problems between the Saudi regime and the Imamate, the destruction of a fellow monarchy that inconveniently, left Nasser and an Egyptian army ensconced immediately next door, was unnerving.
To calm Saudi fears, Kennedy offered Feisal a series of ‘small scale’ proposals and the president’s assurances of United States support for the Kingdom.
The fact that Radio Cairo said the same thing did not help the situation.
On 5 October, Feisal asked Kennedy to use his influence with Nasser to prevent subversive Egyptian activities.
The President responded by saying that the US, despite its aid programs, lacked that kind of influence with the Egyptian leader.
The Saudis believed that the United States had a close enough relationship with Nasser to control his activities, therefore unfortunately making the United States responsible for something over which it in fact had no control.
The Crown Prince then criticized what he viewed as the shortsighted ‘belief that Nasser is the natural and inevitable leader’ and complained that Nasser appeared to be the ‘chosen United States instrument’ in the region.
During the 5 October 1962 meeting, Feisal informed Kennedy that King Saud had not been well and was no longer participating in the details of government.
In response to an appeal from Yemeni Prince Hassan, Saudi Arabia pledged covert support for the royalist cause.
When the King ordered the Saudi Air Force to begin ferrying supplies to advanced bases on the Yemen border, three aircrews defected and took their planes and cargo to Egypt — so much for covert support.
The Saudis immediately grounded the air force, fearing more defections.
Although not immediately apparent, the Yemen coup and Egyptian intervention did as much to stabilize the situation in Saudi Arabia as any other single event.
While Feisal’s presence in Washington had, in some ways, been fortuitous, the confusion at the top of the government in Riyadh created an opportunity for the new YAR government to steal a march on its opponents.
On 19 October, the YAR government invited the United States Consul General in Ta’iz to Sanaa.
The Consul met with Sallal and several influential, well-known pro-Western and pro-American Yemenis.
Ahmad Muhammad Numan and his US-educated son Abd-al-Rahman Numan were present, along with Abdul Ghani Nagi.
The elder Numan was purported to be an ‘influential political advisor’ to Sallal.
Mentioning Saudi confusion in Riyadh, Hart recommended immediate recognition of the YAR regime.
Hart also asked permission to inform his contacts in the Saudi government that the Yemen revolution was ‘succeeding and counter-tevolution succeed’ because the ‘Imamate had acquired too evil and backward reputation’ which it had ‘richly earned’ that attempts at a ‘restoration’ would ‘drain SA’s resources and injure its position’ in the Arab world.
Of course, Hart was very wrong indeed about Feisal’s support, but the position of the United States Embassy in Jidda, supported by the reports from Ta’iz, resonated with Badeau in Cairo and the desk in Washington.
By the time the Saudis had reorganized and lodged a dissenting view, senior United States officials in the region had spoken out in favor of YAR recognition.
On 6 November, aware of planned UAR air raids against tribal resistance in northern Yemen and southern Saudi Arabia, the YAR government summoned the American Consul General in Ta’iz once again to Sanaa.
Claiming a ‘Saudi invasion’, Baydani stated that the YAR would be justified in retaking Najran and Asir, lost to King Abdul Aziz Ibn Saud in 1933.
Baydani also accused the United States of supplying arms and pilots for the Saudi and Yemeni royalist efforts.
The administration offered assurances that Saudi forces were not active in Yemen — a reassurance of questionable value in Sanaa and Cairo.
The attacks delayed United States recognition of the YAR and brought a threat to forego it altogether.
Riyadh demanded additional United States military assistance, and broke diplomatic relations with Cairo.
The advice of friends In the middle of this confusion, the State Department concluded that recognition of the YAR government would prevent a further escalation of the conflict, limit UAR influence, and undermine Soviet influence.
Washington also feared that Saudi Arabia and Jordan might face a rebellion by internal dissidents as a result of their participation in the Yemen conflict.
On 12 November, despite the UAR air raids on Saudi border ateas, Secretary Rusk recommended to Kennedy that the United States recognize the new republican government in Sanaa.
The administration felt that the delayed recognition, coupled with assurances to Feisal in the form of ‘Operation Hard Surface’, the dispatch of United States combat aircraft to Dhahran, would soften the blow and make both the Saudis and Egyptians more agreeable to a compromise.
The Secretary also pointed out that the United States would seek assurances from the Egyptians that no further attacks on Saudi Arabia would occur and that neither they nor the Yemenis had any territorial designs on Saudi Arabia or Aden.
The federation was a British creation designed to support the British presence in Aden.
London believed that recognition of the Yemen republic would undermine Adeni confidence and, ultimately, their position there.
We would, however, remind you that in this matter H.M.G. is handling the Federation’s foreign affairs in terms of the treaty and that H.M.G. therefore has an obligation to consider the question of recognition from the point of view of the Federation’s interests.
In these citcumstances, if H.M.G. intends to recognize the Yemeni Republican regime in its conduct of the Federation’s foreign affairs, we must ask that I should only do so after the Yemeni Republican regime has first given a formal public undertaking to recognize the existence of the Federation as an Arab Government under the United Kingdom’s protection and to respect its integrity.
Clearly, it would be unreasonable for H.M.G. to oblige the Federation to acquiesce in the recognition of a regime within a neighbouting state, which has refused to give such an undertaking.
On 14 November, Macmillan wrote to Kennedy explaining the British position and the potentially ‘disastrous effect’ that the loss of Aden would have on ‘the Anglo-American position in the Gulf.
He suggested that Kennedy needed to withhold recognition in order to make sure that he got something concrete in return from Nasser.
The Prime Minister pointed out that Sallal’s public call for a revolt against the British in Aden made recognition impossible.
On 15 November, Macmillan reiterated opposition to recognition and suggested that the United States should use economic aid as leverage against Nasser and the Egyptians.
The British Ambassador in Cairo, Sit Harold Beeley, supported recognition and believed that Sir Charles and the Colonial Office had not yet recognized that Pax Britannia was a thing of the past.
In an unsettling note, the royal family faced more defections to Cairo by ministers whom Feisal had removed.
These events heightened concerns in Washington about the viability of the new government under Feisal.
Fearing revolutionary instability in the Kingdom, the Kennedy administration continued to hedge in its support for Feisal, expecting a renewed power struggle with the reformist princes or with King Saud at any time with an unforeseeable outcome.
Recognition of the YAR United States hedging did not go unnoticed in Riyadh.
As Feisal became more secure, he flexed his diplomatic and economic muscle.
He instructed Hart to inform Washington to stay out of SAG policy vis-a-vis Yemen.
At the same time, Feisal became increasingly aggressive in his demands for United States support against the UAR bombing campaigns.
He believed that the war had become a grinding stalemate and that he could economically crush Egypt.
Feisal had no intention of backing down in the face of UAR attempts to intimidate him.
He calculated that a UAR invasion of Saudi Arabia would bring United States intervention and that, short of an invasion, the Kingdom had the resources to undermine the UAR in Yemen and at home.
Increasing problems in US-UAR relations spurred Badeau to redouble his efforts for YAR recognition.
As United States recognition of the YAR became more likely, opposition intensified.
In response, the United States attempted to reassure the British that it had extracted non-interference pledges from the UAR regarding Saudi Arabia and Aden.
Amman also pointed out that the Royalists were gaining ground and would be disheartened.
The Jordanian government requested that the United States await the report of a British parliamentary delegation currently visiting Yemen.
The Jordanians questioned United States reliability, stating that Washington would recognize any splinter group, including ones in Saudi Arabia or Jordan that might gain temporary power.
With three key United States allies, Britain, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia, in opposition, Badeau had his work cut out for him.
Having made the decision to recognize the YAR, the administration began a damage-control effort, addressing letters to both Feisal and King Hussein.
Washington informed both Riyadh and Amman that United States recognition was in the interest of both Jordan and Saudi Arabia.
It also warned against Jordanian ‘diversions’ that might undermine domestic development goals.
While these moves caused internal dissatisfaction, including the defection of the commander of the Jordanian air force and two other pilots with their aircraft to Egypt, the embarrassed monarch was not dissuaded from supporting the Royalist cause.
Relaying messages through the Chargé in Cairo, the administration attempted through Nasser to get agreements out of the Sanaa government.
The United States wanted the YAR to acknowledge the Sanaa Treaty of 1934, to recognize British rights in Aden, and to recognize the rights and status of the United States Agency for International Development mission in Ta’iz° The YAR government flatly refused.
In Cairo, A+ Juburiya attributed it to Ambassador Badeau’s consultations in Washington.
The same article also described the United States as the ‘main prop’ for reactionaries.
British Ambassador Beeley, in Cairo, saw the Yemeni chaos as an opportunity for Britain to get its South Arabian Federation organized.
Nevertheless, the increasingly violent tone of Nasser’s pronouncements on the ‘forthcoming liberation’ of Aden left Whitehall more convinced than ever that United States recognition had been a mistake.
The Egyptian President concluded that the United States had little positive to offer.
A fundamental shift in attitude took shape within the Kennedy administration.
The Yemen coup and civil war demonstrated to the White House that economic development usually took a back seat to political considerations in the Middle East.
The looming confrontation between China and India had long been a topic of speculation in Washington, but familiarity had bred complacency.
In addition, the problem with Yemen and the UAR, not to mention the mounting concerns about Soviet missiles in Cuba, also distracted the Kennedy administration.
As a result, the responsibility for watching the situation fell heavily on the United States Embassy in New Delhi and Ambassador Galbraith.
The idea that conflict would erupt simply did not fit Galbraith’s preconceived notions about non-alignment.
His lack of insight also resulted from his dependence on senior Indian officials, whose heads were firmly buried in the sand, for information.
Nehru certainly did not see the dispute erupting into a major border war.
Even the Chinese may not have believed that it would escalate, but they were prepared just in case.
The success of the Goa operation served as a catalyst that made Nehru and Menon over-confident, significantly increasing their capacity for self-deception and miscalculation.
In Washington, the foreign-policy apparatus understood that India could not successfully challenge China and believed that Nehru understood it as well.
Galbraith believed that a war would not occur because India was militarily unprepared and because Nehru was ideologically predisposed against the use of force.
The intellectual association of India with non-alignment, and non-violence, coupled with the leftist leanings of Nehru himself, placed the potential for hostilities outside Galbraith’s preconceived realm of possibilities.
In addition, Galbraith’s well-known hubris made it easy for him to discount any opinions contrary to his own.
The situation with the UAR magnified the impact of his lack of appreciation of the potential for conflict.
Talbot was not alone in this sentiment; it was shared by other senior officials in the administration.
As a result, Washington deferred to Galbraith’s judgment much more than it might otherwise have done.
Nehru’s miscalculation By the fall of 1962, Nehru had backed himself into a corner with the Chinese, and extrication, no matter in what way, promised to be painful.
Nehru and Menon had placed unprepared India on a military collision course with China.
The politicians resented the military, because many of the senior officers had served the Raj.
No country will tolerate the idea of another acquiring the commanding position , which England occupied for so long.
If any power were covetous enough to make the attempt, all the others would combine to trounce the intruder.
This prohibition continued even after Beijing began to make ageressive moves in the late 1950s.
In 1957, Krishna Menon’s appointment as Minister of Defense further undermined the professional military.
Menon had favorites and cteated a ‘promotion crisis, which severely damaged army morale.
With an under-equipped army, a demoralized chain of command, and a leftist Defense Minister who was roundly despised by most of his subordinates, India faced an experienced, tough, stubborn adversary in the Chinese.
The only bright spot for the Indian military, the Goa operation, had in fact created more problems than solutions.
As a result of Goa, surging popular support in India for the government provided a seductive brew that lowered the threshold for aggressive military posturing.
This so-called ‘forwatd policy’ vis-a-vis China became an integral part of the January 1962 election campaign.
Campaigning for Menon in Bombay, Nehru declared that the Indian army was prepared to repel any threat to Indian territory.
More significantly, he managed to convince himself that the Indian military could actually defeat the Chinese.
He also underestimated the lack of ideological synergy between India and China.
In reality, Maoist Beijing possessed a fundamental ideological antipathy toward India.
India had become a Chinese target that would allow Beijing to demonstrate that it, not New Delhi, was the real power in Asia.
Kaul stoked Nehru’s intransigence by assuring him that the Indian military could handle the Chinese.
They ‘brow-beat’ local Indian commanders, stifled dissent, and placed Indian army units in untenable positions.
In September 1962, the Chinese responded to the Indian aggressiveness with a forward policy of its own.
New Delhi concluded that the Chinese moves, particularly at Thag La Ridge, would be the trip-line for Indian action.
When the Indian press reported Chinese advances in the vicinity of Thag La ridge, a violation of the McMahon Line, which had been the established boundary of British India, failure to act would have undermined public support for the government.
Nehru’s personal control over foreign policy significantly increased the potential for a serious Indian miscalculation.
The aging Prime Minister lacked the energy, the basic information, and the focus to deal with the situation.
Nehru controlled the foreign-policy apparatus personally, and those who disagreed with him were ignored or marginalized.
To complicate matters, the Indians lacked basic information and intelligence to accurately evaluate the situation.
He was obsequious and totally unsuited for the job, owing his tenure in the Intelligence Bureau to Krishna Menon.
Nehru might not have listened, but with Mullik in charge, there was almost no information of substance on which to rely.
On 9 September, Krishna Menon convened a meeting of a handful of Defense Ministry officials.
At the meeting, the Defense Minister declared that the Chinese must be evicted immediately from the Thag La ridge area.
Neither Nehru nor Menon saw the possibility of military disaster, only a quick Indian victory and political gain.
They protested that their troops were unprepared, only to have Menon browbeat the area commanders.
At the same time, the Indians intensified their campaign for diplomatic support.
The Kennedy administration actually welcomed increased tensions between India and China.
The situation promised to translate into New Delhi’s support on Cuba and in Southeast Asia.
Finally, Washington hoped that the confrontation with Beijing would create problems in Indian relations with Moscow.
In Beijing, the Chinese, decidedly unimpressed by Indian demands, called for negotiations.
On 6 October, the Indians not only rejected the Chinese overture, but also announced New Delhi’s withdrawal from discussions planned for 15 October.
No matter how foolhardy for Nehru and his government, the prospect of a clash, diplomatic or military, between China and India could be a windfall for Washington.
Although concerned about the condition of the Indian army, both Washington and London believed that the difficult terrain in the border regions would lead to either a military stalemate or a localized Chinese victory and then a move by India toward a Western alliance.
On 12 October 1962, given the hype in the press, public expectations, and the approaching date for convening the next Parliament, Nehru issued instructions to remove the Chinese from the Thag La ridge by 1 November.
Well aware of Indian intentions, the Chinese prepared to teach the Indians and their American and Soviet backers an object lesson.
The Chinese teach Nehru a lesson On the morning of 20 October 1962, concentrated Chinese mortar and artillery shredded the vulnerable, poorly-deployed Indian front-line units.
Shocked by the setbacks, the Indian press, public, and government blamed Krishna Menon.
Questions arose about India’s unwillingness to accept Western military aid.
A thoroughly-shaken Nehru immediately called on London and Washington for help.
Having predicted ‘no war’, Galbraith was in London on vacation when the war broke out.
To test its leverage, the United States requested in a blatant quid pro quo that India support a call at the UN for inspectors in Cuba.
Talbot’s characterization of the potential for a military assistance program to India as a ‘revolutionary development with far-reaching effects’ reflected the administration’s overall optimistic and opportunistic view of the situation.
On 12 November 1962, key Kennedy administration officials met with British officials in London to discuss the Sino-India conflict.
The British understood that Krishna Menon had not been solely responsible for the Indian collapse, but welcomed his political demise as a bonus for the West.
London and Washington quickly agreed to focus on arms for an entrée into the Indian military establishment, to counter Soviet influence, and to contain the conflict.
For those advocating the primacy of India over Pakistan, the border war was a godsend.
Chester Bowles, Galbraith, and Komer believed that ‘a whole new chapter in the relations with the subcontinent’ had begun.
Komer called the border war the end of ‘nonalignment’ and then, in almost the same breath, he asserted that it did not affect India’s non-aligned status.
Far more skeptical, the realists at the State Department, the Pentagon, and the CIA saw a solution to Kashmir as an unlikely outcome.
The State Department and CIA emphatically argued that when the shooting stopped, the chances of a settlement on Kashmir would be remote.
They saw immediate negotiations and concessions from Nehru and Ayub as the only hope for progress.
As an alternative, Galbraith obtained permission to ask Prime Minister Nehru to meet with Ayub and discuss their problems.
He stated that Washington should encourage India to establish normal relations with its neighbors and ‘court peace’ by following up on its international obligations under the 1947 and 1948 agreements for a plebiscite in Kashmir.
He pointed out that Pakistan was the ‘agerieved party’, and yet Pakistan had been far more willing to compromise than India.
Until now, it has been a few million dollars’ worth of items for immediate use by their infantry.
Problems with Pakistan Recognizing the growing problem with Pakistan, Kennedy wrote Ayub on 27 November, stating that the United States intended to provide India with the help it needed.
He assured Ayub that any military assistance would not be used against Pakistan.
It lies in creating a situation whereby we are free from the Indian threat, and the Indians are free from any apprehension about us.
This can only be done if there is a settlement of the question of Kashmir.
Ayub went on to assure Kennedy that the Chinese incursion was limited and that the United States arms would be turned on Pakistan ‘at the first opportunity’.28 Worse yet, Ayub believed that Kennedy had broken his word about consulting with Pakistan on arms for India, and could no longer be trusted.
In Washington those supporting closer alignment with India urged the President not to compromise nor to apologize to Ayub.
The Chicom attack in effect justifies a long needed readjustment in our policy.
Komer, Galbraith, and Bowles wanted no compromises with Pakistan that might jeopardize their goals in New Delhi.
Ayub’s barbs with regard to United States military aid to India and the ‘failure’ of the United States to consult with Pakistan added to White House anxiety.
Kennedy understood that Ayub had strong backers in the Congress, including Senator Stuart Symington of Washington.
No matter how large the potential opportunity with India, the President could not allow the lid to blow off the relationship with Pakistan.
India must understand the limits upon our capacity to influence Karachi.
We ourselves cannot prevent a Pakistan-Peiping side deal and a withdrawal of Pakistan from CENTO and SEATO,’ The Pakistanis had ‘whipped themselves into a near hysterical state’, and the administration had to defuse the situation.
Another Harriman mission Once again, Kennedy dispatched Averell Harriman to Karachi and New Delhi.
He believed that the Indians now viewed China, not Pakistan, as the primary military threat.
Quoting Nehru, who had said that India had been ‘living in a dream world’, Harriman believed that the possibility of a compromise settlement of the Kashmir situation existed, but he did not underestimate the challenge.
Apparently some important officials had not changed their views on Pakistan as the primary enemy.
Hartiman also pointed out that the Indian refusal to blame Communism indicated a desite to maintain its ties with the Soviet Union, in the hope that Moscow would restrain the Chinese.
Despite Menon’s resignation, Harriman saw no Indian inclination to abandon non-alisnment.
United States military aid to India had been a ‘shock’, magnified by the lack of ‘prior consultation’ with Karachi.
The report stated that politicians of all stripes had exploited the situation, and Ayub himself had ‘permitted’ and ‘encouraged’ the political and press outcry.
Harriman stated that Ayub believed that only a settlement of the Kashmir issue on ‘acceptable terms’ could correct the problems and rehabilitate Washington’s image.
Domestically, Hartiman also saw signs of increased political pressure on Ayub.
Ayub told Harriman that new constitutional procedures limited his freedom of action, and that he expected Western assistance in ‘getting a fair settlement’ with India.
Using shuttle diplomacy, Sandys returned to New Delhi and met with Nehru, Desai, and Gundevia.
After some modifications, they agreed, in a vaguely-worded joint communiqué, to talks.
Steadily a consensus began to emerge that military assistance for India required, if not a settlement, then major progress toward a solution on Kashmir.
New tactics for the pro-India faction Having gotten the message about the importance of Pakistan, the pro-India faction began to voice support for ‘ministerial level talks’ between India and Pakistan.
The Indian government released the communiqué on Kashmir talks with Pakistan on 29 November 1962.
The following day, the Indian opposition attacked Nehru in Parliament, demanding a clarification of the Kashmir issue.
While Kennedy hoped for a breakthrough, United States diplomats closer to the problem had become increasingly pessimistic.
All signs point to continued unwillingness of the Prime Minister to trust us or to confide in us, especially as regards Pakistan.
Laise insisted that in India, there would be ‘no retreat from the status quo in Kashmir’.45 Although prophetically accurate, these views did not fit Ambassador Galbraith’s agenda, and were relegated to internal memoranda that were never sent to Washington.
On 7 December 1962, the same day as the Laise memoranda in New Delhi, Komer wrote to Bundy at the White House, expressing his concern about the improving situation in the Sino-Indian conflict.
Komer stated that limiting escalation in the border war worked against United States goals of getting India to side with the West of to compromise on Kashmir.
Komer also pointed out that the end of the Chinese incursion undermined the justification for arms to India.
He wanted to press Ayub to show restrain and limit pressure on Nehru while hoping for continued Chinese pressure on India.
Komer suggested, ‘to put it crudely’, that the United States needed to convince the Indians to be ‘pugnacious’ with the Chinese so that the crisis would continue.
As with the other ‘working groups’, Washington had an agenda — emergency military aid, air defense, Kashmir, and a military assistance program.
The President ordered the NSC Subcommittee on South Asia to come up with a plan of action that would encourage a Kashmir settlement.
Talbot concluded that only continued diplomatic pressure from Washington and London could cause Nehru to conclude that a settlement was to his advantage.
Talbot pointed out that ‘in the absence of further frightening Chinese military successes’ progress would be ‘difficult and slow’.5° By 17 December, there were further indications that the initial scare in New Delhi had worn off.
In Washington, Ambassador Nehru requested a meeting with President Kennedy, and complained about Pakistani efforts to use its relationship with the United States to pressure India into an unfair settlement.
On 17 December 1962, in a memo to President Kennedy, Secretary of State Rusk pointed out that essentially the United States faced a no-win situation.
Rusk believed that Ayub had overplayed his hand and that the United States had encouraged him to do so.
Rusk believed that Ayub saw United States responsibility extending to the point of actually leveraging a settlement.
He wanted pressure applied to bring Ayub back to a more realistic position.
By 19 December, Komer described a policy picture that largely contradicted his view of only a week before.
In a memorandum to Bundy, Komer stated that Harriman and the Department of Defense opposed any aid, beyond the $120 million in emergency military aid and the air defense assistance, without progress on Kashmir.
Komer added that Talbot and Galbraith wanted no linkage between aid and Kashmir for fear of hardening Nehru’s views.
At that time, Komer had strongly supported Galbraith’s contention that aid should not be linked to progress on Kashmir and that Pakistani concerns should not ‘bar’ military aid to India.
Ever the realist, Talbot’s admonition about pressure on Nehru merely reflected what he knew to be the Indian Prime Minister’s aversion to such tactics.
Talbot had always understood and valued what was at stake in intelligence sites in Pakistan far more than Komer.
Just for good measure, Komer also reversed himself on the issue of India as a counterweight to China in Asia.
Indians have already picked them up with ill-concealed satisfaction, seeing in them a means of retaining Kashmir sovereignty while accepting a little ‘European-type’ window dressing.
In the same memo, Komer expressed the opposite concern that the Indians now viewed United States involvement as problematic.
In New Delhi, reduced Chinese pressure removed any sense of ‘urgency’ on the part of the Indians with regard to Kashmir.
Even among political figures that had supported such a settlement, the reality of what it would cost had taken a toll.
Krishna Menon may have been out of power officially, but he and his leftist supporters agitated against any deal with the West that involved Kashmir.
Non-leftists presented a corollary to this theme, arguing that because of the Soviets, the West would provide military support with or without progress on Kashmir.
The net result was that the Indians convinced themselves progress on Kashmir was not vital to their national security.
Just for good measure, the Prime Minister accused the Pakistanis of an ‘attitude of blackmail’.5° In Pakistan, Nehru’s public statements merely served to underscore skepticism about his good faith.
In addition, talks of a ‘condominium’ or other solutions short of a plebiscite wete viewed as part of an Anglo-American conspiracy aimed at the ‘murder Pakistani freedom’ and an attempt to embroil Pakistan in a conflict with China.
On 20 December, President Kennedy and British Prime Minister Macmillan met in Nassau, and discussed the pros and cons of providing military support to India, and the possible ramifications of this in Pakistan.
Macmillan and Commonwealth Secretary Sandys proposed that the Anglo-American effort go slowly.
Macmillan supported Averell Harriman’s concern for the impact on Pakistan.
The British were concerned that massive arms aid to India without progress on Kashmir would leave such a taste of betrayal in Ayub’s mouth that Pakistan might abandon its Western ties.
At that point, Sandys, Home, and Macmillan reminded him that it would be a major psychological victory for the Communist bloc and that Iran would doubtless quickly follow suit.
The President and Prime Minister concluded that they would continue with plans to provide air defense for India while pressuring both Ayub and Nehru to come to an agreement on Kashmit.
On 26 December, the first ministerial-level meetings took place between the Pakistanis and an Indian delegation headed by Sardar Swaran Singh, in Rawalpindi, Pakistan.
In the middle of the meetings, Pakistan announced an agreement with China to negotiate a settlement of its northern border with Tibet.
The Indians debated using the announcement of negotiations as a pretext for breaking off the talks but decided against it.
In the talks, the Pakistani Foreign Minister, Bhutto, made it clear that Pakistan could not accept the status quo.
In response to a question by Swaran Singh, Bhutto stated that Pakistan would consider a ptoposal to redraw the boundary line through Kashmir, but that Karachi still supported a plebiscite.
The Indians intended to propose a redrawn boundary line that essentially confirmed the current ceasefire line.
On 27 December, while the talks with the Indians in Rawalpindi were in progress, Ayub told United States Ambassador McConaughy that he believed the crisis between China and India was basically over and that only significant United States and British pressure would bring any modification in India’s position on Kashmir.
Ayub bluntly told McConaughy that he would tolerate the current levels of military aid to India on condition that the United States pressure India about Kashmir.
So began the effort to achieve a compromise over Kashmir and hopefully to draw India into a closer alignment with the West, without jeopardizing the alliance structure in which Pakistan participated.
The Kennedy administration had clutched at the Chinese border war as a way to reorder the entire political map of South Asia, but had at first underplayed and then later overplayed its hand.
Galbraith, Komer, and Bowles, the pro-India faction, had prevented massive pressure on Nehru at the beginning of the crisis, and once the crisis abated there was no chance that Nehru would compromise.
Quite simply, if the Chinese incursion and the sound military defeat that Beijing administered to the Indians did not fundamentally change the orientation of India, then nothing would.
Supporting and courting India at the expense of Ayub’s Pakistan had been a major mistake.
From Karachi’s point of view, military aid to India and Kennedy’s promises left the United States with only one option.
Washington could attempt to pressure India into a settlement of the Kashmit dispute that was acceptable to Pakistan, or Washington could expect Karachi to take a very dim view of United States policy and a very skeptical view of United States promises.
The Kennedy administration’s entire policy structure toward the non-aligned world hung in the balance in 1963.
Neither side had the inclination or much incentive to compromise, and Kennedy’s concern over domestic political repercussions prevented any dramatic initiatives that might alienate Israel and its supporters.
Israel demanded more military aid, refused to cooperate on any plan involving a settlement with the Palestinians, and refused any meaningful inspection of its ‘peaceful’ nuclear program.
Nasser’s Yemen adventure underscored his intention to pursue a mote radical revolutionary course and his growing conviction that Washington had little to offer that would enhance up his standing in the Arab world.
The border war between India and China, which seemed to promise a major reorientation in Indian foreign policy, ended in a Chinese-dictated truce.
Bitterly disappointed and broken by the Chinese inflicted humiliation inflicted, Nehru deeply resented United States attempts to use the war to leverage a compromise with Pakistan over Kashmir.
The Kennedy administration’s plan to co-opt nonaligned Egypt and India were on life-support, leaving its advocates within the administration struggling to salvage what was left of their hopes for a new United States role in the region.
The unhappiness of United States allies with the administration was perhaps more alarming.
Kennedy’s initiatives with the non-aligned states threatened to wreck containment.
Having given its support for the first time to a specific Iranian politician, Washington now had little choice but to make a similar commitment to the Shah.
Thus, the longstanding Eisenhower policy of supporting Iran, but not necessarily the Pahlavi regime, vanished in Kennedy’s effort to establish an alternative to the Shah.
In Pakistan, United States military assistance for India, Kennedy’s unwillingness to use economic aid to pressure New Delhi, and Nehru’s refusal to compromise on Kashmir alienated President Ayub.
This development threatened Pakistani participation in CENTO and SEATO, as well as United States strategic intelligence interests.
Ayub believed that President Kennedy had intentionally misled him with regard to Pakistan’s role as Washington’s principal partner in South Asia.
Britain, Saudi Arabia, and Jordan were all at odds with United States policy in the Arabian Peninsula to one degtee or another.
Saudi Arabia, Yemen, and the UAR In addition to straining relations with its allies, the Yemen conflict had placed US-UAR relations under considerable stress.
Having recognized the YAR, Washington now faced pressure from its allies to secure a UAR withdrawal.
United States Ambassador Badeau in Cairo sought Nasset’s agreement to outside mediation.
Recognizing the difficulty of this task, Badeau and the administration attempted to put the onus for the Yemeni disengagement on Saudi Arabia and Crown Prince Feisal.
Badeau argued that by prolonging the conflict, the Saudi government raised the specter of instability and revolt.
Feisal’s supporters pointed out that not only was Saudi Arabia pursuing the reforms that Washington had long sought, but, also under Feisal, the government in Riyadh was mote stable that it had been since the death of Abdal-Aziz al-Saud in 1953.
These realists also argued that Western Europe and potentially the United States needed Saudi oil significantly more than they needed good relations with Cairo.
In Washington’s view, the easiest way to secure an ‘honorable’ way out for Nasser was to pressure Feisal to stop arms shipments to the Yemeni Royalists.
Writing to Feisal, President Kennedy called on Riyadh to end its support to the Royalists.
Feisal responded by accusing Kennedy of selecting Nasser as the ‘chosen instrument’ of the United States in the Arab world.
An old charge dating from the Eisenhower administration, it was doubly effective.
It put Kennedy on the defensive and put pressure on Nasser to demonstrate his independence from Washington.
It appeared that Kennedy and his advisors failed to appreciate that while the frail Crown Prince might have been born in Bedouin tent, he was a shrewd politician, highly sophisticated in assessing his political and economic leverage, and the politics of Arabia.
Obviously warming to the subject, Johnston pointed out that Jordan, with everything going against it, had been more stable than either Iraq or Syria.
On 19 January 1963, Kennedy wrote to Nasser complaining that UAR and YAR activities were the cause of Saudi and British alarm and intensified their opposition to the revolutionary government in Sanaa.
With calls for Arab unity in Syria and Iraq once again ringing in evetyone’s ears, Nasser told Kennedy that he ‘had to respond to great concern owing to my knowledge — and the confirmations made to me by the American ambassador to Cairo Dr.
Laying the problem at Kennedy’s door, Nasser stated that Saudi intervention had been made possible by American assistance.
Seeing potential for a serious collision of interests, Badeau attached his own summary to Nasset’s letter.
He argued that the YAR and UAR had acted with restraint given the magnitude of Saudi interference.
In return for the ‘temporary’ basing of United States fighters at Dhahran, Feisal finally agreed to end his support for the Yemeni Royalists.
Kennedy also promised to assist ‘at Saudi expense’ in building up the Kingdom’s air defenses including a new aitbase near the Yemeni border at Najran.
On 6 March, Bunker offered to place United States fighter aircraft at Dhahran ait base in return for Feisal’s compliance with a ceasefire in Yemen.
On 7 April, after signing the Yemen disengagement agreement, Feisal accepted the Bunker offer.
On 17 April, Ambassador Badeau informed Nasser that this United States ‘training mission’ would conduct exercises near the Saudi-Yemeni border.
In a thinly-veiled threat, Badeau expressed concern that ‘grave consequences ... would arise from a confrontation’ between United States and UAR aircraft.
Despite Kennedy’s reassurances, Nasset, through his intelligence chief, Zakaria Muhyi al-Din, knew that Saudi activities and Feisal’s support for the Yemeni opposition continued.
This created a credibility problem for Bunker, who was trying to obtain a UAR commitment to withdraw its forces.
Internal memoranda from Komert to the President indicated that both were well aware of the commitments made to Nasser that the squadron would not be sent until Saudi support for the rebels had stopped, and they were also aware that Feisal had not lived up to his side of the bargain.
From Cairo’s perspective, the arrival of United States Air Force components at Dhahran and the Saudi’s continued support to the Yemeni rebels constituted a breach of faith.
In trying to steer a middle course, the Kennedy administration had damaged its credibility.
The relationship with Nasser was further complicated when Washington announced the sale of Hawk missiles to Israel.
For Nasser and the Egyptian leadership, Kennedy had become little more than a rerun of the disappointments from a decade earlier with the Eisenhower administration — John Foster Dulles in a more urbane package.
On 8 February 1963, in Baghdad, Ba’thist, nationalist, and Nasserist army officers overthrew Qasim’s regime.
Prior to the coup, the ICP held positions of substantial influence and ‘advantage’ in Iraq.
Qasim’s isolation created a situation in which the ICP had become his most faithful supporter and the Soviet Union the principal benefactor of his regime.
Soviet military aid, economic support, and technical assistance dominated Iragi development.
In return, Iraqi foreign policy, diplomacy, and propaganda followed the Soviet line.
By the next day, Qasim was dead, executed ‘after a short trial’, along with the Communist commander of the Iraqi air force, Brigadier Jalal Awgqati, and other Qasim supporters.
Radio Baghdad announced the formation of the yet another RCC and called on the ‘masses to descend to the streets to see the body of Qasim’.2® The Communists knew the score.
They would receive the same consideration that they had meted out when they hung Ba’thists and Nassetists from lampposts in Mosul in 1959.
Just to make certain that there was no ambiguity, the RCC issued Proclamation 13.
Washington welcomed the news that thousands of Communists were either dead or in jail and that the shops in Baghdad were doing a booming business in portraits of the new President, Abd-al-Salaam al-Aref, Qasim’s proNassetist co-conspirator in 1958.30 Neither Washington nor London knew exactly what the coup meant, but both believed that it had to be an improvement over the Qasim regime.
Ironically, the broadly-held assumption that the coup resulted from US-UAR cooperation created the biggest stit among the pro-Western states in the region.
In Washington, administration officials told the Saudi Arabian Ambassador, Sheikh Abdullah al-Khayyal, that the Iraqi coup coming on top of the Yemen situation made it imperative for the Kingdom to cease its involvement in Yemen for fear that ‘emboldened ... nationalist elements’ might move against the monarchy.
To compound this speculation, both the Syrians and Jordanians openly discussed the danger posed by the US’s ‘chosen instrument’, Nasser and resurgent PanArab nationalism.
The Kennedy administration’s initial analysis concluded that Iraq would continue to chart an independent coutse as a ‘separate pole of alignment’ in the Arab world.
The potential downside was that the Ba’thists in Iraq might succeed in overthrowing the monarchies in both Saudi Arabia and Jordan, possibly with UAR complicity.
The administration now feared a coalescence of interests between the Iraqi Ba’thists and Nasser that might overpower the weaker pro-Western monatchies.
There was also the outside possibility of another Nasserist unification movement.
Given the problems over Yemen with Nasser, the possibility of an Iraq cleansed of Communists and friendly to the West presented Washington with an inviting potential for Baghdad to reclaim its traditional role as a counterbalance to Cairo.
On 15 February, in ALAbram, the evercreative Heikal pointed out that it was necessary to differentiate ‘between the real Ba’th and the opportunists and profiteers’ in the party, the latter obviously referring to the Syrian secessionists.
Heikal stated that the UAR looked forward to the possibility of fresh approaches that the Iraqi Ba’thists might have with regard to furthering Arab unity.
Nasser may have been disappointed by the Iraqi Ba’th’s refusal to side with the UAR against its Syrian branch, but he carefully left the door open for cooperation.
London concurred that the new regime would be domestically anti-Communist and nationalist, but they believed that it would maintain correct relations with the Soviet Union.
There was too much Soviet military hardware laying around for it not to be on speaking terms with Moscow.
Because of their support for Qasim, the British were concerned that their lack of connections with the new government, the Nasserist influence, and the imposition of austerity programs might effect Britain’s commercial position.
Immediately following the coup, the new Iraqi Foreign Minister, Talib Shabib, outlined the foreign policy of the regime.
On the matter of Yemen, the Iraqi government supported the YAR and UAR position.
Baghdad made it clear that the culprits standing in the way of progress and peace in the region wete the Saudis, who were subsidizing and supplying the Royalists, and the British, who were creating problems on the southern border.
Officially the Iraqi government intended to stay out of it but it ‘could not control’ the 45 newly-licensed Iraqi publications.
As for Syria, Baghdad expressed specific concerns in light of reports that fugitive Iraqi officials had fled there.
Shabib stated that while Iraq did not plan direct action against Syria, he left no doubt that Baghdad would welcome a more ‘congenial’ government there at the earliest possible date.
The Baghdad coup left the Syrian government of President Nazim al-Qudsi in an impossible position.
In a desperate bid for political survival, Qudsi resorted to what could only be described as a kind of policy schizophrenia.
Following Syria’s secession from the UAR, the United States faced incessant Syrian media and propaganda attacks, predicated on the proposition that Cairo and Washington were working in consort to undermine Syria.
In January 1963, the Syrian government suddenly reversed itself and began to question United States support for Saudi Arabia in the Yemen conflict.
Facing mounting problems with Syrian Ba’thists, and believing that the United States had the influence to put in a good word with Nasser, Qudsi attempted to enlist United States help against his Syrian Ba’thist and Nassetist opposition.
On 19 February, with the Iraqi coup as backdrop, President Qudsi responded to a letter from Kennedy in which Kennedy protested that Syrian accusations against United States officials for allegedly supporting UAR subversion in Syria were false.
In a more ot less friendly response, Qudsi lodged an obligatory complaint about Israel, but agreed that the charges against the United States officials were unfounded.
Isolated, with internal opposition surging, the Damascus regime was simply flailing about in a futile attempt to save itself.
On 8 March 1963, Ba’thist military and party elements overthrew the Syrian government and announced a policy that supported Arab unity with Iraq, the UAR, the YAR, and Algeria.
His credibility undermined by his agreement with Nasser in 1958 to dissolve the Ba’th party, Aflaq was no longer the dominant power in the new Syrian Ba’th.
Instead, a group of military officers, refered to as the ‘Military Committee’, ran the show.
This secretive cabal, composed of Muhammad ’Umran, Salah Jadid, Hafiz al-Assad, Abd-al-Karim Jundi, and Ahmad al-Mir, resented Aflaq and Bitar because of their agreement in 1958 to dissolve the Ba’th.
Now the military Ba’thists no longer needed the civilians in order to grab power.
In addition, Nasser, not Aflaq, remained the most visible symbol of Arab nationalism and unity.
These factors, along with the arrival in Damascus of exiled Syrian Nassetists, resulted in a call on 14 Match for ‘tripartite unity’ between the UAR, Syria, and Iraq.
Negotiations ensued in Cairo in March and April 1963 between Syria, Iraq, and the UAR, paralleling the Yemen mediations.
He explained that before negotiations could begin, he had to clear the air between the Syrian delegation and the UAR with regard to the creation of the UAR and Syria’s secession.
Nasser wanted his pound of flesh in terms of an admission by the Syrian Ba’th of their past sins, and submission to Egypt’s ‘Charter of National Action’ and ‘revolutionary experience’ for inspiration.
If the Ba’th party is ruling Syria and we are supposed to unite with it, then I am not at all prepared to continue these discussions.
Nasser intended to string out the talks, either obtaining the total supplication of both the Syrian and Iraqi Ba’thists or gaining time for his own supporters to grab power in Damascus and Baghdad.
As the unity talks progressed, pro-Nasserist pressure in the form of riots and demonstrations grew in Syria.
Despite prognostications from the CIA and the State Department that Iraq would maintain its independence from the UAR, Kennedy wanted to hedge his bets.
As long as the potential existed for Nasser to head a federated Iraq, Syria, and Egypt, the White House intended to tread lightly on the Yemen issue.
Like Dulles and Eisenhower in 1958, the administration feared finding itself confronted by a hostile Arab super-state.
Kennedy’s conciliatory letter to Nasser on 18 April reflected the uncertainty created by the tripartite negotiations.
He congratulated Nasser on the formation of the new UAR and argued for restraint in Yemen.
To accomplish this, he preferred the Saudis simply to withdraw support from the politically odious Yemeni Royalists.
Now with Iraq and Syria, Kennedy saw the possibility that Nasser might pull another rabbit from his political hat.
Soured relations with the UAR Nasser’s unification talks, Jordan and Saudi Arabia once again became the focus of concern.
On 27 March, in Amman, the coups in Iraq and Syria and internal dissatisfaction brought the fall of the Tal government.
The King called on the venerable Samir Rifa’i to form his last government.
Regime instability and domestic opposition to Hussein’s rule created the possibility, or in minds the probability, of a Hashemite collapse.
There would be no repeat of the 1958 military rescue of the Jordanian Hashemites.
Quite simply, the potential damage of such a rescue to British petroleum interests in the Arab world was now unacceptable.
Leading Syrian Ba’thist Saladin al-Bitar told the United States officials that the ‘Hussein regime’ in Jordan was ‘entirely unacceptable’ to the ‘Arab National Movement’ and to a majority of the Jordanian people.
Pro-union demonstrations in various Jordanian and West Bank towns resulted in Parliament passing a no-confidence vote in the government.
On 20 April, Rifa’i’s government fell, but instead of backing down, the King appointed his uncle, Sharif Hussein ibn Nasir, Prime Minister on 27 April.
On 25 April 1963, Ben-Gurion sent President Kennedy a note citing the unification of Iraq, Syria, and Egypt and their promise to liberate Palestine.
The Ben-Gurion letter also coincided with attacks on Assistant Secretary Talbot’s statement on 22 April 1963 to the National Foreign Policy Conference of Editors and Broadcasters that the administration did not believe that the proposed UAR federation ‘measurably affected’ Israel’s secutity situation.
On 26 April, the Istaeli Ambassador met with State Department officials to discuss the Ben-Gurion note.
The Israelis stated that they would not sit idly by and have a hostile regime replace the Hashemites.
When United States officials expressed their doubts about Nasset’s involvement, the Israelis stated that they believed that the anti-Hashemite propaganda broadcasts were coming from Cairo and that they feared a repeat of the Yemen scenario.
Using the UAR unification announcement, the Israelis expressed concern about the difference between that possibility and the initial United States view that the Syrian and Iraqi coups would form a ‘counterpoise’ to Nasserist ambitions.
Warning against Israeli action, United States officials pointed out that Israeli actions had a tendency to unify the Arabs.
The Israelis returned the next day with visiting minister Modechai Gazit in tow.
The Israelis wanted to know how the United States justified economic and military aid in light of this.
Department officials cautioned the Israelis not to overreact to the situation.
The administration sent Ambassador Badeau scurrying to Egyptian officials on 27 April with another warning about intervention in Jordan.
Badeau met first with Sami Sharaf, one of Nasset’s aides and a direct pipeline to the Egyptian President, to warn about the situation in Jordan and to complain about Egyptian propaganda emanating from the Voice of the Arab Nation radio.
Sharaf denied any knowledge of the station even when confronted by Badeau with its exact location.
Nasser was concerned that action might be taken based on information unavailable to him and asked Badeau to keep him informed.
Acknowledging that any move against Hussein would be laid at his ‘doorstep’, Nasser stated that at the beginning of the unification talks he had personally squelched a Syrian initiative to undermine the Hashemite regime.
He added that the overthrow of Hussein was inevitable and could happen at any time, given the level of discontent in the officer corps, but he had no information of an imminent threat.
Badeau ended the conversation by telling Nasser that the Washington would attempt to restrain Israel but that the UAR needed to stand clear of any appearance or real involvement in the Jordanian crisis.
In his comments on the meeting, Badeau attempted to preempt any further demands on Nasser for assurances, stating that guarantees would not be forthcoming.
To add fuel to the fire, the Israeli newspaper Haaretz reported from Washington that ‘Authoritative United States Sources’ had made it clear that ‘Nasser fully understands’ the United States warning not to intervene in Jordan.
Harman explained to Averell Harriman that the perceived Egyptian threat really had nothing to do with Jordan or UAR unity ‘at the moment’, but that Ben-Gurion was actually concerned about Nasser and the ‘constant military threat’ posed by Egypt.
United States approaches to Nasser, followed by Israeli public pronouncements and press reports, followed by more Israeli demands for United States approaches to Nasser, created the impression in Cairo and other Arab capitals that Kennedy had become Ben-Gurion’s errand boy.
The Israelis no doubt calculated that Congressional pressure on the White House over aid to the UAR, and the looming elections of 1964, put Kennedy in a position where he could not ignore Israeli demands.
In addition, there was always the possibility of an added bonus that an irritated Nasser might break with Washington.
In Cairo, with Arab unity again perhaps within his grasp, Nasser needed to demonstrate his independence from United States pressure.
United States moves to ‘show military interest in Jordan’ made this demonstration even mote critical.
The Kennedy administration had dispatched a small joint exercise Air Force team with two aircraft.
The administration also concluded that regardless of other considerations the maintenance of Jordan as an independent, pro-Western state served United States interests.
Now, in July 1963, fearing a ‘crisis of confidence’ in Amman and the ‘cost to us if it folded’, an alarmed White House brought Ambassador Macomber to Washington to talk to the President.
To improve his Arab credentials, Hussein asserted his position vis-a-vis Israel by allowing Jordanian border guards in Jerusalem to fire on an Israeli military patrol in a disputed zone.
The additional leverage earned King Hussein an invitation to make an ‘informal’ call at the White House in early 1964 to ‘clear the air’ on Arab issues and on problems in US-Jordanian relations.
The Ba’thists in Syria and Iraq had become even more reluctant to enter into the kind of union proposed by Nasser.
Nasser wanted a plebiscite to be held on the question of whether rule of the united UAR should be by committee or a single president.
Remembering 1958, the Syrian Ba’thists and government rejected the plebiscite.
The coup failed and, rather than the usual exile, the coup ringleaders were tried and executed.
The coup and the subsequent suppression effectively ended Nasserism in Syria.
The split with Nasser pushed the Syrian and Iraqi Ba’th parties into closer alignment.
On 26 August, Abd-al-Salaam Aref, Nasset’s old supporter and now President of Iraq, agreed to unity talks with the Syrian Ba’th.
On 8 October 1963, Iraq and Syria signed the ‘Military Unity Charter’ as an initial step toward full unification.
Despite outward signs of progress, relations between the two Ba’th party branches had already begun to unravel.
Basically, the strong Nasserist element in Iraq and staunch Iraqi nationalists would not reconcile themselves to Syrian Ba’thist domination.
Nasset’s tefusal to consider an alliance with any government in which the Ba’thists were a member increased the pressure.
Nasser now had to face the prospect of losing United States aid altogether if he did not toe the United States policy line.
So there would be no doubt that he was in charge, the Shah appointed Asadollah Alam, former head the Pahlavi Foundation and a palace creature, as Prime Minister.
Although running scared, the Tehran regime had opted for a new approach, but ‘once the Shah and his entourage realized the crisis was over, they resumed the perennial game of cutting the new boy down to size.
Nevertheless, activist elements in the administration continued to want to do something about the Shah, and Komer even mused about encouraging the Iranian opposition.
Like it or not, the Shah provided the only viable pro-Western soutce of power.
In addition, no matter how misguided or half-hearted his efforts, the Shah really did want to reform Iran, albeit in a manner acceptable to him.
In December 1962, borrowing an idea from King Hassan II of Morocco, he toyed with the notion of holding a national referendum on his reform programs.
The Shah’s move to break with the past and with the ‘traditional moneyed, land-owning, and religious elites’ received strong support in Washington.
An associate of Ayatollah Borujerdi of Qom, the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, had been preaching openly against the referendum and the reforms.
The message first attacked land reform and then later, women’s sufftage under the planned election law.
To support this claim, Khomeini and other nationalists pointed to the status of force agreement being imposed on the Shah by the Kennedy administration and the United States Congtess.
In return for military aid, the Iranian government had to give up the right to try United States military and aid personnel in Iranian courts for crimes committed in Iran.
This smacked of the old concession system practiced by various and sundry colonial powers in Qajjar Persia and Pahlavi Iran and, perhaps as much as any other issue, branded the United States a colonial power.
In March 1963, in retaliation, Iranian paratroopers broke into the madrasa where Khomeini preached and arrested him.
Sporadic outbreaks incited by disaffected clergy continued during the spring.
He was arrested the next morning on Muharram, the day of Husayn’s martyrdom.
In several major cities, Muharram crowds, already massed and emotionally charged, rioted, calling for the overthrown of the regime.
The uprising went on for several days, but was finally suppressed by security and military units, with heavy loss of life.
The cooperation between religious opponents of the regime and nationalist began with the rioting of June 1963, and a little-known cleric from Qom became a widely-known and influential opponent of the regime.
The Shah’s White Revolution had challenged the traditional foundations of Iranian society.
As a result, the monatch’s survival rested on the loyalty and efficiency of the military and his security services.
In addition, land reform had reduced the focus on long-term development, with the probable outcome being immediate and mid-term economic problems.
Finally, taking United States advice, the Shah was attempting to restructute Iranian society and focus on economic development.
It was the reform program that had served as the catalyst for the uprising.
Military assistance contributed to the problem, but it was the Shah’s attempt to modernize Iran and his White Revolution that sparked the revolt.
Kennedy’s advisors now realized that the Shah, with Washington’s encouragement, had alienated the traditional centers of support for the monarchy.
For the Shah to succeed or even to survive, the military and security services would be the key.
On 20 June, Kennedy, in a personal message, commended the Shah for ‘surmounting the disturbances’ and encouraged him to improve the economic situation to ensure the success of his reforms.
Kennedy also cautioned the Shah about the stresses that reform put on a society.
Kennedy, the progressive reformer, was cautioning against tapid reform; he wanted reform in Iran, but not if it resulted in the collapse of the Shah’s regime.
As for the Shah, he now had the long-sought, undivided attention of the Kennedy administration and felt reasonably sure that Washington saw no real alternatives to his rule.
India and Pakistan The situations in India and Pakistan also defied the Kennedy touch.
On 4 January 1963, the British expressed their reservations about the Kashmir situation.
Reaching the same conclusion, Ayub was simply unwilling to accept the limited adjustments that Nehru might offer.
There was a rising sense that Ayub’s rule had run its course and a belief that Pakistan was descending into yet another period of political instability and economic stagnation.
In addition, senior government officials and army officers felt that Washington had sided with India and that support for the West counted for little in terms of military and economic aid.
Embassy reporting from Pakistan indicated a building crisis on domestic issues and discussion of taking Kashmir by force.
Sandys, the British facilitator, believed that once India obtained military aid, all hope for a compromise on Kashmir would evaporate.
Having spent a lifetime arguing for a secular, united India, he could not bring himself to compromise.
During the summer of 1963, a series of developments further undermined a compromise on Kashmir.
First, Prime Minister Nehru, in increasing ill-health, suffered a seties of internal political setbacks.
Menon was gone, and in July 1963, conservatives in Congtess forced Malaviya from power.
In addition, the ‘opposition’ in the Pakistani National Assembly argued that CENTO and SEATO membership, as well as the alliance with the US, had brought greater — not reduced — insecurity.
The United States realized India really wanted its own modern air force, with a manufacturing capability.
Bowles, now the principal spokesman for the pro-India group, realized that concern over Pakistani overtures to the Chinese would wreck any chance for military aid to India.
Bowles returned in November 1963 with a plan to provide arms to India that he believed would not upset the Pakistanis.
He managed to get Komer’s attention, and the latter coordinated a meeting with the President.
He’s putting up a brave front but actually feeling a bit low, and wondering whether we’re still signed on to moving ahead with India.
The President believed that it only had a ‘50-50 chance of success’ because it only amounted to $50—75 million per year and did not create a modern air force.
Komer relayed the message and requested that President Johnson approve it.
In his memo to Bundy, Komer stated that Johnson was known to be pro-Pakistani and the plan for India needed a sign-off before a potential change of heart occurred.
Komer referred to Talbot’s alleged fears that the Pakistanis would take ‘great heart from LBJ’s advent’ and be more difficult than ever about arms for India.
This exercise marked a last-ditch effort on the part of Bowles and Komer to salvage arms for India.
In fact, Komer’s statement that this was Kennedy’s policy was something of an overstatement.
Given the record and Bowles’ belief that Talbot had undermined the pro-India policy, it is unlikely that Talbot had been a party to this effort to slip the India arms deal by the new President.
Bowles knew that he had lacked the clear-cut support of Kennedy and that McNamara, Rusk, and Talbot actively opposed him; therefore, he tried to use a quick meeting with President Johnson to commit him to the India arms deal.
McCone insisted that the intelligence relationship with Pakistan was of the ‘greatest importance’ to the security of the United States.
McCone couched this argument not in terms of the Middle East, but in terms of the hard-intelligence collection sites that directly affected United States security.
They reviewed with President Johnson the commitments made to Pakistan with regard to an attack by India and the recent deterioration in US-Pakistan relations.
From top to bottom, Kennedy and his advisors believed that they could bring significant improvement to the baseline foreign policy handed them by Eisenhower.
By 1963, it had become apparent that they had nothing to show for their efforts.
The administration had failed to give proper consideration to or to try and understand exactly what the Eisenhower experience had been.
Kennedy found himself pursuing policies that had failed eight years before.
Kennedy’s early approach to Nasser had almost all of the goals and attributes of early Eisenhower efforts.
As in the 1950s, Nasser and the UAR continued to pursue their goal of pan-Arab revolution.
The UAR could not be enticed to make further compromises with Israel or to withdraw its forces from Yemen for any amount of aid.
When pressured by the United States to follow a certain policy, they defied Washington and ignored threats to cut off aid.
In Iran, Kennedy’s attempts to find an alternative to the Shah failed, and left the United States identified more than ever with the Pahlavi regime.
With United States encouragement, the Shah then charged ahead with reform at such a frightening pace that it appeared to threaten his own survival.
This situation left the reform-pushing Kennedy administration counseling caution and emphasizing the critical need for loyal military and security forces.
With regard to India and Pakistan, the opportunity posed by the Sino-Indian border war turned into a mitage and worse.
United States pressure on India coupled with Washington’s unwillingness to provide New Delhi with an indigenous manufacturing capability for advanced arms, resulted in a broad program of military cooperation between New Delhi and Moscow.
In Pakistan, the limited arms that India did receive angered and frustrated Ayub Khan.
To show his displeasure, Ayub opened relations with Communist China and accused President Kennedy of bad faith.
For Kennedy and his advisors, 1963 saw virtually all of their ideas and hopes for the Greater Middle East unravel.
In fact, Kennedy found himself struggling just to maintain the more conservative policy positions established by Eisenhower between 1958 and 1960.
Reform and the Primacy of Containment The policy of global containment of the Soviet Union, China and indigenous Communist movements dominated United States foreign policy for more than 40 years.
The Truman administration created the model first in its commitment to the defense of Western Europe and Japan and then in its strong support for economic development and reconstruction as a means of undermining Communism’s political influence.
This commitment to military confrontation, for example in Korea, or deterrence through defense alliances like NATO and economic development and reconstruction programs like the Marshall Plan became the models for United States Cold War policy.
Although it was clear what this meant in terms of Western Europe and Japan, the exact form and meaning of containment in the developing world and particularly the nature of its application were vague to non-existent.
For example, historians have argued argued that this lack of definition sparked the Korean War and created a muddled situation in Indochina that led from the French to the American war in Vietnam.
For 40 years American administrations took the Truman model for Western Europe and Japan, used it as a baseline, and for better or worse, attempted to construct a Cold War policy paradigm for the developing world.
It was an ad hoc learning process that reflected all the pitfalls of ‘real-time’ ‘on-the-job’ policy development and execution in cultural and political environments where Washington’s understanding of the situations ranged from marginal to opaque.
Truman created a containment policy that held the line against Communist expansion in Western Europe and Japan, but he bequeathed to his successors the unenviable and complex task of creating a workable formula for containment in the developing world.
Truman drew the line on containment in Europe and the Far East, but it would be the Eisenhower administration, through trial and error, that would develop and, to a large degtee, instituationalize containment in Latin America, Africa, and the Greater Middle East.
In 1953, the Eisenhower administration atrived in Washington believing that long-term political stability and staunch anti-Communismn could come only from economic development and political reform.
Eisenhower believed that the new nationalisms of the Middle East and developing world had to be encouraged or tolerated, as the case may be, and supported through economic-assistance programs and, if need be, military assistance as well.
Eisenhower and Dulles believed that military assistance should conform to the requirements of internal security and order.
This primacy of economic development and political reform as the best guarantor of containment and Western interests in the Middle East had strong support from White House advisors like Walt W Rostow, who fitst served the Eisenhower administration and then became a key policy-maker in the Kennedy and Johnson administrations.
Between 1953 and 1955, the Eisenhower administration tried to implement this vision of containment.
This effort included attempts to use economic assistance to entice Egypt into the Middle East Defense Organization, obtain a solution to the Arab-Israeli problem, bring an end to the Kashmir dispute between India and Pakistan, and stymie Soviet attempts to penetrate the region.
It included pressure on the Shah of Iran to reorient his focus from building his military to concentrating instead on developing the economy and on bringing social reform and political liberalization to Iran.
Eisenhower and his advisors fundamentally accepted the idea that traditional regimes in the region would ultimately succumb to nationalist revolutions.
Despite India’s non-aligned status, the administration strongly supported economic assistance and Nehru’s focus on development.
Eisenhower pushed Pakistan toward democracy, economic development, and social reform.
In each case, adherence to a Western defensive organization, whether the Baghdad Pact or SEATO, represented mote of a political commitment than a military one.
Military aid to allies of the West was niggardly compared to economic assistance.
Military aid was a vehicle intended to pacify the various officer corps in order to maintain their political identification with the West and to encourage their support for economic and political development.
The litany of complaints from members of the Baghdad Pact concerning the lack of military aid dominated the history of the organization through 1958.
Even the crisis of 1956 failed to garner significantly more military aid for aligned states.
Initially, in Eisenhower’s view, containment first required economic development, followed by political and social reform, and only enough military assistance to maintain internal stability.
A key pro-Western regime in the process of instituting reforms collapsed in revolution.
Suddenly, short-term stability and a pro-Western political posture took priority over the longer-term theoretical benefits offered by economic development and the uncertainties of reform.
This re-prioritization brought a shift in Washington’s thinking about the importance of stability in the quest of reform.
The maintenance of pro-Western stability became the baseline for economic development and political reform.
This shift began a process in which the United States found itself increasingly identified with authoritarian monarchical or military regimes.
In terms of military and economic aid, Iran and Pakistan were the gteatest beneficiaries of 1958, but Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, and others benefited as well.
Fearing another Baghdad-style coup, the Eisenhower administration raised the priority of shoring up military loyalty and internal-security forces.
In 1959 and 1960, the Eisenhower administration adopted a more flexible approach to both the non-aligned and aligned states.
Relations improved and economic assistance to the UAR and India increased, as did economic and military aid to aligned Pakistan, Iran, and Jordan.
It was this proportionally greater and, therefore, much more visible increase in military aid that resulted in the Eisenhower administration being unfairly characterized as weak on economic development.
The military aid constituted a pragmatic reaction to the events of 1958; it did not end Eisenhower’s focus on economic development, but was instead a means to provide internal security and stability for the very economic development that Washington believed would maintain pro-Western regimes.
In 1960, when Kennedy took office, he inherited a pragmatic, working foreign policy, which he largely adopted.
While Kennedy had run for office on a foreign-policy platform that attacked Eisenhower and Dulles for their alleged blunders between 1955 and 1958, the adjustments made by the Eisenhower White House between 1958 and 1960 restored stability and direction to United States policy in the Middle East.
Containment remained the centerpiece of the United States policy thrust, but the administration adjusted the application of those policies to meet the challenges of non-alignment and revolutionary nationalism.
Despite these improvements, Kennedy and his advisors, including Rostow, believed that through supetior management and sophisticated application of economics they could attain results that would far exceed those of Eisenhower and Dulles.
Instead of objectively assessing Eisenhower’s policies to see what had wotked and what had not in the 1953 to 1955 time-frame, Kennedy and his advisors concluded that Eisenhower and, particularly, Dulles had been too doctrinaite and lacked the creativity to achieve theit key policy goals.
Kennedy made the UAR the center of its efforts to achieve an Arab-Israeli peace, and attempted to dampen radical Arab nationalism by encoutaging Cairo to focus on economic development.
Pushing the Shah toward economic development and away from his fixation on military assistance paralleled similar Eisenhower efforts.
Eisenhower, like Kennedy, attempted to identify an alternative to the Shah’s rule.
The Kennedy administration also attempted to foster better relations with India and a more pro-Western orientation through economic assistance and the promise of military aid, in return for a settlement of the Kashmir dispute with Pakistan.
Kennedy, no less than Eisenhower, found himself tied to Ayub’s regime in Karachi because of its key position in the Western alliance structure and because of intelligence sites critical to the strategic defense of the United States.
Kennedy, due to over-confidence and a lack of appreciation for the degree of change that had occurred in the Middle East during the 1950s, failed to learn from Eisenhower’s setbacks.
In one sense, Kennedy had the luxury of inheriting a set of stable, functioning policies, something that Eisenhower had acquired by trial and error; but in another, Kennedy failed to apprehend the magnitude of the difficulties encountered during the 1950s, and as a result blamed Eisenhower and Dulles for policy shortcomings.
This lack of objectivity and perspective condemned Kennedy and his administration to repeat many of Eisenhower’s early mistakes.
Eisenhower had learned through bitter experience that the Middle East often required a wait-and-see approach to developments.
Kennedy’s can-do attitude created an imperative to take a proactive approach to developments and issues.
As a tesult, aggressive administration pronouncements and policies often brought exactly the opposite results from what was intended.
Pressing Nasser on the issue of a settlement with Israel made the Egyptian leader vulnerable to criticism from his Arab rivals, including pro-Western Arab states.
Despite warnings from Ambassador Wailes, attempting to replace the Shah with Prime Minister Amini left the United States in the end even mote closely identified with and firmly tied to the Pahlavi dynasty.
Campaign rhetoric concerning support for India created a situation in which Kennedy had to demonstrate the importance of Pakistan to United States interests, and this in turn discredited Washington in Nehru’s eyes.
This credibility problem was further complicated by overt, even crude, attempts to leverage the border war with China into an Indian compromise on Kashmir.
The overwhelming desire for action, to get something done, caused a series of miscalculations that actually undermined United States stature and influence visa-vis the gains made by Eisenhower between 1958 and 1960.
Arguably, by late 1963 the United States position in the Greater Middle East had taken a clear step backward from its position in 1960 at the end of the Eisenhower eta.
Nationalism is on the march and world Communism is taking advantage of that spirit of nationalism to cause dissention in the free world.
Moscow leads many misguided people to believe that they can count on Communist help to achieve and sustain nationalistic ambitions.
Eisenhower and Dulles recognized the problems associated with tising nationalism, British imperial baggage, and the Soviet threat.
The administration believed that through astute policy-management the United States could successfully contain, and perhaps even undermine, Soviet influence.
The key to long-term stability and a pro-Western political posture was economic development.
The Eisenhower administration shated the views of Walt Rostow and others that economic assistance would foster economic self-sufficiency, which in turn would bring a pro-Western political orientation and hopefully stable democratic institutions.
Both he and Secretary Dulles viewed economic development as the most viable path to stability and a pro-Western orientation.
It has been on this point that Hisenhower’s policies have been most misunderstood, misrepresented, and criticized.
Whether the Baghdad Pact or SEATO, Western defensive alliances constituted political rather than military organizations.
Adherence to the Western alliances represented a statement of pro-Western political orientation and solidarity.
No-one in Washington, and certainly not President Eisenhower, believed that any of the members of the pro-Western defense pacts, either alone or collectively, could stand up to the Soviet Union.
For example, the members of the Baghdad Pact continually complained about the lack of military assistance, the lack of a command structure, and the utter ineffectiveness of the organization as a real military alliance.
Washington quite simply saw little or no military value-added in the pacts.
Military aid was either intended to placate the various military establishments or provide for internal security, or both.
Between 1953 and 1958, Eisenhower avoided large-scale military assistance that provided any real offensive capability.
It was the unwillingness of the Eisenhower administration to provide sufficient military assistance to Egypt in order that Caito might challenge Israel that brought on the Czech arms deal.
This precipitated a crisis in relations with the West that ultimately led to the nationalization of the Suez Canal and the resulting AngloFrench-Israeli debacle of 1956.
Historians have often credited Nasser’s unwillingness to join a Western defense pact as the Eisenhower administration’s primary reason for not supplying arms to Egypt.
In reality, had Nasser joined a Western pact, Egypt would not have received either the quality of quantity of arms that it sought to confront Israel.
Eisenhower intended to limit arms and military assistance to the essentials required for internal security.
Between 1953 and 1958, no country in the Western alliance systems in the Greater Middle East was satisfied with the level of military assistance provided by Washington; Egypt would have been no different.
The Eisenhower administration steadfastly refused to contribute to an arms race in the region, preferring instead to offer economic aid and to encourage economic development.
Nasser’s realization that sufficient arms would not be forthcoming from the West provided an additional impetus toward non-alignment.
The situation became more complicated when the Turko-Iraq pact of 1955 led to the creation of the Baghdad Pact.
Now he faced an immediate threat to his rule from Westernsupported Israel, while Washington was unwilling to provide arms for Egypt’s defense.
The Soviets were the natural choice to provide what the West would not.
In Nehru’s case, the United States arms for Pakistan under the 1954 Turko-Pakistan alliance placed him squarely at odds with the Eisenhower administration.
No matter how limited in scope, Washington had not only armed India’s bitter enemy, but had also attacked the very ideological foundations of Nehru’s view of the developing world’s place in the Cold War environment.
In a real sense, the pro-Western northern-tier alliance linked Indian and Egyptian interests at a critical historical moment.
The governments in Cairo and New Delhi were attempting to consolidate internal political power in the face of potentially serious opposition, while at the same time facing what they viewed as external threats funded by Washington.
No amount of economic aid could compensate for the political pressure created by insufficient arms for Egypt and any amount of arms for Pakistan.
For Nasser, the guid pro quo for cooperation with the West would not be what he needed in the way of arms, and would probably cost him the support of the Egyptian military, a potentially fatal political development.
Despite their differing political practices and ideological proclivities, Nehru’s and Nasset’s confluence of political interest at the 1955 Bandung conference produced a revolution in Middle East politics.
Bandung provided the crowning blow to the Eisenhower administration’s initial plans for the defense of the Greater Middle East.
Egypt provided India with an effective counter-balance to Pakistani influence in the Islamic and Arab states, and Nehru provided Nasser with global stature and, most of all, a Chinese mid-wife in the form of Chou En-Lai for the delivery of Soviet arms.
Egyptian-Indian policy also profoundly affected Western allies in the region.
Countries like Iran, Pakistan, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia learned to barter their allegiance in ever-escalating demands for economic and military aid from the United States.
While Washington continued to push economic development and reform, its allies pressed for arms to compete with their non-aligned neighbors or with the Soviet threat.
Ultimately, Washington found that influencing even its allies became increasingly difficult as it attempted to maintain a balance between the demands of its erstwhile allies and their actual needs.
United States parsimony generated threats to quit the Baghdad Pact from Iraq, Iran, and Pakistan.
Eisenhower’s good intentions in 1953 for economic development and an Arab-Israeli peace had degenerated into confrontations with Nehru and Nasser, the leaders of what Eisenhower and Dulles believed to be the two most important states in the region.
Eisenhower moved, from faith in the power of economic development to influence not only the political process but also the political orientation of states in the Middle East, to a more realistic view that took into account the balance between economic development and political considerations generated by regional rivalries.
Containment revamped 1958-1960 Despite these problems, Eisenhower and Dulles never lost sight of their goals in the Middle East.
In the post-Suez and Eisenhower Doctrine environment, with expectations scaled back, they sought to regenerate working relationships with Nehru and Nasser.
As a result, the administration once again focused on economic development.
Eisenhower and his advisors hoped to correct the inability of the United States to project the good intentions of its policies properly, and thereby gain greater acceptance from non-aligned and nationalist movements.
By late 1957, the Eisenhower administration concluded that policy revisions were in order.
In 1957, Nasset’s rejection of the Eisenhower Docttine and Nehru’s refusal to compromise over Kashmir coupled with broad instability among the pro-Western regimes to force a major reevaluation of United States policy.
In February 1958, the union between Syria and Egypt and the formation of the United Arab Republic accelerated the process.
Still conflicted about working with Nasser, on the one hand, Washington courted him, while on the other it encouraged Iraq, Saudi Arabia, Lebanon, and Jordan to resist UAR pressure.
The administration had concluded that it needed improved relations with the UAR and to work with Caito on a case-by-case basis.
Based on his experience over the previous five years, Eisenhower had decided on a more flexible but conservative course that allowed the United States to improve ties with Egypt and India while pursuing its strategic Cold War objectives in the region.
The administration had no expectation of major breakthroughs with regard to Nasset’s revolutionary activities, the Arab-Israeli dispute, Nehru’s non-alignment, or the Kashmir dispute, but it hoped to garner limited influence from economic and financial aid.
Then, on 14 July 1958, Brigadier Qasim’s detour through Baghdad destroyed the Hashemite regime and most of what remained of British prestige in the Middle East.
If Iraq’s entry into the Western security system had sent tremors through the region, its exit was an earthquake.
The British were more than willing to settle for a new arrangement with Qasim that protected their oil interests.
The United States also pressed the British to provide similar support to Jordan.
Fearing United States intervention in Syria, Nasser sought immediate Soviet support and lambasted Anglo-American intervention.
This situation threatened to wreck improved ties between Cairo and Washington, as the effects of the Iraqi coup rippled across the northern tier, undermining improving US-Indian relations.
Fearing the collapse of the Western alliance system and of containment, the White House immediately increased the flow of military and economic aid to what remained of the Baghdad Pact.
The administration continued to believe that economic development and reform held the key to long-term, proWestern stability, but Washington’s focus shifted dramatically to the short-term perspective, namely the survival of pro-Western regimes.
As a result, Eisenhower put a priority on stability, economic development, and controlled reform, in that order.
Pakistan was simply too important to United States security and intelligence interests.
In October 1958, Pakistan became even more attractive as an ally when General Ayub Khan replaced the dysfunctional civilian government in a military coup.
Military rule stabilized the situation in Karachi, providing what the White House hoped would be a stable environment conducive to economic development and safe reform.
Bouts of depression and vacillation aside, the Shah had become the real center of political gravity for containment.
Survival of a pro-Western regime, if not the Pahlavi dynasty, became an absolute priority in Washington.
As a part of its conservative approach to Iran, the Eisenhower administration assiduously avoided direct commitments to either the Shah or his dynasty.
Washington wanted to maintain the option of supporting a more broadly based proWestern ruler, on the off chance that such an alternative might arise.
As a result, the White House assured Tehran that the United States was committed to the ‘independence’ and ‘territorial integrity’ of Iran, not the Pahlavi dynasty.
The inability or unwillingness of the Shah to bring constructive change frustrated the administration.
As a result, the United States provided the minimum amount of aid necessary to maintain the Tehran regime.
The Shah deeply resented and vigorously complained about the nigegardly dole from Washington, particularly for the military.
The Shah recognized the opportunity immediately, and began to demand additional military and economic support.
He interspersed these demands with random soliloquies about the virtues of non-alignment and accommodations with Moscow.
Bluff or not, the Eisenhower administration was in no position to take a chance, dramatically increasing economic and military aid.
In addition, the Iraqi coup had an unexpectedly positive impact on US-UAR relations.
Within weeks of the coup, Qasim and his Communist allies began to undermine Nasserist elements in the government.
As disagreements escalated, Nasser found himself under increasing attack from Baghdad, while his supporters in Iraq found themselves in prison or worse.
Strong Communist support for the Qasim government also brought strong Soviet support and military aid from Moscow.
From Khrushchev’s perspective, he finally had an Arab client who did not hang Communists as an avocation.
In the ensuing Arab Cold War, the hostility between Nasser and Qasim spread to the UAR’s relations with the Soviet Union.
Much to the delight of the Eisenhower administration, Nasser finally shared Washington’s concern about the threat of Communism.
Ironically, the British once again faced a situation in which Nasser, with the encouragement and assistance of the Eisenhower administration, was bent on undermining Qasim, whose fall would threaten British petroleum interests in Irag.
The United States and UAR found themselves on even better terms because of the political synergy created by their joint aversion to Qasim’s Iraq.
The Eisenhower administration suffered no misconceptions about the depth of cooperation.
Washington and Cairo had a mutual problem in Iraq, but there was no expectation that cooperation on Iraq of compromises over the situation in Lebanon would translate into solutions for more vexing regional problems like the Arab-Israeli dispute.
The White House really believed, that no matter how problematic it might at times become, a working relationship with Nasser and Nehru was critical to United States interests in the region.
This realization was in fact an acknowledgement that the region had undergone a fundamentally revolutionary change.
In 1953, both the President and Dulles had recognized the nature of the coming change, but their strategies were overwhelmed by its complexity.
Between 1958 and 1960, they reconstructed United States relations in the Middle East based on new political realities and more limited goals.
At the same time, they managed to maintain the fundamentals of their containment strategy with regard to the Soviet Union.
By December 1960, with the knowledge that things could have been far worse, Eisenhower could look back with satisfaction on the progress that had been made since 1958, particularly in United States relations with Egypt and India.
The policies of 1958 to 1960 did not include dramatic breakthroughs, but they were balanced and workable.
Through eight very tough years of policy ups and downs, the Eisenhower administration had learned that some regional problems were simply insoluble, that the situation was usually neither as bad nor as promising as it appeared, and that the United States had little leverage, economic or otherwise, to force solutions.
January 1961 would bring a new administration and its own understanding of the lessons of the Eisenhower years.
Kennedy’s Middle East and the Eisenhower legacy In January 1961, the Kennedy administration had the options of continuing with Eisenhowet’s conservative but workable foreign policy in the Middle East, or embarking on the series of activist initiatives proposed during the presidential campaign, or both.
In an almost exact reflection of Eisenhower’s attitudes about Truman in 1953, the Kennedy administration arrived in Washington determined to replace what they considered the lethargy and mismanagement of the Eisenhower administration with activist programs.
Just as Eisenhower and Dulles had believed that their ability to manage foreign policy would immeasurably enhance United States interests, so Kennedy believed that his technocrats and intellectuals would correct the shortsighted policies of the past and open a new era of United States influence in the developing world — the ‘pay any price, bear any burden’ approach.
In an intellectually selective way, the new administration viewed United States Middle East policy in terms of the turmoil of 1955 to 1958, rather than over the continuum of the entire Eisenhower period.
They also ignored the fact that the junior senator from Massachusetts had often supported Eisenhower’s policies when the majority of Democrats had opposed them.
Here again was a rough parallel with the Eisenhower administration’s arrival in 1953.
Eisenhower criticized the very Truman policies that he had helped create as NATO Supreme Commander.
Instead, Kennedy took office committed to correcting what he viewed as the mistakes of the past.
He wanted to translate into policy his campaign rhetoric about the importance of India, the UAR, an Arab-Israeli settlement, and an accommodation with non-alignment.
Distrusting the traditional channels of foreign-policy development, Kennedy brought with him a cadre of experts and technocrats who believed that they had the answers.
Using these outsiders, Kennedy sought to bypass the bureaucracy and put his personal stamp on United States foreign policy.
Thus, a small group of ‘experts’ attempted to reshape policy largely without the benefit of an objective evaluation of what had gone before.
In the Middle East, the quiescence of the Arab-Israeli dispute, the shared views of Nasser and Eisenhower on Iraq, and growing Indian preoccupation with China tended to mask the chronic nature of regional conflicts.
The situation created the illusion that key states in the region were actually moving toward more moderate positions and away from confrontation or revolutionary agitation.
As a result, Kennedy and his foreign-policy advisors concluded that more activist policies could result in major gains.
For example, Kennedy advocated more aid to India, criticizing Eisenhower for ignoring the importance of Indian economic development.
During the campaign Kennedy had advocated economic aid to the UAR in an attempt to turn Egypt away from revolutionary activity and toward economic development.
Kennedy pronouncements about a new opening to the non-aligned countries had raised the expectations of both Nasser and Nehru.
When Washington deemed the existing programs sufficient, there was a sense of disappointment and a feeling that the New Frontier largely represented a continuation of Eisenhower policies.
The Eisenhower administration had learned from bitter experience between 1953 and 1955 that aid often translated into only limited leverage in the Middle East, and the new administration failed to learn from that experience.
Like Eisenhower and Dulles in 1953, Kennedy was far too optimistic about economic aid generating a political quid pro quo.
For example, Kennedy concluded that United States aid and an increased Egyptian focus on economic development would open the door to an Arab-Israeli peace settlement.
He failed to consider that funding for Aswan had not altered Nasser’s arms deal with the Soviet Union or his Arab nationalist policies.
Aid had little effect on Ben-Gurion, who was even more opposed to a settlement.
With increasing aggressiveness, the administration attempted to exploit the growing rift and later the border war itself.
First, Washington attempted to gain Indian support in opposing North Vietnamese and Chinese policy in Laos and Vietnam, and then attempted to use the border war itself to leverage a settlement of the Kashmir issue with Pakistan.
Across the board, the administration’s efforts to find solutions to chronic regional problems failed.
These same activist policies that were to improve relations with non-aligned India and the UAR precipitated a series of problems between Washington and its allies in the region.
Neither the Shah nor Ayub Khan were particularly enamored of Kennedy’s campaign pronouncements about increased support for non-aligned states.
In Pakistan, pro-India statements by candidate Kennedy necessitated an immediate campaign to reassure Iran and Pakistan of continued United States support.
Kennedy was no less committed as a Cold Warrior than Eisenhower, and he had every intention of keeping Pakistan and Iran in the Western camp.
In fact, Kennedy had to be even more circumspect about maintaining the Western alliance system than Eisenhower.
The latter’s stature as a famous military figure provided him with a latitude vis-a-vis security issues that Kennedy did not enjoy.
Thus a move by any significant United States ally in the Greater Middle East toward neutrality or accommodation with the Soviet Union constituted a major credibility problem for the Kennedy administration.
With regard to Pakistan, word of Ayub’s unhappiness with Washington prompted high-level reassurances ftom Washington that United States policy had not changed.
Worried, Kennedy’s effusive assurances of support in 1961 for Pakistan and for a compromise settlement of the Kashmir dispute did little to endear the administration to Nehru.
In Iran, the Kennedy administration, like Eisenhower’s before it, started off with a crisis.
Where Eisenhower and Churchill toppled the Musaddiq government, untest resulted in Kennedy’s open support for Prime Minister Ali Amini.
This move in favor of a specific Iranian politician departed significantly from past policy.
Despite Eisenhower and Dulles’ role in placing the Shah back on the throne in 1953, the United States had refused to provide specific support to any politician in Iran, including the Shah.
Under Eisenhower, Washington supported only the independence and territorial integrity of Iran.
The administration believed that it needed options, given the political instability of the regime and its disappointing track record with regard to reform.
Having removed the day-to-day management of the Iranian crisis from the State Department and placed it under a special Iran Task Force, the more limited group concluded that Amini was the ‘last hope’ and that his survival required direct United States support.
As a result, the administration committed to supporting a particular Iranian politician, who, as it turned out, was totally reliant on the Shah for survival.
When Amini fell, the administration found itself tied even more firmly to the Shah.
Now United States interests in Iran were irrevocably tied to the Pahlavi dynasty.
Kennedy’s desire to influence India and Egypt through economic aid mimicked that of Eisenhower and Dulles, as did his conspicuous lack of success.
Eisenhower put the Shah back on his throne because he lacked another realistic option.
In the end, Kennedy’s direct support for Amini backfired, and tied United States fortunes directly to the Pahlavi dynasty.
The collapse of the Syrian union ushered in a revolutionary surge on Nasset’s patt that ultimately led to the Yemen revolution and strained United States relations with the UAR and its allies, Saudi Arabia, Jordan, and Britain.
The 1963 Ba’thist coups in Iraq and Syria created regimes less objectionable to Washington and independent of UAR control.
Resenting Western support for the new Iraqi regime, and suspecting that the United States and Britain had attempted to undermine Arab unity talks in March and April 1963, UAR policy gravitated toward a renewal of closer relations with Moscow.
With regard to India, the euphoria created in Washington by the border war with China dissipated rapidly.
The thinly-veiled attempt to force an agreement over Pakistan angered Nehru, and when the threat passed, drove India into the close military relationship with Moscow that continues to this day.
The modest provision of United States arms to India and Washington’s failure to pressure New Delhi successfully during the China crisis sparked simmering resent in Karachi, and soured US-Pakistani relations.
By November 1963, the United States position was weaker than when Kennedy took office.
The realities of United States Cold War commitments came into conflict with the same tegional political realities that had plagued Eisenhower and Dulles.
The United States position with the key non-aligned states of the region, India and the UAR, was in tatters.
New Delhi and Cairo had turned to broad military assistance and economic-cooperation programs with the Soviet Union.
Following the Chinese border wat, undisguised United States pressure to compromise on Kashmir in return for arms had pushed New Delhi into an arrangement with the Soviets.
Upset by limited United States military aid to India, Pakistan now pursued closer relations with Beijing.
Nasser concluded that the combination of Saudi Arabian oil and increasing Israeli domestic political pressure on Kennedy left little to be gained in better relations with Washington.
In the Arab Middle East, the traditional regimes of Jordan and Saudi Arabia and the clients of the British were now the principal United States allies.
Ties with Israel had strengthened, further isolating the United States from Lebanon, Syria, and Iraq.
In Iran, the fortunes of the Shah would now determine those of the United States as well.
Convinced of their intellectual and management superiority, Kennedy and his advisors misunderstood the broader political context in the region.
Often relying on personal diplomacy, Kennedy, and his advisors seemed oblivious to the fact that their initiatives were almost identical to the failed Eisenhower initiatives of 1953 through 1955.
Like Eisenhower in 1953, the Kennedy administration imagined itself to be fundamentally different from and superior to its predecessor.
In the process, the United States largely displaced the British as the guardians of Western interests in the Middle East, and did so with relatively little political or economic dislocation.
They pushed for change in Iran, Saudi Arabia, and Pakistan, and settled on a policy of top-down reform.
Where he pushed for more activist apptoaches, he usually repeated Eisenhower’s failures.
Kennedy learned that pressure on Nehru and Nasser brought negative results.
He learned that neither the Arabs nor Israel really wanted a peace settlement.
He learned that personal diplomacy put the prestige of the presidency on the line, and often backfired.
And by November 1963, Kennedy learned, as Eisenhower had in 1953-1956, that chronic regional problems were largely unsolvable and that no amount of economic or military aid could force a settlement.
Kennedy learned that the maintenance of United States containment strategy in the Middle East required a pragmatic, deliberate approach, tempered by limited expectations.
Political conflicts and regional rivalries took precedence overt any amount of economic or military aid.
The Johnson administration took these lessons to heart and pursued policies that focused on allies in the region and a natrower view of United States interests.
He paints the Eisenhower administration as the real hardcore anti-Communists.
Larres manages to avoid mentioning the fact that it was Churchill, in 1953 and 1954, who advocated getting rid of Musaddiq in Iran and the Egyptian government, Neguib or Nasser, because of the opening that, in his view, both provided to the Communists.
Jackson’s Psychological Strategy Board , drafted a speech for Eisenhower designed to forestall any Soviet overtures.
It called for free elections in Germany, a solution to the Austrian problem, and high-level talks on disarmament.
It made any high-level meetings with the new Soviet leadership contingent on the Soviets ending the Korean War.
Jackson, as “Eisenhowet’s trusted associates’ and the driving force behind ‘plans for a psychological warfare offensive’ aimed at Moscow.
This underscores the fact that from the very beginning, Rostow was heavily involved, at the highest levels of the Eisenhower administration, with critical policy issues related to contaianment and anti-Soviet policies.
Rostow’s association with both the Eisenhower and Kennedy administrations also supports the contention that a strong relationship existed between the policies of both with regard to the relationship between economic development, political reform, and the over-arching strategy of containment.
Jackson, strongly supported a summit conference with the Soviet leadership immediately following the death of Stalin.
He argues that it would have headed off the Soviet ‘peace initiative’, and might have resulted in the unification of Germany on terms favorable to the West.
Churchill’s intervention and suggestions were believed to be premature, and even Macmillan and Eden expressed concerns in that regard; Eisenhower functioned in staff mode and allowed controversial decisions to sort themselves out, thus precluding a decisive initiative from the top.
The President, Dulles, and the State Department had all criticized ‘summitry’ in the form of Yalta and Potsdam and were afraid of domestic ‘right-wing’ Republican criticism and the rising influence of Senator Joseph McCarthy.
These differences in interpretation notwithstanding, the fact remains that Rostow played an important part as a ‘Cold Warrior’ in the policy-formulation process in the Eisenhower administration.
At times, he may have advocated a more aggtessive approach to engaging the Soviets but it was always with the same strategic view of subverting the Soviet empire.
This work is well worth reading for a well-documented perspective on the decisions of March 11 and a birds-eye view of Rostow’s early involvement with Cold War policy and the Eisenhower administration.
Rostow analyzed Soviet society in light of the expected departure of Stalin from the political scene.
Completed just prior to Stalin’s death, Rostow revised the last chapter after it.
The work provides a useful glimpse into the thinking the drove policy advisors and the Eisenhower administration in the immediate aftermath of Stalin’s death.
Rostow’s book The Process of Economic Growth also increased the level of his participation in early Eisenhower policy planning.
Rostow attempts to explain within a historical context the phenomenon of economic development.
His discussions of stages of growth and the requirements for transition from one stage to another caught the attention initially of Eisenhower’s and later of Kennedy’s administration.
The book provides insight into the importance of economic development as a policy pillar in both administrations.
Ideology and association with the Communists drove United States policy, while economic interests drove the British.
Harper & Row, 1969, 141. nN Chapter 1 Eisenhower, Dwight D., The White House Years: Mandate for Change 1953-1956.
In 1952, as Eisenhower was leaving his post at SHAPE, he stopped in London for talks with Churchill and Foreign Secretary Anthony Eden.
Eisenhower informed them that ‘he knew of no other American so well qualified’ to become Secretary of State.
Harold Macmillan, in The Blast of War 1939-1945, makes it plain that the British concerns about Dulles began with their contacts with him during the Second World War.
Dulles told the British that ‘it was utterly futile’ for London to try to convince the United States public of the benefits of colonialism.
Only through working in cooperation with the United States to better the lot of developing nations could something positive be achieved.
In 1951, Dulles worked on Far East issues for the Truman administration.
British Foreign Minister Herbert Morrison believed that Dulles had acted duplicitously on a series of issues, including the trilateral ANZUS Pact with New Zealand and Australia that excluded Britain, a bilateral pact with Japan that did not allow Japan to make its own choice about recognizing one of the two Chinas, and a bilateral pact with the Phillipines that excluded Hong Kong and Malaya.
This lack of trust in Dulles reflected itself in Eden’s relationships with him.
On 13 November 1952, Eden met with Dulles, who asserted that the Western nations had to present a united front in dealing with non-Western problems in the developing world.
Eden agreed, but he may have been alerted by Herbert Morrison that Dulles could not be trusted, undermining any real willingness on Eden’s part to work with the Secretary of State.
In fact, in traditional British parlance, the ‘Middle East’ referred to the Persian Gulf and what is now referred to as Southwest Asia.
Just as Britain worried about the political connectivity and the impact of events in the Arab Middle East on the situation in Iran, Afghanistan, and British India in the 19th and early 20th centuries, the Eisenhower and Kennedy administrations also treated the region as politically, economically, and culturally connected in the mid-20th century.
As a case in point, the State Department lumped Greece together with the Middle East, in a desk that had responsibility for Greece, Turkey, and Iran.
Because of the NATO connection, the CIA placed Greece and Turkey in Europe and Iran in its Near East Division, which also included Pakistan and India.
The State Department also placed Pakistan and India in the same bureau, that of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs.
The State Department placed North Africa, with the exception of Egypt and sometimes Libya, into the Africa bureau, while the CIA placed all the Arabic-speaking countries in the Near East Division.
At the NSC level, these slight organizational differences were totally transparent because the same set of experts had responsibility for what amounted to the Muslim Middle East — Morocco to Pakistan and India, and often beyond to Southeast Asia.
Thus the historical view of the region contributed not only to connectivity in policy formulation, but also to the bureaucratic organizational structure set up to deal with the region, which tended to reinforce this broader conceptualization of region.
While there were peripheral organizational differences, a cohesive core existed based on Egypt, the Levant, Arabia, the Persian Gulf, Iran, Pakistan, and India.
Louis’s work lays out the various schemes through which the British hoped to maintain their influence in the Arab Middle East and Persian Gulf under the Labour government of Clement Atlee, 1945-1951.
He points out that Atlee’s government had no desire to pull out of the Middle East or to allow independent states to pursue policies detrimental to British interests.
Rather, the Labour government hoped to use regional collective security arrangements to maintain its influence and indirect control.
Churchill’s overarching foreign policy goals, namely British influence and control, were the same; Churchill was merely more willing to use coetcive means to accomplish them.
Eisenhower fumed that the British ‘went blindly ahead’, and domestic riots forced the Jordanians to withdraw, not only handing London a diplomatic defeat but also, clearly more annoying, making the United States, as well as Britain, the focus of local unrest.
Rostow served as an advisor to the Eisenhower administration from 1953 to 1958.
On February 8, in talks with Anthony Eden, the British Foreign Secretary, Eisenhower recommended that the British attempt to settle the Buraimi Oasis issue with Saudi Arabia by direct high-level talks, and reaffirmed American support for the tripartite agreement of May 25, 1950 made by France, Britain, and the United States on controlling potential Arab332 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 GREATER MIDDLE EAST AND THE COLD WAR Israeli hostilities.
The exchange leaves the impression that Eisenhower sought to warn the British against a more aggressive approach to its regional problems.
Eisenhower’s remembrance of events diverges somewhat from the historical record.
The Shah’s failure to remove Musaddigq, followed by his abdication, shook official Washington to its core.
President Eisenhower’s 1963 reflections on Musaddiq focused much more on the Iranian Prime Minister’s ‘stability’ than did contemporary accounts.
Apparently Musaddiq’s habit of appearing in his pajamas perturbed the President — he mentioned it several times in his memoirs.
The 1951 assassination of General Razmara became the feared model for what might happen to the Musaddiq government.
In Bill, James A and William Roger Louis , Musaddiq, Iranian Nationalism, and Oil.
In Bill, James A and William Roger Louis Musaddiq, Iranian Nationalism, and Oi.
The Shi’a Ulama strongly opposed the Tudeh and secular nationalist forces in Iran, and played a significant role in the fall of Musaddiq.
Opposition to the Shah would follow, but use of Islamic influence in the Cold War struggle against the Soviet Union and various Communist and Socialist groups became a standard feature of United States policy, reaching its apogee in the Afghan War of the 1980s.
Bill describes the defection of Ayatollah Abul Qassim Kashani from the Musaddig coalition in early 1953 as ‘the major blow’ to the National Front government.
The move forced Musaddiq into a position more dependent on the leftist parties and particularly the Tudeh.
It is interesting that Dulles’ first major trip through the Middle East and South Asia coincided with a ‘crisis’ in Anglo-American relations that became the major topic of an NSC meeting even before the Secretary returned home.
The British dislike of Dulles reflected a difference in personal style.
And that on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays, he holds a press conference.
Much to the chagrin of the British, the American Embassy in Cairo had imposed itself as the ‘go-between’ for Anglo-Egyptian negotiations.
American Ambassador Jefferson Caffery used his relationship with British Ambassador Sit Roger Stevens and the relationship between his political officer William Lakeland, Muhammad Heikal, and Nasser himself to gain a bird’s-eye view of the negotiations.
Lakeland became the intermediary carrying versions of the agreement back and forth between the Egyptians and the British.
Lakeland’s role would have consequences later, when he was branded by key British officials in the Jordanian crisis of 1960 as too pro-Nasserist and willing to give up on the Hashemite regime.
Lakeland stated that only the belief that significant ‘economic and military aid’ would be forthcoming from the United States convinced the Egyptians to compromise on the departure date of the British, on issues related to British redeployment to the Canal Zone, and on the issue of independence for Sudan.
Heikal stated that Nasser took Dulles at his word and sent Ali Sabry to Washington to negotiate for arms.
At the same time, Nasser assured officers in the Egyptian army that the United States would provide them with modern arms.
As Heikal put it, all Nasser got back was Ali Sabry himself — an embarrassment to both Nasser and Sabry.
The latter became an implacable foe of United States interests in Egypt and the region.
Dulles rejected Syria and the Shishakli regime as ‘very unpopular’ and potentially unstable.
This work provides a very good narrative of the process through which the Baghdad Pact came into being, and of the Egyptian struggle with Iraq for influence in the Arab world.
In addition, in treating anti-American propaganda on the part of Egypt, Podeh appeats to ignore, or is ignorant of, the CIA’s role in supporting Nasser.
During part of 1954, in order to protect Nasser from internal criticism, the CIA was actually assisting in creating anti-American propaganda.
In Egypt, various groups opposed the 1954 compromise agreement on two basic grounds.
It allowed the British almost two years to complete their withdrawal from the Canal Zone, and it provided for the ‘reactivation’ of the British bases in the event of war or a threat to the Canal.
When a member of the Brotherhood attempted to assassinate Nasser in October 1954, he used the incident as justification to crush the Brotherhood and his other political opponents Copeland, Miles, The Game Player.
Copeland states that the CIA brought in Paul Linebarger, ‘perhaps the greatest ‘black’ propagandist who ever lived’, to coach the Egyptians and that a ‘goodly portion’ of the anti-American propaganda coming out of Cairo was written with CIA help.
This article provides an interesting contemporary perspective on the ‘northern tier’ concept, and the difficulties faced by the Eisenhower administration in its early attempts to come up with a containment strategy for the Middle East.
There was a long discussion of the role of the American Zionist lobby at the NSC meeting on July 22, 1954.
Eisenhower’s impression of Israel showed a remarkable lack of understanding of the nature of the Jewish state.
It was not anticipated that the Johnston Mission would bring back a clear-cut solution; it was intended as an exploratory step to determine whether a basis for agreement existed.
The new administration saw the Jordan waters as ‘a central element of American policy in the Near East.
With respect to the Arab-Israel conflict, generally, it is clear that we are not leaving the problems to solve itself.
Incidentally, concerns about the influence of the Zionist lobby surfaced in discussions of the Johnston effort.
Neff makes an excellent case that the Gaza raid was the key event that ultimately drove Nasser to Moscow for the arms that the United States would not provide.
The Egyptian Army comprised Nasset’s political constituency and he had to deliver arms, and at least the appearance of military parity with the Israelis, if he was to survive.
The Gaza raid was as much the result of internal Israeli politics and the gross embarrassment caused by the Lavon Affair as it was about security-related issues on the border.
In the Lavon Affair, the Egyptians had uncovered an Israeli covert operation in which Israeli agents in Egypt were to attack British and American consulates and embassies with explosives.
The goal was to blame the attacks on the Egyptians and increase Anglo-American anti-Arab sentiment.
To restore morale in the IDF, Ben-Gurion pressed Moshe Sharett to authorize the raid.
Sharon had previously carried out a violent raid against the Palestinian village of Qibya with numerous non-combatant deaths.
The scale of the casualties not only horrified Sharett but also placed Nasser in potentially the same internal political situation as that experienced by King Faruq following the failure of Egyptian forces in the 1948 war.
Nasser told Sir Ralph Stevenson that he had to have arms to maintain his government, no matter what the source.
Nasser delivered the same message to United States Ambassador Byroade in Cairo.
Vatikiotis also credits the combined impact of the Gaza Raid and the Baghdad Pact negotiations as the determining factors causing Nasser to embrace ‘non-alignment’ and seek arms from the Soviet Union.
Amam focuses primarily on justifying the demise of Egyptian Field Marshall Abd-al-Hakim al-Amir following the 1967 war.
The author emphasizes the theme of the Egyptian military being out of step with Nasset’s political goals and agenda.
Amam’s view, while something of a rationalization, fits closely with the views of Neff on the subject of Nasser’s need to placate the military in general and Amer in particular.
With the dismissal of General Glubb from the Jordan Arab Legion, an incipient military struggle for power was added to the already volatile compound of refugees’ hatred for Israel, and anti-British, anti-West, anti-Baghdad Pact sentiment.
Macmillan took pride in his attempt to foster a climate of mediation and cooperation between India and Pakistan at the Commonwealth Conference, 1957.
It included himself, Nehru, and the Pakistani Foreign Minister, Husayn Shaheed Suhrawardy.
At this meeting, Macmillan encouraged both to accept the International Bank’s proposal to settle claims related to the Indus River waters.
The Prime Minister believed that this might be the first step to a negotiated settlement on Kashmir.
This very British view is interesting in that it reflects the British view that a unity existed on the subcontinent under the Raj — a contention that continues to be debated today.
Also Interview with Christopher Van Hollen on 12 June 2003, Washington, DC; Van Hollen is the former Assistant Secretary of State for South Asian Affairs.
He stated that neither the Truman nor Eisenhower administrations saw any real chance for compromise on India’s part with regard to Kashmir.
Ralph Bunche of the United Nations discussed Indian attitudes in general and Kashmir in particular with the United States Ambassador to India, Ernest A Gross, and his staff.
He commented that the Indians had emphasized the military in a recent National Day celebration and that this was directed not toward Communism, but toward Pakistan.
It also appeared that the Indian officials whom he had met were ‘discouraged’ by the prospect of years of economic struggle to get the country on its feet and deal just with the population and food problems.
He reported that, in Pakistan, the military received even greater focus and that Kashmir remained the dominant theme in all discussions.
The Pakistanis were deeply concerned that India wanted the situation to ‘drift’, and solidify into permanent Indian control.
Within the context of the discussion on Pakistan, Nixon commented that in his talks with the Shah and Prime Minister Zahedi in Iran, both focused on military aid.
He clearly believed that stability in Iran depended on a strong military and that this model also applied to other countries in the region.
He also supported direct immediate aid because he believed that the northern-tier organization would take too much time to unfold.
Rostow should get credit for seeing early signs of a Soviet-Chinese split over national interests.
Ram highlighted not only Western opposition to some of the content in Menon’s plan for prisoner of wat repatriation in Korea but also Soviet attacks on him at the United Nations.
Ram was something of an apologist for Menon and attempted to explain away many of his obvious shortcomings.
Ram called the ‘Jeep Scandal’ a ‘mistake’ rather than malfeasance, and he appeared to be using the incident with the Soviets to portray Menon as something other than a Communist or Soviet agent of influence.
This comment is all the more significant when viewed in the context of Adel’s interpretation of Korean events.
The point here is that even those holding radical leftist views of events found themselves taken aback by the vehemence of the Soviet attack on Menon.
William Phillips Talbot published this work when he was the executive director of the American Universities Field Staff.
When World War I broke out, Talbot served in naval liaison in the China-Burma-India theater, returning to India after the war as a foreign correspondent for the Chicago Daily News to cover the transfer of power in 1947.
Talbot knew many of the leading figures of Indian politics personally, including Nehru, Gandhi, and Patel.
The Institute of Current World Affairs published an account of his walk and conversation with Gandhi in the East Bengal district of Noakhali during the turmoil of 1947.
In 1961, Talbot became the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs and one of the key drivers of regional policy from Cairo to Calcutta.
Days after the assassination of President John F Kennedy, Talbot would play an instrumental role in the maintenance of the pro-Pakistani tilt in United States foreign policy in South Asia under the administration of President Lyndon B Johnson.
He viewed it as a mistake on the part of the United States and Britain to ‘rely more and more on the military aspect’ of alliances instead of focusing on economic development.
Brown struggles with balancing Nehru’s political theory and its practical application.
There is just as sound an argument that the arms agreement provided Nehru with an ‘out’ vis-a-vis negotiations with Pakistan over Kashmir, and that he was more than happy to get that bonus along with his economic aid from Washington.
Nehru was nothing if not a practical politician, and as such, principles were usually fine as long as the price was not too high.
Menon made the cover of Time, with a snake charmet’s pipe on one side and a menacing cobra on the other.
Appointed High Commissioner to Britain in 1947, scandals forced Menon to resign in 1952.
Menon paid over $300,000 for 15 British army surplus Jeeps, none of which would run or had spare parts.
He also purchased a palatial mansion as the residence and a Rolls Royce for the High Commissioner.
He did all of this at a time when the Indian government faced a monumental economic crisis.
Ram, a nephew, wrote that the Jeep Scandal was an error of judgment in that Menon arranged the contrast privately and not through government channels.
Another proMenon biographer explained the scandal in terms of a controversy centered on Sudir Gosh, who was Vallabahbhai Patel’s candidate for the London post, and Menon.
This account claims that the Gosh brought the Jeep scandal to light and Patel used it to discredit Menon.
Interestingly, not even his most ardent supporters offered any explanation of what happened to the money.
Akbar criticized the United States for ‘sniping’ the Control Commission into ‘impotence’, but at the same time he felt that the ‘backlash’ against Menon, because of his ‘acerbic, and garrulous speeches’, was detrimental to India and to Nehru personally.
Gopal stated that Nehru obtained a resolution calling for all “Great Powers’ to stay out of Vietnam and to let the Vietnamese settle their differences.
Describing Dulles as ‘hardly an ebullient personality even under the most salubrious circumstances’, Cooper states that his arrival that ‘gray April day lent little joy’ to either the ‘cheerless’ surroundings or the ‘oppressive mood’ of the United States delegation.
Interview of Walt Rostow by Roby Barrett on June 12, 2002 at LBJ Library in Austin, Texas.
Consequently he was treated as an upstart in politics depending on the Prime Minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, for support, patronage and sustenance.
This lengthy interview published in book form provides interesting first-hand responses by Nehru to a series of questions affecting policy in the mid-1950s.
It is a part of a much larger collection of Indian government publications at the Australian National Library, Canberra.
DOS, Office of Libraries and Intelligence Acquisition, Division of Biographic Information, CRES, CIA-RDP8001446R000100170033-3, 10.
With regard to the Colombo incident, it stated that Ceylonese Prime Minister Sir John Kotelawala jumped up’ and ‘demanded’ that Menon either apologize or ‘leave the Conference’ on the threat that Kotelawala would ‘walk out’ if Menon did not do one or the other.
The participants in the meeting discussed the lack of a cleat British position on the conference, citing a lack of any instructions on the matter from London.
The Embassy in New Delhi commented that the British attitude toward the conference was one of cautious welcome.
This raises a broader and perhaps in some quarters more controversial point about the Algerian conflict and the present work.
In fact, remarkable unanimity existed between the Western powers, the Arab states, and the non-aligned states that the French needed to get out of Algeria.
This unanimity did not always take the same form, but the basic premise was that self-determination should be the basis for the outcome of the struggle in Algeria.
Despite Cairo’s support for the FLN, the United States never felt as threatened by Nasserism in Algeria because there was a fundamental recognition that the independence movement was indigenous and that the Algerian leadership was almost as concerned about maintaining its independence from Nasser as it was about gaining it from France.
In addition, the Algerian movement had very strong critical support from pro-Western and anti-Nasserist political leaders in Tunisia and Morocco.
Algeria was a special case, and only fit into the Middle East policy models pursued by Eisenhower and Kennedy from the standpoint that both administrations understood that colonialism in Africa and Middle East was coming to an end and both wanted to see independent non-Communist, if not pro-Western, states emerge.
Algeria was a stumbling block to NATO policy in Europe and a problem for French political stability, posing bilateral problems for the United States and France.
The problem was more binary in nature, and revolved around decisions in Paris, not in Arab capitals.
Within a matter of months, the importance of the conference and its impact on the Eisenhower administration’s perception of Western interests in the region would become more apparent.
Menon made it clear he was anti-west and antiUnited States Nehru had drifted far from Gandhi.
This is a harsh judgment coming from a sympathetic advocate of the Civil Rights movement in the United States who was presumed sympathetic toward Gandhian ideas on non-violent protest.
It is indicative of many American reactions to meeting with Nehru in person.
In addition to Powell, Chester Bowles had discussed attending, but was convinced by the White House not to do so.
Indraprastha, 1982, 736, in which Nehru compares the respective positions of India and Egypt in the British colonial system.
And the way imperialism functions in its efforts to suppress these nationalist movements is also much the same.
It is hardly surprising that Nasser would become the focus of a campaign to bring Egypt into the non-aligned group.
In 1955, he became information officer at the Egyptian Embassy in Washington.
He would later work for Muhammad Hussein Heikal at A-Abram during the height of the Nasserist era.
According to Hakki, Bandung is the key to understanding Nasser and Nasserist Egypt.
This self-image of superiority and importance drove everything he did in the 1950s and 1960s.
Nehru and Sukarno told him that he was the leader of the Arab world and he believed it.
Something of a consensus exists that Nasser, like many other world leaders, viewed dealing with Nehru as tedious.
Eveland provides an excellent description of the arms negotiations with Nasser.
The United States was willing to provide $20 million in arms and equipment suitable for internal security purposes.
Eveland commented that Mossad had organized the Zionist lobby in Washington to oppose the arms deal even before the exploratory delegation had departed Cairo.
In addition, the CIA, represented by Copeland and Roosevelt, had no legal basis on which to negotiate a major arms agreement because it required Congressional approval.
Eveland stated that Ambassador Jefferson Caffery and Deputy Chief of Mission G Lewis Jones were concerned that Nasset’s expectations had risen to the point that the likely failure of the CIA effort to broker an arms deal would have serious long-term consequences.
Goodpaster stated that the Soviets took advantage of what they perceived as a moment of ‘weakness and confusion’ in the United States administration to renege on their agreements and move into the Middle East.
He speculated that Moscow calculated that should Eisenhower die, the ensuing change in administration would offer additional opportunities to expand their influence.
Goodpaster firmly believed that if Eisenhower had not had a heart attack, the Czech arms deal would never have happened.
China stole the limelight from India because the Chinese and Indian views happened to coincide; and people are inclined to think when this happens, that India has yielded to China, rather than the other way around.
Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehra’s Speeches and the Final Communiqué from the Publications Division of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting , found in the India collection at the Australian National Library, Canberra.
This was published to counter the impression that India and Nehru had taken a back seat to other nations at the Bandung Conference.
In Washington, Kermit Roosevelt, the almost mythic hero of Tehran 1953, refused to participate in British-sponsored schemes to overthrow Nasser.
Upon returning, Roosevelt told the White House that the sole reason that Tehran had worked was because the momentum against the Musaddiq regime already existed.
In contrast, he pointed out that Nasser was actually popular and that a coup had no chance of success.
You have to have so much going your way before you dare undertake them.
First and foremost, you have to have the vast majority of the people behind you.
And you have to have a leadership that is better than the one in power and one that can take control.
Roosevelt advised the White House to get used to Nasser because an ‘Iran option’ simply did not exist.
Roosevelt actually became so aggravated with the elder Dulles that he quit over persistent attempts to enlist him in attempts to overthrow Nasser.
Srodes believes that Roosevelt’s friendship for Nasser played a role in the decision.
Allen was upset about it and recognized eventually that I couldn’t take it any longer.
Faris was an Americaneducated Palestinian who had served as the Head of the Arab Desk in the Overseas Operations Branch of the Office of War Information.
This work provides an interesting perspective on the growing perception that United States policy in the 1953-1954 timeframe had fallen under British and Israeli influence.
This was written prior to the Soviet arms deal with Nasser, and Faris predicted that Arab perceptions of United States policy would result in major policy gains for the Soviet Union in the Arab Middle East.
Interspersed throughout his narrative, Kyle provides a series of excellent snapshots of the Indian role.
Despite a disagreement over tactics and concern in India that problems with the Canal would harm the Indian economy, Nehru supported Nasser’s right to nationalize the Canal.
Krishna Menon told the British that India could not come out publicly against Nasser, but that India would push for an international conference and encourage the Egyptian leader to attend.
Kyle concluded by saying that Nehru’s solution of an international conference appealed to Eisenhower.
Although something of a reach, Kyle infers that had Nehru taken a more personal role Suez might have been avoided.
Lall, a senior Indian diplomat and the self-described ‘closest aide’ to Krishna Menon for 17 years, related Nehru’s disillusionment with Menon.
The latter failed to gain acceptance of Nehru’s plan for avoiding war over Suez, and then voted against the United States resolution condemning the Soviet Union for its actions in Hungary.
As a result, Nehru telephoned Lall every morning with specific instructions for Menon to carry out in that day’s UN session.
Heikal argues that Suez underscored waning British influence and the beginning of real problems for the British in protecting their oil interests in the Middle East.
A Personal Account , Selwyn Lloyd, the British Foreign Secretary, offered a systematic, if biased, assault on American policy, arguing that it was simply naive and wrong-headed.
The author discusses the general confusion and disagreement among presidential advisors and military officers when it became apparent that the Anglo-French attack was under way.
According to Admiral Arleigh Burke, Dulles ordered him to prepare to engage anyone in the Mediterranean, including the French and British.
The Secretary of State then headed off to talk to Allen Dulles and the President.
The ditection to Burke would later be denied, as would the refusal to float the pound sterling unless the British troops were withdrawn.
Mosley also points out that Dulles was preoccupied with Hungary, exhausted, and would be hospitalized within days for major cancer surgery.
Nevertheless, there was an undercurrent in the administration that the United States stance against intervention had been a mistake.
In less understanding accounts, Eisenhower and Dulles had a choice of ‘Nasser or Eden’ and they chose the ‘assassin’ over their old ally.
Later, the author was British Ambassador to Iraq following the July coup.
Trevelyan stated that he never supported intervention, either in Egypt in 1956 or Iraq in 1958, because both lacked any real chance of success given the post-World War II environment.
Trevelyan clearly viewed the post-1958 period as an ‘epilogue’ to British dominance in the Arab Middle East.
See also Vernon Bogdanor’s article ‘Suez changed everything’ in The Times, 29 October 2006, 21.
He also pointed to later comments by Eisenhower regretting that the United States had intervened as it had in the crisis.
These views tend to reflect a British school of thought which was prevalent at the time in the Colonial Office that Suez was a net negative for Britain in the Middle East.
To the contrary, with pretentions about prerogatives in the former colonial empire gone, the British government could focus on downsizing its commitments; London no longer had the ability to support the breadth of its former commitments in the Middle East, nor was it necessary to do so.
British foreign policy was hardly ‘ruined’; rather, it merely took a different and perhaps more effective and certainly more sophisticated form.
Macmillan shifted the responsibility and the costs largely to the United States, and yet maintained a very effective program of influence over those policies through Washington.
Eisenhower’s decision was correct in 1956 and even mote correct in the hindsight of 50 years.
His lament about not supporting the British arguably had as much to do with wishing that the British, as opposed to the US, still had responsibility for the region than it did getting rid of Nasser.
As for Bogdanor’s comment on the Falklands, Thatcher knew that she required the support of the US, politically and with tactical and strategic United States intelligence support, and she got it.
Bogdanor also blames Suez for Britain’s estrangement from Europe, and for the French commitment to Europe.
The British privately voiced their concern that, given the unlikely possibility of a direct Soviet attack on the Middle East, the Eisenhower Doctrine was ill-advised and served only to inflame local nationalism and anti-Western sentiment.
In November 1956, Ben-Gurion made withdrawal even more difficult by claiming in the Knesset that the Sinai was historically a part of Israel, and by asserting Israel’s ‘right’ to expand beyond its 1956 borders.
Although partly for domestic Israeli political consumption, his statements and intransigence confirmed in Arab minds the aggressive and expansionist aims of the Jewish state.
Copeland offers an entertaining account of the various reactions to the Eisenhower Doctrine.
Complicated or not, Copeland points out that Nasser understood that the Eisenhower Doctrine targeted his version of Arab unity and his influence in the region.
At the same time, it encouraged his enemies, chief among them Nuri Sa’id and the Hashemites in Iraq.
At their first meeting in October 1952, during a dinner, Nasser made it clear to Kermit Roosevelt that Neguib was a figurehead by dismissing or ignoring contemptuously everything that the General said.
Copeland credits William Lakeland, the Political Officer at the United States Embassy in Cairo, with being the first official American to grasp that Nasser was the real power in the Revolutionary Command Council and not Neguib.
It was through Lakeland’s friendship with Muhammad Heikal, then just a reporter in Cairo, that the primary early conduit for communication between the Embassy and the RCC was established.
Nasser’s view of a ‘sound democratic life’ fell somewhat short of pluralistic democracy.
He was suspicious of political parties, particularly after the Muslim Brotherhood attempted to assassinate him in 1954 and leftist elements strongly supported more radical measures and closer ties with the Soviet bloc.
Arms from the Soviet Union were one thing, but political challenges from the Left were another.
Richards, an American student in Cairo in the early 1950s, knew many of the Ikbwan members personally.
His narrative of events in the 1953-1954 timeframe presents an historical narrative that is also a firsthand street-level view of events.
Nasset’s Philosophy of Revolution was partly propaganda to establish ideological credentials and partly a reflection of his personal revolutionary nationalism.
Nasser believed in the permanence of the revolutionary struggle, and would repeatedly return to revolutionary activities when moderate policies failed.
In Karpat, Kemal H , Political and Social Thought in the Contemporary Middle East.
Various calls for Arab unity over the years had anesthetized official Washington to the possibility of a real union.
The degree of surprise associated with the EgyptianSyrian union was attributed to a lack of adequate intelligence, and reflected itself in all manner of speculation, including the possibility of oil-sharing between Iraq and Egypt, the need to protect Kuwait and Iran, and Dulles’ comment that if Jordan fell, a general Arab/Israeli war would result.
Nasser apparently confided in Raymond Hare, the United States Ambassador in Cairo, that the union with Syria would become a ‘great headache’ and that most of the RCC actually opposed it.
Most accounts of Nasser’s reluctance to form the union came from a later period, after its collapse, and as a result ring somewhat false.
There is little doubt that by 1962-3 Nasser regretted his decision but, in 1958, riding the crest of popularity and seeing a future full of promise, there is little doubt that he believed that he could manage the difficulties.
Clearly, in 1958, the Syrian adventure represented the welcomed first step on the road to Arab unity.
Stage-managed or not, the crowd clearly reflected the mood in the much of the Arab world.
Copeland points out that Nasser believed United States assertions about Soviet designs on Syria, but he found American protestations of innocence in that regard somewhat disingenuous.
Barry Lampton, the Egyptian desk officer in NEA, provided a briefing memorandum to the Secretary of State that included a background paper describing the sources for and development of the union.
He traced the union effort back to a fundamental Egyptian and Syrian hostility to the Baghdad Pact and the Syro-Egyptian military pact of October 20, 1955, which provided for a joint military command under an Egyptian general officer.
In this interpretation, the Turko-Syrian crisis of September 1957 created the catalyst for a vote in both the Syrian and Egyptian parliaments on November 17, 1957 to explore political union.
Lampton’s argument followed the line of reasoning offered by Nasser, namely that the latter feared a Communist takeover.
NEA also pointed out that the Syrians granted the Egyptian leader virtual dictatorial powers, making it an offer that Nasser could not refuse.
Nutting provides an interesting evaluation of Abd-al-Hamid Sarraj, the head of the Syrian intelligence and security service or muhabbarat.
True or not, the Eisenhower administration’s frustration with civilian government throughout the Middle East-South Asia region had brought the United States government to just such a conclusion.
Military rule meant stability and was preferable to a civilian rule that invited plurality and Communist infiltration.
Heikal comments that the Soviets ‘were obliged to give the union their reluctant support’, despite the arrest of Communist supporters.
According to Heikal, it was the combination of the union and the suppression of Communist elements that made Nasser’s April 28, 1958 visit to Moscow a top-priority item in the Kremlin.
Washington was not the only Great Power attempting to gauge the potential for a relationship with the Egyptian leader.
Heikal believed that the Soviets not only were intent on impressing Nasser but also wanted to calibrate his relationship with the US, his views on the Arab-Israeli dispute, and their own long-term potential for a relationship.
The report on the situation in Syria reflected Nasser’s own explanation.
The popularity of the union with the Arab ‘street’ and its unpopularity in Saudi Arabia, Lebanon, Israel and among Syrian Communists was noted.
Interestingly, there was no mention of Iraq or support for an alternative union.
Exxecutive Sessions of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee , Volume VIII, Eighty-Fourth Congress Second Session, 1956.
Morse, in arguing with the other Senators, stated that the United States should support ‘free states’, which in his view excluded most of the states in the Middle East and Africa.
In the same session several of the Senators expressed concern that Nasser was playing the United States off against the Soviet Union on the issue of the Aswan Dam.
Under Secretary of State Herbert Hoover, Jr. had made the case earlier that the dam at Aswan ‘would be built’; it was just a question of whether it would be with Western or Soviet aid.
Given the lack of support in Congress, whether the administration supported the dam or not may was probably irrelevant; there was considerable Congressional opposition.
The debate was indicative of the difficulties that the administration had in getting the aid that it wanted to support containment policy in the Middle East and to maintain a balanced policy in the region that included support for allies, aid to the non-aligned, and placating the pro-Israeli lobby.
Copeland’s description of the atmosphere in Beirut matches exactly the reality of double-dealing, so long a part of the Lebanese political landscape.
While his descriptions of the camaraderie between competing intelligence services is to a degree exaggerated, there is some truth to it.
Sa’ib Salaam, Abdullah Yafi, Adnan Hakim, and Abdullah Mashnuq were pro-Nasserist operatives around whom the Egyptians built their strategy to mobilize the street mob.
The Four were supported with money and weapons by Egyptian intelligence and Sarraj.
Suez through Egyptian Eyes (London: André Deutsch, 1986), the author points out that within the framework of the Baghdad Pact, so-called ‘free nations’ were not allowed to address certain issues that were central to their own security.
At the Baghdad Pact meeting on February 11, Zionism and Israel were, according to the American representative, topics that he had no authority to discuss with Pact members.
At the time of the Syrian-Egyptian union, Sa’id was not the Prime Minister, although he represented Iraq at the Baghdad Pact conference in Ankara.
His thinking was that Sa’id would cause an intensification of Egyptian and Syrian attacks and propaganda against both Jordan and Iraq.
Hussein did not like Sa’id on a personal level, and wanted his role limited to behind-the-scenes support for any new government.
The view that Nasser and the Soviets were in league in Lebanon persisted.
Dulles’ address to those present in this ‘restricted meeting’ of the Baghdad Pact, if rendered correctly by Bowker, was almost insulting to the delegates.
Perhaps this was a goad directed at Nuri Sa’id, since the initiator of any action had to be an Arab state and he represented the only Arab state present.
PRO, FO371/143197, in which Sir Michael Wright outlined the British view of a JordanianIraqi union.
Wright believed that union would strengthen the two weak Hashemite regimes and undermine UAR attempts to divide them.
Wright feared that Nuri was overreaching in his plans, but that the United States and Britain could hardly veto his activities for fear of demoralizing the anti-Nasser factions.
Johnston attached summaries of Egyptian news accounts to further illustrate the kind of pressure now confronting the Saudis.
See Page, Bruce, David Leitch, and Phillip Knightley, The Philby Conspiracy.
This telegram included a complete listing of the positions and appointees to the new UAR government.
Sarraj was the deputy to Nasser as head of the Executive Council for the Syrian Province.
Contemporary analysis of the situation illustrates the degree of uncertainty and concern, particularly over Saudi Arabia.
For all his oil riches, Saud’s financial position is so bad that world banks ceased several months ago to honor Saudi letters of credit.
This move on the part of Saudi Arabia represented a major setback for their perceived role in containing Nasser’s ambitions.
During much of 1957, many viewed King Saud as the most effective opposition to Nasser.
The British understood that the price of relations with Saudi Arabia required the British to withdraw support for Omani claims to the Buraimi Oasis.
As Riches put it, the British ‘could not abandon our friends’, meaning the Sultan of Oman.
This underscored the level of desperation for good news to which the administration had sunk.
The administration faced growing pressure in the press on the Middle East, and it was an election year.
He had no control over events, but was being pilloried for doing nothing to reverse the situation.
Describing Feisal as ‘pro-Nasserist’ emphasizes the unsophisticated view of the Middle East held at the highest levels.
Saud was an incompetent and arguably a degenerate as well, but the administration had pinned its hopes on him for leadership.
In contrast, Feisal would do more real damage to Nasset’s position in the Arab world than any another Arab leader.
Feisal was a realist who understood that reforms had to be made in Saudi Arabia if the Kingdom were to sutvive.
Feisal showed his interest in reforming the Kingdom, and explained what he was doing to reorganize the central administration of the government.
He also speculated on Yemen and stated that he hoped there would be no outside interference in Lebanon.
The Alexandria Consulate used Nicolas Rigos, a Greek businessman with excellent contacts in the Egyptian government, as a sounding board and information source.
Rigos believed that the US’s ‘new policy’ was so badly timed that much of the potential benefit was lost.
Its close proximity to the Moscow trip made it appear that Nasser and the Egyptians were in the driver’s seat.
In the Sudan, the Umma and Mahdist parties generally followed an anti-Nasserist line.
Egypt’s proximity to and historical involvement in Sudan made any form of ‘union’ with the UAR a bedrock point of political debate.
Sudan had historically opposed Egyptian expansion, having experienced Egyptian rule first-hand.
The British, having mid-wifed the creation of an independent Sudan, did not want to see it fall under Egyptian domination.
The Nasserists had the problem of projecting a Sudanese nationalist image within the context of a pro-Nasserist program.
A February 1958 border dispute with Egypt brought the issue of Sudanese nationalism to the forefront.
The NUP took the position that Sudan should not surrender territory, while Nasserist elements argued that closer cooperation and coordination with Cairo would avoid such incidents in the future.
Given the upcoming elections, the PDP and NUP recognized that support for formal union with Egypt would be political suicide.
The internal political situation quickly turned problematic when the PDP demanded half of the cabinet posts, including the Ministry of the Interior for an ardent Nasserist, Ali Abdal al-Rahman.
All involved anticipated additional Nasserist attempts to gain influence through the coalition government.
Imam Ahmad had ruled Yemen since the 1948 assassination of his father, Imam Yahya.
Imam Ahmad was quite the survivor, most probably because those closest to him were not.
Colin Reid of the London Daily Telegraph compiled a list of Imam Yahya’s fourteen sons that survived childbirth.
It is instructive on the nature of Yemeni internal politics, ordered from the oldest Ahmad to the youngest Abd-al-Rahman.
Ahmad became the Imam; Muhammad drowned (not easy in Yemen, without assistance); Hassan was exiled; Hussein was murdered; Ali moved to Coventry (no doubt motivated by self-preservation); Abdullah was beheaded; Qazim exiled; Mutahir died in Cairo; Ibrahim disappeared; Ismail went ‘abroad’ and apparently stayed there; Abbas was beheaded; Yahya disappeared; Muhsin was assassinated; and the youngest, Abd-al-Rahman continued to live in Yemen.
Following his tour in Cairo 1951-1955, Lakeland was given the post of Consul General in Aden and accredited to the Imamate in Yemen.
In November 1955, he traveled to Ta’iz and then on to Hudaydah on the coast to meet with Imam Ahmad.
There was at the time no real road from either Ta’iz or Hudaydah to the capital in Sanaa.
Holding court in Hudaydah, the Imam, wearing a large turban, sat on a raised dais and took petitions from his subjects.
When an issue of importance came up, the Imam would jot down a few notes on a scrape of paper, take off the turban, put the note inside the turban, and put the turban back on.
Lakeland missed Thanksgiving with his family in Aden that year because the Imam decided that he needed ‘more exposure to Yemeni culture’ and refused to allow him to depart until early December.
Looking for help, the British Consul in Ta’iz reported that King Saud had expressed his ‘deep concern’ over the presence of Soviet Communist in Yemen.
Badr, in fact, believed that with Soviet arms and Egyptian assistance the British could be driven from Aden and the Protectorate.
Also known as the Imam’s ‘spy and agentprovocateur’, Hadarani excited Kemp’s concern that he and the British government were about to be blamed for something.
This being Hadarani’s third visit, Kemp knew that something was definitely up.
One of the plotters allegedly had a letter on his person that implicated both the Americans and British.
In making their way down the street to the palace in Ta’iz, the plotters were intercepted and arrested.
The Yemenis of course believed that the British and their friends the Americans were behind the coup.
Lintcott wanted to inform the ‘Old Dominions’, get Canada, Australia, and New Zealand on board, and then later follow-up with the ‘new’ dominions of Pakistan and India, hoping that they would quietly acquiesce.
This also covered a rumor about the imminent demise of the Imam and Crown Prince Badr’s fall.
Fearing further pressure from Washington, and knowing the United States contact to be Muhammad al-’Amri, the Deputy Foreign Minister, the British attempted to undermine his credibility.
The British argued that ’Amri had consistently misrepresented their position in order to get the Imam’s permission to talk to the British.
Radcliffe, 1995; this is an interesting memoir on his career in the colonial service.
Having previously served in Jidda, he became Ambassador to Saudi Arabia in 1968, at which point the Jewish Chronicle ran a story about his appointment, including the fact that he was born to a poor Jewish working-class family in Glasgow.
At that point, King Feisal ordered his credentials withdrawn and Phillips left Saudi Arabia.
In early July 1958, the Sultan of Lah’j, a member of the Aden Confederation, defected to the Imam.
It was unfortunate timing, occurring only two weeks before the Iraqi coup.
This added to the United States view that the British had lost their touch in the Middle East.
In his memoirs, Eisenhower fails to mention the new policy toward Egypt.
He refers to Nasset’s political leanings as ‘still something of a mystery’ and briefly speaks of the ‘troubled and confused atmosphere’ at the close of the Baghdad summit.
Pressure had also been building in the press for a new policy approach to the Middle East.
A Time for Diplomatic Calm’ , had addressed the issue of Arab nationalism: “There is no reason why the United States should oppose the principle of Arab unity.
Indeed, we appear to support the recent Iraq-Jordan federation; we would not object to an eventual link between Morocco, Tunisia and Algeria; and we inferentially blessed the Syrian-Egyptian union when we recognized it.
It might be wise for us once again to make some mild show of approval for Nasser’s new state in order to demonstrate that it need not look only to Russia for help and psychological sympathy.
What we must make plain is that while we have no objection to Nasser’s confederation or to its extension through peaceful, voluntary adherence by other lands, we cannot tolerate moves to expand it by conspiracy or force.
A Change Toward Nasser’ concluded that the new policy ‘gamble’ had a good chance of paying off with better relations and Egyptian gratitude for American assistance.
The United States only released Egyptian assets after the British and French had done the same, but it was still viewed as a reaction to Nasser’s Moscow trip.
Hammerskjold told Dulles that he believed that the Syrians really had more control over the operations in Lebanon than the Egyptians.
Hammerskjold felt that Nasser ‘was not happy with the situation’ and wanted it to quiet down and wait for the elections, but that Sarraj and the Syrians had their own ideas about the disposition of Lebanon.
He also felt that, left to their own devices, the Lebanese ‘genius for compromise’ would work things out.
This is not to say that Nasser would have been unhappy with a pro-U.A.R. government in Beirut.
To the contrary, it would have been a major plus, but having supplied the arms and encouraged his new Syrian partners to support the revolt, his control was probably limited at this point.
In the 1950s, he became ‘disenchanted’ with the ‘Moslem politicians of the worst type’ who used Arab nationalism as a smoke screen for supporting Nasserist ambitions.
While Nasser probably agreed with Chamoun’s concern over linking Arab nationalism and Islam, the Lebanese President’s support of the Eisenhower Doctrine and the West in general made him a target for subversion.
At the same time, the Ambassador argued that the press ignored the ‘unanimous vote’ in the Jordanian parliament for union with Iraq.
In light of pronouncements against Nasser, Pack and Richardson state that the Administration’s position on Suez was hypocritical and inconsistent.
Washington had overthrown the government of Iran, toyed with subverting Nasser’s government, branded Nasser a ‘Middle East variety of international Communism’, denounced the illegal nationalization of the Suez Canal, and preached the dangers of radical nationalism in the Middle East to all who would listen.
When the opportunity to get rid of Nasser’s regime appeared, Eisenhower and Dulles failed to act, for presumably domestic political reasons related to the election of 1956, use of the Israelis, and personal pique at not being fully informed by the British and French.
Despite Chamoun’s ever shriller calls for support, the United States and Britain had managed to limit involvement to clandestine assistance.
Then the assassination of Nasib Metni, an effective, anti-Chamoun, pro-Nasser journalist, elevated Chamoun to prime suspect.
This set off an all-out revolt, fully aided and abetted by Sarraj, the Syrian security and intelligence chief, and various anti-Chamoun factions in Lebanon.
The British wanted to make sure that Canada and Australia were on board should a military operation be mounted.
In other words, it was questionable whether Nasserist Syria was the source of the problem or merely supporting pro-Nasserist indigenous Lebanese.
Macmillan convinced Eisenhower to offer more support to Jordan and Iraq.
This increased aid included $25 million to cover Jordan’s entire share of the costs of Jordanian-Iraqi union and part of Iraq’s share.
During this meeting, Assistant Secretary of State for NEA Rountree brought up the idea of replacing Chamoun with General Fuad Chehab, the Chief of Staff of the Lebanese Army.
While those present complained that Chehab had ‘recently shown a lack of political astuteness’ — Chehab had made the West unhappy by playing both sides in the Lebanese struggle — they concluded that Chehab was one of the few acceptable candidates.
PRO, FO371/134125 in which the British were clearly aghast at Dulles’ suggestion of getting the French, Turks, and even Pakistanis involved in any potential Lebanese operation.
On May 2, 1958, Mr Elath brought up the subject of Nasser with Selwyn Lloyd, the British Foreign Minister.
In making a case for outside intervention, Chamoun accused the UAR of providing the funding and leadership for the Lebanese revolt.
As a result, the United States administration had difficulty understanding where he stood in the conflict.
Washington had assumed that Chehab, a Maronite Christian, would support Chamoun, but the Lebanese imbroglio was not that simple.
Dulles believed that Chehab was ‘sitting on his hands’ and not prosecuting the war against the rebels and insurgents vigorously.
He was afraid that Chehab’s failure to act would necessitate intervention.
In the Foreign Service cables are usually written so that the officer in question can always argue that they were with right, or at least partially right.
No doubt, in July 1958, A David Fritzlan, Counselor of the Embassy, would liked to have had this dispatch back so that he could better choose his wording.
Macmillan learned of Nuri’s threat from Assistant Secretary of State Richard Rountree during the 9 June meeting with Eisenhower.
The King, whether by good management or good luck, has appeared as one bearing gifts to a province which has long been deprived of the fruits of the oil it produces.
Sir Michael Wright recommended the consideration of a ‘crash’ program to build a pipeline from Kirkuk to the Persian Gulf and a deepwater offloading facility on the Fao Peninsula near Basra.
Executive Sessions of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee , Volume X, Eighty-Fifth Congress Second Session, 1958.
Batatu provides an outstanding analysis of social and political movements in Iraq and how these movements and individuals interacted to produce the July revolution of 1958.
He suggests that ‘one must take a wider view of things’ in order to understand the importance of elements other than the military.
The events of July 14 must be seen in their natural historical context.
From this perspective, they are the climax of the struggle of a generation of the middle, lowermiddle, and working classes.
The author believes that this class involvement is what made July 14th a true revolution and not just another coup.
Batatu views the coup as the product of class struggle and irresistible historical forces; there is more than a little hindsight in this evaluation.
The coup was hardly inevitable; arguably it was the result of bad luck and incompetence.
It came as a big surprise, and it happened in an historical window that allowed it to survive — it endured.
It could have easily been just another of the many failed Iraqi revolts.
According to Warner, the British were able to reestablish control in Iraq because of the poor planning of the plotters, the lack of a solid military concept of operations, no Axis support, and the escape of the regent, Abd-al-‘Tlah, Nuri Sa’id, and other key pro-British elements.
Also, in 1941 there was never any doubt in London of what the coutse of action would be.
Warner’s short book on the coup in Iraq and the following campaigns in Iraq and Syria provides solid insight into the events in 1941 that returned Iraq to the British fold.
In 1958, Qasim would argue that his ‘revolution’ was merely the fulfillment of 1941.
This provides an excellent overview of the entire Iraqi campaign, including maps, diagrams, and pictures.
The military analysis is first-rate and the political analysis, although more limited, is also very good.
Eisenhower made his views clear on the British in the Middle East in his first meeting with Churchill after the election.
It should be noted that Qasim met with ‘catastrophic success’, to quote Donald Rumsfeld, but knew how to deal with it.
The first dealt with plotting against the security of the state, and the second with ‘corrupting’ the state.
For added leverage against political enemies, the new regime made the law retroactive back to September 1 1939.
This is an interesting analysis of what the United States Embassy believed to be prearranged ‘mob’ action in the immediate aftermath of the coup.
Sir Michael Wright provided an excellent narrative of events on 14 and 15 July in Baghdad.
This telegram included a list of those being tried for crimes against the Iraqi people.
Executive Sessions of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee , Volume X, 572.
The Pentagon suggested that planning also include also Jordan, Iraq, Syria, and the West Bank.
General Twining wanted a coordinated approach that included British, Turkish, and Israeli participation.
Cooler heads prevailed after Ambassador Frederick Reinhardt pointed out that the scale of Western intervention would probably determine the nature and scale of Soviet reaction.
During the meeting, Vice-President Nixon, no doubt with an eye toward the 1960 elections, urged the President to consult Congress and the Democrats.
Others present were reluctant to do this because they feared continued Democratic criticism.
In Baghdad, the Western embassies braced for more rioting on rumors of plans for intervention.
Wright and United States Ambassador Jernegan sought assurances from the Iraqi security chief, Brigadier Ahram Ahhad, that foreigners and foreign installations would be protected.
Remembering 1954, Eisenhower commented that India would have issues with the United States providing Pakistan with additional military aid.
Dulles provided a fairly accurate account of what actually happened, emphasizing the impromptu, nowor-never aspect of Qasim’s move.
He also added that the Iraqi government had been much more lax about security than the weaker governments in Jordan and Saudi Arabia, and this accounted for their survival.
There are elements of unity but there are great elements of divergence.
In this report on a conversation with Golda Mier, the Israeli Foreign Minister, the Embassy related Tel Aviv’s intentions of moving into the West Bank in the event of a collapse in Jordan.
Randall also discounted United States fears that an Israeli seizure of the West Bank would bring a general Middle Eastern war, simply because Nasser was not ready.
The Israeli Embassy tried to explain that Ben-Gurion’s remarks had been off-the-cuff, and did not represent a policy statement.
Nevertheless, Nasser could not help but take heed of any Israeli threat and of the bellicose editorials in the Israeli press.
British discomfiture at not being taken into Washington’s confidence on the initial approach to the Israelis was interesting.
When questioned on the subject, Dulles stated that he refused to warn the Israelis formally against intervening in that he saw no reason to ‘save Nasser any territory’ in the event of a coup or revolution in Amman.
Just the same, the United States refused to be a party to any Israeli occupation.
Meroz included the assassination of King Hussein or the establishment of a UAR republic.
Meroz had supported a hard line against the Arabs for his entire two-year tenure in Washington.
Quoting Lenin, Dulles discussed the Soviet use of nationalism and colonialism to influence the developing world.
He stated that the Soviet Union had three great advantages in the Middle East.
Second, the West needed oil and had to support the traditional regimes that owned most of it.
Third, ‘the USSR has a real asset in the personality of Nasser — who with great ability and fanaticism has given voice to the extreme pan-Arab movement.
Nasser is the hero who has walked upon the stage which has been set ...’ presumably by the Russians.
The article argued that America had ‘no conceivable grounds for conflict with Nasser’ or with Arab nationalism.
Barraclough represented a left-of-center view of the situation, but the views from right of center were hardly less critical.
The article advocated encouraging moderate Arab nationalism that did not threaten regional stability.
See also Edward Weintal , lamenting the loss of Baghdad Pact intelligence files.
Dulles complained to Lord Hood about a ‘great lack of information’, revealing that the United States was unclear about British intensions in Iraq and Jordan.
Riches’ career in the Middle East and Horn of Africa dated back to 1934.
Sir William Luce, the Governor General in Aden, endorsed these comments from two members of the Legislative Council in Aden, named Bashraheel and Bayoomi, and sent them on to London.
These two men were co-opted and supported by the British government in Aden, and were hardly unbiased observers.
Allen Dulles often failed to get justifiable credit for his long-term projections because of his pronouncements on near-term events.
For example, to Dulles, meetings between the Emir of Kuwait and Nasser signaled that Kuwait might join the UAR, when in fact, the Emir merely sought leverage against Iraq.
The coup in Iraq sparked real concern that Iran might be next, and drove sentiment for the United States to more closely align with Tehran as a further guarantee against just such an occurrence.
The frustration came through when Dulles referred to Nasser as being ‘like Hitler’ and when he described Nasser’s ambitions as ‘insatiable’, despite the underlying desire to work something out with the Egyptian leader.
Sir Charles did not like Rifai’ because Rifai’ was pro-American and did not take Sir Charles into his confidence.
PRO, FO371/134021, in which Willie Morris precipitated Johnston’s rebuttal letter by stating that the United States was more than happy to let Britain handle Jordanian affairs, until the Glubb dismissal and the termination of the Anglo-Jordanian Treaty.
Morris believed that Dulles and Eisenhower viewed the survival of Jordan as not only important, but also a realistic possibility, while NEA believed that British military support for the Amman regime was only a ‘reprieve’ in the process that would lead ‘inevitably’ to collapse.
PRO, FO371/134279, in which the Eisenhower administration expressed its frustration at being handicapped by British colonialism and by Zionism.
Dulles described Israel as a ‘millstone around his neck’, stating that ‘except for Israel we could form a viable policy’ in the Middle East.
PRO, FO371/134284, the British expressed concern that Ben-Gurion would use the Jordanian situation and British over-flights to extract new formal treaty arrangements from the West, guaranteeing Israel’s frontiers and a supply of advanced weaponry.
Fearing that Washington might agree, the British encouraged the United States to resist Israeli demands for a guarantee of Israel’s territorial integrity, and for a formal agreement recognizing Israel’s unilateral claim to assistance.
The British urged Washington to maintain a ‘free hand’ on the basis of its current relationship with Israel.
The modifications included a statement on improving US-Yemen relations to counteract Soviet penetration there.
In addition, there was an acknowledgement of the problem of the British in Aden.
In this message, Crawford discusses in detail the strong Communist opposition to any formal alignment with Cairo.
The Communists went on to state that they viewed a ‘federal union’ like that between Yemen and the UAR as the proper relationship, and not unification.
The declaration went on to argue that the union between Egypt and Syria had its problems as well.
By the end of 1958, Nasser had concluded that the real threat to his leadership of the Arab nationalist movement and to his vision for the UAR lay in Baghdad.
In reporting on his visit to Baghdad, Rountree stated that the Communist-controlled press attacked with equal ferocity any hint of a Qasim-Nasser or QasimUnited States rapprochement.
He also stated that Soviet aid to Egypt and the state of UAR-Iraq relations contributed to a real ‘conflict of interests’ for Nasser.
Rountree also briefly discussed the widely-held belief in Baghdad, which the Communists fostered, that both the United States and the UAR were plotting against the Qasim regime.
Bill points out that during the Eisenhower years, the United States provided over $1 billion in economic and military aid to the Shah’s regime.
He believes the aid allowed the United States to control Iranian foreign policy and fostered corruption instead of progress.
Along with others, Bill argues that this aid was the basis for the animosity of Iranian nationalists toward the US, and that this animosity led directly to 1979.
Bill sees United States policy as the source for emphasis or imbalance in assistance towatd military and security functions.
This popularized view of Eisenhower’s policy simply fails to give credit where credit is due.
The Eisenhower administration was as concerned as the Kennedy administration and latter-day critics about the Shah’s insecurities, his paranoia, and his preoccupation with military aid.
Prior to 1958, Washington pressed for reforms, hoping to see the Shah’s rule evolve into a stable constitutional monarchy.
After 1958, the fear of another ‘Baghdad’ placed the initiative increasingly in the hands of the Shah, making it more difficult to ignore his priorities.
The British made a parallel approach, and Washington cautioned the United States Embassy not to leave the impression with the Shah that London and Washington were joining forces against him.
The Iranian government arrested, tried, and executed members of the Fedayan-e-Islam, whom it believed had been responsible for the assassination of General Ali Razmara on March 7, 1951.
Razamara’s assassination led almost immediately to the assumption of power by the National Front under Musaddiq and to the nationalization of foreign oil assets.
By early 1956, the Shah felt strong enough to open a broad investigation of events surrounding the assassination and to arrest those responsible.
Rumors floated around Tehran that the swift trials, the executions, and the death of one witness ‘shot while trying to escape’, were to cover up ‘palace’ contacts with the Fedayan prior to Razmara’s assassination.
This indicated the Shah’s growing confidence, because the government had up to then been unwilling to tackle the problems associated with an investigation of the assassination, despite pressure from the military.
NSC staff expressed concern that any British or French action against Nasser over Suez would lead to more Soviet pressure on Iran.
In order to obtain more aid, the Shah busily stoked fear in Washington of Soviet efforts to ‘neutralize’ Iran.
It should be noted here that Bowling would become a important figure in USIranian policy in the Kennedy administration.
In this report, the Embassy discussed a growing list of complaints against the Shah’s government, related to rising prices, free elections, and foreign influence.
Iranians also voiced strong criticism that the infrastructure improvements were aimed at projects useful to the Baghdad Pact and the military alliance with the West.
They point out that the old ‘conservative’ families would be hardest hit by these reforms.
Many senior officials in the Iranian government shared this view of the Shah.
Ali Amini, the Iranian Ambassador in Washington, stated that he had attempted to convince the Shah to work through his ministers so that they would take the blame for failures.
He was determined to take charge personally and to run the government himself.
Amini attributed the Shah’s refusal to take advice to the monatch’s ‘fear’ of most prominent Iranians.
During his sojourn as Ambassador in Washington, Amini learned a great deal about what United States officials wanted to hear vis-a-vis stability in Iran and the Shah’s rule.
To some degree, by telling official Washington what they wanted to hear, the Ambassador constructed his own American constituency.
The formidable image of Reza Shah dominates him and he seeks to imitate it; yet his personal characteristics inhibit.
He has no personal staff he feels he can trust and his most frequent contacts are with a corrupt ineffective Court group, which seeks to influence him in its own personal behalf.
Although these interpretations of the Shah became the standard fare of his Western detractors, the apparent vacillations and indecision, real and contrived, may in fact have worked in the monarch’s favor.
The Shah was attempting to placate political constituencies as diverse as the make-up of Iran itself.
Whether by design or merely scrambling for survival, the Shah managed to keep his opposition divided and his foreign benefactors placated in what was a careening drive toward modernization.
Even the end of the dynasty in 1979 was something of an accident, that could have gone in any direction, including that of the Peacock Throne’s survival.
Pegov was Soviet Ambassador to Iran until 1963, and later became Soviet Ambassador to India during the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971.
Because of the landtenure system, the landlord who supplied the land, the seed, the water, and the ‘beasts of burden’ received 80 per cent of the proceeds while the laborers received only 20 per cent.
The Shah’s schedule included visits to Taiwan and Japan prior to his arrival in Washington.
The concern was so acute that the Pentagon asked for guidance from the State Department.
NACPM, 788.11/6-658, 1, in which a military program had been agreed upon for the Shah.
It included naval demonstrations, Strategic Air Command briefings, and plane rides.
This telegram details some of the problems that the Eisenhower administration had with the Shah’s unrealistic requests for military aid.
For example, the Shah asked for two destroyers despite the fact that the commander of the Iranian Navy privately told the Embassy that he could not crew more than one corvette.
The Shah then began to talk about Nasset’s Philosophy of the Revolution as a parallel to Hitler’s Mein Kampf.
Their processes in this regard were interesting, and Dulles’ fascination with comparing Hitler and Nasser belied a more sophisticated grasp of Nasser’s predicament.
In fact, the impression emerges at times that Dulles’ theories in conversations with other leaders were more the arguments of a lawyer attempting to sway a jury than they were his own personal view of the situation.
The Defense Attaché also reported that Reza Afshar, the President of Iranian Airlines, had alerted the American in charge of pilot scheduling to prepare a contingency plan for evacuating the royal household should the army revolt.
Afshar stated that the army was not loyal to the Shah or its senior commanders, and that trouble from junior officers was anticipated.
There was genuine concern that elements from the 1954 coup might be active again and that the Iranian security service might not know what was going on.
In addition, the British were also concerned about Iranian army-unit distribution.
They feared another opportunity like the one in Baghdad, in which no loyal units had been available to support the palace.
In the short-term Tehran expected increased tensions and problems with the Qasim and with whatever government came after it.
Sir Roger then recited the rumors of dissatisfaction in the officer corps and the outspoken opposition to the regime on the street.
This lengthy and alarming report reflected concerns, British and American alike, about the future for the regime.
These concerns served to support further demands by the Shah for military and economic assistance.
This long memorandum on Kurdish issues and the lack of United States knowledge and expertise in the region suggested that at least one Arabicand Farsi-speaking Foreign Service officer be trained in Kurdish.
The Baghdad broadcasts complemented broadcasts from the UAR designed to attract Kurds to a broader nationalist base.
In a meeting with the Kurds in Baghdad, Eagleton pointed out that the word ‘assimilation’ should be avoided, even though the United States wanted to point out to the Kurdish leadership, Mulla Mustafa, a Barzani leader, and Shaykh Latif of Sulaymaniya, that linkages with Iran were much more workable than those with Baghdad or Moscow.
These two entries form an amusing commentary on the meetings between President Eisenhower and Prime Minister Nehru.
Apparently, State Department officials were concerned that Eisenhower would have difficulty engaging the notoriously difficult to-talk-to Nehru and that ‘problems’ might result.
Nehru was notorious for sitting silently for long periods even in one-on-one meetings.
Nehru made some unintentionally amusing and at the same time ‘disparaging’ remarks about Nuri Sa’id and Iraq.
Here again, the Indian aggravation with the Baghdad Pact and its implications for arms and Pakistan mirrored the Egyptian annoyance over Baghdad as a competing center of Arab power.
Desptie Nehru’s concern over the closing of the Suez Canal, ideologically and geopolitically he, like Nasser, had problems with the Western alliance system.
During the meeting, President Eisenhower attempted to get Nehru to bring up the subject of Krishna Menon.
Menon had become a target of Western wrath after he voted against UN resolutions condemning the Soviet Union for the invasion of Hungary.
Nehru knew the complaints that would follow any mention of Menon, and skillfully avoided the subject.
The United States clearly wanted Britain to take the lead on the Kashmir issue, promising support in the UN Security Council.
Noon came expressly to line up support for the Pakistani position on a plebiscite in Kashmir.
Among other things, Noon, in what was supposed to be a brief courtesy call to Under Secretary Herter, launched into the Kashmir issue, claiming that the Indians were using a Nazi-trained officer, Allama Mashriqi, to train pro-Indian irregular troops in the region.
London viewed Washington’s assessment and planned course of action as broadly similar to London’s position, but the British saw no upside to leading the charge.
Of London was ‘anxious to know what happens in the meetings’ so that they could influence United States policy.
The cartoon appeared in Murasoli, a pro-DMK Tamil-language weekly, on May 10, 1957.
In the first, Gandhi predicted that Jinnah would drop his demand for Pakistan.
In the second, Jinnah’s image appeared next to a map of India showing an independent Pakistan.
Annadurai, the DMK leader, would drop his demand for a separate Dravidian state.
The fourth displayed a map of India with a separate Pakistan and Tamilnad with Annadurai looking on.
Talbot did not invent the comparison; rather, the Tamil Madrasis saw a parallel with Jinnah and the Muslims.
Ambassador Langley emphasized his excellent rapport with President Mirza and the latter’s willingness to listen to the his advice.
Washington’s response provides an even more instructive view of the trepidation in the United States government concerning the situation in Pakistan.
Because of the unstable situation, a close Embassy relationship with any particular politician or group could place the United States on the wrong side if the government changed.
Anti-British attitudes in Pakistan resulting from partition manifested themselves during the Suez crisis.
First the populace wanted the Pakistani government to do something substantive to show solidarity with Egypt.
Lastly, they demanded a withdrawal from the Baghdad Pact, or the ejection of Britain.
American demands that the French, British, and Israelis withdraw temporarily raised the United States image.
Although Talbot anticipated no overt action by Pakistan, he believed that the rise in “Pan-Islamic feeling’ foreshadowed more animosity toward Britain and new challenges to Pakistan’s pro-Western foreign policy.
The issue of impartiality on the part of Mountbatten continued as a hotly-debated subject.
In November 1947 The Pakistani Times claimed that Mountbatten was in ‘active command’ of Indian troops confronting Pakistani and Muslim tribal forces in Kashmir.
This assessment was optimistic given the circumstances, and the overall tone tended to reflect an interest or perhaps even a bias on the part of Talbot.
United States Ambassador Horace Hildreth, whose daughter was maried to Mirza’s son, departed Pakistan in the summer of 1957.
Hildreth had a real affection for Pakistan and avoided negative evaluations of the situation.
During the same period, Ayub Khan, Chief of Staff of the Pakistani Armed Forces, worked with some success to convince Allen Dulles at the CIA and DOD officials that India threatened ‘containment’ policy, and that military aid was a small price to pay for the use of intelligence and U-2 facilities.
Ambassador Langley may have had excellent access to the administration, but Ayub had his own Washington advocates.
Given the anti-Western, pro-Soviet, and socialist elements in India, real concern existed about the problems India faced in its the Second Five-Year Plan.
New Delhi had already reduced the plan’s goals; without immediate additional foreign aid it would fail.
Dalal, First Secretary] to MEA New Delhi, 15 April 1959’, INA, MEA 50 AMS/59.
This letter, with its attached memorandum, clearly underscored the nature of the relationship between the United States and India.
Bunker presented a letter from President Eisenhower to Prime Minister Nehru explaining United States reasons for intervention in Lebanon on the heels of the coup in Iraq and asking for ‘moderation’ in Nehru’s public comments on the situation.
Nehru rejected the idea that Nasser was behind the coup in Iraq or instability in Lebanon.
He stated that it appeared that the more direct cause of the Lebanese problem was a political breach of faith on the part of Lebanese Christian President Chamoun, who had attempted to amend the constitution and succeed himself as President.
Nehru bluntly stated that the important issue was to get American troops withdrawn as soon as possible.
HI, 57, in which he states that United States support for Pakistan left Nehru with an ‘uneasy mind’ about the lengths to which the United States would go in pursuit of its Cold War objectives.
Chapter 6 Malcolm Kerr, in his excellent essay The Arab Cold War devotes a scant dozen pages to the discussion of the events of 1959 and 1960.
He focuses instead on the revolutionary events of 1958, and then begins again with a more detailed narrative in 1961.
To be sure, he hits the highpoints of 1959-1960, but his treatment skims over much of the complexity and confusion of the period.
Kerr provides little detailed explanation of this or its longer-term consequences.
The author focuses primarily on the bilateral issues between Syria and Iraq, and particularly on the radically different mutations of their Ba’thist governments.
From Revolution to Dictatorship capture the situation in Iraq during the period by using the coup attempts against Qasim as the backdrop for their historical narrative, but here, too, the complexity and continually shifting nature of the overall situation is alluded to but largely missed.
The story is much the same for Charles Tripp’s 4 History of Iraq, although the author does provide limited additional insight into the external as well as the internal players.
Although somewhat dated, Anthony Nutting’s Nasser is the best biography.
Nasser was at the center of the political storm, and thus a biography of the Egyptian leader touches most of the events of 1959-1960.
Still, the Nutting book is a biography and thus, by definition, focuses on Nasser and not the overall situation in the region.
In interviews with Phillips Talbot, General Andrew Goodpaster, William ‘Bill’ Lakeland and Walt Rostow, each used the term at one point or another to describe the United States evaluation of Nasser and the Nasserist wave that seemed to be sweeping the Arab Middle East.
This work provides excellent detail on the ups and downs in the Egyptian-Soviet relationship.
Heikal was certainly a witness over the years to this rollercoaster ride between Moscow and Cairo.
Despite his prejudices, his views have to be taken seriously within the context of other official documents on exactly what transpired.
Nevertheless Heikal’s views on the events of the period provide a quasi-official record of the positions of the Egyptian government and must be weighed and evaluated against what actually occurred, just as official United States and British government records are evaluated.
Nasser chided Khrushchev pointing out that he had been a party to persecuting and executing numerous Communists, who he called ‘very bad men’ because they had deviated from an acceptable political course.
Hakki was an Egyptian Information Service officer attached to the Egyptian Embassy in Washington, DC from 1957 to 1958.
In early 1959, he joined the staff of A+Ahsram, where he worked closely with Muhammad Heikal.
In 1973, Hakki stated that Anwar Sadat tapped him to head the Information Ministry, but the appointment was cancelled following Sadat’s assassination.
He was brutal — witness the slaughter of the Hashemites and mutilation of Nuri Said, as compared to King Farouk and General Neguib departing into comfortable exile.
All of this reflected parochialism indicative of an Iraqi, the antithesis of progressive, Arab nationalist regimes.
These differences, of course, would have been much easier to overlook had there been a political meeting of minds.
The Syrians opted for unity believing that they will be equal partners with Egypt and they joined the unity believing that their own surrender of freedom was but a prelude to the general realization of an Arab entity.
There has been a debate about whether Sarraj was acting on his own,e. without Nasser’s knowledge, and whether Nasser really would have taken the risks associated with a coup attempt against Qasim.
However, it strains credulity to believe that Nasser did not know and approve of Sarraj’s preparations for the coup against the Qasim regime.
Given Nasser’s predisposition for intrigue and skullduggery, it absolutely lacks credibility that he did not know and approve of Sarraj’s actions and plans at some level.
Since the Iraqis in Mosul acted prematurely, obviously neither Nasser nor Sarraj knew the exact timing or exercised tactical control, but both were behind it.
Although not stated, the withdrawal would also remove a major issue that Nasser could use in attacking the Qasim regime, while at the same time paving the way for more Soviet support.
In March 1959, Britain still had troops and Royal Air Force personnel at Habbaniya Air Base in Iraq.
On hearing the news, Ambassador Trevelyan immediately stated that Britain would now want to remove its military personnel as soon as possible.
At this meeting of the NSC, the resignation of John Foster Dulles was announced.
See also ‘British Mission NATO to FO, 8 May 1959’, PRO, FO371/141011, 1.
Nasser also used the speech to cast doubt on Qasim’s credentials as a revolutionary, crediting Abd-al-Salaam al-Aref as the leader of the 14 July coup and casting Qasim in the role of opportunist.
This, of course, referred to Egyptian reliance on Soviet military hardware and spares.
This telegram is a memorandum of aconversation between the United States Ambassador in Iraq, Jernegan, and Qasim.
Nutting had just returned from Iraq and a round of meetings with various Iraqi officials.
Jawad, the Iraqi Foreign Minister had raised this issue with Trevelyan, who discounted it.
Jawad also raised it with the Pakistani Ambassador, who naturally blamed it on an Indian diplomat.
Trevelyan believed that Jawad’s concern was the end result of rumors emanating from the talk about a UAR/Lebanon/Jordan antiCommunist front.
One of the assassins, 22-year-old Saddam Hussein, would flee to Cairo, where at UAR government expense he earned a university degree.
The information on the current situation in Baghdad came from Australian Embassy discussions with William Lakeland , Jordan-Iraq desk at the State Department.
In a separate meeting, Lakeland pointed out that once responsibility for the assassination attempt had been firmly established there would be ‘serious trouble’ internally.
There is little doubt that most observers would have largely agreed with this assessment.
In this lengthy report, they denigrate Qasim’s contribution to the revolution, giving others including Abd-al-Salam Al-Aref, more credit.
Batatu’s work is an unrivaled tome that deals in minute detail with the revolution and its aftermath.
It is hard to imagine another work in more detail on any set of political events in recent Arab history.
While Batatu carefully covered the internal political conflicts in Iraq, he did not have available at the time some of the documentation since declassified by the United States and British governments.
It is clear that Qasim authorized Foreign Minister Hashim Jawad to convey to the United States Ambassador the message that he was bringing the mainline Iraqi Communists to heel.
This lack of access hardly detracts from the internal political story, but more recently released sources place events in a broader context.
In Od Social Classes, 844, Batatu states that Jawad was a Sunni, born in 1911.
Speculation existed in relation to the Mahdawi’s reaction to the commutation of the many of the conspirators’ sentences.
Mahdawi, the chief judge and Qasim’s brother-inlaw, refused any comment, and in fact reduced his own profile significantly.
Nuruddin Khahala was Vice-President; Fakher Kayyali was Minister of State; and Faid Zainuddin was Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs.
This work was the first attempt at a quasiofficial explanation of the coup in Syria.
Sartaj was in prison in Damascus, having had the misfortune to time his return from Cairo just before the 28 September coup.
Heikal’s book was an attempt to lay the blame at the feet of anyone but the Egyptian government and Nasser.
Written in a typically Arab newspaper editorial style, the book presents series of questions and answers to explain the coup.
He brings up the fact that King Saud attempted unsuccessfully to bribe Sarraj, and he points out that the power accumulated by Sarraj was not for personal gain but for the defense of Arab unity.
The book explains the years 1959 and 1960 as ones in which Nasser and the loyal supporters of Arab nationalism and unity in Syria, of which Sarraj was the most prominent, attempted to preserve UAR unity against the forces of imperialism and reaction, which were strongly represented by Qasim, King Saud, and King Hussein.
They then make the argument that the idea of Arab unity was part and parcel of the Syrian attempts to free itself from imperialism, and that the union with Egypt was a natural step in this progression.
For support, these two authors quote voting returns on the various referendums on unity.
This was an apparent attempt to combat criticism that the union showed signs of disintegration at a very early stage.
They also recited the list of Syrian calls for unity, including 1955 and 1956.
This work and Heikal’s, although focused on explaining the split between Syria and Egypt and justifying the Egyptian position in this matter, provide an interesting insight into how the Egyptians chose to interpret the events of 1959 and 1960.
These are period pieces providing a window on Egyptian attitudes toward Syria; they also reflect the inability of Egyptians to understand the problems that the UAR administration created for itself in Damascus.
This also in some sense provides an insight into Nasser’s own inability during this period to really understand Syrian resentment, and thus the dangers posed to the union, and into his failure to heed Sarraj’s warnings.
In Nutting’s Nasser, 266, Sarraj probably had the most telling response of all.
When asked if he had been too heavy-handed and repressive in his tactics as head of the mubabbarat in Syria during the 1959-1960 timeframe, he stated that ‘allowed a free hand’ the coup would never have occurred.
As early as September 1959, rumors abounded that because of Sarraj’s prickly relationship with Nasser and his clashes with Amer, he would be promoted to Vice-President and moved to Cairo.
Virtually all of the British information came through the American Consul Reams, in Damascus.
This particular report came from the American Embassy via the Regional Information Officer in Beirut, who had visited Damascus.
Given Jordan’s precarious and highly vulnerable position, Salibi provides very little substance and even less analysis of the situation.
That said, the author’s presentation of what he calls “The Difficult Years’ overlooks Hussein’s contributions to his own problems in the propaganda war with Nasser, and Jordanian concerns about the sincerity of United States support for his regime.
Influential elements in the United States government viewed Jordan as a lost cause and a waste of aid money.
This study will attempt to better place Jordan within the context of the Arab Cold War.
The situation in Jordan differed from that in Iraq in that the United States Embassy in Amman took a mote antagonistic line toward British pressure to support the Jordanian regime.
In Iraq, the State Department actually informed the British Foreign Office that United States Ambassador Jernegan ‘reflected too closely’ London’s view of the situation in Baghdad.
Jernegan’s British view of the situation and, in general, his recommendations ran counter to the views and policy direction that the Eisenhower administration wanted to pursue.
Following his tenure in Amman, he was posted to Aden as Governor-General.
This occurred during the border wars in which Yemen received Egyptian support.
He was there during the Yemen Revolution of 1962 and the subsequent introduction of Egyptian troops into the Yemen civil war.
The British were relieved when they learned that there would be no ‘switch’ in sources of supply.
The British made a concerted effort to see what kinds of military equipment were on the list prepared by the Americans in order to protect orders for high-dollar equipment that the Jordanian had already made.
They were very concerned that the United States survey would not include radars.
Jordan had placed an order for an expensive Marconi radar system, and intended to pay for it with the United States aid.
By deleting radar from the list, the United States military mission placed the onus on the Jordanians to come up with the money or the British to come up with the aid.
From London’s point of view, maintaining morale was particularly important when it involved a large-scale sale of British radar purchased with United States aid dollars.
British concern about the rapprochement between Jordan and the UAR came from conversations in Washington with William Lakeland, the Iraqi desk officer.
Lakeland’s close relationship with Nasser and the Egyptians during the negotiation of the 1954 treaty for the removal of British troops from the Suez Canal Zone tended to raise British suspicions about Lakeland’s presumed pro-Egyptian sentiments.
During the period 1952-1954, Lakeland was on a first-name basis with Nasser, Amer, and Heikal, all of whom were guests at Lakeland’s apartment on al-Gazira island from time to time.
The British were highly concerned because a link with Nasser would not only severely weaken their influence in Amman, but might, they believed, start a change of events that would result in the loss of their petroleum interests in Iraq.
Morris pointed out that Lakeland was sometimes ‘out of line’ with the powersthat-be in the State Department, but that clearly there was a debate going on about the degree of support that Nasser’s anti-Communist campaign should receive.
Johnston described a series of internal scenarios that he believed could occur in the absence of the King and Prime Minister.
All centered on the Bedouin element in the army and the armored brigade that they controlled.
Johnston feared that repression by Bedouin army units or the replacement of the al-Rifai’ government with a military dictatorship would lead to a Nasserist revolt, or that the Jordanian army might take the Qasim route and overthrow both al-Rifai and the King.
See also ‘British Embassy Amman to the FO, 16 March 1959, PRO, FO371/142102, 1.
This informant stated that when approached by the group Nasser had offered his assistance.
Johnston worried constantly about playing second fiddle to the Americans.
He was well aware of who really paid the bills in Jordan, and saw every new development as a threat to British interests in Jordan.
Rifai’ went so far as to state that if al-Shara was arrested or replaced that he would resign from the government.
Informed speculation can make a very case for the possibility that Lakeland knew about Shara’s plotting against the Hashemite regime through United States intelligence.
This information was undoubtedly available to MI6 through liaison contacts or its own sources within the Jordanian security services.
This is a reference to Sulayman al-Nabulsi, the former pro-Nasserist Prime Minister in Jordan.
They believed that they could use the Israelis and Jewish organizations to guard against a change in United States policy toward Jordan.
Johnston was extremely concerned about the British position in Jordan, particularly with reference to the Jordanian military.
As an example of his sensitivity, at a dinner party in May 1959 the United States military attaché accused the British of undermining Prime Minister Rifai’ because he was too pro-American, and replacing him with the pro-British Majali.
Additionally, Johnston reported that the American military attaché stated that he was sick of paying the bills in Jordan while the British got the credit.
Johnston stated that he was concerned that the Americans were saying these things to the Jordanians, and perhaps even to the press, and asked for instructions on any action the he might take.
His paranoia about growing American influence and his fundamental dislike of any who disagreed with him, particularly if they were American, would also emerge in the Kennedy administration.
A few months before, London had had its fingers burned with regard to the situation in Iraq when the American Ambassadot’s judgments had been called into question because they were too optimistic and tended to echo those of the British Ambassador and the Foreign Office.
Instability in Jordan had become a widely-followed regional topic; so widely-followed that the British Embassy in New Delhi felt obliged to explain to the Indian government the nature of proposed British and American aid to the Hashemite kingdom.
The issue of Majali’s ‘liberal nature’ centered on the fact that the two perpetrators of the bombing plot apparently had known anti-government views and had previously participated in anti-government activities.
William ‘Bill’ Lakeland was the Iraq-Jordan Desk Officer from the summer of 1958 to the summer of 1960 when he became the political officer in Baghdad.
Lakeland viewed the Jordanian regime as a nuisance and a waste of foreign aid, a widely-held view in the foreign-policy establishment.
The United States desire for good relations with Nasser had not gone unnoticed in Amman.
The Turkish Ambassador to the United States, Melih Esenbel, told G Lewis Jones, NEA, that many Jordanians blamed the United States for the assassination of Majali.
They believed that only the United States had the actual influence in Cairo to deter Nasser’s aggressive intentions toward Jordan.
As a result, they surmised that the United States had condoned Nasset’s activities.
Jones responded that while the allegations were absurd, the United States would do everything in its power to calm the differences between Jordan and the United Arab Republic.
The concern had reached such a high point that the Americans and British asked the Shah of Iran to use his influence with King Hussein.
The fact that Talal, Hussein’s father, was certifiably mad was a point lost on few in the Arab world, and almost no one in Jordan.
President Eisenhowet’s memoirs describe the meeting with Nasser as ‘a highly interesting experience’, while not even mentioning a meeting with King Hussein that occurred at the White House after the UNGA on October 7, 1960.
The British had managed to get the United States committed to the idea of maintaining the Jordanian state, and now they wanted to limit their exposure.
For London, despite its old ties to the regime, Jordan had never been the real issue; the heart of the matter was Iraq, the IPC and Kuwait.
Total United States aid to Jordan from 1951 to 1960 totaled $188 million.
Erhard attended a dinner on the same evening as the Dillon-Lloyd meeting.
Both took this opportunity to press the Germans on the issue of aid, pointing out that West Germany had become the largest commercial supplier to Jordan.
Erhard replied that he ‘thought something would be possible’ along the lines of $5 to $7 million in direct aid.
The Chairman of the Deutsche Bank, Karl Blessing, who was also present, concurred that they could probably manage the problem.
The author offers a set of chapters that provides a wellorganized domestic and international context for the period of the Arab Cold War.
Although brief, the chapter on ‘Colonel Nassetr’s New Way’ gives an overview of the impact of Nasserism on the Saudi world.
First, it briefly discusses the role of Egyptian teachers in Saudi Arabia and the grassroots influence that they exerted on the Kingdom.
Lacy also takes a look at the exact circumstances in which the decision to place Feisal in charge of the government occurred.
In the chapter entitled “Enter the Crown Prince’, Lacy states that the meeting occurred immediately after Nasser’s radio broadcast announcing Saud’s attempt to bribe Sarraj and wreck the Syrian union (p.
No reference is made to an Arab Cold War, but the substance of these two chapters, and to a degree also the ‘OPEC’ chapter, place the internal situation in Saudi Arabia in the broader context of the Arab Cold War period.
It deals with the period of the Arab Cold War in terms of the problems besetting the Saudi royal family, during the transition from Saud to Feisal.
The book also provides a useful outline of the controversy surrounding Tallal ibn Saud and his attempts to secularize the Saudi state along Nasserist lines.
The original author David Holden, a correspondent of The Sunday Times was shot and killed by unknown assailants on a trip to Cairo on December 7, 1977.
Richard Johns then took over the partially-finished manuscript and completed the work.
The authors treat the 1959-1960 period, in a chapter entitled ‘A House Divided’, as the beginning of more disciplined rule by Feisal following the erratic actions of King Saud in 1957 and 1958.
They pointed out that Feisal’s rapprochement with Nasser sharply reduced the shock of the Iraqi coup of 1958.
The book provides a useful look at the transition of authority in Saud Arabia during the late 1950s and early 1960s, but not much analysis of the broader context that drove these events.
Like Nasser prior to his falling out with Qasim, Feisal defended the revolution in Iraq.
After the Egyptian-Iraqi break, Feisal mirrored UAR thetoric and attacked Qasim.
The connection between Saudi Arabia and the UAR was strong enough for The Times to argue that diplomatic relations with Egypt would bring diplomatic relations with Saudi Arabia.
The Saudis’ retention of Azzam Pasha, the former Secretary General of the Arab League, reinforced this view.
An effort through the UN was underway to find a compromise on the issue of Buraimi.
Beaumont finally decided that Ayub could assure the Saudis of Macmillan’s desire to see a settlement, but London wanted Ayub to point out the process of solving this problem was a long one, and one that had proven intractable for over eight years.
They were referring to the propensity for the Truman administration to enunciate a position on the Middle East, and then to back away from it under Israeli-orchestrated pressure.
This work argues that Eisenhower, who was elected by a landslide with the vast majority of Jewish voters supporting the Democratic candidate, Adlai Stevenson, faced no such handicap in pursuing Middle East policy.
In reaction to Suez, Eisenhower embargoed $26 million in aid to Israel and threatened to end the tax exemption for contributions to American Zionist organizations, in order to pressure Israel to accept UN observers.
The authors take a highly negative view of Israel’s ability to influence United States policy.
Both give Eisenhower high marks for his unwillingness to budge in the face of Israeli and American Zionist pressure, and for his television address to the nation in 1957, in which he issued an ultimatum to Israel to either withdraw from Sinai or face a total cutoff of United States monetary and aid support.
The authors present a picture of frantic and fanatical American Zionist political efforts to force the President to back down, and laud his refusal.
The Balls argue that the major failing of the Eisenhower administration was fixation on Communist influence, and its inability to understand that a comprehensive Middle East peace was the only real protection against Soviet inroads.
Additionally, the authors state that the death of John Foster Dulles weakened the drive for a solution in the region.
This work is largely an indictment of Israeli and American Zionist influence on the policies of the United States toward the Middle East.
It argues that, fundamentally, Israel used Holocaust politics and the cry of anti-Semitism to deflect any real attempts to solve the problems in the region.
While critical of Arab missteps, the authors view Eisenhower as the last American president to pursue United States national interests in the Middle East.
Many of the quotes used in this short chapter came from Neff’s Warriors at Suez.
Neff obtained them from the notes and minutes of meetings made by Eisenhower’s chief of staff Brigadier General Andrew Goodpaster.
The overall work is clearly anti-Zionist, anti-Israeli and highly concerned with what it views as the undue influence of Israel and the American Jewish community over American foreign policy.
Mark Tessler, in A History of the IsraeliPalestinian Conjlict makes little mention of the 1959-1960 period except to argue that despite Israel’s military performance during the Suez war, it was Nasser that reaped political gains in the region.
Other than brief comments about the impact of the Syro-Egyptian union on Israel, and the fact that Tel Aviv always continued to view Nasser as the primary threat, the period is hardly mentioned.
These papers included a list of all Nasser’s transgressions in the region.
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs prepared the paper for a visiting representative of the Italian Prime Minister.
The Ministry liked it so much that they handed it out to other Western embassies and legations.
From its very inception, the Israelis viewed the UAR as the primary threat.
The Israelis predicted that Syria was only the first step, and that attempts to include Lebanon and Jordan would surely follow.
Alteras’s work is a good narrative, examining the complicated relationship between the Eisenhower administration and Israel.
Hoever, it does not discuss the last two years of that administration, and the author makes sweeping judgments that are in fact incorrect in that regard.
As we have seen, Nasser and not Israel was the chosen vehicle for stemming the Communist tide in 1958-1960.
While useful from time to time, Washington viewed Israel as a policy albatross, an impediment to Western interests in the Middle East.
Between 1959 and 1960, the Israelis gained something of a break from violent Nasserist attacks, but Israel saw its principal benefactor as what the British called the United States, ‘the rich uncle’, encouraging and supporting Nasser’s policies in the region.
Additionally, Alteras fails to ask hard questions about issues like Ben-Gurion’s fear of a Soviet attack.
The high probability, almost a certainty, is that Israel had little or no fear of a Soviet attack, and merely used Soviet bluster in an attempt to gain a policy goal — namely a security guarantee from the United States.
This is an interesting work that is reasonably good on facts up to 1958, but woefully short on analysis.
The antipathy that the Israelis and Zionist organizations held for Byroad was pronounced, primarily because he outspokenly supported a solution to the Palestinian refugee problem and refused to criticize Arab efforts to use the refugees as a political issue against Israel.
Byroad saw no difference between Zionists using the stateless-person argument to justify the founding of Israel and Arab leaders using the plight of Palestinian refugees for their political ends.
While the early years remain sketchy due to the non-availability of documentation, Cohen does a solid job of outlining the highpoints in the decision process that made Israel a nuclear power.
In his short chapter ‘Dimona Revealed’, Cohen relates the story of how the United States intelligence community had the information that could have led them to discover Israel’s intent in the 1958-1960 timeframe, but failed to put it all together.
Cohen use of interviews provides an interesting dimension to the story.
It is particularly useful in understanding the process by which intelligence organizations seem to overlook the obvious due to an imperfect intelligence ‘fusion’ process.
Cohen points out the evidence offered by NPIC consisted of a large site with a security fence around it, a large road network, significant provision for electrical power and, most suspiciously, what appeared to be an attempt to ‘hide the dirt’ from the excavation.
While it had all the earmarks of a nuclear site, there was no way of telling what the exact nature, scope and purpose of the site would be.
Additionally, NPIC personnel briefing senior government officials tended to be very conservative in their presentations.
They presented only the facts and offered little speculation about a given site.
Saying that it was a ‘probable’ nuclear site was going about as far as NPIC personnel would go in a senior briefing.
Had the President or Strauss been privy to the private conversations at NPIC then their concerns would have no doubt been heightened considerably.
In any case, the information received in early 1958 from all sources did result in a focused attempt to get an answer from the Israelis.
James Jesus Angleton was one of the primary reasons that the ‘dots’ went unconnected.
An orchid-growing, bizarre figure given to regular mole hunts and counter-intelligence theories so convoluted that many thought him mad, Angleton wielded enormous power in the agency.
He carried compartmentalization to the point that it was virtually impossible to share information.
He also saw himself as the ultimate authority on counter-intelligence and on the Israelis.
In the former persona, he failed miserably in detecting one of the greatest double agents of that period, Kim Philby.
Philby was stationed at the British Embassy in Washington and was Angleton’s British counter-intelligence contact.
He was also a Soviet spy — a minor detail that Angleton never suspected.
In the case of the Israelis, Angleton believed that his contacts were so solid that Israel could not undertake a major effort in any national security area without him knowing about it.
Either Angleton knew about the nuclear weapons program and did not tell anyone in Washington, or once again, he was fooled by his own secretive arrogance.
Its objectivity has made his work something of a lightning-rod for Israeli government criticism because it debunks many of the myths about the Jewish state.
Recently, a private individual paid for the translation and publication.
Because it is a very broad work, it provides an overview of the period 1959 to 1960, but Shlaim does not go into depth in discussing the Isreali nuclear weapons.
This is unlike the detailed account of the program in the Alteras book.
Membership placed Turkey on a level that none of the other countties in the Middle East or South Asia could match.
NATO was a real military alliance designed to fight a war with the Soviet Union.
The Baghdad Pact, CENTO, and SEATO were organizations intended to maintain the pro-Western orientation of their members at a minimum cost in economic and military aid.
In contrast, Turkey’s membership of NATO provided vast quantities of military aid and arms.
Since the Sputnik coup of 1957, Khrushchev had periodically crowed about Soviet missile superiority and the Soviets’ ability to attack the United States.
The administration took this threat seriously, particularly when political opponents capitalized on it.
Senators Stuart Symington and Henry Jackson bombarded the administration with accusations of Soviet superiority.
While their concerns were largely exaggerated, the Eisenhower administration used evety available means of collecting information on Soviet missile development and capabilities.
Two sites in north-eastern Iran and the two in Pakistan, including U-2 operations, provided vital information Soviet test facilities in Central Asia and on missile deployment.
These sites collected telemetry data and optical information on Soviet missile capability and thus contributed directly to the defense of the continental United States.
The airfield at Peshawar in Pakistan was also a center for U-2 operations.
Given the limited technology of the day, the United States government felt that those sites were critical to national security, and much of its policy toward Iran and Pakistan was predicated on the sites.
Arora states that Krishna Menon supported the move to modernize the Indian armed forces with Soviet arms because he feared a coup.
While this was no doubt a rationalization in large part, there is some indication that Menon may have genuinely feared the military because senior commanders detested him and many had served the British.
The intelligence estimates, concerning the Shah, reflected the administration-wide overreaction to perceived intelligence failures, of which Iraq was viewed as a massive example.
Many also feared that the Badhdad Pact intelligence files lost to the Qasim government provided a bonanza for the opponents of Western interests in the region.
The intelligence estimates lurched in the opposite direction, taking a more pessimistic view of the situation.
Should Iran succumb to a revolution or coup, the intelligence community wanted to be able to say that the administration had been warned.
Thus as 1959 arrived, warning of disaster and listing all the potential reasons for impending implosion in Iran were in vogue.
On June 4, Ambassador Rundall, in Tel Aviv, cabled that the Israelis were once again asking for British help in getting Tehran to recognize Israel.
They left the matter up to the Iranians, who had to date always in the end rejected it.
Apparently the Israelis viewed the Shah’s negotiations with the Soviets in January and February as an indication of Iranian insecurity and isolation, and were preparing another attempt at recognition.
PRO, FO371/142289, 1, the British in Tehran took the view that such a move by the Shah could happen and might be a positive thing.
Trevelyan, the British Ambassador in Baghdad, informed United States Ambassador Jernegan that despite a downturn in relations between Qasim and London, he intended to recommend the sale of arms to Iraq.
Trevelyan stated that the Iraqi army constituted the only stable, reliable force, and the arms might cultivate pro-Western sentiment.
Trevelyan argued that because the actual delivery dates were well into the future, the arms agreement could always be broken if the situation in Baghdad worsened.
In an effort to reduce the potential for an angry reaction, Ambassador Wailes wanted the British to approach the Shah, as a courtesy, before the official announcement of arms sales to Iraq.
Wailes expressed this concern after Iranian talks on a non-aggression treaty with the Soviets had collapsed.
Wailes was no doubt concerned that arms sales to Iraq would spark even greater demands for arms from the Shah.
NACPM, 787.00/3-1459, 1, Washington informed all posts in the region that Prime Minister Macmillan and President Eisenhower had talked and that the United States concurred with the British plan to sell additional arms to Iraq.
The circular stated that the United States had no intention at this time of selling further arms to Baghdad, and that Baghdad had not raised the issue of previously-approved military assistance.
The report stated that the Shah was probably trying to get a limited agreement with the Soviet Union to reduce pressure on his regime from that quarter while not rupturing his relations with the United States.
The SNIE concluded that an agreement with the Soviets would be a major propaganda coup, but that they only real casualty would be the Baghdad Pact arrangement.
Although not dated, this document offered the best blow-by-blow account of what actually transpired between the Soviets and the Iranians in February 1959.
At this point pressure from the Western powers and Baghdad Pact allies forced the Shah to reconsider.
In a surprise move, the Soviet delegation contacted Moscow and on the specific orders of Chairman Khrushchev gave in on both points.
The Russian pointed out the ‘dangerous consequences of Iran’s actions’, accused the Shah of ‘bad faith’, and left for Moscow the next day.
Washington feared a ‘Kurdish land-bridge’ from the Soviet Union across Turkey and Iran into Iraq.
The Iraq Desk concluded that the immediate target of any instability fomented by the Soviets would be Iran.
The Iraq Desk followed up with a report on the Kurds that outlined a brief history of the issues and conflicts.
The report did not have an addressee on it, but given the content, it probably resulted from a request at the Secretariat level.
It provides an interesting overview and assessment of the situation in Iran as well as that in Iraq.
It stated that the Kurds of Iran were ‘quiescent at present’ and ‘still entertain a traditional loyalty to the institution of the monarchy’ for the most part.
But, the report added that the poor quality of Iranian administration coupled with endemic corruption had bred resentment.
Herter also mentioned that there were issues yet to be ironed out with regard to the wording of the bilateral agreements.
Iran wanted the agreement to state that the United States would deal with an attack on Iran as if it were an attack on United States territory; Washington, of course, declined such wording.
Most interestingly, Pakistan wanted to include any attack upon Pakistan.
It was an obvious attempt to enlist United States aid in the event of an Indian attack.
That wording was also rejected, but it clearly demonstrates the linkage between Iraq 1958 and relations on the subcontinent.
Turkey, Iran, and Pakistan wanted to see the Baghdad Pact adopt a formal military commandstructure.
The Shah wanted something to show for his cooperation that included increasing his own stature in the region and at home.
Ayub also pointed out that, in his view, British opinions vis-a-vis Baghdad Pact policy were suspect.
Ayub obviously saw British involvement at the policy level as an impediment to greater United States military support for Pakistan.
London wanted to protect its economic and commercial interests in India, and arming Pakistan through the Baghdad Pact was not the way to do it.
See also ‘Letter DOD to Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs , 20 February 1960.
DOD reported that the Shah had greatly overstated his requirements and the potential threats from Afghanistan and Iraq.
The report added that the cost of the Shah’s proposed military aid would exceed $600 million.
This dispatch contains a very detailed look at both parties and the principal politicians in each.
The assessment in Washington and at the United States Embassy in Tehran agreed that land reform had only succeeded in alienating the landowners in Iran.
See also the files contained in FO371/140856; these chronicle the impressive British study and tracking of land-reform efforts in Iran and the practical effects of the program.
It charts the demise of fundamental reform as the Shah faced increasing pressure from many of his most loyal supporters.
Some argued that Bakhtiar’s plan in fact constituted preparations for a coup.
Just that fact that the Shah survived the turmoil of the failed election surprised some.
The Soviets made another proposal for a ‘demilitarized zone’ on the Iranian border, and the United States and Britain were trying to come up with an argument against such an arrangement.
The Soviets kept Washington and London on edge with a barrage of proposals to the Shah.
He, quite naturally, made certain that the Western allies knew about them.
He had asked that his name not be put on Mirza’s calendar because local newspapers published the calendar, and Langley was in Mirza’s office almost every day.
In addition, other United States agencies, not under the control of the Ambassador, were quietly reassuring Mirza and Ayub of United States government support come what may.
Despite some misgivings in Washington, the Ayub takeover obtained quick American support.
Bhargava provides a useful overview of the development of Pakistani politics, in particular an interesting analysis of the linkage between the ‘controlled democracy’ of the Ayub regime and the outright military dictatorship of later regimes.
His analysis also explains the development of Ayub’s concept of political participation.
In Bhargava’s presentation, Ayub had an approach to political parties that was similar to Nasset’s,e. it progressed from no political parties to officially-sanctioned ones that could be controlled.
The Origins of Pakistan’s Political Economy of Defense , 303: ‘Ayub hoped to bolster central authority without being constrained by parties and politicians with provincial bases of support.
Goodpaster stated that in the same vein the Iranian military was viewed as the key not only to the Shah’s rule but also to continued pro-Western policies in Iran.
In fact, should the Shah no longer be able to govern effectively, then military rule would become perhaps the only viable option.
The military coup in Turkey on 27 May 1960 fell into the same category as had Ayub’s.
Ziircher points out that military elements had planned the coup for years.
Tiirkes had no confidence in the politicians or the political process, and demanded reforms in the shape of curbs on political activities.
From the United States point of view, key Cold War allies could not be allowed to succumb or be incapacitated by irresponsible political elements, and in such an event ‘temporary’ military rule was both acceptable and desirable.
In the discussion of what to do about Iraq, Nixon wanted a ‘Mossadegh type operation’ to overthrow Qasim and put pro-Western military officers in power.
Because the United States had agreed not to increase aid to Pakistan above the levels of the 1954 agreement, the Indians would view modern weapons as a serious breach of faith.
The use of ‘revolution’ to describe the coup was mote sleight-of-hand to improve Ayub’s image.
It should be noted that when Dupree wrote this article, he was working for Phillips Talbot, Executive Secretary of AUFS and soon to be Assistant Secretary of State for NEA in the Kennedy administration.
Discussion with Rostow, November 6, 2001, Lyndon Baines Johnson Library, Austin, Texas.
This conversation between President Eisenhower and Walt Rostow apparently occurred after the latter had begun to work with the Kennedy campaign.
It seems to provide another indication of the interchangeability of key Eisenhower and Kennedy advisors and policies.
Ayub argued that Pakistan could only maintain de facto neutrality with regard to Israel by continuing its policy of non-recognition.
Pakistan’s official position was that Israel was a foreign provocation that exacerbated Arab problems, and as such should not be recognized by Pakistan.
This was directed at weakening the government of Pakistan and creating leverage in the border areas.
The situation was so acute that the United States and Britain discussed the possibility of tripartite talks with Pakistan on the Pushtunistan issue.
Khrushchev viewed the Pushtunistan issue as a means of pressuring and punishing the Karachi regime for its cooperation with Washington.
The Soviets called for a referendum by the tribes in the border region on the creation of a state.
This Russian pressure on Ayub had the side benefit of generating pro-Soviet sentiment in New Delhi.
The border flare-ups between Pakistan and Afghanistan evolved into an issue that was addressed in a meeting between President Eisenhower and Prince Naim, the Foreign Minister of Afghanistan.
The President encouraged Naim to seek an agreement with Ayub and to align Afghanistan more closely with Pakistan and Iran.
Recent defeats of Afghan Lashkara by Pushtun tribesmen loyal to Karachi had raised the possibility of a wider war, perhaps involving the regular armies.
Washington feared that attempting to remain neutral in the dispute had hurt its relations with Pakistan, and wanted to avoid that development by not making any moves that would appear to legitimize the Pushtunistan claims.
Washington feared that a Soviet aid offensive in India, targeting high-visibility projects, would be a propaganda bonanza for Moscow.
As a result, the aid situation came under review in an attempt to identify ‘useful’ but ‘more visible’ development projects for which the United States could get more political credit.
Concern existed that the diffusion of United States aid throughout the Indian economy reduced the ability of the Embassy to ‘get across’ the extent of United States aid to the average Indian.
Neville’s work on the Sino-India border dispute that led to the border war in 1962 is the most comprehensive and best-balanced on the subject.
As the author points out, the Indians and Chinese, specifically Nehru and Chou En-Lai, exchanged _ significant correspondence and discussed the matter on more than one occasion.
Neville also cites the 1954 discussion in which Nehru raised the issue of the currency of Chinese maps of the area, and suggested that the Chinese change their maps to reflect India’s view that the McMahon Line accurately represented the border.
In short, the Chinese were ceding nothing unilaterally, and expected negotiations prior to a confirmation of borders.
The idea of negotiation over territory flew directly in the face of the Indian policy since 1950.
The obvious specific implication of negotiations with the Chinese would set a precedent and provide Pakistan ammunition on the issue of Kashmir.
Mullik was the director of the Indian Intelligence Bureau from 1950 to 1964.
While obviously colored by his own interests and opinions, this work provides an excellent insight into not only the actual events and relationships leading up to the Chinese War, but also the Indian governmental processes.
For example, the lack of any real bordermonitoring in the regions adjacent to Tibet in the mid-1950s resulted in New Delhi learning of the Chinese penetration through the local rumor mill.
Additionally, it took almost 18 months, from the confirmation of the Chinese presence to March 1958, for a formal report with recommendations to be issued by the Bureau.
Mullik states that Nehru was also motivated by the need to maintain security on the northern frontier, and particularly in the Ladkah area.
The central government hoped that sympathy toward the Dalai Lama would in turn increase its support among Buddhists in Dikkim, Nepal and Bhutan.
In what were planned to be ‘fortnightly’ letters, Nehru lays out his position on the revolt in Tibet.
He states that while he is sympathetic with the Tibetans, the situation is fundamentally an internal Chinese matter and India has no case for direct involvement.
He also states that the Indian government is not suppressing stories of the uprising to reduce the pressure on his government to get involved.
It is a clear attempt to be viewed as sympathetic, while maintaining separation from the dispute.
See also ‘British Embassy WDC to FO, 4 December 1959’, PRO, FO371/141264, 1, in which appears Eisenhowet’s answer to a question about the border dispute.
The President replied that no one really knew where the border or the McMahon Line was.
Ironically the President appeared to agree with Chou En-Lai and Mao Tse-Tung.
The date on this letter is somewhat confusing because Gopal (in Nehru, Volume III, 127) refers to the letter dated 17 December from Chou in a footnote.
The source of the British copy of the letter was the Chinese Chargé d’Affaires in London, raising the possibility that the Chinese published the letter in advance of any Indian announcement that they had actually received it.
This supports the Foreign Office’s view that the letter was a ‘clever move’ designed to place China in a favorable light.
Nehtu clearly expected the Chinese rebuff; ‘If we get a favourable reply to our proposals, then the question will arise of my meeting Chou En-lai.
In this letter and its cover sheet, the CRO is ‘encouraged’ by the Soviet attitude on the dispute and the fact that they have not automatically sided with China.
The text of the memorandum pointed to the fact that the Indians were also pleased with the Soviet position.
Akbar argues that the responsibility for the Chinese war and subsequent debacle lies squarely with Nehru.
It is interesting that the perception from London failed to take into account the possibility of a Chinese ploy for bargaining purposes, while later Indian biographical accounts did.
This memorandum indicated that Menon was feeling the political pressure, and to some degree personal insecurity, from criticism leveled at him in New Delhi.
He downplayed any differences with the Indian armed forces Chief of Staff, General Thimayya, stating that ‘he could not understand the criticisms made of him’ over his handling of the military.
He also stated that he was willing to accept the Chinese incursion in the Ladakh area, but that the McMahon Line should be held everywhere else.
He was highly concerned about his personal position, requesting that the British Secretary of State support his contention that British unwillingness to see him on his last trip was a result of scheduling problems and not British ire.
Gopal’s view of the events leading to the Chinese war is highly critical of Nehru, and particularly of his faith in Krishna Menon and his theoretical views on Asian cooperation.
It had yet to dawn on the administration that India might go to the Soviet Union for modern military equipment.
The speculation was that if the United States did not sell the equipment to the Indians, then, they would buy it from the British.
The Kennedy used the dubious claims of Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev about Soviet missile superiority over the United States and transformed them into a campaign issue.
In an interesting twist, Allen Dulles, Director of the CIA, flew to Hyannis, Massachusetts on July 30, 1960 to brief Kennedy on intelligence matters.
Rather than putting the ‘missile gap’ issue to rest, as the Nixon camp wanted, Dulles referred Kennedy’s questions to the Pentagon.
From Nixon’s perspective, his friend Allen Dulles had let him down, and the non-existent ‘missile gap’ lived on as a campaign issue.
Attacks on Eisenhower policy in the Middle East and South Asia were of the same ilk, if not so prominent.
All contributed to a strategy that painted the United States as bogged down and strategy-less in world where the Communists were gaining on all fronts.
The Iran Desk requested excerpts from campaign speeches to use with the Shah of Iran to show that all the candidates were committed to confronting Soviet aggression.
The Nixon quote came from United States News and World Report, 13 June 1960, 51.
The Kennedy campaign carefully avoided mention of Eisenhower policy in the post-1958 environment, because the facts did not fit their campaign strategy.
There was virtually no difference between the policies advocated for the Middle East and South Asia by Senator Kennedy and those that had been in effect, to one degree or another, since early 1958.
Those post-1958 policies did not make good campaign issues, and the new Secretary of State, Christian Herter, had a close association with a principal Kennedy foreign-policy advisor, Chester Bowles.
As a result, differences had to be almost manufactured, or the focus had to be kept on the turmoil of the 1955-1958 period.
This quote is an excerpt from a statement given by Senator Kennedy in Democratic Digest, May 1960, 4.
Rostow was an important advisor to the Eisenhower administration on foreign economic development from 1953 to 1958.
Interestingly enough, Rostow stated that during Herter’s tenure there was ‘no difference’ between Republican and Democratic foreign policy goals.
In fact, Rostow stated, the amount of foreign aid included in the last Eisenhower budget was so substantial that the incoming Kennedy administration did not have to ask for more than Eisenhower had provided.
In this account, Bowles states that President Kennedy, in common with his brother Robert, ‘had a rather deep sense of skepticism about the Foreign Service and the State Department.
Freedom of Communications — Final Report of the Committee on Commerce, United States Senate.
Prepared by the subcommittee on communications, pursuant to S.R. 305, 86th Congress.
A Political Life, 248, provides an unflattering picture of Krishna Menon’s eccentricities and erratic behavior.
While this was true, Brown’s explanation smacks more of a rationalization for Nehru’s lapse in judgment.
It also overrode Nehru’s personal political interests, and ultimately the interests of India.
Lengyel’s short, superficial biography of Krishna Menon was published in 1962, and thus forms something of a ground-level view of him.
It also contains a brief but explanation of Menon as the focal point of media ire, particularly in the United States.
Lengyel’s description of Menon’s relations with the press continued with further observations on the British press as well, but the point well made is that Menon was a public-relations disaster of the first order for India and Nehru during the mid-1950s.
This might have been true up to a point, in the British environment he was so familiar with, but in India, where he had no roots due to his long absence, he made no effort to publicize’ his accomplishments.
Janaki argues that as a result, Menon was treated as a ‘political upstart’ totally dependent on Nehru’s ‘patronage’ for support.
Of course, he was dependent on Nehru’s patronage, and did lack a political base in India.
Brecher, in Krishna Menon’s View, attempted to map Menon’s ‘hostility statements’ in a piece of 1960s-esque social science research.
The characteristics of “Capitalist” and “Interventionist”, whether overt or covert, direct or indirect, political, economic, cultural or military, justify in Menon’s eyes the designation “Imperialist” for the United States.
George’s book, while overstating Menon’s accomplishments as Defense Minister, provides some interesting insight into what may have been Nehru’s motivation in returning Menon to New Delhi.
His election in 1957 to the Indian Parliament gave Nehru the opportunity to bring him into the government as Minister of Defense.
The Congress as a party was committed to s socialistic pattern of society, but the Cabinet contained no one, barring of course the Prime Minister, who was in earnest about it.
Kennedy’s team did not diverge significantly from that of Eisenhowet’s on the respective aid packages for India and Pakistan.
As pointed out earlier, Rostow stated that the last Eisenhower foreign aid budget needed no additional funding.
A substantial amount of the United States grant required that India use it to purchase United States goods and products.
Bill draws several conclusions about differences between Kennedy’s and Eisenhower’s policies that are just not supported by the facts.
Both administrations believed that ultimately the Shah had to have a powerful military and security apparatus to ensure his continuation in power.
The tendency to see differences between Kennedy’s and Eisenhowet’s policies results primarily from giving too much weight to Kennedy image-building and not enough scrutiny of the differences between the 1958-1960 period and that of the Kennedy administration.
The Eisenhower administration faced what it perceived to be the immediate emergency of the post-Iraq petiod.
The initial part of this period focused on security and military issues.
In fact, in 1963 the Kennedy administration’s stand on the status-of-forces agreement for United States advisors in Iran and the fiery opposition to it would result in a littleknown cleric, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, becoming the symbol of opposition to the Shah’s regime and to the United States presence in Iran.
Khomeini’s imprisonment and exile to Iraq would lead in the end to the Shah’s fall in 1979.
These included maps showing the spread of Soviet influence in the Middle East and caricatures of Dulles, the lightning rod for criticism of the administration.
An article and map in Newsweek of May 5, 1958 is an excellent example of the criticism.
Executive Sessions of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee , Volume XIX, Eighty-Fifth Congress First Session, 1957.
Executive Sessions of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Volame XIX, 1957, 321.
In this memo, NEA informed Christian Herter, the Secretary of State, that the overall situation in the Middle East had improved but that the improvement was precarious.
He pointed out that if the Arab-Israeli dispute became an open campaign issue then efforts to solve the refugee problem and achieve progress on other issues could be compromised.
Interestingly he alluded to an informal understanding with the Democratic Platform Committee about avoiding references to the Arab-Israeli problem.
Bass does his best to make the case that the Zionist lobby in the United States lacked the clout to influence policy, and that Republican claims that Kennedy found himself pressured to take a pro-Israeli stance was unsupportable.
While Israeli influence in Washington was not what it is today, Israel and its supporters carried enough clout for President Eisenhower to have to go on national television to explain his reasons for demanding that Israelis withdraw from the Sinai in 1957.
Because Eisenhower took a courageously independent stand and refused to bow to political expediency should not be used to understate Israeli political pressure and influence peddling.
In contrast, Kennedy had no choice, as he told Phillips Talbot when he blocked plans for a state visit by Nasser.
In a later interview, Talbot also stated that Feldman used Israeli and Zionist influence to block pressure on Ben-Gurion over the Johnson Plan for a solution to the Palestinian refugee problem, and to prevent a state visit by Nasser.
In this same interview, Talbot commented that Ed Bayne, a would be biographer of Ben-Gurion, stated that the latter had described the private session between him and Kennedy, at the Waldorf-Astoria during the UNGA in September 1961, as a meeting in which Kennedy had thanked him profusely for Israeli and Zionist support in the 1960 election.
Allegedly Kennedy also stated that he recognized that without support from Israel and the Zionist community Nixon would have won.
According to Ben-Gurion, via Bayne, Kennedy promised that he would not forget that debt in the future.
Because of the importance of Jewish votes, Kennedy felt obliged to have Feldman in the White House and to adjust his Middle East policy, including the state visits of Arab leaders, to placate the American Zionist community.
In light of this, Bass’s attempt to argue a minimal Jewish influence in the Kennedy White House seems misguided.
During this turmoil, in 1957, Eisenhower had a major heart attack, the seriousness of which was kept from all but a few close aides, and in May 1959 Dulles died of cancer.
Oral History — Robert W Komer, Staff Member, National Security Council.
Komer recalled a conversation with Phillips Talbot the night after Kennedy’s assassination that accurately summarized the formulation of United States Middle East policy under Kennedy.
We didn’t have to deal with the Seventh Floor on Middle East Policy very much.
The brief section on the Middle East is interesting for its impressions of personalities and relations.
Concerning Talbot, Bowles stated that it was he who had brought him into the administration, and that he viewed this as a mistake.
In this account, Badeau emphasizes his distaste for Dulles’ policy in the Middle East and Kennedy’s desire to bring ‘new blood’ into the diplomatic corps.
In light of policy statements and commitments in speeches this is curious, but it reflects the President’s intention, confirmed by Chester Bowles, to conduct his own personal foreign policy and use his Ambassadors and the State Department as implementation tools.
Al-Atasi, Jamal, A+Thawra li Jamal Abd-al-Nasser wa ala Fikribi al-Istratyi wa al-Tarikhi.
In Karpat, , Political and Social Thought in the Contemporary Middle East, 202.
On this point, Chester Bowles wrote an assessment of Nasser and relations with Egypt on February 21, 1962, following a fiveday visit to Cairo when he met with Nasser and several key members of the UAR government.
The campaign and later the administration ignored the ideological warning indicated by past behavior and later by Bowles’ telegram.
Hubert Humphrey’s visit to the UAR and meeting with Nasser illustrated Badeau’s attempts from Cairo to manage Nasset’s image.
This was just after the Syrian coup, for which Nasser blamed his intelligence service and the fact that unlike in Egypt, where he locked up the capitalists whose property he confiscated, he had not done that in Syria and they had forced the coup against him.
He also predicted another coup within six months in Syria — which did in fact occur, backed by Nasserist Syrians.
Nasser, like Ayub in Pakistan, was concerned about the political rhetoric and the perceived influence of the Israeli lobby.
This is evidenced by the UAR reaction to the appointments, following the election, of Averell Harriman and Chester Bowles.
These appointments encouraged Cairo to believe that a balanced policy would continue, and that the real question would be how the aid dollars would be split between Tel Aviv and Cairo.
When asked if he had recommended funding of the Aswan Dam following the announcement of the Soviet-Czech arms deal, he stated that he had not been consulted directly but that it was politically untenable.
At one level, key advisors like Rostow who were well-acquainted with both administrations understood the similarities between Eisenhower and Kennedy policy; on another level, Kennedy’s administration, like Eisenhower’s, simply could not bring itself to give their predecessors credit for having pursued what they themselves viewed as sound policies.
In dealing with the apparent contradictions, Rostow stated that he believed that Eisenhower was simply unwilling to make “command decisions’ on foreign aid in the face of Republican opposition.
Rostow added that Eisenhower’s final foreign-aid package was so generous that the Kennedy administration found it unnecessary to ask for additional funding.
Karpat , Political and Social Thought in the Contemporary Middle East, 202.
Talbot had suggested to President Kennedy that despite ‘pain to Israel’, the President needed to take a more overtly pro-Arab stand to protect United States interests in the Middle East.
Talbot blamed Myer Feldman, in his role as special counselor to the President on Jewish issues, for blocking the Johnson Plan and a solution to the refugee problem.
Talbot stated that Feldman kept the Israeli embassy informed on everything that went on in the White House.
In Rostow’s view, the war in Yemen was a perfect example of this tendency.
Rostow’s frustration was real, and reflected the disappointment felt in the Kennedy administration concerning their UAR policy.
They sincerely believed that Nasser had passed through his revolutionary stage and was ready for an inward turn.
They did not interpret the situation as one in which another cycle of heightened revolutionary activity was about to begin.
When it occurred, it came as a major disappointment to Rostow, because he had suggested to Kennedy that the United States should make a real effort with Nasser.
This boosted aid to Jordan from seven million to eight million dollars for Jordanian fiscal year 1962.
United States and British aid for fiscal year 1961 totaled $47. million. based on an agreement that the United States footed 85 per cent of the bill.
In February 1961, King Hussein sent a letter to Nasser suggesting that they meet and consider settling their differences.
This was taken as an insult by the Jordanian government, and even some proNasserist elements that had applauded the letter were unhappy that a more prompt, positive reply had not been forthcoming.
These telegrams raise concerns that Nasser would get the best of King Hussein in exchanges of letters.
They also point to the concerns of antiNasserist elements in the Jordanian government who did not believe that the exchanges with Nasser were a good idea.
PRO, FO371/157527, 1, in which King Hussein expressed his chagrin over the fact that Nasser published the correspondence after being asked not to do so.
On the subject of Iraq and Kuwait, Badeau related a conversation with Nasser, with Badeau speculating that the Iraqi move was to compensate for the lack of financial success resulting from the IPC nationalization.
Apparently, in more recent times, the Iraqis are not the only ones who use that decision-making process.
The British Embassy reported that on the night of 30 June railway flatcars loaded with British-supplied Centurion tanks departed the Baghdad area along with various Iraqi army units for the Kuwaiti border.
The implication is that Qasim’s actions were motivated by the very Arab unity that he had always resisted.
It completely ignores that the fact that Qasim’s motivations vis-a-vis Kuwait had nothing to do with pan-Arabism and everything to do with his personal goals, the economic mess in Iraq, and Iraqi nationalism.
Aburish goes on to insinuate that the UAR position was in some way part of an American plot against Arab unity rather than a grossly stupid misstep by Qasim.
Aburish forgets that not only the Americans but also most of the Arab world ultimately applauded the UAR position on the dispute; thus, by the authot’s logic, they must have been a part of the plot also.
King Hussein’s bizarre proposal was for a union between Jordan, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, and Iraq.
It can only be described as a feeble, illogical attempt by the Hashemite monarch to isolate Egypt, which had made the decision to dispatch troops to Kuwait.
Why Hussein attempted to include Iraq, the perpetrator of the crisis, puzzled everyone.
This move tended to discourage foreign oil companies from investing in the new exploration because of political uncertainties.
Additionally, the IPC retaliated by decreasing oil production and thus curtailing Iraqi government revenues.
He lost revenues that worsened Iraq’s economic situation but gained some prestige lost in the Kuwaiti adventure.
On the other side of the Atlantic, the Kennedy administration attempted to contain Egypt’s African adventures.
On February 5, 1961, Nasser wrote to Kennedy complaining about the assassination of Lumumba and calling for a greater United Nations role in stabilizing the country.
Nasser argued that the current recognized regime in the Congo was illegitimate, and propped up by foreign powers.
He was pointedly referring to the Congolese regime backed by strongman Joseph Mobutu, and strongly supported by the United States.
In response, Kennedy made a strong case for non-aligned support for the UN mission in the Congo as a means of averting civil war.
To his credit, Bass identifies the Kennedy administration as the beginning of the special relationship between the United States and Israel, but he misapprehends the significance of domestic politics and political pressure by Jewish groups in support of Israel.
It may not have been ‘foreordained’ but it was certainly highly predictable, given Jewish electoral support and the close election.
For example, Bass cites Kennedy’s concerns over Dimona and the exclusion of United States Jewish soldiers from Saudi Arabia as examples of a lack of Jewish influence.
Bass argues that the Israeli lobby during the Kennedy period was not strong enough to heavily impact United States policy.
The author seems not to comprehend what had actually occurred during the late Eisenhower era.
Kennedy believed that the Arab leader had ‘moderated’ because of the rapprochement with the Eisenhower administration.
On this basis, Kennedy and some of his advisors made assumptions that were simply not based in reality.
The Eisenhower administration pursued an even-handed policy out of principle; Kennedy pursued a pro-Israeli policy out of naiveté over Nasset’s malleability with regard to a settlement with Israel, and with an eye to votes in Brooklyn.
It was Eisenhower’s policy of 1953, but with additional domestic political considerations.
There are strong indications that indeed the Zionist support and Jewish votes figured prominently in Kennedy’s policy decisions.
Kennedy appointed Myer Feldman as his Special Counsel to represent Jewish and Israeli interests in the White House.
It begs the question of why Nasser did not also have a lawyer on the White House staff.
Komer also states that Feldman was instrumental in propagating ‘the great Egyptian rocket scare’, a story fabricated by the Israelis that Egypt was developing rockets and nuclear weapons.
Abd-al-Nasser, Jamal, President Gamal Abdel-Nasser’s Speeches and Press Interviews, JanuaryDecember 1963.
This is the basis for the Rusk memorandum to the President, and clearly shows who is pushing an aggressive UAR policy.
This work has not focused on the Algerian war, because it was peripheral to the main thrust of this narrative; however, Nasset’s role in support of the FLN was significant and pugnacious.
To counter this, Nasser authorized Heikal to print that portion of his letter to Kennedy in which he laid out Egypt’s support for the Palestinian cause.
Heikal stated that Saudi Arabian and Jordanian actions required it; otherwise they would not print the excerpted letter.
Heikal told Badeau that this was the equivalent of the United States providing a courtesy warning on the Syrian recognition issue following the coup and the sale of Hawk missiles to Israel.
It is clear that Badeau was seriously aggravated and concerned by this development because he sent his communication NIACT and Top Secret/Presidential Confidential.
As an indication of what Feldman saw as his priorities, he told Jewish leaders ‘in confidence’ about the negotiations over the Hawk issue and the Johnson Plan.
Komer expressed concern that the situation with the UAR over the Hawks could get out of hand as the news spread.
The United States Consulate lodged a formal complaint with the Yemen government about the arrival of Soviet tanks in Ta’iz because their trip from Hudaydah on the coast had ‘torn up’ the American-built road between the two cities.
The Consul also described Yemeni proficiency in driving, stating that one of the tanks had been driven over a cliff, killing the driver and reducing by one the number that participated in a military parade the next day.
He also recounted rows of tanks, trucks, armored cars, and guns parked in a large field near Bajil.
The British found themselves quite frustrated with United States progress on various aid projects, and concerned that Washington did not take the situation in Yemen and Soviet penetration seriously enough.
The British frustration included what, in their view, was a lack of suitable United States progress on its two major aid projects, the Ta’iz to Hudaydah road and the Ta’iz water project.
Despite this, it is useful as a concise reference that provides a chronological framework around which the researcher or reader can arrange anecdotal but often more detailed accounts of specific events found in Holden and Johns’ The House of Sand and Lacey’s The Kingdom.
The author states that the Sudayri Seven were allied principally to Feisal in the power struggle of the late 1950s and early 1960s, but she provides little explanation.
Feisal indicated that he had been Nasset’s friend, but that Nasser had deceived him.
Slow deliveries of arms also concerned President Kennedy, and he sent a note to Secretary of Defense McNamara asking why it took so long for the United States to deliver promised military aid.
Ben-Gurion refused to accept Pinhas Lavon in a government coalition between the Maipai and Histadrut parties.
As a result, both parties refused to enter a coalition headed by Ben-Gurion because of his handling of the Lavon affair.
Summitt’s article on Iran and the Kennedy administration deals better with the reality of the situation from 1961 to 1963.
Summitt states, correctly, that the Shah manipulated the Kennedy administration into continued support for his regime.
The author leaves the impression that she believes there was some teal alternative.
Eisenhower, Dulles, Herter, and Kennedy knew that the Shah exaggerated external threats.
They understood that he had serious faults that might bring regime collapse at any time.
They wanted a reform-minded, more liberal alternative to the Shah, but they were dealing with Iran — no such alternative existed.
In fact, Kennedy’s ill-advised decision to identify the United States with Prime Minister Ali Amini was a major shift in United States policy.
The Eisenhower administration had steadfastly avoided identification with any Iranian faction.
In fact, Ambassador Wailes, a holdover from the Eisenhower years, lobbied strongly against the Kennedy decision.
He urged that Washington go no further than Eisenhower’s position, guaranteeing the territorial integrity and independence of Iran.
Kennedy’s decision to back Amini personally drastically altered the dynamic of US-Iran relations.
It led Washington down a torturous path to making similar commitments to the Shah.
It placed the interests of the United States squarely in the Pahlavi basket.
This decision lashed Johnson, Nixon, Ford, and later Carter to an inherently unstable regime and left the United States with no alternatives in 1979.
The problem is ‘American diplomats’ did study and understand, but they could see no alternative given the Cold War and the commitment to containment.
In addition, the Shah, not the United States, should be viewed as the proactive driver in the equation.
It was the Shah’s understanding of the Iranian situation that allowed him to survive until 1979, and it was the Shah’s miscalculations that led to his downfall.
The mullahs of 1979, who are still in charge in Iran, say that the Shah’s regime fell because he was not harsh enough in his suppression of the opposition.
In describing the events of 1961 and 1962, Fischer points to the very reform programs supported by Washington as the catalyst for antiShah activities.
He cites the election issues of 1960 and 1961, and nullification by the Shah because of corruption.
He points out that Ayatollahs Behbahani and Borujerdi opposed land reform.
In November 1962, the w/ama launched a campaign against the Shah’s attempt to create a grass-roots political movement through the Local Council Election Bill, because it allowed women to vote and did not mention the Koran.
In effect, many of the liberalizing reforms that the United States urged on the Shah became the catalyst for growing traditional and religious opposition to the regime.
See Ora/ History — Chester Bowles, JFK Library, 6, in which Bowles relates the views of Dean Acheson, former Secretary of State under Truman.
Acheson believed that Kennedy was “unqualified and simply the wrong man’ for the presidency.
The new White House knew about these views in various quarters and was most sensitive about them.
Bill’s work on Iranian-US relations distorts the real relationship between Eisenhower and Kennedy’s policies toward Iran.
In particular, he borrows from the State Department memos and telegram traffic of John W Bowling, the Iran desk officer in the NEA Bureau.
Bowling wrote the same kinds of plans for Iran during the Eisenhower administration.
A closer reading of Bowling’s positions during the Eisenhower administration would have revealed that Bowling was a weak choice to use to support the idea that Kennedy’s focus and plans for Iran was different from those of his predecessor.
The problem with the Shah was only too well known to the Eisenhower administration, as were Young’s views on the situation.
Many if not most of his views on the situation in Iran were shared by the Eisenhower administration, which actively tried to push the Shah toward reform.
Bill also cites Kennedy efforts to alter aid to the Shah from military to economic; the Eisenhower administration used the same tactics.
Bill also laid the controversial ‘Status of Forces Agreement’ of October 1964 at Lyndon Johnson’s doorstep when in fact the United States positions on the agreement were clearly established on Kennedy’s watch.
Be that as it may, this is misleading vis-a-vis what had gone before and what actually occurred during the Kennedy years.
As in the Eisenhower years, pressure from the United States for social and economic reforms and political liberalization caused the Shah to go through the motions of reform, just as he had under Eisenhower.
In reality, he worked assiduously to undermine any real attempt to alter the s/afus quo or to liberalize the political system.
Kennedy followed the same policy path trodden by Eisenhower and, like his predecessor, learned that reform in Iran could not be purchased at a price that threatened the stability of the country.
The Shah was just as determined not to relinquish his power, and to use whatever means were available to extract the military aid that he desired for the regime.
In addition, United States military support finally reached a crisis point during the Kennedy administration, in which the solution insisted upon by Washington would ultimately lead to 1979.
The idea that the United States could have controlled the Shah smacks of ‘salvationist’ superiority.
At a minimum, it infers that the Iranians were not responsible for their own actions.
It should be remembered that most Iranians, including the clerics, supported the 1953 coup against Musaddiq.
It also infers that a better policy strategy existed, and that an improved situation would have emerged had the Shah fallen.
In all likelihood, just another corrupt regime would have taken power, touting the interests of its supporters over the rest of the country.
But, most of all, it insinuates that United States owed something to Iran.
The Iranians understood the game from their support of the 1953 coup to the 1979 revolution.
Without that support, the coup would never have succeeded, just as the United States was unable to prevent 1979.
This is the document on which Bill relied so heavily in his interpretation of Kennedy administration policy and the ‘so-called’ fourteen-point ‘blueprint’ for Iran by Bowling, the Iran desk officer.
It offered a shopping list of options, most of which had been tried under Eisenhower and all of which the Shah had managed to circumvent.
The analysis that Bowling offered about the nature of Iranians and of Iranian society at that particular juncture was very interesting and perceptive.
Bill also overlooks the fact that Bowling concluded that there was no element of Iranian society capable of leading the country and preventing chaos other than the Shah.
In Washington, intelligence and foreign policy analysts had two anchors for political stability along the northern tier, Turkey and Pakistan.
In both, unstable but democratic governments had succumbed to more reliable, benevolent military dictatorships.
Analysts looked for patterns when practicing the ‘art’ of intelligence and foreign political prognostication.
Fundamentally, the assumption was that the potential for a military takeover was not only possible but also likely.
During this period, the new nationalist governments that came to power by military coup tended to be composed of younger officers with new radical nationalist ideas and ideals — Nasser and Qasim were examples.
These types of military governments created problems for Western policy, particularly given their penchant for non-alignment or even left-of-center policies.
These types of coups seemed to occur in countries where the higher echelons of the military had become closely associated with the ruling elite.
In other words, the senior military leadership became as much of a target to be disposed of as the political regime itself.
In countries where coups occurred and the political orientation remained largely pro-Western, it was usually the senior military leadership that took the initiative to change the government before the building pressure from below had reached critical mass.
For example, on October 27, 1958, after months of stewing, General Iskander Mirza, President of Pakistan, with the support of the Pakistani Chief of Staff Ayub Khan, overthrew the government of Prime Minister Noon.
While ostensibly opposed by the United States government, in reality this coup became something of a model for ‘controlled democracy’ in the region.
The new Abboud government reinforced the idea that the pro-Nasserist plotters included mid-level officers in the military.
You are in a better position than I to understand meaning of constant interference of a certain state in internal affairs of its neighbors.
The point learned in Washington was that coups by conservative general officers were preferable to those of their potentially more radical subordinates.
Bowles lamented that Holmes had become an impediment to new policies with regard to the Shah because he ‘wanted to bring all these planes in all the time to please the Shah.
Also included in the payments were Allen Dulles and three former Ambassadors to Iran.
These were provided to the McClellan committee investigating the Foundation.
Rostow’s search for answers netted responses that were just as unpalatable.
Talbot was a naval liaison officer based in Bombay, India during the Second World War.
Her office was in the same building and near that of Dean Rusk, who was an OSS officer.
Rusk and Talbot met from time to time when Talbot was in Calcutta visiting his wife.
There was no lasting or close relationship that flowed from this prior to the Kennedy years, but they did know each other personally and by reputation.
The author argues that it was under Derakhshesh that systematic and implacable opposition to the West took root in the Iranian educational system.
Following his appointment in May 1961, Derakhshesh formed the Commission on the Aim of Iranian Education.
Jalal Al-e Ahmad, a polemicist, wrote a report for the Commission, which was reviewed in November 1961 and again in January 1962.
It was a ‘nativist’, anti-regime, and anti-Western work, and the Commission decided against publishing it.
Following this rejection, Al-e Ahmad managed to get it published under the title Gharbzadegi.
Boroujerdi describes Gharbzadegi as the first to seriously attack Western intellectual modes of thought and to offer an Iranian alternative.
There is simply no way that any American administration could understand the variables in attempting to change the fundamental nature of Iranian society, and that is exactly what Kennedy and his White House hoped to do.
In so doing, they failed to realize how limited United States options were in this regard.
They tied themselves directly to the programs and person of Amini, who was in turn just as tied to the Shah.
When Amini failed, the only option was an even tighter relationship with the Shah or, at best, a neutralist, anti-Western Iran.
At the same time, the events of 1961-1962 would set in motion the ultimate unraveling of the pro-Western regime in Tehran.
In early June 1961, Julius C Holmes replaced Edward T Wailes as Ambassador to Tehran.
Arsanjani had long been an advocate of land reform, calling for it in an article in Darya on January 15, 1951.
The administration used these ‘special task forces’ to circumvent the normal diplomatic and intelligence channels.
This often resulted in ‘hyper-active’ reactions to anything resembling a crisis and in some less than balanced interpretations of various situations.
The key to Vietnam may be found as much in the information-interpretation processes emanating from the ‘task force syndrome’ as from other sources.
Holmes knew that Bowles would express a very positive view of Amini and complain about the Shah’s focus on the military.
By sending a telegram straight to the White House and Secretary, he made certain that they heard his version of the discussion with the Shah before Bowles had an opportunity to comment on it.
He then went on to say that he needed Talbot’s help in advancing the date of the Shah’s visit, because that might improve the situation at the palace.
In effect, the MAP Steering Group had decided to offer Iran $300 million in military aid over the fiscal year 1962 through fiscal year 1967.
This included training and logistics support, but not a thorough modernization program.
This program included a thorough modernization of the Iranian military accompanied by a reduction in overall force levels from 205,000 to 150,000 men.
The Shah’s presence in Iran and his support — or at least tolerance — of a reformist government like the present one is essential.
Holmes’ message that the Shah was the essential element for reform had now taken root.
The briefing memorandum points out that Turkey had a larger population, and as a member of NATO provided a potential staging-area for United States troops and intermediate range ballistic-missile sites, and that this accounted for any differences in aid.
In talks with McNamara, the Shah made it clear that the 150,000-man force envisioned by the United States was insufficient and that higher force-levels would be required.
McNamara agreed that this could be discussed, and implied that a 10,000-man increase over that number might work.
The Shah readily accepted a ‘planning team’ from the Pentagon proffered by McNamara.
Keddie’s work on Iran is a general history, but in a brief eight pages she attempts to provide detail on the relationship between Amini and the Shah.
Most traditional interpretations of this period tie Amini’s tenure to the Shah’s jealousy over United States support for Amini’s reforms, and his clashes with the Shah over those reforms; and In reality, Amini was little different from the Prime Ministers that went before him.
A careful examination of the source materials reveals considerably more calculation on the part of the Shah.
The Shah is clearly in control of the situation with Amini from the very beginning.
In fact, one could argue that he appointed Amini instead of Teymour Bakhtiar, the Chief of SAVAK, to the Prime Minister’s position because he believed that more United States aid would result.
The fact that Kennedy held one-on-one discussions with foreign leaders left the substance of the meetings open for discussion.
It gave foreign leaders the opportunity to ascribe something personally to the President.
This memorandum from Komer to President Kennedy illustrates the problem in selecting documents for publication.
Komet’s suspicion that ‘Amini had to turn to blaming the US’ because of the ‘Shah’s refusal to back him in cutting the military and civil budget’ contributes to the view that the Shah was entirely to blame for the situation.
Holmes, ever mindful of his prerogatives as Ambassador, made sure that Washington ‘remembered’ that he had predicted the possible fall of Amini two weeks earlier.
Holmes had believed almost from the beginning that the Shah, not the Prime Minister, was the right political horse to bet on in Iran.
Bill portrays Johnson as ‘particularly blunt’ with the Shah over the need for reform, and quotes Ambassador Holmes as saying that progress toward economic and social justice was the only real insurance against subversion and the Communist threat.
With regard to military reductions, Johnson pointed out that even the United States with its global commitments and the Berlin Crisis had to demobilize two army divisions because of budget considerations.
Johnson left no doubt about the thrust of the American message to the shah’s government.
However, in the next breath, Bill makes a series of ‘Kennedy Legacy’ statements, insinuating or stating outright that the Shah duped Eisenhower, Dulles, Herter, Johnson, and Nixon but not John Kennedy, a position at considerable variance with documentary evidence.
In addition, Kennedy’s personal support for Amini, aside from the fact that it involved the United States more deeply in internal Iranian politics than ever before, was out of concern that the Shah would fall and that the United States would need a strong anti-Communist alternative.
Once the hysteria in the NSC and White House subsided, the Shah became the ‘indispensable’ element for stability in Tehran.
The Shah’s rule, and for that matter, Amini’s as well, always had used heavy doses of repression.
Shortly after his government came to power, Amini banned demonstrations and authorized the use of force on university students.
The Shah and Amini jointly agreed upon the tough antiriot measures of January and June 1962, and it was Amini, with strong Kennedy backing, who ruled unconstitutionally by not calling for elections.
The bottom line is that those American officials with an understanding of the Iranian people believed that the Shah’s survival and ability to ‘control’ the situation were essential to stability.
Asian dictators were always preferable to instability or Communist expansion.
In fact, there is a good argument to be made that at least one Asian dictator, Ngo Dinh Diem, would earn a bullet in the back of the head, with the knowledge of President Kennedy, for entertaining an arrangement with the National Liberation Front in Vietnam.
We will also get around to discussing how impressed Kennedy was with Ayub Khan during his visit to Washington in 1961.
The point is that Kennedy, like his successors, was trapped within the confines of United States interests.
Kennedy’s problems with the Shah were no different from those of Eisenhower or Johnson.
In reality, the United States never had any real control over events in Iran.
For 25 years everyone in Washington wanted an alternative to the Shah; the fact is that it took until 1979 for the Iranians to produce one.
This document is a history of the status of the United States military personnel issue, including the informal arrangements for jurisdiction, and argues that the time had come for a more formal arrangement to be put in place.
Chapter 13 1 Bowles was well known for his pro-Indian views and sentiments.
He made it clear that he believed that Nehru was the teal influence in Asia.
Jalal argues that Pakistan’s growing involvement in the American defense structure after 1954 severely hampered economic development efforts.
The author states that maintenance and administrative costs placed a serious burden on already limited amounts of economic investment funds.
National Commission on Historical and Cultural Research, 1976), traces the development and programs of the principal Pakistani political parties.
He argues that the nation did indeed face political chaos and paralysis, and that Ayub took the only course possible in abrogating the 1956 constitution.
In fact, both Jalal and Aziz are probably correct in the sense that each man identified elements that contributed to the 1958 coup and ‘controlled democracy’, but each, having an individual axe to grind, over-simplified and excluded other contributory factors that might complicate their particular arguments.
Apparently, Ayub had toyed with the idea of ‘controlled democracy’ as eatly as 1954 when he was Defense Minister in Bogra’s cabinet.
Jalal speculates that that the idea might have been prepared with the backing of senior Punjabi civilian bureaucrats.
Bhargava argues that the entire structure of Pakistani foreign policy revolved around a desire to obtain a military advantage over India, and the ‘megalamaniacal ’ designs of the Pakistani military.
While the author is over-the-top in his accusations leveled at Ayub Khan, he is undoubtedly correct about the real purpose of Pakistani military programs and about Ayub’s view of economic aid to India.
Talbot was probably the most experienced and best prepared of all the Kennedy appointees to deal with the intractable problem of India and Pakistan.
In addition, he displayed remarkable appreciation of the situation in both countries, while never forgetting that his primary mission was to act in the best interests of the United States.
Despite his many ties to India and his sympathy for Indian nationalism, Talbot also understood and appreciated the conflicted emotions that drove Muslim separatism.
The paper provided Talbot’s view of the emerging Pakistani national identity and the motivations that had driven the creation of the Pakistani state.
Surprisingly, Talbot consistently provided the policy balance missing among those who more blindly supported the pro-Indian position within the Kennedy administration.
Grafurov’s work provides a discussion from the Soviet perspective on the relationships between NATO, CENTO, and SEATO, and the key role of Pakistan in the alliance system directed at the Soviet Union.
To emphasize the linkages, the author cites the February 1959 visit of McGhee and Admiral Radford to Karachi as an example of the close collaboration within the western alliance system.
The author also points to the direct link between the situation in post-coup Iraq and the massive influx of United States aid.
The overall work, of coutse, is an indictment of Anglo-American imperialist designs on the region and of the Ayub regime’s complicity in those efforts.
Grafurov also argues that Anglo-American designs on the region and exploitation of economic need and military dictatorship flew in the face of the ideas embodied in the Colombo Plan.
In effect, political unrest and economic dislocation created a situation in which the democratic government of Menderes found itself attempting political reforms and launching an anti-corruption campaign that included formerly influential army officers.
These moves further alienated an increasingly estranged army, segments of which had been attempting to piece together a coup since 1955.
Ironically, the coup occurred the day before a planned state visit by Indian Prime Minister Nehru.
Brecher’s article provides an excellent insight into Krishna Menon’s highly anti-Western views.
Brecher provides a solid overview of the inconsistencies of Menon’s views, and of how they influenced and in many cases drove Indian foreign policy in the 1950s and early 1960s.
Gundevia in the Indian MEA on 19 June, which is attached to the same document.
He served as Ambassador in Switzerland 19531954; High Commissioner in Sri Lanka, 1957-1960; Commonwealth Secretary, 19611964; and rose to become Foreign Secretary, 1964-1965.
The problems between India and Pakistan appear to have entered an almost dormant stage at this point, and did not come to the fore again until 1962, but pressure was building.
The Afghanis argued that because of Pakistani ‘taunting’ Pushtun tribes and Kabul, with United States weapons barring military and economic aid from the US, they had no alternative but to turn to the Soviet Union.
Desai’s report on Galbraith’s grousing about the political opposition in Washington provides insight into the Indian perception that the Kennedy administration found itself constrained by the Republican opposition in its dealings with India.
See also Lall, Emergence of Modern India, 144, in which Lall, apparently oblivious to Harriman’s total disdain, commented that there was ‘excellent cooperation between Kennedy’s representative Averell Harriman and myself.
Lall also claimed that he had been selected to succeed Menon as Minister of Defense, when the Chinese War resulted in Menon’s ouster, thus destroying Lall’s opportunities as well.
Cooper’s work on the Vietnam conflict provides some interesting, if limited, views of India’s role and also of Ambassador Galbraith’s early involvement on behalf of the administration.
It also reinforces the view that Galbraith was a duck out of water as a diplomat.
Just as his suggestions that the United States allow the recognition of Communist China proved unpalatable, Galbraith suggested ‘strong medicine’ for the Diem regime in the form of a demand that they liberalize politically or face reduced United States aid.
Galbraith did suggest that a change in government might be in order, as long the United States did not initiate 1t.
SarDesai, D.R., Indian Foreign Policy in Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam, 1947-1964.
Galbraith’s ‘rather disturbed’ demeanor, and what appeared to be transparent insecurity in requesting that Nehru not respond to Kennedy’s letter until after Nehru and Galbraith, had talked caught Desai’s attention.
If Rusk, Talbot, and Rostow had been waiting for an opportunity to bring Galbraith down a notch or two, the latter could not have done a better job of offering himself up.
We should take a passive attitude on the Chicoms, making a token vote against them but no impassioned pleas.
Talbot stated that Galbraith never understood the bureaucracy or how to use it.
Talbot believed that Galbraith ovet-estimated and over-stated his influence with the President and, when he became aware of this, he grew more frustrated with the situation and ultimately left India.
Talbot also commented that Galbraith’s personal behavior bordered on the bizarre at times.
Talbot stated that Galbraith had an ‘enormous ego’ and was totally inept at managing the bureaucracy.
As a result, he seldom achieved his goals because he alienated the very people with whom he needed to work.
In addition, he had some ‘unproductive ideas’ about how policy with India and China should be conducted.
Rostow believed that his suggestion about allowing China into the UN was ‘ludicrous’, given Mao’s domination and his policies at the time in Southeast Asia.
Akbar lays the blame for the failure of the talks with Kennedy squarely at Nehru’s feet.
The only animated conversation that the two men had pertained to religion, during a banquet at the Indian Embassy in Washington.
The President’s rude behavior to him had not been directed against him personally, but against the Prime Minister.
Talbot points out that Galbraith thought that the Indians would not move on Goa.
For his part, Galbraith provides a detailed account of a telegram from the State Department telling him that the Indians were about to move on Goa, and then of his rushing around trying to convince the Indian government to stay the operation.
On December 21, four days after the Goa operation, the Indians approached the United States about military aid.
The timing was so bad that Galbraith believed Menon intentionally arranged it in order to justify the Indian plan to produce supersonic aircraft.
In reality, Menon probably proposed the military purchases knowing that Washington would turn them down.
He could then argue that the United States had refused military aid once again, and thus begin his planned campaign to find another source in Moscow.
Air Force Magazine, June 2005, 74, for an explanation of one aspect of the value of the intelligence sites in Pakistan and Iran.
Khrushchev threatened the United States with missiles that would approach North America from the south, thus evading early warning radars directed toward the North Pole.
These lowtrajectory missiles armed with 2.2-megaton warhead could strike United States command and control targets, with less than five minutes’ warning from US-based space surveillance assets.
This is one example of the strategic United States requirement for information-gathering and missile early warning across the ‘northern tier’ in Pakistan and Iran that directly contributed to the United States strategic defensive posture.
The Administration had formed another of its vaunted working groups, the Kashmir Working Group.
The group viewed the potential for Security Council debate as damaging to India and Pakistan, as well as to the interests of the United States.
The objective was to get an alternative proposal on the table before the Kashmir debate began at the United Nations.
The report pointed out that it might be very difficult to determine who started the conflict and, therefore, whom the United States was obliged to support.
Talbot met with the Indian Ambassador the same day that the letter arrived from Prime Minister Nehru.
Nehru, in an attempt to put the best face on matters, ‘praised’ the straightforward nature of the letter.
INR speculated that Menon, perhaps for the first time, actually thought that succeeding Nehru might be possible.
This is a collaborative survey that has little interpretive value; however, it is a period work and some of the commentary reflects contemporary evaluations of the situation.
Ayub appeared to have brought stability to a failing state, and his apparent success brought him much acclaim as a model military ruler.
His article in Foreign Affairs portrayed his paternalistic approach as the only reasonable methodology for representative government in the region.
Ayub’s experiment was the model that the Kennedy administration pursued in Iran.
There is an argument that Galbraith had always intended to leave after two years, and that his resignation was not a direct result of the failed United States arms deal for India.
Given the frustration, not only with the policy issues but with the bureaucracy as a whole, Galbraith most likely was simply fed up and decided to quit.
There is no record of anyone in the administration being upset to see him go.
It was during the visit to the farm that Ayub and the First Lady spent a well-publicized afternoon horseback-riding.
In September 1962, Ayub stopped briefly in Washington on his way to a Commonwealth meeting in Canada.
According to Komer, nothing really transpired during the meeting with the exception that Ayub accused the Indians of overstating their problems with China.
This did not particularly help Ayub’s credibility, because a border war broke out within a matter of months.
Baydani was born in Cairo, and his wife was a close friend of Anwar Sadat’s wife.
Thus Sadat became Baydani’s friend and a powerful patron within the Egyptian regime.
The Ba’thists had supported the September 1961 coup against Egyptian rule in Syria; thus Nasser could hardly be expected to look the other way when his Yemeni protégés took a Ba’thist tilt.
Jidda pointed out that the new YAR Prime Minister, Abdullah al-Sallal, could not have pulled it off without UAR support.
In another meeting a year after the coup, Nasser stated that the revolution in Yemen was a historical necessity and that the ‘feudal’ regime could not be allowed to return.
A paratrooper officer who was a member of the prominent Yemeni Zabarah family stated that he supported the Republic despite the fact that they had shot some of his relatives.
He believed that the revolution was a necessity, but perhaps all the executions were not.
He also predicted that the Royalists would ‘cause trouble’ but that the YAR would survive.
He urged United States recognition of the YAR as a counterbalance to the Soviets and Chinese, a typical UAR argument.
This was typical of numerous reports coming out of Yemen following the coup, and no doubt influenced Washington’s view.
The Jordanians threatened to act on behalf of the ‘legitimate’ government of Yemen against foreign intervention if asked to do so.
The United States Embassy in Amman commented that most Jordanians believed that the government was backing the ‘wrong horse’ in Yemen.
The Saudi Royal family must have shuddered at the thought of the Hashemite Arab Legion protecting the Holy Places.
It was the Saudis who had driven the Hashemites, who were direct decendants of the Prophet, out of Mecca and Medina in the 1920s.
Prince Talal, either on October 17 or the following day, renounced his royal title in protest.
Washington told Ta’iz to ‘categorically assure’ the Yemenis that the United States was in no way supporting Saudi efforts to assist Yemeni loyalists.
The SAG published a new series of laws and reforms, perhaps the most sweeping in history.
This letter was responding to a letter from Kennedy on November 8, 1962 which strongly encouraged Feisal to continue with his program of reforms.
He noted Kennedy’s advice that Saudi Arabia should not contribute to the ‘tense atmosphere’ in the region, all the while supporting and supplying the tribal elements fighting the YAR government and the Egyptians.
Ambassador Badeau was in Washington ostensibly on consultations but presumably pressing for just this recognition.
He was figuratively, if not literally, at Strong’s elbow when this memo was written.
In addition, Badeau met with President Kennedy, so a direct appeal to the President was undoubtedly made.
The rapidity of the YAR’s recognition following this memo suggests very high-level involvement.
The Administration obtained no guarantees from the YAR, and little in the way of Egyptian goodwill, but Badeau and Talbot, with the support of the President, pushed their Egyptian agenda forward.
In this letter, Aden requested that London mount a diplomatic campaign to counteract Egyptian propaganda about the RAF bombarding the ‘peaceful population’ in Yemen and Oman.
His discussion of the role of Krishna Menon and Menon’s army protégé, General Brij Mohn Kaul, and their roles in the war with China is particularly interesting.
Perhaps most instructive is Maxwell’s narrative of Kaul’s relationship with Nehru and his rapid rise through the ranks.
While there is some debate about Nehru’s exact role in the decision-making process, Maxwell believes that General Kaul and Menon pushed Nehru into the occupation of Goa when he might have chosen a different option.
Brown believes that Nehru had little option but to end the Portuguese anachronism.
Whether Nehru decided on his own to take Goa or was maneuvered into doing so is immaterial; the fact is that, without consulting Parliament, Nehru acted.
As a result, they saw no downside in taking a provocative position with the Chinese, believing that it would merely increase domestic support for the government.
Maxwell argues that General Kaul and Krishna Menon intentionally hid those deficiencies from the Prime Minister.
Nehru conducted Indian diplomacy without significant input from others, with the exception of Krishna Menon.
Maxwell states that Beijing used the argument that Ayub and the military dominance of Pakistan represented a more developed stage in the progression toward a Marxist state than that of India.
As far as India was concerned, the Chinese viewed New Delhi as falling more and more under the influence of the United States.
To add insult to injury, the Chinese concluded that Soviet policy actually favored India, and that Moscow approved of the Indian alignment with the United States.
Mullik, the erstwhile ‘intelligence chief, states that the policy was later criticized on the grounds that India was militarily weak.
Mullik states that the real problem with regard to the Chinese was the fact that the policy had not been implemented two years earlier, in October 1959.
Mullik defended both himself and Menon against charges that they had ‘caused’ the Chinese debacle.
He argued that Menon was not responsible for the state of the army at the time of the invasion, nor was he responsible for the ‘forward policy’ that precipitated the Chinese attack.
Mullik also defended himself against ministerial level charges of failure.
Mullik hotly denied this; he claimed that the minister was upset became Menon had had him watched by one of the security services.
During the conversation, Rusk raised Krishna Menon as a major issue in US-Indian relations.
Rusk stated that Menon had been the ‘principal face and spokesman of India’ in the United States for many years and that he was a considerable problem in obtaining aid for India.
Gandhi replied that she sympathized with the United States position on Menon but that it was impossible for her father, Nehru, to ‘handle’ or ‘dismiss’ Menon given his visibility and the United States criticism of him.
In an interview with Talbot on 31 May 2002, he stated that Galbraith allowed personal issues to affect his conduct of government business in New Delhi.
Talbot commented that on one occasion, Galbraith absented himself from the Embassy in New Delhi without notifying Washington and turned up at an army hospital in Hawaii with some unspecified medical ailment.
Talbot also commented that the Chinese victory in the border war left Nehru ‘a broken man’ and contributed to his rapid decline and death.
This document provides the United States assessment of the London meetings and is remarkably similar to the Foreign Office and CRO documents.
It reflected the Anglo-American agreement to coordinate assistance to India and to work together to lessen the impact on Pakistan.
Ambassador Galbraith had already received notice from sources in contact with the Second Secretary in the Political Section, Albert Lakeland, Jr., that the Indian cabinet and had met and called for Krishna Menon’s removal and that Nehru would ask for his resignation.
In the Ambassadot’s view, something good had come out of the Chinese military efforts.
Galbraith took some pleasure in meeting with Menon later and seeing him desperately fighting for his political life.
Fearing an end to military aid to India before it began, Komer wanted Harriman to make it clear to Ayub that the aid would continue even in the event of a ceasefire.
Gundevia served in various capacities in the Indian Ministry of External Affairs from independence to 1969.
During the period of the Chinese Border War, he was the Commonwealth Secretary.
He provides a particularly interesting description of the climate in the Indian government during the Chinese Border war.
He is very complimentary about Duncan Sandys’ efforts during the process of establishing a basis for further discussions on Kashmir.
His description of Sandys’ meeting with himself, Nehru, and Desai on 29 November 1962 is particularly entertaining.
Gundevia described it as ‘three-cornered pencil ding-dong’, with Nehru looking on in amusement.
Feisal not only wanted the UAR to withdraw to its bases immediately, but also wanted a withdrawal of all supplies, tanks, and ammunition that the UAR was supplying to the YAR government.
Under the rules of engagement, pilots were not authorized to shoot except in self-defense, and could not pursue UAR aircraft.
Of course, the Egyptians were unaware of the restrictions and unwilling to press the issue to see what would happen.
It did however constitute a highly visible symbol of United States support for Saudi Arabia, and a tangible signal to Nasser that Washington would protect the Saudi regime.
Sabry became Nasset’s ‘alter ego’ to deal with foreign missions and emissaries during the early 1960s.
This is that same Ali Sabry who was humiliated in 1952 when, on a mission to the United States for arms, he returned empty-handed.
During the last months of the Truman administration, United States officials told Sabry that the decision had to await the arrival of the new administration.
Batatu also put Communist dead between February 8 and 10 at more than 5,000, and quoted King Hussein of Jordan as stating that he knew ‘for a certainty’ that the coup had the support of United States intelligence.
With reference to this last statement, the entire United States government supported the coup.
The United States lacked the operational capability to organize and carry out the coup, but certainly after it had occurred the United States government preferred the Nasserists and Ba’thists in power, and provided encouragement and probably some peripheral assistance.
Syrian Ba’thists had outmaneuvered their Nasserist allies by announcing the coup for March 7.
They told their Nasserist counterparts that it had been postponed until March 10, and then executed it on March 8.
The upshot was that the Ba’thists were in control before the Nasserists realized what had happened.
Ba’thist unity talks between the Iraqi and Syrian branches of the party had already been under way, and these now picked up steam.
In spite of their talk about unity with the UAR, the Syrian Ba’thists had one eye cocked over their shoulders, determined to prevent a repeat of their 1958-1961 debacles with Nasser and his supporters.
The Syrian delegates called Nasser “Your Excellency’ or “Mr President’, while he called them by their first names.
The meeting was ‘theater’, planned by Nasser for public consumption without the knowledge of his Syrian counterparts.
This set of documents, transcripts of the meetings published by the Egyptians, was an obvious attempt to completely undermine the position of the Ba’th in Syria and the region as a whole.
The transcripts were printed in Al-Ahram between 21 June and 22 July 1963 and broadcast over Radio Cairo.
Badeau had triangulation experts come to Cairo in order to pinpoint the exact location of Sawt al-Umma al-Arabiyya.
In a meeting the next day, Nasser apologized to Badeau for Sharaf, citing his inexperience, and for his lie about the radio broadcasts, telling him that he had told Sharaf not to lie if the other side knew you were lying.
Badeau expressed his concerns in a thinly-veiled ‘hypothetical telegram’ to Moscow from the Soviet Ambassador.
It was a creative way for Badeau to make his point, and events would prove it to be remarkably accuarate.
In this letter, Ambassador Macomber laid out both the economic and political situation in Jordan.
He argued that the United States had a fundamental choice either to wholeheartedly become the benefactor for the Hashemite regime in Jordan or to allow political and economic forces to take their course and undermine the Jordanian government to the point of collapse.
As a result of this discussion, President Kennedy asked for a meeting with Macomber.
Macomber identified the principle threat to Hussein as internal and nonCommunist.
In arguments reminiscent of the Dulles years, Macomber made the case that the pro-Western orientation of the Jordanian army was the critical element for the stability of the regime.
It was indicative of the shifting policies in the region that Macomber, with his close ties to Allen Dulles through the Office of Strategic Services and the CIA, and to John Foster Dulles, as his erstwhile special assistant, became the single most influential voice on the situation in Jordan.
Dann’s work provides excellent insight into the petiod, but his view that the Kennedy administration was willing to see the Hashemite regime in Jordan collapse as long as Jordan retained its independence is somewhat misleading.
The author uses Talbot’s statements on the maintenance of the ‘separate state’ in Jordan as an indication that this did not necessarily mean the Hashemite state.
Theoretically this may have been true, but the hard reality was that since the crisis of 1958 the United States government had seen no real alternative to the Hashemites.
The Kennedy administration had little choice but to follow the course laid out by Eisenhower, a course in large part determined by the efforts of Sir Charles Johnston, the British Ambassador.
King Hussein’s visit was cleared through Myer Feldman, Kennedy’s advisor on Israeli affairs.
He agrees that of all the Arabs, Hussein is probably the most acceptable in 1964.
Nasser’s view of the internal political situation in the United States was not far off the mark.
Mufti provides an interesting and detailed outline of the events of November 1963 that led to the Aref coup.
Komer was still convinced that the United States had to force reform in Iran, but he lacked any workable specifics.
In fact, Holmes, shortly after his arrival, clued into the fact that Shah was the center of power and that the National Front was no longer a real threat to the throne.
At the same time, Komer was calling Amini the ‘last hope’ and worrying about building ‘bridges’ to the National Front.
NACPM, CFPF, 1963, Political 6 Prominent Persons Pak to Political 14 Elections Pakistan, 2/1/63, 2.
Komer stated that despite the situation with Pakistan, the United States intended to go ahead with the military assistance to India.
When Bowles returned later to brief the effort, Johnson turned him down.
Bowles states that Johnson finally set a meeting to discuss the India military-aid plan in late May, but Nehru died three days before the meeting and the effort collapsed.
Publications Division of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, January 1963.
Executive Sessions of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee , Volume VIII, EightyFourth Congress Second Session, 1956.
Executive Sessions of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee , Volame XIX, EightySixth Congress First Session, 1959.
Kennedy, John F Freedom of Communications — Final Report of the Committee on Commerce, United States Senate.
Address by President Gamal Abdel Nasser to the Arab Socialist Union, February 21, 1965.
President Gamal Abdel Nasser on Consolidation of the Cause of World Peace.
President Gamal Abdel-Nasser’s Speeches and Press Interviews, January— December 1958.
United Arab Republic Information Department — Al-Shaab Printing House, 1959.
Publications Division of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India Press, 1955.
Excerpts from Prime Minister Nehru’s Speeches in Parliament: 1954-1956.
Oneworld, 2003 Ahmad, Muhammad Abd-al-Aziz, and Wafiq Abd-al-Aziz al-Tahmi’s Tajraba al-Wabida bayn Misr wa Suria.
Al-Atasi, Jamal. [alah ala al-tajribat al-thawrijat li jamal abd-al-nasir wa ala fikratu istratiji wa altarikhi.
A/Thawra li Jamal Abd-al-Nasser wa ala Fikrihi al-Istratyi wa al-Tarikh.
Badeau, John S East and West of Suex, the Story of the Modern Middle East.
Badeeb, Saeed M The Saudi-Egyptian Conflict over North Yemen, 1962-1970.
A Study of Iraq’s Old Landed and Commercial Classes and of its Communists, Ba’thists and Free Officers.
Marxist Politics and the Arab-Israeli Conflict in Egypt and Israel, 1948-1965.
Burrowes, Robert D The Yemen Arab Republic, The Politics of Development, 1962-1986.
In Feuchtwanger, E.J. and Peter Nailor The Soviet Union and the Third World.
Gerges, Fawaz A The Superpowers and the Middle East, Regional and International Politics, 1955— 1967.
Rathalik infajar al-srab fi falistin, 1948-1998. al-gahira: dar al-shuruq, 2003.
In Richard Immerman John Foster Dulles and the Diplomacy of the Cold War.
A Biography of Eleanor, Allen, and John Foster Dulles and Their Family Network.
In Kemal H Karpat Political and Social Thought in the Contemporary Middle East.
In Hisham Sharaby Theory and Politics in the Arab World, Critical Responses.
The Transformation of John Foster Dulles from Prophet of Realism to Priest of Nationalism.
The Emergence of Pan-Arabism and its Impact on Egyptian Foreign Policy, 1945-1981.
An Egyptian View, 1952-1970 — the Impact of the Differences between Arab Socialism and Marxist-Leninist Ideologies.
The United States, the Arab Middle East, and the Eisenhower Doctrine, 1956-1959.
