After the tapes were declassified in the late 1990s, I wrote three books about their historical importance.
For thirty years, the American perspective on the Cuban missile crisis was dominated by Robert Kennedy’s memoir Thirteen Days.
RFK claimed that war was avoided because the president stood firm against Nikita Khrushchev’s threats.
JFK's advisers later evaded many errors and falsehoods in Thirteen Days, especially the fact that the president had actually cut a secret deal with Khrushchev to jointly remove Soviet missiles from Cuba and United States missiles from Turkey; Thirteen Days became the accepted template for understanding the Kennedy administration’s handling of the Cuban missile crisis.
The Week the World Stood Still, offers readers a narrative of these historically unique ExComm discussions, enabling them to get beyond the accumulated myths of three decades.
Winner of the Pulitzer Prize for an authoritative biography of Robert Oppenheimer, Sherwin deftly reconstructs the thinking, expectations, miscalculations, and blunders of policy makers and politicians from the end of World War II to the Cuban missile crisis.
Voorhees' assessment of John F Kennedy's leadership during the Cuban missile crisis is strikingly different from most books on the subject.
He examines JFK's decision-making through the lens of the president's domestic political concerns and use of back-channel diplomacy with Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev rather than through the conventional workings of his foreign and national security policy establishments.
Voorhees insists, supported by an impressive array of evidence, that the Cuban missile crisis did not bring the world to the brink of nuclear Armageddon and his book promises to become an integral part of the historical conversation.
In 1960, a planned summit meeting in Paris between the US, the USSR, England, and France was suddenly jeopardized when an American U-2 spy plane was shot down over Russia and the pilot captured.
President Eisenhower agreed to suspend flights until the end of his term , but the Soviet leader angrily denounced the offer and returned to Moscow.
Ironically, President Kennedy’s concern in 1962 about “another U-2 crisis” convinced him to suspend U-2 flights over Cuba—a pause that lasted from late August to early October.
JFK did agree to authorize one flight over western Cuba in response to pressure from CIA director John McCone—and the missiles were luckily discovered just before they had become operational.
At the height of the Cuban missile crisis, President Kennedy met with the Pentagon’s head of civil defense, Steuart Pittman, to assess plans for protecting the American civilian population in the event of nuclear war.
Kennedy became quite irritated, but unfortunately, his harsh reply was largely lost because the sound quality of the tape recording suddenly went from poor to inaudible.
The books discussed above concentrate on the missile crisis in the US, but there was also a crisis in Moscow and Havana.
Americans called this event “the Cuban missile crisis,” the Soviets called it “the Caribbean Crisis,” and the Cubans “the October crisis”—because conflict with the United States had become a recurring fact of life in Cuba.
The Kennedy administration had also been sponsoring sabotage and political assassination in Cuba kept secret from the American people but well known to the Russians and the Cubans.
As a participant, we may earn from qualifying purchases made on those sites.
Try again Topics are things like World War 1, dinosaurs, grief, or jazz.
