Background In October 1962, United States aerial reconnaissance pictures showed about forty offensive nuclear missiles being installed and manned in Cuba by Soviet technicians.
These missiles had an effective range of a little more than two thousand miles and threatened much of America.
Although the United States had already broken off diplomatic relations with Cuba after the revolution led by Fidel Castro, President John F Kennedy refused to authorize air strikes against the missile installations and instead demanded the immediate removal of the missiles.
To achieve that, he ordered a naval blockade and quarantine of all offensive military equipment under shipment to Cuba.
By a vote of 20 to 0, the Organization of American States also recommended that member nations take necessary measures to stop the flow of offensive weapons to Cuba.
Kennedy told Nikita Khrushchev, the Soviet leader, that if Cuba launched any missiles at the United States it would be considered an act of war by the Soviet Union, and the United States would retaliate directly against the Soviet Union.
Americans waited while Soviet ships carrying offensive weapons to Cuba approached the blockade, while cargo ships were allowed to pass.
The Soviet government agreed to dismantle its bases and remove the missiles.
Kennedy and Khrushchev came to a compromise that if the nuclear missiles were pulled out of Cuba, the American quarantine against Cuba would end and the United States would not invade the island.
The United States also agreed to speed up removal of nuclear missiles from Turkey.
Timeline 1 January 1959, President Fulgencio Batista fled; 2 January 1959 Fidel Castro proclaimed victory in Santiago; 2 February 1959 Cuba declared Castro was the new premier and president.
Kennedy replied that all work in Cuba must stop before any negotiation.
The NSA has also sponsored a series of interpretive articles on the crisis as part of the Cold War International History Project.
Castro, the Missile Crisis and the Soviet Collapse , provides a comprehensive description of the crisis.
Robert Kennedy, The Thirteen Days , are the memoirs of one of the key participants in the crisis.
Cuba's Struggle with the Superpowers after the Missile Crisis by James Blight and Philip Brennes.
