Rafael Lima November 2012 Militiamen trained in the Escambray mountains while superpowers tested each other’s resolve.
Inside the crates were MiG-15s and -19s, the first weapons in a buildup in Cuba that included Soviet fighters, bombers, radar, anti-aircraft batteries, and eventually the nuclear missiles that would ignite the 13-day standoff between the United States and the Soviet Union in October 1962.
A year after the MiGs arrived, Cuba’s armed forces chief, Raul Castro, younger brother of Cuban leader Fidel Castro, signed a secret agreement in Moscow allowing the Soviets to introduce offensive nuclear weapons to the island, just 90 miles from the Florida Keys.
Not long afterward, truckloads of Soviet military equipment began flooding into Cuba.
Miami resident Roberto Canas was a 13-year-old schoolboy living at the time near the small town of Moron.
Canas remembers playing in his front yard and seeing the convoys roll past.
For days, the mysterious trucks rumbled through the Cuban streets, highways, and countryside.
Enormous 18-wheelers moved in convoys that stretched for hundreds of yards, cutting off traffic.
Rumbling through rural villages and narrow paved roads, the convoys would sometimes pause while power lines and mailboxes along the route were removed to make room for their passage.
As the trucks passed through the various towns, they left a trail of downed telephone poles and crushed huts.
I had left Cuba, as a seven-year-old, two years before the missiles came, but I have heard many stories about what it was like on the island for the people who stayed.
Del Pino, a hero of the April 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion, had flown a Lockheed T-33 jet, shooting down two Douglas B-26 Invaders and sinking several CIA ships.
Del Pino’s performance in 1961 set him on a course to become Castro’s chief air force adviser and, as such, a key eyewitness to the missile crisis.
Today, at 74, the retired general is living in Europe under the United States Federal Witness Protection Program.
One of the top-ranking defectors from the Cuban government, he fled Cuba in May 1987.
Del Pino recalls dozens of MiG-21F.13 fighters arriving at Santa Clara air base in central Cuba in August 1962, to be assembled by Soviet engineers.
Weeks before the missiles arrived that September, Soviet troops threw up cinder-block walls around parts of Cuba’s main harbor, Mariel, to shield it from view.
Residents within a mile of the port were suddenly ordered to evacuate their homes.
After that, all Cubans—even members of the Cuban military—were barred from Mariel, where the first missiles would come ashore.
It didn’t take long before word of the convoys, and the appearance in Havana of uniformed Soviet soldiers along with numerous young Soviet men in checkered cotton shirts and ill-fitting trousers, reached United States intelligence analysts.
The stories streamed in from returning tourists, diplomats, and newspaper reporters, prompting the CIA in late August to step up its overflights of Cuba with the Lockheed U-2 spyplane.
Those reports of truck convoys…were critical to discovering the secret cargo.
In the early hours of Sunday, October 14, a U-2 Air Force pilot, Major Richard Heyser, took photos of the western part of the island.
The next morning, fuzzy images of rural Cuba were unfolded on United States analysts’ light tables at the National Photographic Interpretation Center in Suitland, Maryland.
The weapons were determined to be R-12 medium-range ballistic missiles.
They could reach Washington, D.C., along with 40 percent of the Strategic Air Command’s bomber bases, in less than 20 minutes after being launched.
On Monday, October 22, President John F Kennedy announced to a stunned world that he knew of the nuclear threat in Cuba.
In a radio and TV address to the American people, Kennedy ordered a “quarantine” of the island to intercept any Soviet ships carrying more missiles.
We were told the Yanquis were invading us and that the Russians were protecting us.
When we discovered that Fidel had allowed Russian missiles on the island, we thought that was the end of the story.
This call to action reminded the island’s six million people of the showdown’s seriousness.
Castro had strengthened the police-state he imposed after the Bay of Pigs.
Anyone suspected of being a “counter-revolutionary” faced prison or the firing squad, and people were encouraged to report their suspicions about counter-revolutionary activities.
The missile crisis “was a period of heightened tension for the government and for the Cuban people,” says Suchlicki.
By October 25, Cuban men and women of all ages and professions were taking their place in people’s defense units—civilian “militias” organized by the Cuban military to counter the perceived United States threat.
These were unarmed civil defense units, and included brigades for health and sanitation, firefighting, and construction.
But they were loosely organized; only the firefighters and medical emergency responders conducted drills.
Fidel is up there telling everyone the Yanquis are coming back to finish the job.
Fidel’s anti-American speeches during the crisis were epic, says Suchlicki.
The speeches railed against the United States, and warned of a Yanqui attack at any moment.
The Cubans did not realize the danger they were in; it all happened too quickly.
People may have seen trucks covered in tarps, or maybe low-flying planes, but they had no idea what was under those tarps or what those planes were looking at.
The Cuban government ordered all armed forces units to be ready for combat.
Del Pino was told to report to a secret command post at armed forces headquarters on the outskirts of Havana, where Castro urgently needed an air force adviser.
Nevertheless, with the imminent threat of war, the high command felt this was the safest and most reasonable place for the main command post,” del Pino writes.
On October 25, with the United Nations attempting to resolve the crisis, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev sent a coded message to Kennedy through the Soviet Embassy in Washington proposing to withdraw the missiles in exchange for an end to the naval blockade, and a guarantee that the United States would not attack Cuba.
That evening, according to del Pino, Castro arrived at the riverside bunker, read the command post reports, and grew livid when he learned the Soviets were negotiating with the Americans behind his back.
He called for his Soviet advisers and shouted at them that he was ordering all Cuban military units to fire on any United States aircraft in Cuban airspace.
Castro paced back and forth, rolling his cigar between thumb and fingers, del Pino writes.
He pointed out that the Cuban pilots had no radar and would be able to engage only if they were lucky enough to chance upon a visual sighting of an enemy aircraft.
Under the circumstances, he told his president, he was not hopeful of shooting down United States aircraft.
Later that day, Khrushchev sent Kennedy another secret letter, this time delivered by Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin to the president’s brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy.
It called for the United States to also withdraw its Jupiter missiles from Turkey in exchange for removal of the missiles in Cuba.
President Kennedy, Dobrynin was told, was anxious to get rid of the already obsolete Jupiters, and had ordered their removal some time ago.
But since those missiles were installed under the auspices of NATO, it would be difficult for the United States to unilaterally remove them without damaging the structure of the alliance, the younger Kennedy said.
The next morning, October 27, an unarmed U-2F piloted by 35-year-old Air Force Major Rudolf Anderson Jr. took off from McCoy Air Force Base in central Florida and headed for Cuba.
At noon, three SA-2 anti-aircraft missiles nestled in the tropical foliage of Banés were launched toward Anderson’s airplane; two hit it, killing him.
Anyone who is knowledgeable in the complexities of these missile systems can understand that it takes at least two years of learning and training for an officer to be capable of operating them with minimum efficiency.
Almost four hours after the U-2 was hit, several United States Navy RF-8A Crusader aircraft flying low-level photo-reconnaissance missions over Cuba were also fired on.
One was hit by a 37-mm shell but managed to return to base in Key West, Florida.
At 4m. the day of the U-2 shootdown, Kennedy urgently summoned his advisers to the White House.
A message was sent to United Nations Secretary General U Thant asking the Soviets to suspend work on the missiles while negotiations were carried out.
During Kennedy’s meeting, Army General Maxwell Taylor, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, delivered the news about Anderson and the U-2.
Though his advisers urged him to retaliate against Cuba or at least allow United States pilots to return fire if attacked, the president resisted.
If that secrecy were breached, the American public and NATO allies would see the deal as a concession to blackmail.
Though the crisis was over, the full terms of the agreement would not become publicly known until years later.
Historian and Kennedy adviser Arthur Schlesinger told National Public Radio in October 2002 that he believed Castro did not want the missiles, but that Khrushchev pressured him to take them.
Crucial to the peaceful resolution of the crisis was that the missiles in Cuba were always under Soviet control.
Castro, Khrushchev writes, “was hot-headed” and had pleaded for Moscow to launch a pre-emptive nuclear strike.
In the Cuban-Soviet relationship, the Soviets clearly had the upper hand, says Suchlicki.
Though that war did not come, the crisis led to significant actions on both sides.
Washington and Moscow set up the Hotline Agreement, establishing a direct means of communication between the White House and the Kremlin.
The body of Anderson, who posthumously became the first recipient of the new Air Force Cross medal, was returned to the United States and buried in November 1962 with full honors in Greenville, South Carolina.
USAF / Workers rally in Havana a week after President John F Kennedy announced a United States blockade of Cuba.
Keystone-France / Gamma-Keystone via Getty Images / Near the El Nicho nature park on Cuba’s south coast, a MiG-15 and an S-125 surfacetoair missile commemorate the near-war of 50 years ago.
Cristian Viarisio / A U-2 photo captures a Soviet truck convoy deploying missiles near San Cristobal on October 14, 1962.
Courtesy of Rafael Del Pino / Militiamen reinforce antiaircraft guns on Havana’s shoreline in early October 1962.
Alan Oxley / Getty Images / The battered engine of Air Force Major Rudolf Anderson Jr.’s U-2 is in a Havana museum.
Mark Busby / To bolster defenses during the crisis, the United States Army set up anti-aircraft rockets in Key West, and pointed them out over the Florida Straits.
AP / The presence of Soviet nuclear missiles just 90 miles from Florida terrified Americans.
Martin Trolle Mikkelsen / “Fatherland or death; we will prevail” was a popular slogan for Cubans.
MS / Visiting defense chief Raul Castro greets Khrushchev in the Kremlin Palace on July 3, 1962, a day after signing a secret pact to allow nuclear missiles into Cuba.
Arriving in June 1961, the fighter was used for patrols and intercepts.
Also shipped in were MiG-19 and MiG-21F.13 fighters, and nuclear-capable Ilyushin Il-28 bombers, flown by Soviet pilots.
Michael Priesch / The CIA had been flying the Lockheed U-2 spyplane over Cuba twice a month and supplied data about the arms buildup.
But it was an Air Force U-2 that spotted mediumrange ballistic missiles near San Cristobal, Cuba, on October 14, 1962.
The Soviets’ shootdown of a U-2F on October 27 almost brought the two sides to war.
DOD / The Vought RF-8A Crusader, based in Key West, Florida, flew dangerous low-level photo-reconnaissance missions for the United States Navy.
The flights, which began on October 23, 1962, confirmed the Soviets were installing offensive nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Also flying low-altitude reconnaissance missions was the Air Force’s supersonic RF-101 Voodoo, which helped confirm at the end of the crisis that the missile sites were being dismantled.
