Levels of power motive imagery in reports or paraphrases of statements by the ‘other’ side were accentuated, while levels in reports or paraphrases of statements by one’s own side were diminished.
These results confirm a pattern of perceived intentions previously found in other escalating conflict situations, and are consistent with many related social psychological phenomena and experimental results.
These findings suggest that comparing mutual perceptions of power imagery is a precise, operational way to measure ‘threatening’ intentions and thus an important mechanism of conflict escalation.
Judgements about structural factors determine whether a crisis the intentions of the ‘other side’, which are escalates to war or is peacefully resolved.
In order for research is focused on each side’s perception economic prospects, political relationships, of the other side’s threatening intentions adversaries’ intentions, or military situations during the 1914 crisis, which escalated to to affect political leaders’ behavior, they must World War I, and the 1962 Cuban Missile first be perceived.
Perbe misperceived, especially in the stress of a ceptions of intention are operationally * The research reported in this article was supported by defined in terms of power motive imagery in grants from the John and Mary Markle Foundation, summaries or reports of communications.
I am The research represents an operational transgrateful to Janet Malley for assistance in the analysis of data and to Abigail Stewart for advice.
Power Motivation, Expressed and Perceiving Intentions Intentions, however, Perceived are not only expressed; they are also perceived by others.
More precisely, they are inferred Expressing Implicit Intentions People’s through perceptions, reports, and interpremotives involve their conscious and uncontations.
At each step of the perception scious or implicit goals, along with their process, as lengthy original texts are mental representation of goals and goal‘processed’ or reduced to shorter reports related actions.
Power is a major dimension (summaries, précis, ‘sound bites’, mental of motivation.
The power motive is representations), errors and distortions are measured through content analysis of verbal possible, especially under stressful crisis contexts, and is defined by verbal images of ditions.
The research reported in the present impact, control, influence, or prestige.
These measures are 1968) used an a priori set of ‘tip-off words’ ‘implicit’ in that they do not correlate with and themes to score government documents people’s conscious statements or responses to for ‘perception of hostility’ from other counquestions about goals (McClelland, Koestner tries.
In the present article, intentions are & Weinberger, 1989). conceptualized as implicit, and measured through the use of previously validated Expressed Motive Imagery and Conflict psychological variables.
Comparing the accounts by unity among people and groups) in German each side of the same statements will indicate and British diplomatic documents as the whether such perceptions are symmetrical or 1914 crisis moved toward war; during the asymmetrical.
They are asymmetrical 2 if the two accounts differ – that is, if the level 1 The motive scoring systems were originally developed to of imagery in one side’s text summary is score the Thematic Apperception Test, and were adapted by Winter to score speeches and interviews, govern2 I avoid the term ‘distortion’ because it raises epistemoment-to-government communications, popular fiction, logical and practical issues about the motive-imagery etc.
The basic assumption is that for trolled or counteracted by conscious resolves the perceiver, high levels of power motive to be ‘accurate’ or ‘fair’. imagery in a received message are a sign of the other party’s more aggressive intention.
Perceived Implicit Intentions at the Any perceptual accentuation of power motive Outbreak of the American Civil War The imagery of the other side (or diminution of present research replicates and extends an the power motive imagery of one’s own earlier study of the American Civil War by favored side) would, therefore, increase the Winter , as well as a general motipresumption of aggressive intent, hence pervational–perceptual model of conflict escalaceived threat.
He then colconflicts. lected accounts, reports, and paraphrases of these speeches that appeared in two northern Cognate Theories and Mechanisms in pro-Union newspapers and in two southern Social Science Research The phenomenon pro-secession newspapers, and scored them of mutually exaggerated perceptions of for power motive imagery.
He found an threatening intention in an escalating asymmetrical pattern among all newspapers conflict recalls many classic psychological in their excerpts and paraphrases of these experiments, mechanisms, and theories.
Winter found no such and examination of evidence (Blake & accentuation–diminution effects for achieveMouton, 1962; Lord, Ross & Lepper, 1979). ment (images reflecting a concern for excelHolding a partisan position can lead to lence) and affiliation motive imagery, which bias in the selection, extent of coverage, and suggests that the pattern was specific to framing of ‘news’ (Huang & McAdams, power.
Later historians pointed to described, analyzed, and explained in terms the lengthy arms buildup ignited by the of theoretically relevant general psycho‘spark’ of Sarajevo (in a phrase attributed to logical variables.
Bismarck, ‘some damned foolish thing in the Since Winter analyzed newspaper Balkans’), ineffective crisis management, the reports, it is possible that his results simply inherent strains of capitalism and imperialreflect deliberate attempts by editors to ism, and the allure of violence (Joll, 1968, manipulate public opinion during a crisis by 1992, ch.
To sive missiles in Cuba, United States President explore this possibility, the study of British John F Kennedy proclaimed on 22 October and German newspaper reports in 1914 is 1962 a blockade of Cuba supplemented by a study of British and and demanded immediate removal of the German diplomats’ confidential missiles.
It shall be the policy of this nation to regard any nuclear missile launched from Cuba against any nation in the Western hemisphere Two Crises as an attack by the Soviet Union on the United States, requiring a full retaliatory response Some important historical details of these upon the Soviet Union. two crises can be briefly presented as a background to the research to be reported.
As in 1914, there had been an extended arms race, fueled by 16 years of oversimplified Escalation in 1914 Cold War rhetoric.
As in 1914, both sides No one quite understood how World War I felt a sudden and sharp sense of threat, and came about only six weeks after the Sarajevo both sides suspected the other side’s intenassassinations.
Perceived Power Imagery in Sarajevo) through 7 August 1914 (several British and German Newspapers in days into the general war), each issue of The 1914 Times of London and the Norddeutsche In many respects, war between Great Britain Allgemeine Zeitung of Berlin5 was and Germany was the least inevitable, most searched for reports, quotations, or parasurprising, and most consequential phrases of any British or German speech, of the statement, or newspaper editorial.
This many separate dyadic conflicts that comsearch produced 21 pairs of stories involving prised the 1914 crisis.
Only two years indirect quotations, summaries, and paraearlier, for example, Britain and Germany phrases of any statement by either side in the had worked together to prevent the Balkan newspaper stories were assembled.
All Wars from spreading into a general European material relating to a single statement was conflict.
Sixteen days before Sarajevo, considered as a single ‘document’ for scoring German Chancellor Bethmann Hollweg purposes.
While the nature of the across excerpted statements of the two sides. material could not be concealed, neither the The focus of this article will be on differences translator nor the scorer was aware of the between accounts of a statement from the nature or hypotheses of the study.
In this article, therefore, the 1,000 words, then converted to standardized terms ‘accentuation’ and ‘diminution’ are form with an overall mean of 50 and used in a comparative sense. standard deviation of 10.
Results An Example These quantitative results can Descriptive statistics for motive imagery be illustrated by a brief scores of British and German statements, as example.
During the early ‘mild’ phase not compromise if Austria–Hungary of the crisis, there were no consistent patterns attacked Serbia; a declaration that if France of motive imagery accentuation–diminution, mobilized, then Britain must avoid isolation at least for British statements.
Lichnowsky reported the gist of these Winter’s earlier finding, they do not conversations in telegraphed dispatches to the resolve the question of whether the asymGerman Foreign Office in Berlin.
At the same metrical media perceptions are really implicit time, Grey summarized these same conversabias processes, rather than deliberate tions in his daily cables to British ambassador attempts to manipulate public opinion and Sir William Goschen in Berlin.
Study 2 was therefore the evidence seems clear that throughout the designed to shed light on the generality of 1914 crisis, Lichnowsky and Grey worked the asymmetrical accentuation–diminution strenuously to avoid war.
In fact, Lichnowsky was so pro-British and 7 Not all brief summaries are higher than their correcritical of German policies and actions that sponding full texts.
Just four days before expressed as images per 1,000 words, and Sarajevo, Lichnowsky recorded that Grey then standardized on wanted ‘to go hand in hand with us into the the pooled summaries of statements of both future and to remain in close contact overall diplomats, but separately for the Grey and on the questions that might arise’ (quoted in Lichnowsky versions.
Comparative analysis of use high or low levels of imagery for that their respective reports, therefore, can shed motive.
Once again, 28/29 July was the some light on whether the pattern of motive dividing point between early and late phases accentuation–diminution observed in of the crisis.
Study 1 is specific to newspapers or more general, thus whether it is deliberate or Results implicit.
In the late phase of the crisis, paired accounts of London conversations however, the same pattern of power motive were constructed – 12 British statements and accentuation–diminution emerges, just as in 10 German statements.
Once again, the statements and five German statements) in asymmetrical pattern occurred only for power motive imagery, and only in the late 8 Lichnowsky and Grey met twice on 29 July; these are phase of the crisis.
If power motive accentuation– Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles diminution is associated with escalation, 9 US–Soviet–Cuban diplomatic contacts during the Cuban then it should not have occurred in 1962.
Missile Crisis were more varied and less conventional than Because we have no published records of in 1914.
Tape transcripts of Kennedy’s Executive Comdiplomatic conversations analogous to the mittee of the National Security Council meetings (May & Grey and Lichnowsky cables,9 this test was Zelikow, 1997) are mostly rambling discussions rather than summaries, paraphrases, or quotations from statements of carried out only with newspaper reports. each side.
In the future, as United States and Russian archives are more fully opened and published (e.g.
Processing and Scoring All direct and However, to expand the analysis into the indirect quotations or paraphrases of a stateperiods before and after the crisis, the New ment were assembled.
The result was 30 York Times and the Current Digest of the paired accounts, 13 of United States stories or stateSoviet Press were searched for matching ments and 17 of Soviet stories.
All docureports, quotations, or paraphrases of any United States ments were mixed together randomly and or Soviet speech, statement, or interview by scored as in Studies 1 and 2.
Motive imagery the head of government, or any newspaper scores for each motive were expressed as editorial, for the entire period 1961–63. images per 1,000 words, then standardized on the combined stories from a variety of Soviet newspapers statements of both sides, separately for each and magazines.
Finally, documents from 7 opposing side and diminished in the November 1962 through the end of 1963 reported statements of one’s own side.
A 2-way ANOVA revealed era; if it had remained unchanged, one might no significant main effects, but a highly have expected the missile crisis to have escasignificant crisis-by-stage interaction, lated to war.
In other words, the actual crisis itself, however, the accentuaasymmetrical pattern of motive accentuation–diminution pattern disappeared comtion–diminution observed during the late pletely.
This is consistent with the peaceful resolution of the Discussion crisis.
To this task they quite properly bring imagery or power images per unit-length of knowledge and experience external to the text] which fall into distinct categories [the texts themselves.
First, because the 1914 heuristics also make us vulnerable to accentuation–diminution pattern occurred illusions.
Events may set off asymmetrical in diplomatic documents as well as in newsperception ; paper stories, it seems likely to reflect a more whether this is ‘correct’ or ‘incorrect’ can general phenomenon than simply deliberate only be known at the end of the story, after manipulation of popular opinion by newsfurther cycles of mutual action – cycles that paper editors.
Second, since the power are themselves affected by these very percepmotive asymmetrical accentuation–diminutual mechanisms.
At the time they occur, tion occurred only during the severe part of however, events may not always an escalating crisis and during the relatively disclose their full final meaning or signifisevere years of the Cold War, before the cance to the observer.
Later that afternoon, These two examples suggest that, Khrushchev was preparing a message to although events do shape interpretations of Kennedy when he learned that a United States U-2 texts, the events themselves often have accidentally strayed over the highly sensitive multiple possible meanings.
Thus, the events Chukotski Peninsula in Soviet Siberia. themselves require interpretation, and such Soviet fighter planes scrambled to intercept interpretations may be shaped by ongoing it, but United States fighters from Alaska (armed with interpretations of message texts.
Probably nuclear air-to-air missiles) escorted it out of every crisis produces numerous such events Soviet territory without any exchange of fire that are subject to alternative interpretations. taking place.
Your aircraft violates our tuation–diminution differentiates documents frontier, and at times as anxious as those from the 1914 outbreak of war and the Cuban which we are now experiencing, when everyMissile Crisis, they do not establish that the thing has been placed in a state of combat perceptual pattern ‘caused’ (or even conreadiness.’ tributed to) the escalation in 1914, or that the That same morning, a United States U-2 absence of the pattern caused or contributed photo-reconnaissance plane was shot down to the peaceful resolution of the Cuban over Cuba by a surface-to-air missile.
However, to many United States leaders at ric patterns of perceiving them may simply be the time (who could not imagine any other epiphenomena, resulting from other factors reason why the Soviets would shoot down a that produce different crisis outcomes but U-2) this was a clear Soviet escalation, the without inherent causal significance themkind of event that might ‘reasonably’ have selves.
Findings from two case studies cannot led them to perceive Soviet intentions as rule in or rule out any of these interpretations. highly threatening.
If it can be overcome, perhaps crisis when it has rolled through cities and escalation can be avoided, controlled, or even villages, everywhere sowing death and reversed.
Of course, specific historical analogies can Emotional Calm Calmness or emotional cut both ways, promoting escalation as well stability, which reduces ‘differences in value as prudence.
Thus, in justifying their or relevance’ and promotes Vietnam escalations, United States leaders relied – more complex, differentiated thinking and inappropriately – on the historical analogy of analysis , may failed appeasement in 1938 at ‘Munich’. thereby contribute to minimizing misperception.
By accurately registering and communicating the intentions (not accentuating Adopting a Historical Perspective The the power motive imagery) of each side to ability to view one’s actions from the the other and thereby avoiding asymmetrical perspective of history may be another perception of threat and other mispercepimportant factor.
And as Kennedy’s advisers debated an The present results should be interpreted air strike, they were haunted by the realizawith caution.
They may illuminate some tion that they would be repeating the psychological and perceptual dynamics that Japanese surprise attack on Pearl Harbor. operate when leaders truly exaggerate the (‘Pearl Harbor’ was mentioned 10 times in threat of the other side.
And in his 26 October letter to tion of threat may help to preserve peace.
The present British and French leaders did during the rise research was designed to offer precise operaof Hitler in the late 1930s.
Because they felt tional ways to measure the perception of that they themselves were not a threat, Jervis power imagery – one important aspect of suggested, they were reluctant to threat perception – and test a theory about believe that others were threatened.
The asymmetrical perception, in a comparative Swiss playwright Max Frisch satirized this study of two crises that ended quite differperspective in his play ‘The Fire Raisers’ ently.
Obviously further research, involving , which portrays a man who other crises, is needed to cross-validate the naively admits two arsonists into his home; present results.
In such cases, avoiding threatReferences magnification by minimizing the perception Albertini, Luigi, 1957.
I Two Basic Principles of and private diplomatic conversations in Judgment’, Journal of Psychology 5: 1938–39 would be useful.
Rowman & Littlefield. about in March 1939, after Germany Blight, James G & David A Welch, 1989.
Hill & Wang. shift toward accentuation of perceived power Bruner, Jerome S., 1957.
Psychology Department, ed., Contemporary Research is currently under way to explore Approaches to Cognition.
The World War and nearly always more or less defective, often Germany’s Collapse, 1909–1919.
Attitudes, mation-Processing Mechanisms in Children’s Self-Esteem, and Stereotypes’, Psychological Social Adjustment’, Psychological Bulletin Review 102: 4–27.
Macmillan. mental Phenomena and Scales of Attitude Ferguson, Niall, 1999.
Measurement: Item Displacement in ThurAllen Lane, Penguin. stone Scales’, Journal of Abnormal and Social Frisch, Max, 1962.
Huang, Li-Ning & Katherine C McAdams, Fursenko, Aleksandr V & Timothy Naftali, 2000.
Khrushchev, paper Accounts of Political Conflict: A CrossCastro, and Kennedy, 1958–1964.
Psychological Polarization: The Effects of Prior Theories on Studies of Policy Decisions and Fiascos.
The Struggle for Mastery System for Scoring Motives in Running Text’, in Europe.
Foreign Relations DAVID G WINTER, 1939, PhD in Social of the United States 1961–1963, Vol.
