The United States and the Soviet Union, the main players in the Cold War, were on opposing sides during this crisis.
First, during the crisis, the leaders of powerful countries had to make decisions about a nuclear weapon set-up at a time of great uncertainty.
Information about the real situation in Cuba was lacking on the United States side.
Second, the crisis was solved successfully without military conflict or a deep diplomatic rift.
Third, this crisis is one of the most thoroughly analysed examples of political leadership, and has inspired such decision-making theory classics as Allison and Zelikow’s Essence of Decision, as well as more recent studies on this topic (e.g.
What happened is still considered to be a benchmark of good leadership and decision-making.
These tapes have been gradually released during recent decades, and they provide a unique opportunity for analysing the ongoing contemplation and negotiation of the top management of a superpower during a serious crisis.
As far as the author of this book knows, there exists no equivalent real-time, detailed verbal data about any other strategic decision-making incident.
In this case study, I will be leaning on the reports of the original archive researcher of the tapes, Sheldon Stern , concentrating on the turns and events within the group that are of interest in the light of the more general questions related to wisdom and stupidity in decision-making.
In public, Kennedy answers positively to Khrushchev, promising that the United States would abstain from invading Cuba and wants to explain the options for relieving tensions regarding Turkey.
The purpose is not to provide actual empirical or historical analysis, but to go over the dynamics and shifts in the crisis group’s actions that are essential with regard to wise leadership.
All excerpts and other background information have been sourced from Stern’s overview of the crisis, summarised from the perspective of issues pertinent to the wisdom framework of the book.
The participants are not used to reading the symbols of spy plane photographs and have to ask how this material is definite proof that these are Soviet nuclear missiles.
Then, the conversation moves quickly to the effects and consequences of an armed strike.
The Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defence and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff each give their own assessment.
Everyone views a quick air strike against missile bases to be inevitable.
The question lies mainly in how efficient a mere strike would be to remove the military threat.
Larger operations, such as a fullscale invasion of Cuba, are also on the table.
Rusk continues by stating that this could be a countermove to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization new nuclear missiles in Europe, which the people of the Soviet Union could consider to be a genuine threat to their security.
Secretary of State Rusk continues his speculation that Khrushchev might be seeking a psychological reminder and counterweight to what it is like living in the vicinity of a real missile threat.
Another emerging theory is that the Russians are trying to find a solution to the Berlin crisis by blackmailing the United States with nuclear weapons positioned in the nearby areas.
In addition to the list presented by the President, Robert Kennedy suggests a full-scale invasion, because even a small strike would in practice expand into a more extensive conflict.
JFK asks the army commander whether it would be possible to mobilise a large number of troops within seven days.
Furthermore, he is concerned how the Cuban people would react to a possible takeover operation by the Americans.
However, the leading idea is still a surprise attack on the missile bases.
The President is thinking hopefully that the Russians would only use regular bombs in their aircraft.
In the evening of the same day, the discussion of the interpretation of the situation and various options continues at another meeting.
Although a political or diplomatic route is also on the table, the consensus is that a military strike is almost unavoidable, despite the violent reaction of the opposing side.
Intelligence agents have established that the missiles will be operational soon.
At this stage, the President again attempts to open up emotional consensus by contemplating his own role in increasing the confrontation.
He himself had emphasised that the armament of Cuba must not be allowed, and now he must respond to the situation with strength.
On the other hand, the threat of nuclear weapons in a broad sense has not changed between the superpowers.
In other words, Kennedy reflects on the extent to which he is in danger of ending up in an uncontrollable vicious circle of rhetoric and moves, where the stakes are raised at every round.
Perhaps it is not really a matter of an increased direct threat, but rather “a case of a conflict that is as much political as it is military”, he says.
However, the President decides that at this stage, the first option is a larger air strike, and the second option is a limited strike against missile bases.
The President has to restrain his brother, who repeatedly brings up the topic of a comprehensive occupation, even suggesting the sinking of a United States ship as provocation.
Having picked up a signal from this surprising turn in the discussion, McNamara admits that the President might not currently have to do anything other than “deciding to prepare” for the air strikes, and that it would also be a good idea to make an exact plan of a limited strike.
The conversation is churning with different alternatives, and the President seems to be uncertain which direction to choose.
McNamara expresses concern regarding the unpredictability and danger of a counterreaction, to which the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Taylor states that a military operation has to be strong or nothing at all.
Kennedy responds by announcing that now is not the time for an “army committee to shove us out”, and presses the commander to admit that he is not in favour of an invasion.
Khrushchev had previously demonstrated patience as the confrontation had intensified, so why would he be acting now so recklessly.
On the other hand, it is exactly what the United States has been doing, National Security Advisor Bundy states laconically.
The irrational behaviour of the Russians bothers the President, and he asks whether the experts of the State Department have a better explanation for this escalation.
When Kennedy leaves the room, the recording system is still on, and the follow-up conversation in the group is recorded.
The talk is led by Secretary of Defence McNamara, who again emphasises the unexpected consequences of a military strike.
The United States government is a victim of their own rhetoric, and is having to react in a way which can escalate into a full-scale nuclear war in any case.
Someone also mentions a comparison with Japan’s surprise attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941.
The 1941 attack led to the US joining WWII, and thereby also an end to the American policy of restraint.
However, the attack by the Japanese took place before nuclear weapons and the threat of total destruction their use entails.
The Secretary of Defence, assuming the role of the Chairman when the President left the room, indicates that there are competing aspirations in the group, as well as a desire to dominate in the decision-making process.
No recording of this meeting exists, but according to the minutes, McNamara is still vocal, seemingly having considered the unpredictable consequences of a military strike in even more detail.
On 18 October, the President has returned from the campaign trail, and the group has received new intelligence photographs.
Now, the photographs indicate that the Soviets are also installing long-range missiles in Cuba.
Secretary of State Rusk announces that his position has changed; he is now in favour of a military strike.
Kennedy is interested whether the public could be convinced about the threat with the help of the photographs.
Then McNamara also joins the people in favour of a military strike, explaining that there would be losses as a consequence of even a small strike, so it would be easier to declare a full-scale invasion operation.
The risks of a small strike would be hidden inside a large preventative offensive.
Exceptionally, he adopts a position of authority and lectures the others about how their allies do not see Cuba as a direct military threat, and would interpret the attack as an overreaction.
Instead, the former Soviet ambassador Thompson’s reply is an account of the Russian mentality, concluding that the adversary could consent to a legitimate naval blockade and a negotiated compromise.
However, the President does not warm to the idea of a naval blockade, because it does not remove the threat of the existence of the missiles in the Cuban soil.
Others, however, continue to consider air strikes to be the top option.
When talking about possible Russian losses, McNamara specifies that there would be casualties, “Hundreds of Russians will die.
The discussion consists of a series of apathetic statements in anticipation of countermeasures by the Soviet Union and the United States reactions to these.
After the United States strike, the Russians will try to take over Berlin, NATO’s troops will fight, they will be overthrown, the conflict will escalate into a general state of war, which in turn means a nuclear war.
Kennedy interrupts the series of apathetic statements by emphasising that a solution must be found to avoid “the ultimate failure”, referring to the onset of a nuclear war.
After making another philosophical intervention in the discussion, the President wonders whether it would be possible to establish a naval blockade without a declaration of war.
Others think that a blockade without a declaration of war is illegal, and otherwise an impossible equation in many ways.
Kennedy nevertheless emphasises that the declaration of war would corner Khrushchev.
When McNamara lists two options—a slow escalation starting with a blockade, or a quick air strike—Kennedy “reframes” this by stating that the first option is a naval blockade without a declaration of war, then a blockade with a declaration of war, air strikes and invasion.
He is now taking the decision to his preferred direction, regardless of the group’s resistance.
When the President leaves the room, the recording stays on again, revealing conflicts inside the group, and even a mild mutiny against the President’s tactics.
Robert Kennedy is also of the opinion that a naval blockade is useless against the missile threat.
McNamara had to respond strictly to both, repeating the President’s line, according to which direct strikes are too dangerous as a first reaction.
There is no recording system in this location, but according to the notes, the discussion is still tense.
The President is about to start campaigning again, and instructs the quarrelsome committee to prepare the details of a naval blockade.
Before going to sleep at midnight, Kennedy outlines the issues of the day, by talking straight into the microphones in his office.
He was still confused about the contradictory views, which were offered even by experienced veteran politicians.
Before embarking on his campaign trail, the President has a short meeting with the commanders of different army branches on 19 October.
The President responds calmly to the pressure coming from the military men by stating that the Cuban missile situation does not change the overall global picture.
As the tape keeps rolling after the President leaves, the generals vent their frustration with the commander-in-chief.
If the United States only progresses in small steps, it will be at a disadvantage, the soldiers conclude.
On the following day, 20 October, Kennedy has to stop his campaign trail and return to herd the discordant ExComm.
During an unrecorded meeting held at night, JFK wonders out loud about the meaningfulness of “destroying Cuba”, but nevertheless gravitates towards a naval blockade as the first measure to be taken.
The President makes an announcement regarding the implementation of a naval blockade.
On 21 October, the group prepares the details of the blockade, and air strikes as a back-up plan.
The President wonders again how much the Soviet Union knows about the Americans’ awareness of the missiles.
The assumption is that Khrushchev already has a response planned to US actions.
Kennedy issues repeated instructions to the army to refrain from sudden counterstrikes, at the missile bases in Turkey among other places.
Later, it becomes evident that the President’s instructions were not taken seriously; instead, the soldiers were assumed to follow regular operation patterns in case of a surprise attack.
It is precisely this kind of “automatic” escalation that Kennedy wants to avoid by all means, and on the next day, he again orders not to use force without approval from him, the commander-in-chief.
On 22 October, the President is ready to give an evening speech on TV, revealing the existence of missile bases on Cuba.
The morning meeting deals with the reactions from the public and the press.
In the afternoon, the ExComm is alarmed by the information that the Soviet Union’s Minister of Foreign Affairs, who is currently visiting Washington, will be giving a speech.
Kennedy emphasises that the committee must stick together and present a united front with the same message.
Then, Kennedy adopts a more controlled stance and says that although an air strike was an extremely tempting option, he let it go on the previous morning, due to the risks and ethical problems related to the strike.
The President seems surprisingly militaristic, although he has opted in favour of a naval blockade.
He also emphasises that the air strike option must not be made public, as it would weaken the image of the US as the peaceful party in the conflict.
The chosen route is a naval blockade, after which the secret second option is a full-scale invasion.
A former ordinary member of the United States parliament is now the President.
Russell proposes sarcastically that the government is probably just waiting for the OAS to support the blockade, without doing anything themselves.
Another influential senator, Fulbright, states that an invasion would be more straightforward in the political legal context.
However, Kennedy emphasises that any strike would also result in Russian casualties, opening up the path for Soviet counteractions.
Meanwhile, he expresses the great uncertainty that is floating in the air, “We don’t know where we’re going to end up with this.
However, the naval blockade is now the first step, and it will remain to be seen what direction the different parties will take matters.
On 23 October, the group anticipates different reactions from the Soviet camp as well as among stakeholders in the United States and among the allies.
Kennedy is evidently vexed with having to justify the late discovery of the missiles to the Americans, and the limited range of options under the guise of a dramatic nuclear threat.
Now, we have to “put our cards on the table in a situation with an unknown ending”, he describes the difficult circumstances.
He is the commander-in-chief, but also an elected politician whose future depends on the popular vote.
On the Soviet side, in turn, all power lies in practice with Khrushchev, who is making decisions very independently during the crisis.
At the end of the meeting, information is received that the OAS is in favour of a naval blockade as a measure against the missile threat, which partially soothes the atmosphere.
On the evening of the same day, the meeting continues to contemplate the Russian reaction to the naval blockade and possible encounters at sea.
Kennedy still seems to be desperate, and does not understand why the Soviet Union is keen on continuing on a hard line.
Khrushchev’s response to the speech and the naval blockade had been sharp.
During the Berlin crisis in the previous year, “we had the nuclear monopoly, but we did not use it.
It looks like that’s exactly what they are going to do”, the President notes.
After the meeting, the Kennedy brothers have a discussion at the President’s office.
JFK admits that the situation “looks really bad” but “we didn’t have any other real option” to some type of counter-reaction.
Robert Kennedy says that he has received information through unofficial channels that the Russians are going to challenge the blockade and that they think the missiles have a defensive purpose.
However, the discussion still revolves around the anticipation of a possible incident at sea.
It is suggested that depth charges are used against Russian submarines to get them to surface.
Slightly later, however, he suggests that if the submarine does not react to the requests, it must be attacked.
The President is concerned and states that it is dangerous to engage with a submarine.
However, McNamara appeals to the President by saying that he has mapped the situation, and recommends issuing a command for operational readiness to the fleet captains.
The submarine crew is not in contact with Moscow, and therefore unable to get an overview of the situation.
Only a refusal from the fleet commander prevents the launch of a nuclear weapon, while two other officers are in favour of an attack.
Kennedy’s intuition about the risks related to a submarine hunt was right, although he deferred to his Secretary of Defence’s personal hardline perspective.
Then, new information arrives regarding a change of course for the Russian ships at sea.
It is clear now that the ships have received instructions not to cross the blockade boundary.
Although the information is incomplete, it seems that the extreme tension eases off for a moment.
Instead of a confrontation and rising stakes, there is the first evidence of compliance.
Kennedy emphasises that the ships must not be stopped without a pressing reason.
In secret, the President has started making preparations for withdrawing the missiles from Turkey.
After the meeting with Congress leaders, Kennedy has another meeting with his advisors.
It seems that he would now prefer to listen to viewpoints that favour a more diplomatic solution.
Former Secretary of Defence Lovett explains that “there are no small military operations.
The President is wondering how Cuba could ultimately be kept as a “hostage” of the US, turning the generals’ interpretation almost completely upside down.
Cuba is surrounded by the United States and its allies, much like Berlin is in the middle of a Soviet bloc.
On the other hand, Kennedy estimates that Khrushchev has had more of his political and military authority at stake in this crisis than himself in the Berlin situation during the previous year.
Kennedy tries to understand the situation through a previous similar confrontation.
The conclusion is that the United States should not put too much pressure on the Soviet Union, because it might be difficult for Khrushchev to respond in any other way besides by force.
The government is doing everything it can so that the army would not needlessly provoke Russian ships at sea.
On 25 October, there is further confirmation that the Russians have instructed the Cubans not to attack United States aircraft, and anti-aircraft missiles are also beginning to be camouflaged, making them more difficult to use in acute situations.
Historical sources later reveal that Khrushchev had on the previous day become aware of the gravity of the American stance and loss of trust, which prompted him to retreat from the tight line in the crisis.
The participants of the meeting are still contemplating what to do if a Russian ship should cross the line of the blockade and it has to be stopped by force.
Messages from the Soviet government still contradict the way the ships are changing course.
Furthermore, the preparation of the missile bases has continued at full capacity.
He anticipates a situation where the Americans have to stop a Soviet vessel for the sake of plausibility.
In the evening of the same day, the committee starts to think about the insufficiency of the naval blockade.
Robert Kennedy claims that instead of a showdown at sea, it would be better to go back to contemplating limited air strikes against the missile bases.
He thinks that the United States should demonstrate firmness with Cuba.
Secretary of State Rusk tries to defend the effectiveness of the naval blockade.
Some extra step must be taken, and an air strike is becoming a not inconsiderable option in this respect.
The general feel is that the Russians do not seem to have changed their attitude regarding the main issue—the preparation of missile bases.
Then, the conversation turns to the role of Castro, the Cuban leader, in the crisis.
As the events progress, communication only happens between superpowers, and during a critical stage, directly between leaders—partially through secret channels.
Now, however, they were about to dispatch a short telegram directly to the revolutionary leader of the Cuban state.
The discussion oscillates to a new level, wondering how Castro feels about the Russian military command, and whether he could be overthrown under the guise of the crisis.
Kennedy is in favour of this upmost goal and dismisses the speculation about Castro’s fate.
Stevenson is a Democrat and a former presidential candidate who has many political opponents on the ExComm.
However, he proposes bravely that the motive behind positioning the missiles was to defend Cuba against United States aggression, and that solving the crisis requires the Americans to promise not to attack the island.
Furthermore, he anticipates that the Soviet Union will demand Western missile bases to be dismantled in Turkey and Italy during the negotiations.
However, when it nevertheless appears that preparing the missile bases for battle has only accelerated despite the United States position, the President seems to concede that the screw has to be tightened, as far as the Russians are concerned.
The naval blockade could be expanded to aircraft, but this might inevitably lead us “to decide to take another path, the path of using power”, the President notes.
Now, the negotiated solution, including the disarmament of the Turkish missiles, is fading into the background.
Military preparations are progressing, and the army is ready for air strikes as well as an extensive invasion.
There are also plans for a new civilian government after overthrowing Castro.
A smaller meeting held at the President’s office also seems to drift in favour of air strikes.
McCone from the CIA optimistically believes that there is a greater chance of destroying all missiles, although there is no full assurance about this matter.
Meanwhile, in his message, Castro urges the Soviet leader to start the first strike against the United States with nuclear weapons.
On 27 October, in the middle of the ExComm morning meeting, another public statement arrives from Khrushchev, which demands the removal of the missiles in Turkey in addition to the suggestion from the previous night.
Out loud, it is suggested that they should only respond to the first letter and ignore the second one.
The new letter expands the negotiations to the more general arms race of the superpowers, and could be a diversion.
Rusk announces that “the Cuba issue is about the Western hemisphere”, and Bundy adds, “It’s Cuba that’s the problem.
As the President briefly leaves the room, other people become increasingly more vocal about their objections to the Turkey-related concessions.
Among others, Robert Kennedy states that he cannot “see how we can ask the Turks to give up their defence” without the Soviet Union dismantling the weapons aimed at Turkey.
Many think that the United States cannot order Turkey, which is under NATO’s control, to remove the missiles.
After further clarification, it becomes evident that only the nuclear warheads are under United States control.
The others think that the new letter was not composed by Khrushchev, but hardline communists.
That is why negotiations with Khrushchev should be continued based on the message from the previous evening.
This is expressed as the committee’s consensus when the President is away from the meeting room.
The ExComm is apparently trying to take over the authority of interpreting the unfolding situation from Kennedy.
However, the President emphasises that the new letter is public, and that it should be considered as the most recent offer.
He also emphasises the perspective of the global community and the allies, “An attack on Cuba would give justification to the Soviet Union to advance in Berlin on the grounds that we are being really unreasonable.
JFK aims to find a response, which would be sufficiently categorical regarding the dismantling of the missile bases, while leaving a door open for other concessions.
There is also news that another U-2 plane has gotten lost in Soviet airspace while on a routine flight to Alaska.
These events may cause the forces leading to an escalation to become stronger all of a sudden.
It is still not clear who gave the order to fire anti-aircraft rounds in Cuba.
The Russians have previously said they have given the command not to fire upon foreign aircraft.
Two hours later, the meeting participants receive information that the spy plane has been shot down over Cuba using an anti-aircraft missile, and that the pilot is probably dead.
General Taylor reminds the others that the committee had decided to respond to the shooting of spy planes with military force.
The President wonders whether to start the counteractions immediately or on the following day.
The anti-aircraft missile batteries are under Russian control, increasing uncertainty about what is happening.
Before and after the U-2 incident, the discussion revolves tightly around the United States response to the Soviet Union.
Kennedy suggests that they would be ready to negotiate on concessions, but only if the Russians stop the preparation of missile bases in Cuba.
It would be important not to convey an image of the United States rejecting Khrushchev’s offer or offers.
National Security Advisor Bundy announces that including the removal of the Turkish missiles in the negotiations would endanger the future of the entire NATO community.
Kennedy responds to Bundy’s challenge by stating in a personal voice that “the deal option is attractive”, because it can be used to avoid a military conflict, which would in turn weaken NATO’s performance.
Even his brother Robert thinks that the demand of stopping the construction of the missile bases is only postponing an inevitable attack.
NATO member states in Europe are unwilling to compromise on their own defence in order to resolve the situation in Cuba.
Nevertheless, JFK prophesies that after first resisting the diplomatic solution, they would later see how insane it would be if the Soviet Union were to attack European military objects or to take Berlin in revenge.
The committee continues to see weaknesses and loopholes in Kennedy’s response options.
It is easy to be strict today, but the consequences of the response change the situation decisively, for the worse.
He asks the participants to consider the consequences of the different options to a wider extent.
Meanwhile, General Taylor announces that if information about the dismantling of the missile bases does not come soon, military action must commence immediately; that is, within two days, on Monday.
JFK admits that if the Soviet Union is not willing to meet them halfway at all, but on the contrary, continues to use firepower, the United States is forced to commence air strikes.
Interestingly, as the President is away on occasion, the group dynamic changes.
Among others, Vice President Johnson is emboldened during the breaks to present his own views.
He examines McNamara’s interpretation critically, according to which the missiles could not be removed by any other means besides an air strike.
Johnson replies, “If you’re ready to let go of the Turkish missiles, let Khrushchev know, tell him that we’re ready to make a deal.
On the other hand, according to the mood in the group, there should be a sharp response in the response letter regarding the shooting down of the planes.
When the President is absent, the remaining people speak critically and ironically about the ideas he has presented just moments before.
The general view is that due to many reasons, withdrawing missiles from Turkey is impossible in the current situation.
However, Kennedy is able to respond to this critique logically and without becoming flustered.
The members are tired, and at this stage, the President suggests a short snack break.
JFK does not activate the taping system, so there is no record of this meeting.
He suggests that Robert Kennedy would inform the ambassador that the United States cannot publicly give in regarding the solution that involves Turkey, but is ready to withdraw the missiles within a few months.
However, this secret part of the agreement could not be made public, otherwise the suggestion would become void.
However, it was not necessary to activate this back-up plan, and only the President and Secretary of State Rusk remained aware of it.
Kennedy had decided to ram the negotiation solution through, bypassing the key people of the administration.
Soldiers and intelligence managers were excluded from the actual decision-making.
It may well be that ExComm’s tenacious resistance and the repetitive discussions played their part in turning the President towards using informal and confidential channels to achieve the solution he wanted.
The approach itself was somewhat questionable because some members of ExComm did not have accurate information about the content of the solution and could draw misleading conclusions from the resolving of the conflict.
Among others, Vice President Johnson may have thought that the threat of using military force was a critical element in solving the Cuban crisis , which could have later carried over to his vision regarding the resolution to the Vietnam War using military escalation during Johnson’s own presidential term.
The President does not want to attack anti-aircraft bases immediately, because the details of the U-2 plane that was previously shot down are not yet known.
McNamara’s preference that “some kind of pressure” is nevertheless added, so that the government would not look too soft.
Kennedy is also concerned that the public will think that the Americans have pressured NATO allies to adopt the position of diplomatic settlement.
The allies should be pressured, but in the end, they should draw their own conclusions.
However, JFK cannot talk about the Turkey element in the solution directly, as some of the committee members have not been involved in previous discussions.
Few think that Khrushchev would agree to a relatively vague message, which responds to the first letter from the Soviets, and does not specifically address any measures required to resolve the issue.
The air strikes were planned to commence on Monday; the Air Force was still at the second-highest defence condition.
In Moscow, however, Khrushchev had become aware of the extreme riskiness of his game, and had started to make preparations to approve the offer.
He forbade all military commanders in Cuba to make decisions autonomously, emphasising that the missile bases had to be protected against external disruptions.
Castro had suggested the first strike with nuclear weapons, and the Kremlin was afraid that an escalation would occur without their control.
At this juncture, Khrushchev formulates a positive response to the suggestions contained in the letter from the US government.
In order to get the information to the opposing side as quickly as possible, Khrushchev orders his response to be broadcast on Moscow Radio, reaching the United States government almost instantaneously.
Soviet and American leadership have reached a compromise that can resolve the confrontation.
Although trust in the Russians was weak in the United States government (JFK, for example, states on 28 October, “We don’t trust them.”), a military escalation is kept under control, and after a few complications, the Soviet Union verifiably completed the dismantling of the weapons and the missile bases from the Cuban soil.
To begin with, Kennedy showed his excellent ability to read a changed situation.
The United States had been heavily involved with Cuba for several years already, and after the unsuccessful invasion of the Bay of Pigs, aggressive operations continued, only with increased secrecy.
Kennedy gave the green light to a project whose purpose was to sabotage the Cuban infrastructure, and weaken its new government in every possible way.
This also included a very sensitive project aimed at assassinating Fidel Castro.
In other words, Kennedy was not being “soft” with Cuba in any way, instead largely continuing with plans drafted during the time of his predecessor, Eisenhower, regarding the overthrowing of Castro’s government.
Although like the rest of the American public, Kennedy was ready to use any means necessary to overthrow the new communist government in Cuba, he nevertheless understood that a situation involving nuclear missiles and their positioning was on a completely different level to the sabotage campaigns that had so far been run on low intensity.
Now, the matter involved the most destructive weapons the superpowers possessed, and would require extreme care and control.
Kennedy himself had participated in WWII on the Pacific Ocean, experiencing first-hand the uncontrollable nature of a global war.
The events in 1914 slid quickly out of the control of individual countries and quickly led to the onset of the Great War.
As the events of October unfolded, he occasionally provides a glimpse of the option of a military strike.
Kennedy understood that once started, a reciprocal series of military strikes would easily move out of the individual leaders’ control, while the army would start operating automatically.
Kennedy considered it to be a potentially dangerous situation, where a once-started strategy would be difficult to retract.
In management literature, this trap of wise contemplation is known as “escalated commitment to a chosen course of action” , where the implementation of decisions that have been found to be poor is continued because the termination of such a commitment is difficult psychologically and for authoritative reasons.
Kennedy was particularly sceptical regarding his generals, as he thought they wanted to be able to use the available weapons and force without considering the wider effect of the use of military force.
If the path of using military armed force were opened up, it would be difficult to close it using decisions made by the political administration.
Without knowing it, Kennedy was right; later archive information has shown that if the United States had struck the missile bases in Cuba, the Soviet soldiers had the order to launch a tactical nuclear weapon against the US base at Guantánamo located on the island.
This would have led to a counterstrike and probably to total nuclear war.
During the crisis, an American U-2 spy plane was shot down using a Russian anti-aircraft missile.
Kennedy had to use all the methods of persuasion he knew to prevent ExComm from choosing an immediate counterstrike against the missile batteries.
He presented his suspicions about how there could be underlying factors related to the strike, which would change the interpretation of the adversary’s motives.
In addition to trying to stop the use of military force by all means necessary, Kennedy was also careful not to corner the Soviet Union politically.
For example, while he was preparing a naval blockade, he wondered during a meeting whether there should be a declaration of war against Cuba along with the blockade.
As a result of the discussions with ExComm, an option emerged according to which the blockade would be implemented through the OAS, in which case it would not be necessary to declare war.
Approval from the OAS gave Kennedy wider international support, which softened the impression that the United States was attacking Cuba and its ally, the Soviet Union, on its own.
Kennedy also made the switch from a blockade to a quarantine when he relayed his decision.
The purpose of this was to soften the impression of the strictness of the measure.
Second, Kennedy attempted to detach himself from the attitude towards Cuba that was prevalent in the American atmosphere.
In practice, Cuba had been a satellite of the United States since 1898, when the Americans overthrew the Spanish colonial masters after a short war.
The Europeans did not understand the emotional Yankee attitude towards losing their “own” island state in the aftermath of Castro’s revolution.
Kennedy tried to analyse the prevalent beliefs in an unprejudiced way, and to highlight alternative interpretations of the situation.
In a way, he also challenged himself; after all, he had become known as a Cold War “hawk”, for example, during the presidential elections of 1960, and had also been personally involved in deciding to launch secret operations targeting the island state and its government.
Perhaps Cuba and the threat it constituted as a geographically close and openly communist country were not the main topic during the crisis.
He can also see how the actions of the Soviet Union are influenced by their overall view, which also includes the Berlin issue.
The Soviet Union had recently built a wall around West Berlin, and threatened to attack it if the global tension increases.
Kennedy considered it to be highly likely that the Soviet Union would respond to United States strikes by occupying West Berlin.
In this context, Kennedy’s intuition also played a deciding role in the discharge of the crisis.
He emphasised at meetings that the significance of the Cuban missiles is political, not military.
Later research has revealed that the missiles were placed in Cuba to protect it against United States aggressions.
Cuba was afraid of a new United States invasion, and that is why they turned to Khrushchev.
Therefore, the Soviet Union’s persistent explanations about the weapons being defensive were true from their own perspective.
On the other hand, Khrushchev thought that by moving a small quantity of nuclear weapons near the US, he could convince his own people that the nuclear deterrent of the Soviet Union is real and convincing.
During the preceding years, the Soviet Union had fallen behind the United States in the development of a nuclear weapon arsenal, which was worrying for the Soviet government and its generals.
The motives behind the placement of the missiles were more complicated than what members of the United States government and ExComm would have believed.
He emphasises constantly that the weighing of different options and the analysis of the situation must be based on avoiding an armed conflict.
Long-range missiles were in a constant state of readiness on land, at sea and in the air.
The military readiness was like a pile of gunpowder, which even the smallest spark could unwittingly ignite.
Accordingly, it was as if Kennedy had to explain his underlying ethical motivation to military personnel, government members and leading politicians.
However, Kennedy held on tightly to his position, although he listened patiently to the estimates of the ExComm specialists regarding the consequences and scenarios of different options.
He did not push his own clear view on others, but instead attempted to take into consideration all of the offered perspectives, carefully analysing the arguments and interpretations presented by the group members.
As Stern emphasises, after having listened to the tapes perhaps more carefully than anyone else, Kennedy never gets agitated or raises his voice.
He lets others present their perspectives, and then offers his own emphasis in the discussion.
Already from the very beginning, he considered the possibility that the Soviet Union might want the United States to withdraw their nuclear missiles from Turkey as a countermove for dismantling the weapons positioned in Cuba.
In part, he guides the group to see his own solution that would preserve peace, although at times he has to follow more precipitous positions.
These observations refer to an ethical evaluation of a situation and knowledge—all characteristics of wisdom.
Kennedy did not want to embrace the information provided by the experts and the members of the government without a more extensive, moral evaluation.
Therefore, different options had to be weighed in particular regarding the prevention of an escalation, instead of rational national benefits or military calculations.
On the other hand, Kennedy wanted to make use of the benefits of a collective dialogue in his own decision-making process.
Nevertheless, he held on to his moral vision, and made sure that he had the ultimate power and responsibility for decisions as the President and commander-in-chief.
For him, ExComm was a tool for a broad review of the situation and a detailed evaluation of different options.
The underlying existence of a moral vision is also highlighted in the extent to which Kennedy was able to be flexible with political interests.
The Cold War atmosphere was dominant in the US, fearing the increased influence of the communist camp and a nuclear attack on America cities.
The fear was nearly hysterical in a country that was traditionally used to being safe from direct military strikes.
Japan’s 1941 attack on the Pearl Harbor base in Hawaii had been a traumatic shock, which prompted the country to become involved in WWII to fight against the Axis powers.
Any kind of compromise, which would make the United States look weak when facing obvious aggression from the Soviet Union, would be interpreted by the people as weakness and cowardice.
On the other hand, withdrawing missiles from Europe as a reciprocal favour for dismantling Cuba’s arms would undermine NATO allies in a sensitive situation on the Old Continent.
However, Kennedy was ready to handle these political losses due to his absolute moral goal.
In case the Russians had rejected the basic offer (abstaining from occupying Cuba, withdrawing Turkish missiles at a later time as a secret appendix), Rusk would have contacted UN Secretary General U Thant through quiet channels, who would have made the suggestion to withdraw Cuban and Turkish missiles simultaneously.
In this case, of course, the readiness of the United States to be flexible with the withdrawal of their missiles from Turkey would have been made public, and probably would have decreased Kennedy’s public popularity.
However, the Soviet Union responded positively to the first counter-offer on 28 October, meaning that this back-up plan did not have to be implemented, and it was made public only at the beginning of the 2000s.
Before the missile crisis, Cuba had awkwardly entered the picture during the first stage of his presidential term, in the form of the Bay of Pigs Invasion.
This was an unsuccessful attempt to launch a spontaneous uprising against Castro’s government by sending in 1500 refugees to a seemingly spontaneous invasion in the remote area of the Bay of Pigs on the Cuban coast.
Calculations about the resistance met by the troops and the spontaneous uprising were deceptive, and the invading troops met with superior resistance on the coast.
There was no popular uprising, and the US did not provide the necessary air support for the invasion.
As a result, the invading troops perished or were captured, and the role of the United States in the offensive was revealed.
As noted, Janis used the mistakes made during the decision-making process that led to the fateful operation to develop his theory of groupthink.
Second, he launched a wide investigation into decision-making and communication problems underlying the fiasco.
Based on the reports, Kennedy made changes to the decision-making approach in foreignand security-policy-related issues.
Tobegin with, if the situation so required, a special group would be established to solve crises, with representatives from the political, diplomatic, military and intelligence sectors.
Each participant would have to focus on a holistic analysis of the problem instead of their own area of expertise or administrative field.
The President did not participate as a chairman, but instead was involved in the discussion like everybody else.
If necessary, subgroups would be formed to prepare different lines of action for a larger discussion.
These new structures and processes were implemented during the missile crisis.
Kennedy gave up his own authority when he offered the group the opportunity to discuss strategic decisions freely.
All the different sectional interests and perspectives were boldly brought to the same table.
It was possible for both the military “hawks” and the more diplomacyoriented “doves” to express their views.
On several occasions, Kennedy had to defend his position laboriously as the rest of the group leaned towards solutions that they thought were more advantageous than the perspective proposed by the President.
The assembly of ExComm and the format of the meetings meant that power was shared with a mixed group of top specialists and leaders, each with strong views on foreign and security policy.
It would have been easier to continue with the traditional bureaucratic model, where communication and decision-making moved along formal divisions of responsibility and established hierarchy.
Kennedy had to surrender to the ebbing and, at many times, emotionally charged opinions of ExComm.
The preferred path was not the easiest one to implement with the group and diverse viewpoints.
In each form of the manifestation of wise leadership, we can see a connection with the more general elements of wisdom.
The ability to read a situation indicates that Kennedy was independent from external lines of action, and was able to change the perspective radically as the situation changed from a low-intensity confrontation and sabotage operations to the possibility of a nuclear conflict.
A moral imperative superior to everything else during the crisis—avoiding a nuclear war—is also a sign of philosophical wisdom.
Learning from mistakes denotes that Kennedy was ready to develop his own intuitive-experiential wisdom by scrutinising the background of his fateful decision and by changing the operating method of his administration.
Bad solutions were not hidden or sidelined; instead, the people involved learned from negative experiences, with the future in mind.
Why good leaders make bad decisions and how to keep it from happening to you.
Victims of groupthink; a psychological study of foreign-policy decisions and fiascos.
Inside the White House during the Cuban missile crisis concise edition.
