It is associated in many minds with violence, murder, fanaticism or radical idealism.
Mississippians became aware that the RNA had settled in their midst with the publicity surrounding an attempted purchase of land from a Mr lason.
According to RNA president, Imari Abubakari Obadele, whites moved against them when they purchased the land because they realized the psychological impact possession of the land would have.
Mississippians became acltely aware of the RNA presence in August of 1971.
On August 18, at 6:45 A.M., police opened fire on an RNA residence at 1148 Lewis Street here in Jackson.
Chuckwe La Mumba, Minister of Justice for the RNA described the incident as a ""massacre attempt"" perpetrated by 40 heavily armed police vigilantes on five men and two women.
Brother La Mumba was speaking at the Masonic Temple on August 16, three weeks ago, during the RNA's Legal Awards Night.
Eleven RNA members were arrested after the shooting, and charged with a number of crimes, the most serious of which was murder.
President Obadele was one of those charged with murder even though he was not present at the time of the shooting.
Some were arrested on such charges as JACK WOODWARD, Dean of Men expresses new concern for freshmen problems.
Photo by WALTER WOFFORD New approach for freshman needs carrying concealed weapons, and wearing obscene objects.
In the long-run, however, the attack helped to spur the Black community, beginning a period of strength seemed to make up for their numbers, and out of the Black reaction to the attack grew a movement resulting in the formation of Black Jacksonians for Justice and later, Black Mississippians for Justice.
The RNA has fulfilled a need in the Black community and in the Black movement.
The organization has been a potent force in the Black community simply because it represents one of the most organized, most functional elements of the Black community at this time.
The RNA hosted ""Solidarity Day"" in 1973, here in Jackson, an attempt to unify the Black community behind the cause of political prisoners which included the RNA 11, Angela Davis, and others.
The audience participated in repeated shouting of ""Break the chains, break the chains,"" and called for the freedom of political prisoners, prisoners who are victims Of a racist judicial system, those mentally enslaved, and those who do not realize that they are, in fact, imprisoned.
La Mumba feels that it is necessary for Blacks not only to have access to those things that we need, but control over them to insure that they will never be taken away.
The RNA serves as a visible army for the Black community; a visible force that the Black community seems to want and need to be able to point to and know that there are people who will risk their lives in military combat for them.
They are active on many fronts across the United States and the world and on several fronts ht. re <>♦. home.
They appeal to the people to break the chains, to rally behind political leaders, and to serve as a watchdog on the structure.
Without the watchful eyes of the Black community, the police, the government, and the bigilante Reporter offers Jackson an alternative By EMILY WOFFORD Freshman life, with all its fears and anxieties, often leaves a new college student lonely and emotionally unstable.
Through a new ""continuing entation"" process, Millsaps is lping its freshmen alleviate these destructive feelings and replace them with confidence and security, according to Jack Woodward, dean of men.
The tem, with the cooperation of erclassmen and faculty members, will help freshmen adjust with greater ease to college life and all its complexities.
Russell Levanway, psychology department chairman, met with key faculty members throughout the summer to prepare for the continuing orientation program.
It has been discussed for several years among Millsaps administrators and faculty.
He recommended Carl (continued on page 4T For the past year, Jackson has seen the first attempt to provide the city and its environs with alternative, professional journalism in the form of a weekly newspaper called The Reporter.
Alternative newspapers, usually weeklies, are becoming quite popular and successful in practically every city in the nation the size of Jackson and larger.
Not to be confused with the ""underground"" newspapers which emerged as symptomatic of the protests of the 1960's, the alternative papers result from the public interest in having another source of news and opinion, particularly in cities with daily newspaper monopolies.
The new owners formed a corporation, Capital Reporter Publishing Company, dropped ""Northside"" from the masthead and launched the conversion of the newspaper into a city wide weekly which could provide a provacative new dimension of news and opinion.
From investigative reporting to political insight, The Reporter has consistently provided the added dimension of news which it set out to provide.
For the first time locally, readers learned through The Reporter how much money Hinds County's Chancery and Circuit clerks and Justices of the Peace make through the antiquated ""fee"" system of paying such officials.
They learned also how a Hinds County state representative used his legislative position — and his official legislative stationery — to solicit business for his private engineering firm.
Before any other newspaper in Jackson, The Reporter told of intervention by the United States Department of Justice into the job discrimination suit brought against the City of Jackson by the sanitation workers and other low level city employees, and the fact that the city had been forced to pay more than $200,000 in back In The Reporter, the struggling efforts of police officers to organize a union, powerful opposition from city officials, \vere given understanding treatment.
Details of how Mafia-tinged outfit from New Orleans moved into a Jackson hotel and pulled out what the underworld calls a ""Scam"" were revealed in The Reporter.
Constant pressure has been applied by the newspaper through a ""Pothole of the Week"" feature to get the city to repair the streets, and a continuing exposure has been given to need for preservation of the Manship House, the oldest residence in the city.
Consistently, the newspaper has provided in-depth reports pointing out the problems of the poor and the deprived, as well as the aspirations of the racial minority in the community.
Seeking to go beyond the smooth exterior of the city's cultural life, The Reporter has probed into the night life of the town,* the out-of-the-way restaurants, and given frank evaluations of what it found.
All movies offered to the public in the city are listed weekly in the newspaper.
Overall, the style and content of The Reporter has reflected competence, and responsible journalism, taking the position that an alternative newspaper has a constructive role to play in Jackson.
Page 2 Thursday, Sept., 1974 On the good life Waking early Tuesday morning, we ecided it a good time to explore the lifestyle we would enjoy this year at Millsaps.
After a frantic search for the necessary paper, finding a stall complete with door, and racing the cockroaches for a shower, we felt sufficiently prepared to face the lunch line — though dreading the crosscountry trek ahead.
We arrived at the Millsaps Mecca healthier, but late, and had to be comforted by the scowling faces of the early birds and a cup of canteen coffee.
Finding ourselves in the 'student union' we wondered how many students had been united by this stark structure, whose main floor consists of gastronomic catastrophes, two students glazed on ""Lucy"" reruns, and a bookstore with two few textbooks and too many 1950's classics.
All this glory is crowned by an upper floor, divided among the student affairs service (terra incognita for most), furniture from a dead person id the bleak offices of we chosen Images of city building inspectors lost in hysterical laughter entertained us briefly.
We sighed as we walked past an impudent squirrel who remained to compete with the beautiful Holiday Inn, knowing we had not been the impetus for the trip.
It is rumored that our ""beer-a-go-go"" will be funded by the college this semester as a student gathering place, with the red light bulbs being replaced — angry accounts of cockroaches having eyestrain abounded — and a portrait of the student union hung under the Budweiser beasts.
All letters will be published as they are written, providing there is no libelous or obscene overtone, and should be submitted with the author's name and signature.
Names will be withheld upon request, providing proper identification is made to the editor. the hopeless dupes of a corrupt system — because of the good in all — rather, that our dreams of becoming educated are critically wounded in this present college environment and becomes — in fact — the burden of the student only, who is usually illequipped for such an undertaking.
This quixotic line has the approximate validity of berating a Chinese son of communism for his inattention to capitalist values.
It is our position that the Millsaps student — though not singularly so — is carefully conditioned in the art of insensibility to his environment by a budget-conscious administration and complacent faculty, doctrinaire public schools, watchful parents, puberty-pandering peers, and a resiliently moribund homestate.
OUTLOOK TYLERTOWN — Martha Mitchell, the ebullient, charismatic wife of the Either way, the Pine Bluff, Ark., native appeared to be delighted to be in former attorney general of the United States of America, visited here last week.
She was warmly greeted by friends here as well as by friends in The occasion was the marriage of her son, Jay Jennings, to a local girl, Miss Greenwood.
She also thinks that her husband, John Mitchell, was the number one patsy of One thing that bugs her is the image she has gained on the basis of her dealings the Nixon crowd.
She said the other day that she does not play millionaire and was mesmerized by Nixon and his crew."" the role that ""they"" claim.
Mitchell probably didn't want to be separated from her husband, but ""They have a bad image of me,"" she said.
And her designer, Philip Robertson, that's the way it worked out, even though she said, ""I liked being a housewife and who travelled to Tylertown with her, confirmed that some things have been said mother."" about her that were not justified.
And she thinks that Mr Mitchell will go to jail, a spin-off from the indictment One gets the impression that Mrs.
Mitchell doesn't particularly like the that he's under, national role that she plays.
Yet, she has the personality and character that lend But last week her role was being attentive to her son and his bride ... a role her to public notice. b ih that she fulfilled well.
Visits with Vinaruhu i Mad Dog on the River, or Providence Lifts its Leg by Ebenezer Pendergrass Beware all ye who read these words.
The story I am about to relate is not for the faint hearted or feeble minded.
It is a tale of one man's encounter with spiritual metamorphosis, divine revelation, and chronic alcoholism.
It is not a story that I lightly reveal, but if not for our own sake then for the sake of our children and our children's children, so that posterity will be forevermore enriched by the encounter of this writer.
The heavy action of a Friday night in Jackson had once again taken its toll.
As I crawled out of bed I could still hear the siren at Friday's punishing some poor tipper for his generous indulgence.
Upon arrival I ambled to the bank and eased my battered body into the warm water.
But no sooner had I settled back to enjoy a peaceful morning, when a strange voice bellowed in my direction.
The shorts, covered with red hearts superimposed with the caption ""be my valentine"", were partially obscured by a sagging stomach that seemed inconsistent with his otherwise scrawny body.
His hair showed all the meticulous grooming of Albert Einstein and his eyes displayed the serenity of the Boston strangler.
I was not really sure of his intentions, but not being one to turn down an adventure, I grabbed a stick and followed him through several cow pastures to a small cabin in the woods.
After situating myself, I queried Vinaruhu on his background and his crusade.
What emerged is no doubt the most bizzare story since the death of Catherine the Great.
Vinaruhu, it seems, is actually Herbert Headlessman, one time heir to that grpat Jackson newspaper misfortune.
Were it not for a strange turn of events forty years ago, Herbert would no doubt be spending his time harrassing the Jackson public with myths and wivestales from the editors desk.
On his way to newspaper stardom, Herbert had assumed the Political beat for the Daily News.
After some brilliant investigative work, he had determined that Theodore Bilbo was livth cousins with no less than Aunt Jemima.
The next thing he remembers he was floating down the Mississippi River.
Fighting desperately for his life, Vinaruhu struggled to the nearby bank and pulled himself ashore.
There, before his very eyes stood a giant body with two heads standing on top of a three legged elephant.
One head bore a striking resemblance to Harry Krishna and the other was clearly the face of Senator Vardaman.
The heads were singing ""I get no kicks from campaign"" mixed in with a medley of Frank Sinatra favorites while the elephant danced in step.
Vinaruhu swears that the voice he heard was the voice of Clark Reed, but this being forty years ago, he didn't know any better than to listen.
Vinaruhu explained pointing to what must have been fifty cases of wine.
Vinaruhu then went into an explanation of how his position in the spiritual community enables him to see visions of the future by peering into his crystal decanter.
Our alumnus contributor, who wishes to remain in alcoholic anonymity, was a member of the graduating class of 1931, captain of the golf team, member of Eta Chi Fraternity , and an avid New Dealer, whether in politics or at the card table.
Moveover, after serving in WWII as a sub commander, our guest writer and his wife settled in Columbia, South America and amassed a small fortune mining diamonds.
Since his retirement, he has once again returned to his beloved Mississippi, and is currently writing his memoirs somewhere along the banks of the muddy Loosahatchie River.
Due to our guest writer's rather unorthodox, stream of consciousness style of prose, we have taken the liberty of adding parentheses, underlining, and summarizing for the sake of clarity to me reauer.
Not that I mean any harm in the saying of it, mind you, but to get right down to it, there's not a whole lot of anything that you can say about ole 'Saps with any kind of certainty.
Every year you come staggering in, a strange breed of souls out of the woodwork.
With those words, he fell to the floor in a stupor, snoring loudly as the remaining wine poured over his clean white shoes.
I walked away in stunned silence, determined to return next week and discover the riddle of the universe.
Now being so ill-defined in this tradition as you have now come to find yourselves, you might want to ask just how in firing blazes did you happen to come by earning this sudden stroke of name-calling, libellabeling.
Not nearly time enough for people to already be picking out your bad habits.
Me myself, I always put the blame on our founding father, you know, Major Millsaps.
Major Millsaps and his ole lady laid out stiff all these years, smack-DEAD center of campus, buzzing and a 'humming through the cement, throwing off the sins of the WHAMIE to generations of unsuspecting Millsapians.
Just try and keep your backside to them and strut on by as quick as you can.
And that's not all that you've got to reckon with; there's the VOLCANO too.
That crater has been a hotbed of unrest and terror for years on end, pouring out commiefag-long-haired hippies like lava.
People drive by and say ""Oh look at the young people playing frisbee, laying out in the grass, sitting on park benches"" and all the while they're just storing up boiling seeds of dissention and atheism.
But I'm thankful to say that things seem to have settled down as of late.
I haven't heard of a demonstration against the football team in a couple of years.
Like I was saying, people are beginning to enjoy their college days like they were made to be.
Swallow goldfish I Page 4 Thursday, Sept., 1974 vening courses offer student opportunities By CATHY PASSAILAIGUE This fall Millsaps is offering Jackson area residents and Millsaps students the opportunity to participate in a specialinterest program of noncredit courses.
The classes will open beginning September 16 in the Academic Complex and registration will be held at the first class meetings.
Other courses scheduled include Crewel Embroidery, Ceramics, Basic Interior Design, Advanced Interior Design, Indoor Horticulture, Marriage, Antiques, Needlepoint, and Beginner Knitting.
The registration fee for the courses is $25.00 each, except for Travel Abroad and Beginning Piano for Adults, and may be paid at the first class meeting by the students who are not registered at Millsaps.
Millsaps College will offer its special course in investment procedures again this fall, according to Dr.
Richard Baltz, chairman of the Department of Economics, Accounding and Administration.
Jackson attorney and business counselor Abe Rotwein is teaching the special course.
Lillian Cooley has joined the Millsaps Library staff as Reference Librarian, replacing Mrs.
Cooley will, among other duties, provide research help, library instruction, and interlibrary loan service for students and faculty.
Students needing assistance with any research project are urged to seek her help. o The library has restored its pre-energy crisis schedule, though ""subject to change if conditions require,"" the staff announced.
In an effort to promote maximum use of library facilities, the library staff has printed a new handbook for students, especially the freshmen.
Results of the National Teacher Examinations are used by many large school districts as one of several factors in the selection of new teachers and by several states for certification or licensing of teachers.
Prospective teachers should contact the school system in which they seek employment, or their colleges, for specific advice on which examinations to take and on which dates they should be taken.
The Bulletin of Information for Candidates contains a list of test centers, and information about the examinations, as well as a Registration Form.
Opinions herein do not necessarily represent the attitudes of the student body, faculty, or administration.
David Anderson, Earl Aycock, Mike Forester, Carmen Gettis, Doug Minor, Cathy Passailaigue, Dean Pittman, Alan Cameron.
Course content includes study of the stock market, security industry and other investment organizations.
The 12-weeks investments"" course began at noon on Tuesday, September 3, in the Academic Complex, Room 137.
The continuity of Liberalism By KAREN ROEMER The first speaker for this fall's series was Reverend Keith Tonkel.
He is a graduate of Millsaps and a local minister, active in community affairs and writer of a column for The Reporter, a local Jackson newspaper.
Tonkel's speech was molded around the challenges of today and the great opportunity people have to influence the Photo by WALTER WOFFOF events that shape this world.
He sees this activism as the key to healing the brokeness of our world.
Concerning himself with three major areas, education, politics, and religion, he recognized the need for broad mindedness and unselfishness in the struggle for uniting the world.
Tonkel viewed man as the essential factor in this solution, through a serious involvement in FrGShfTIGn Guru Roger's book ""On Encounter Groups"" which has been studied by all the faculty involved.
Eighteen faculty members and two administrators are now meeting once a week with groups of eight to 14 freshmen.
Woodward said the original plan was to experiment with five groups but enough people were enthusiastic about the program for 20 groups to be formed.
Faculty members and upperclassmen are included for continuity and experience, but they will not necessarily determine the direction of the group.
Hopefully, the groups will continue their meeting for nine weeks, but if two or three meetings are sufficient, they can stop any time.
The most important thing is for each group to meet the needs of its members by being spontaneous,"" says ""As the freshmen become more a part of the college, we may find the groups replaced by fraternities, sororities, and other organizations.
Faculty members are also finding the group meetings beneficial, especially since the groups consist of students in a variety of fields.
With these things man could do anything and everything his heart desired.
The series was introduced into a new season with a hopeful and hearty welcome.
His subject will concern liberalism in the past two centuries and what the future holds for liberalism.
McElvaine plans to review the 19th century lassiez-faire liberalism and its replacement by 20th century New Deal liberalism as the movement in which the seeds of future liberalism are growing.
His view of future liberalism is a product of these experiences and a subtle maturation which will hold new solutions for tomorrow.
The subjects presented are of a wide range geared to attract all student interest.
William Rowell, late chairman of the Millsaps Art Department, have been prepared by an ad hoc committee of faculty members for Thursday; September 12, in the recital hall of the Academic Complex.
Rowell's family as well as members of the Mississippi Art Association and the Art Entnusiasts uud will be present.
Page 5 Disaffected CIA agent on covert operations in Latin America FORTENBERRY, chairman of the Chaplain's Comical groups provide campus interaction By DEAN PITTMAN The Chaplain's Committee of Millsaps recently conducted the first organizing session of the Christian Support Groups.
A second organizing session will be held next Monday before beginning the unique program, aimed at developing selfawareness and personal friendship.
Each Christian Support group will consist of five to twenty members, showing common interests, who will work together in solving day to day problems.
Groups will function mainly on the basis of common need and continue as long as they are serving their purpose.
Don Fortenberry is the Chairman of the Chaplain's Committee and the driving force behind the Christian Support Program.
Fortenberry listed several topics different groups may want to explore including basic bible study and prayer sessions.
Other topics, not so religiously oriented, cover such subjects as sexuality, ethics and morality, politics, medicine, inner personal relations, and self-awareness.
Stressing the independency of the groups, Fortenberry explained that each group will have an appointed leader but will be able to decide meeting places and times, subjects discussed and, in general, what course the group will take.
Chaplain Fortenberry also predicted that if the group works correctly, individual members will develop a responsibility toward the group, that should strengthen it.
Along the same lines and also sponsored by the Chaplain's Committee, are the Personal Growth groups.
E Gene Bennett, director of the Counseling and Consultation organization in Jackson, are in some ways an offspring of the encounter groups or the group dynamics movement.
This professionally-led program's objectives will be to bring about open confrontation and communication among the group.
This, theoretically, will teach the members to deal effectively, not only with others, but with themselves.
Four differently aimed groups are planned, each concluded in a two-day period.
All of the groups are aimed at providing skills in knowing oneself and then confronting oneself.
These professionally supervised groups in the Personal Growth program will require a fee of twenty-five dollars each, excluding the Experimental Theology Group, which will cost either forty or fifty dollars.
Don Fortenberry assured that the Office of the Chaplain will work to alleviate any financial burdens.
Philip Agee is the first agent from the clandestine service of the CIA ever to tell his story.
Other intelligence officers, most recently Victor Marchetti, have related what they know about CIA operations, but they have always been operatives from the CIA bureaucracy in Langley, Virginia, never secret field agents.
The Times report was termed ""nonsense"" by informed sources who felt that the CIA was trying to discredit Agee's potential revelations by portraying him as a traitor.
In fact, it is becoming increasingly clear that at the time of his resignation from the CIA in 1969, his superiors had no idea of the extent of his dissatisfaction with his own mission or the general pattern of covert United States activities in the countries where he worked.
Swimming pool to open soon Plans for student use of Millsaps's new Physical Activities Center are now being developed by the Physical Education Department under Dr.
Work on the swimming pool is progressing rapidly towards completion and should allow full usage by September 11.
The activities schedule will depend on when students wish to swim and the pool will remain open as long as weather and endurance permit.
Life-saving instruction is planned on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday of the first two weeks followed by two weeks of a water safety course.
Beginning swimming is tentatively scheduled for C period, or free and convocation periods.
Coach Montgomery would like to see created a sports committee composed of interested members of the student body, faculty, and administration that would be receptive to ideas concerning the new facility.
Concerning the new gym, Coach Montgomery explained that due to energy costs, the night schedule would be rigidly structured to allow maximum activity in a compressed period of time; though he assured ""plenty of time during the week"" for off-the-street activities.
Further information, including . registration, concerning any of the above may be obtained from the office of Dr.
Agee said recently that he intends to demonstrate in his book that the CIA has served as ""the police force of American capitalism"" in imposing United States ""economic exploitation"" on Latin American countries.
According to Agee, he resigned in 1969 ""because of my comprehension that all the things that we were doing were supporting fascist-type governments.
The American secret police was preserving the rule of the wealthy minorities and attacking those who stood for change in Latin America.
The agency's job was to keep the lid on ... to keep insurgency down at a lower level than in Vietnam.
In a recent interview with the Washington Post, Agee withheld specific details that were in his yet to be published manuscript.
He felt that releasing such details before the book is published next year would put his life in danger.
He did reveal, though, something of his work for the CIA in Latin America.
During a brief assignment at CIA headquarters in Langely, Virginia, in 1966 Agee set up the Mexico City cover operation for the CIA, conducted by Robert Mullen and Company, a public relations firm that fronted for CIA operations in many parts of the world.
CIA fears that he would publicly disclose the Mullen front in 1972 led to its closing by the CIA, which also closed Mullen offices in Singapore and Amsterdam.
The placement of CIA agents in United States corporations around the world is common practice.
The agents are assigned to those posts with the full knowledge and permission of the companies and the CIA reimburses the companies for the agents' salaries and expenses.
In Mexico, Agee's cover in 1967 and 1968 was as the Olympics staff assistant to then United States Ambassador Holton Freeman.
In his Olympics role, Agee's covert mission was to ""meet all kinds of people"" in order to extend the Mexican CIA station's network of agents.
It was just before the Mexico City Olympics in 1968 that Mexican students and workers mounted a strike and massive demonstrations against the brutality of the Mexican army and police.
While serving in the CIA's Ecuador station in 1962 Agee participated in launching a pressure campaign against the Ecuadorian government to end diplomatic ties with Cuba.
The President ""didn't want to break relations but we forced him,"" said Agee.
The CIA's anti-Cuban campaign was carried out through the media, mass organizations and the agency's influence with the Ecuadorian military, Agee said.
Frei won, but was eventually defeated by Salvador Allende in the 1970 Chilean presidential election.
Agee handled the cashing of the check and conversion into Chilean currency in Montevideo, Uruguay, where he was then assigned to the CIA station.
Agee also said that the United States poured an estimated $20 million into the 1962 Brazilian election in support of several hundred candidates for gubernatorial, congressional, state and municipal offices.
Agee's ideological break with the CIA and United States policy in Latin America started, he says, during his 1962-66 assignment to Uruguay where his official mission was to direct operations against the Cubans and build up local police forces.
It was in Uruguay that he lost faith in the possibility of solving the region's problems through political reform.
My own big change was the comprehension that reform is really rhetoric.
The King is Dead Long Live the King I drink when Ik ave occasion >} Foil Movie Schedule Sept. — THE REIVERS — Filmed in North Mississippi, this is the cinematic version of the novel that won Faulkner a Pulitzer Prize.
Sept. — REBEL WITHOUT A CAUSE — The James Dean classic of frustrated American youth.
Sept. — MAN IN THE WILDERNESS — Richard Harris stars as Zack Bass in an epic struggle for survival.
Oct. — THE PRODUCERS — From Mel Brooks, the man who gave you Blazing Saddles.
Oct. — BEDKNOBS AND BROOMSTICKS — Walt Disney cashes in on the witch-craze.
Nov. — BLACK GIRL — The story of a young woman's ambitions and her fight to realize them.
Nov. — THE WAR BETWEEN MEN AND WOMEN — A James Thurber classic on film.
Dec. — RED SKY AT MORNING — A moving story of young people growing up during World War Two.
Bugs Bunny, Foghorn Leghorn, Road Runner, and Yosemite Sam, to name a few.
The Millsaps Players will open its 51st season with ""The Infernal Machine,"" Jean Cocteau's bitingly humorous treatment of the Greek Oedipus myths.
Auditions were held Tuesday night in the Christian Center auditorium, and Goss says that rehearsals will begin Thursday.
Goss noted that he was quite pleased with the large turnout for auditions, particularly of freshmen.
Other Players' productions are scheduled for late November, early February, and mid-April.
Paul Walker and Brian Flint, typlify enthusiasm for new a son. hoto by WALTER WOFFORD ajors buoyantly approach new season By WARD EMILING With a wealth of talent and experience in his ship, Head Coach Harper Davis is expecting good things from his 1974 Millsaps Majors.
However, the brightness of the coming campaign was somewhat eclipsed by rain clouds last week.
DAVID ANDERSON intramurals, the most popular jic ( urricular activity at ■r.^ps, is beginning its first ""We had an unusual week last week,"" remarked Davis.
Needless to say, the inside of the new Activities Complex saw alot of the Majors last week, bu.
Saturday, when the skies finally allowed, they took to Alumni Field and looked ""surprisingly good,"" according to Davis.
Despite last week's weather, Davis is quite pleased with what he, and Assistant Coach Tommy Ranager have seen so far.
He was referring to his twenty-three returning lettermen, including sixteen starters from last year's 54 squad.
The offense, losing only two from last year, looks extremely Intramurals begins new year under new program ex Mil ' under the Intramural ciL a committee of the v ""a r Sitti&rit Senate.
The intramural Coun . , program has become increasingly popular at Millsaps because it allows for participation by all students, yet it has the least cost per student of any physical education program.
In the past, intramurals was both directed and financed by the physical education department.
Last year, however, the department was unable to provide sufficient funds due to increased costs.
The intramural program turned to the Student Senate in hopes of obtaining funding.
The Senate set up the Intramural Council to administer and direct intramurals.
It is comprised of two advisors from the physical education department — Dr.
Edge — , two chairpersons appointed by the Senate — Alan Brehm and Sharon Arnold — , and eight nonpartial appointed representatives, four men and four women.
There is also an advisory group consisting of elected i representatives, one from each team whose sport is in season.
Alan Brehm stated that the committee expects to adopt the Men's and Women's Intramural constitutions into its bylaws.
Some of the committee's goals for this year are to develop a comprehensive system for administering the intramural program, to supervise playing conditions, to develop rules for each sport, to set up schedules, and to review the system for determining the intramural schedules, and to review the system for administering the intramural trophy winners.
He added that although this year's budget will exceed last year's $1,200 budget, there will be sufficient funds to administer it.
Fall intramural sports include soccer and volleyball for the men and flag football, volleyball, and badminton for the women.
Montgomery, one of the two advisors to the committee, said that in preparation for intramurals this fall, the soccer field has been reworked and the PAC is being finished.
Montgomery's suggestions for the year include indoor soccer for the women (as a possible replacement for flag football), intramural swimming activities, Page 7 good.
Safety Jeb Dominick busted a knee and is expected to be sidelined for six weeks.
As far as the outlook of the season's opener against Southwestern is concerned, Davis had only one observation.
So, after the flood and with an ark full of experienced upperclassmen and hopeful newcomers, Coaches Davis and Ranager are plotting a course toward another winning season. o and corecreational volleyball and badminton.
He stated that the PAC can easily be set up to accomodate indoor soccer.
He also hopes that the intramural committee will study the various swimming activities that can be included in the intramural program.
Men's soccer and women's flag football will begin within the next two weeks.
Intramurals is one of the most enjoyable activities at Millsaps and we hope that everyone will take part in at least one aspect of the intramural program.
He appeals to the people to remember the prisoners who suffered for them — people like Angela Davis, the RNA 11, the Wilmington 10, and the Charlotte 3.
Nor must we forget those persons who are simply victimized by the system, persons who are imprisoned for no other reason than that they are Black or Chicano, or Native American, or poor.
The people, sident Obadele says, are onsible for getting him out of prison, and if they do not continue to put the pressure on, and to build the type of power that has to be listened to, the chains will never be broken.
President Obadele feels that Black people are already a nation — a people pressed together by suppression.
He states that the legal basis for the existence of a New African nation is found in Cherokee Nation State of Georgia, 1839.
The Cherokees developed a written language, patterned a civilization after the White man's, wrote a constitution, and established a legislature.
They even adopted Christianity and tried to live peacefully amidst the Whites.
They saw themselves as a foreign nation with whom the United States government had made treaties.
The Cherokee RNA Nation felt pressed to seek action through the Supreme Court to enjoin gold-hungry Whites from taking their land.
Chief Justice Marshall gave the Cherokees a peculiar label, refusing to call them a foreign nation, but The RNA has changed somewhat since its earlier days.
Its emphasis now seems to be on unifying, solidifying the Black community.
Obadele is working for unity within the system as president of the Mississippi Black Assembly.
Legal Awards Night was an attempt to recognize those persons who had served or stood by the RNA and to generate support from them and others Angela Davis was the featured speaker on the program.
This belief is a guiding factor in their difficult struggle to break away.
It is ironic, or perhaps prophetic, that those who struggle hardest to break the chains are those who become the most tightly bound. recognizing their unique position 1 as a sort of nation within a nation.
Obadele sees this case as legal justification for the existence of the Republic of New Africa.
We have a right to the land, he says, because we have worked it, developed it, and fought to stay on it.
We are already a nation, but a subjugated, suppressed nation, a people tired of giving our money to a government to be used for 'white purposes.' like them.
In so doing, they lessened the gap existing between themselves and persons of this type.
The presence of James Meredith, a somewhat moderate Black political figure, was also a unifying factor.
Betsy Holmes RECENTLY ELECTED class presidents are, from left, Dennis Wells senior, Mike Stevens junior, and Paul Stephens freshman.
Classes Elect Officers by Steve Germany The 1974 elections at Millsaps brought few surprises to anyone; it almost seemed that everyone who had ever held office was running against everyone who had ever lost.
There were few changes and it is unlikely that any differences of ideology will be present when it meets.
One point of interest, however, is the growing role of women in student politics.
All four class vice-presidents, one class president, the secretary of the SEB and two at-large senators are female — a situation which will develop into an eight to eight male-female ratio in the new Senate.
Race is an issue we haven't faced that we had better: a subculture of black students has developed within, and apart from, the Millsaps community.
It is a complicated situation that has resulted in the absence of black participation in college activities.
In the recent elections no black ran, nor was a black interviewed for appointment to the Judicial Committee which is really a shame; but participation on any level has to be self-motivated.
In the future, independent participation is imperative as there are only three independents on the student senate.
It's a shame that the majority of the student body has such minimal representation on the senate when they have the greatest to gain without the benefits of social organizations.
If the trend of the 60's towards individualism had continued, the Greek system would have died out because it's president and Diane McMullen vicepresident; seniors are Dennis Wells, president and Dee Dee Woroner, vice-president.
The four senators-at-large, chosen from a field of ten, are Mark Jones, Patsy Pharr, May Line Zehnder, and David Bourgeois.
However, the trend of the past two years has been towards the 50's idea of banding together to benefit those you want to benefit, and excluding others.
I think the Greek system will eventually die out, when all groups realize they can't maintain an exclusive type atmosphere.
I think administration-student relations have to improve a lot if Millsaps is to become the king of college that many have visualized.
By assuming the Student Senate is Common Cause Attacks State Corruption by Glade Mclnnis To see the problem was to crawl, the problem of governmental corruption; to characterize the problem was to walk, corruption through secrecy and the influence of money; to organize an assault was to run, an organization to protect the people's interests.
Passage of ethics and open meeting legislation are their weapons for the coming 1975 legislative session.
The bill to require open meetings of public bodies (House bill 139) strikes at the heart of secrecy in government, while allowing closed meetings when in the public interest.
Smkh feels that the present bill is superior in its provisions to a similar bill presented last year, and that the time is now ripe for such legislation.
Besides the support of legislators and organizations (e.g., National Governor's Conference, Board of Supervisors, League of Women Voters) ""the common man now realizes that he needs to have a say in his government . . . and it's this frustration and lack of responsiveness to which Common Cause is responding."" the student's contact with the administration we lose a great deal.
They've got to establish contact with the student, not just the student leaders.
First of all, Millsaps The ethics bill comes closer to the financial heart of politicians and Smith is not as optimistic about its passage.
Even if both bills were to be defeated, Smith sees no adverse effects toCommon Cause/ Mississippi, which has grown steadily since the last session of the Legislature failed to act.
The basic unit of Common Cause is the Congressional District whose steering committees saw these issues as the movement's top priorities.
Common Cause/ Mississippi is part of the national organization with over 300,000 members that has been extremely effective in Congress, and is presently struggling to gain reforms in campaign financing.
Presidents, Pardons, And Prevention At the risk of appearing terribly 'unliberal', we offer our support to President Ford in his recent decision to pardon Richard Nixon.
We agree with the visiting Art Buchwald that the President was probably convinced by persons close to Mr Nixon that his health was in great jeopordy.
There do seem to be several excesses, however — the extra $200,000 allotted the ousted President and the closing of the book on Watergate are two — serious excesses.
This for a man who struck at the heart of America's existence as a free society, whose crimes are vast in number.
Returning to our more accustomed position, we can state with little relish that whomever the Democrats may nominate for President in 1976 will be more welcome than Gerald Ford.
In his recent visit to Mississippi as Vice President he demonstrated his faith in conservatism, the strengths and weaknesses of that ideology.
His strength is in his belief in the wisdom of the people and their ability to govern themselves without the ever-present hand of central control.
Mr Ford is a militarist who stated with verity that ""if you're strong you get peace ... if you're weak you get war"" (with all our strength, would that we had a little peace); he believes in running ""government in the black"" — a theory disproved by the depression forty years ago; and he is too assured that the interests of big business are the interests of the people — a theory disproved every time one buys gas.
We never expect the government to be conducted for the best interests of the people, but perhaps recent events have ironically been so.
President Ford's pardon of Mr Nixon will, we believe, be finally recorded as the compassionate act of a man of integrity, while it will hopefully prevent his election as President.
OUTLOOK Mississippi Republican leaders, dismayed by what they regard as somewhat erratic behavior on the part of President Gerald Ford during his first month in office, are privately making a new assessment of their chances to elect three GOP congressmen in the coming general election.
Ben Hilbun in the second district, their previous thinking was that Trent Lott in the fifth and Thad Cochran in the fourth district were lead pipe cinches to retain their seats.
He came out, for instance, for amnesty for the Vietnam draft-dodgers, spoke up for legalized abortion and finally granted former President Richard Nixon a full pardon, long before any legal action had been taken against him.
Possibly the most significant of the congressional races will, take place in the fourth district.
That district includes Hinds county, which has something in the order of 72 per cent of the voters in the entire district.
Thad Cochran is the congressman for the district, serving his first term.
His Democratic opponent in the general election is television executive Kenneth Dean.
Dean, in spite of the very low profile he is trying to maintain, has been combing the territory, cultivating organized labor as well as blacks and the some 30,000 identified Democrats who voted for Lyndon Johnson, the late president, and Sen.
Some political observers theorize that Dean's low profile as a candidate might stand him in good stead in this race.
He is counting on a low voter turnout, and the strategy is to try to get his supporters to the polls.
Dean says he has the tacit support of Mississippi's regular Democrats, for whatever that is worth, and with the tide running against Republicans nationally, the economy in a mess, and President Ford's future a quandary, he conceivably could pull off a coup.
What it really depends on is whether Dean can get his people to the polls, a very iffy question.
Some are even claiming that you're going to get an education and others that you're going to make this a better place to live.
Oh you'll hear them complain a bit and see them drink and date out their boredom, but they don't let that provoke them into organizing.
Tell him with defiance that you've already got what the faculty wants you to have and are damn proud of it.
David Anderson, Earl Aycock, Mike Forester, Carmen Gettis, Doug Minor, Cathy Passailaieue.
Page 3 The Fatal Havana by Ebenezer Pendergrass The riddle of the universe was heavy on my mind.
Here, in the backwoods of Simpson County, I was about to partake in a substantial dose of divine revelation; administered by a demented old peckerwood who claimed to have cornered the market on spiritual insight.
As I knocked on Vinaruhu's door, I noticed a well placed bumper sticker reading ""one way"" with a picture of a bottle of Mad Dog 20 20 pointing toward the heavens.
I had begun to have second thoughts about this business and my potted pedagogue was bearing them out.
His body began moving to a strange rhythm as he commenced a bizzare chant.
Vinaruhu collapsed on his bed, his body and mind in a state of shambles.
As the initial shock wore off, I looked up and queried Vinaruhu as to the scope of Lubofuno's powers.
I would catch Vinaruhu off guard with an unexpected test of his powers.
He lay himself on the floor, took a crystal decanter, and balanced it on his nose.
The old guard is laughing and making jokes about him, but none of them will look him in the eye.
RobMcDuff Black man's burden With the white political leadership in Mississippi as poor as it has been over the years, perhaps it comes as no surprise that the publicly political — and potentially political — black leadership in our state is similarly deficient.
But the point is brought home all too vividly when we see James Meredith conduct a campaign and make a speech whose asininity could rival that of the biggest tobacco-chewer down at the state legislature; when we see Charles Evers get hit by the IRS for taxes unpaid and thus lose whatever threads of credibility he may have had left as an honest spokesman for his people.
It all lacks of class; it lacks of eloquence; it lacks of integrity; it lacks of the many things which politicians must at least appear to have in order to reach the high places where they can do good things for the people.
The point was brought home even more vividly for those who dropped in at the Tougaloo College chapel night before last to listen to Julian Bond, the articulate, young Civil Rights organizer turned Georgia state legislator.
This black man's mere charismatic presence leads one to realize, in contrast, just how boorish Meredith, Evers, and white counterparts such as Jim Eastland can really be.
And Bond exudes a sense of hope, not so much from a speech that sounded like it might have been given on half a dozen different campuses within the past two weeks, but from a life that illustrates just what a young and gifted person can do in the public arena, given the right times and the right spirit of mind.
For, as a Morehouse College student of twenty, likened to poetry and other platonic pursuits, Julian Bond found the Civil Rights cause staring him in the face and not about to go away.
He responded accordingly and in early 1960 was arrested for trying to integrate the City Hall lunch counter in Atlanta.
Activity grew to marches, voter-registration drives, and most importantly, a position as public information director for the conflictoriented Student Non-violent Coordinating Committee.
Bond travelled extensively on back roads and college campuses, organizing young people for massive assaults on the South's barriers of segregation.
In 1966 a Supreme Court ordered reapportionment of Georgia created a new 95% black electoral district in Bond's section of Atlanta.
Sensing the opportunity, he ran for the state assembly and won rather easily.
But the powers that were decided not to seat the ""uppity"" 26-year old for his stand against the Vietnam War.
Finally, after winning two subsequent elections, the Supreme Court ordered that Bond be given his rightful place in the legislature — a position he still holds today.
Chicago in 1968 catapulted this new politician to the national forum, as he triumphantly led a Loyalist challenge delegation at the Democratic Convention to claim half of the Georgia seats controlled by the ""machine"" of then-governor Lester Maddox.
His popularity reached such a crescendo that week that he was nominated for vice-president, only to decline because he wasn't old enough to meet the constitutional requirements for the office.
As for now, it seems that Julian Bond is just waiting — sitting back with the confidence that, as in the past, times and issues and events will soon coalesce to present a challenge that will call forth his gifts and talents and charm, propelling his onward in the national political arena toward louder outcries and bigger things.
Page 4 Hinman College should revolve around the education of the student.
Making sure the college is financially stable has been the main concern of the administration during President Collin's tenure.
I must say they've done a rather fine job; but certainly, less emphasis should be placed on that.
I'd like to see a student, or recently graduated alumnus, on the Board of Trustees.
That alone would indicate that the administration is interested in the student's opinion.
I think the faculty and administration — and certainly there are exceptions to this — seem to place themselves above the student, as if they are on a lower level.
This condescension is going to have to stop — no student vants to feel he is under the humb of anyone.
If educators would show concern for the student's growth as a person, as well as his academic wellbeing, and not develop a parent-child relationship, we could move towards a positive relationship in Sept., 1974 which both would benefit.
There are going to be an increasing amount of activitieimade available this year in an attempt to transform Millsaps into a college on weekends as well, instead of functioning like a high school.
And an important role that I see the Student Senate fulfilling is as a place where students should come to make their views known.
Any person may speak with the consent of the Senate, which has never been denied.
There is a clause in the Constitution that allows the President to veto any college senate action, which is like high school where you can do anything the principal doesn't mind you doing.
Also, I think the students are not so immature that they can't decide how their dormitories are regulated or whether they as freshman should be allowed to live off campus.
Troubodours announce members SEB PRESIDENT Charlie Hinman squints cheerfully as he relates to a Student. photo by Walter Wofford Students Free to Series by Janette DeBoever The Board of Directors of the Millsaps Art and Lecture Series announced that all Millsaps students presenting an ID card will be admitted free to the balcony section during the 1974-75 season.
The attractions will include the Claude Kipnis Mime Theatre, a total theatre in pantomime; Lehman Engel, a Millsaps graduate who is a highly successful musician and producer; a debate by liberal Max Lerner and conservative Reirf Rnckl^y , anA Millsaps' own music group, The Troubadours.
The Claude Kipnis Mime Theatre will be presented November 9, and on January 18 will be followed with Lehman Engel's appearance.
The Troubadours' April 28 performance will be the attration offered from the College.
All Millsaps students are encouraged to attend the seventh year of the series, which Began April 28.
Students with ID cards will be admitted free to the balcony on a first-come, firstserve by Emily Wofford After less than a week of practice, the Troubadours are already making their own kind of music, the kind that requires talent and hours of practice and appeals to audiences everywhere, including such obscure corners of the world as Sibiel, Romania.
Fifteen members and two Fulbright Competition Announced The Institute of International Education announced the official opening of the 1975-76 competition for grants for graduate study or research abroad and for professional training in the creative and performing arts.
These grants, whose purpose is to increase mutual understanding between the people of the United States and other countries through the exchange of persons, knowledge and skills, are provided under the terms of the Mutual Education and Cultural Exchange Act of 1961 and by foreign governments, universities and private donors.
Applicants must be United States citizens at the time of application, who will hold a bachelor's degree or its equivalent before the beginning date of the grant and, in most cases, be proficient in the language of the host country.
Except for certain specific awards, candidates may not hold the Ph.D. at the time of application.
Creative and performing artists are not required to have a bachelor's degree, but they must have four years of professional study or equivalent experience.
Social work applicants must have at least two years of professional experience after the Master of Social Work degree; candidates in medicine must have an M.D. at the time of application.
Selection is based on the academic and/ or professional record of the applicant, the validity and feasibility of his proposed study plan, his language preparation and personal qualifications.
Preference is given to candidates between 20 and 35 years of age who have not had prior opportunity for extended study or residence abroad.
The deadline for filing apnliratinnc nn thic nammc ic October 25, 1974, but as there are two to three weeks of work involved, one should apply as soon as possible. alternates were selected by audition last week for this year's group.
Among the shows planned this year, The Troubadours have been selected to appear in the Millsaps Arts and Lecture Series in the spring.
The accompanists are Elizabeth Harwell, pianist, a junior organ major who is also accompanist for the Millsaps Singers and played with the Jackson Symphony last spring; Adren McCoy, drummer, a sophomore and a member of Chi Omega Sorority; and Marland Dulaney, bass, a biology major from Slidell, La. — the only freshman member of the group.
The other Troubadours are Sherry Pearson, a sophomore voice major, a member of the Millsaps Singers and Chi Omega ; Maura Mcintosh, also a member of the Singers and Kappa Delta Sorority.
She is majoring in music education and is the Troubadours' second four year member; Pat Goodman, Vice President of Kappa Delta, a history major, and a member of the Majorette Club; Jan Dickson, a KD pledge and theatre major who received the Best Supporting Actress Award in 1974; Lynn Pledger, also a theatre major.
College majoring in chemistry; and Robert Smith, a history major and a member of Lambda Chi Alpha.
Congressional Election ✓ by Sharon Edwards The general election will be held the first Tuesday in November.
Any Millsaps student who is registered to vote in another district may vote in this election if you change your registration to the 4th district.
To be eligible, register with the Hinds County Circuit Clerk within 30 days before the election.
Greeks have Successful Rush Some 52 girls at Millsaps have accepted bids offered by the college's three social sororities at the end of Rush Week.
Jane Corder, dean of women, each of the three sororities were pleased with the number of girls participating in rush this year.
CHI OMEGA — Carol Albritton, Nancy Barksdale, Ann Bear, Kathryn Carter, Nancy Clarkson, Kelli Cogin, Cindy Crowe, Isabelle Ezelles, Sherry Lipscomb, Sarah Louise Loewenburg, Marsha McHenry, Leah Melichar, Robin Rice, Cindy Rossin, Cindy Sanders, Carol Deriese, and Rebecca Brent.
KAPPA DELTA — Sara Buehler, Deborah Burnham, Beverly Clement, Jan Dickson, Celeste Draffen, Gail Gober, Cindy Guild, Jane Harvey, Martha Hutchinson, Sandra Johnson, Margaret Lawrence, Galle Mallette, Nancy Martin, Kathy Meena, Wilma Parry, Theresa Prescott, Sally Sudduth, Bitzi Tate, Susan Tsimortos, Peg Wahrendorff, Jan Wildmon, Cindy Wilson, and Diane Wiltshire.
PHI MU Kathy Atwood, Carol Butler, Karen Crawford, Sharon Edwards, Leigh Farron, Janet Hall, Jacy Hill, Linda Luck, Deborah Madden, Margie Maxwell, Martha Mouser, Betsy Sherman, and Ellen Sessions. by David Anderson This past Fall Rush was the most successful rush that the fraternities have had in recent years.
A record number, 96, men went out for rush and another record, 72, men pledged fraternities.
Kappa Alpha : Barry Wax, Rusty Ball, David Bourgeois, Cooper Morrison, Ed McManus, Brad Carter, Bill Ray, James Holland, Bruce McKinley, Bill Leech, Roger Lawson, Hugh Tedder, John Williamson, Steve Haygood, Rob Rice, and Charley Frye.
Muellen, David Reilly, Donald Reilly, Warren Robinson, Mitch Singley, Keith Thrash, Jim Watts, and Terry Young.
Charlie Waters, Jim Clark, John Stark, Don Hall, Richard Fox, Kent Stone, Joel Youngblood, Mike Gaby, David Raden, Ben Fewel, Mark Scarborough, Mark Stanton, and Lance Syble.
Boycott of Wines Called by UFW by Suzie Wiels The United Farm Workers Union is engaged in a boycott in support of the striking in the grape and lettuce fields.
For five years until 1970, the UFW, smallest and poorest of the unions, fought huge agriculture industry in California for union recognition.
As a result of the five year strike and consumer boycott, the grape growers signed union contracts guaranteeing decent wages and working conditions for the farmworkers.
The UFW then rried the fight to the lettuce Ids where the fight for recognition still goes on.
The union contracts restrict the use of pesticides as well as prevent the use of child labor.
Perhaps one of the most welcome changes brought about by the union was the substituting of the exploitive labor contractor system with the union hiring hall.
The UFW has set up three health clinics and provided workers with a prepaid medical plan that has already paid out two million dollars in benefits.
The farm workers have shown that Filipinos, blacks, whites, and Chicanos can work together in one union.
There is a new spirit of self-respect and independence that takes the place of fear and helplessness.
The farmworkers have new hope that their lives can and will be improved, and this hope is only fair.
The contracts that were signed in 1970 expired this year and instead of resigning the contracts, some growers hired Teamster Union Scab labor.
This not only is hurting the UFW, but is the path to destruction of all unions by the all-powerful, Nixon supported Teamsters.
In regard to the boycott, many stores have vowed to buy and sell only UFW products, and when these are not available because of lack of grower contracts in California, they do not sell any grapes or lettuce.
The Boycott is still on against the Sunflower Stores who once signed, and then backed down on the UFW, as well as Kroger Stores.
Hopefully, the state wide boycott on Sunflower and Kroger will gain UFW support.
Only our support of the UFW boycott can bring about the fair treatment of farmworkers who have received little more than survival wages for generations.
David Anderson 38 votes, Lloyd Gray 42 votes, Betsy Holmes 61 votes, and Mike Stevens 56 votes.
Having the two highest numbers of votes, Holmes and Stevens were declared winners by the election committee under James Galloway.
Later that afternoon Gray contested the election to Dean Harvey Saunders, on the grounds that no candidate had received a majority of the votes.
Stevens was notified at 10:30 Thursday evening in Hollingsworth's Cafe that the runoff would be held Friday morning, and, though he protested he could not have it postponed.
Gray and Holmes were to be the new senators and the matter seemed closed.
Upon investigation into the confusion, SEB President Charlie Hinman discovered that the actual reading of the constitution was that ""the two candidates receiving the majority of the ballots cast shall be the winners"" the key word being ballots.
Since both Holmes and Stevens exceeded that number in the first ballot, the original decision was reinstated and the controversy resolv ed.
T W Lewis will preside over the service which is open to all religious faiths and is a new concept which seeks to blend the traditional with the contemporary.
Reiff has been selected to be included in the seventh edition of ""Personalities of the South, 1974"" published by the American Biographical Institute.
The conference is in preparation for the President's Economic Summit of late September in which Governor Waller is one of the nine governors asked to participate.
Mr Bavender, a political science professor here at Millsaps, will analyse the turbulent situation in Northern Ireland and try to convey some understanding of an extremely complex and widely misunderstood current event.
Bavender will draw from his recent experiences in Northern Ireland and his personal study of this crisis area.
His first-hand account of the violent and chaotic world of Ulster and the terrorizing tactics of both Protestants and Catholic factions will be recounted and their ideologies explained.
Mr Bavender will explore the many facets of the conflict and the effect it has had on human interest in social, political and economic spheres of activity.
The understanding that he has acquired through his study will greatly enhance the knowledge of Northern Ireland to those who attend his lecture.
His exciting episode in Northern Ireland will surely shed light on an often misinterpreted subject.
While it is doubtful that any of them have exhibited all of these peculiar behaviors, sizable numbers have at one time or another been known to bob and weave like bezouki dancers inside hula hoops, to bake and smoke the scrapings from banana peels, and to construct mock landing strips — complete with bamboo beacon towers and decoy airplanes — to lure giftladen gods from the skies.
I may never comprehend the attraction of the hula hoop or the electric banana, but, better informed than I was about the culture and circumstances of the cargo cultists of New Guinea and environs, I am now almost a convert to the worship of Kilibob, pre-eminent among those giftladen gods.
Although Harris's credentials as scholar are quite in order, his book is a good read, light on academese and only slightly tainted by the author's high regard for Marvin Harris.
Among the seemingly peculiar, behaviors he looks at, and makes seem less peculiar, are the refusal by devout and starving Hindus to slaughter and eat their sacred cows, the refusal by devout — and often hungry — Jews and Moslems to eat their less than sacred pigs, the waging of war by primitive South Seas peoples popularly supposed to live lives of idylic ease, and the burning in 15th-, 16thand 17thcentury Europe of some five hundred thousand witches; hence, the title.
It is in those instances far less remote in time and geography that Harris finds questions of why people behave as they do most perplexing, and most exasperating.
Whether or not Harris's positions and dispositions are in accord with your own, I think you'll enjoy that chapter on the cargo cults.
Nearby are thatch-roofed hangars, a radio shack, and a beacon tower made of bamboo.
The airstrip is manned twentyfour hours a day by a group of natives wearing nose ornaments and shell armbands.
A man goes inside the radio shack and gives instructions into the tin-can microphone.
From time to time they watch a jet trail crossing the sky; occasionally they hear the sound of distant motors.
That a small population oi disadvantaged Papuans, probably not more than a couple of centuries removed from the Stone Age, should wait patiently for gods and ancestors to bestow on them the wealth of the Space Age does mankind little discredit.
In its first years a system of psychotherapy, Scientology became in 1955 (more, it would appear, for fiscal than for spiritual reasons) The Founding Church of Scientology.
Because of its organizational identity crisis, it is difficult to decide what Scientology's adherents ought to be called.
First — and I know this to be so from personal experience — a Scientologist can outstare anyone who is not a Scientologist.
You might at first suppose this is an ability well worth cultivating; after all, straight-shooting Amurricans have always admired the fella who can look a guy in the eye.
But the unflinching gaze of the Scientologist is like that of the humanoids in thriller-chiller movies, and very disconcerting.
The stare is the least of the powers and one practically anyone could cultivate.
I defy you, though, to emulate some of the other achievements claimed by assorted Scientologists, these including growing new teeth at will, overcoming gravity and — as L Ron Hubbard, the founder, did — visiting Heaven.
On his second visit, he experienced a common traveler's disappointment.
He found the place shabby, its pillars scruffy, the saints and angels gone.
If Scientology were merely screwball, it could be dismissed as a harmless diversion for people who like that sort of thing.
Scientologists are classified according to changing ""Conditions,"" scaling from a little ""above the angels to a little below the beasts.
A Scientologist in the Condition of Danger is forbidden to bathe, wear make-up, have a hair-do or shave.
There are still lower Conditions like NonExistence where changing clothes is prohibited, Doubt where the miscreant must wear handcuffs and Fair Game where the poor soul ""may be deprived of property or injured by any means by any Scientologist without any discipline of the Scientologists.
Scientology even has its own uniformed Schutzstauffel (whose uniform blue blazers and grey flannels are, to be sure, better suited to a tea party than to a putsch), the members of which have a penchant for pinning notices to bulletin boards with throwing knives.
Evans manages in the first half of Cults of Unreason to perform the incredible feat of presenting a witty but serious and balanced study of Scientology and its founder.
He continues:"" Readers of the book up to this point may be surprised to find that after highlighting the absurdities, inconsistencies and smoky background of Scientology, I conclude without giving it a wholehearted thumbsdown.
The closer I have looked at Scientology the more I feel that it is changing for the better, and the more eager I believe its leader and its adherents are to forget its past.
Evans's conclusion was fabricated to forestall his being declared in the Condition of Fair Game.
It is the kind of movie in which people go around speaking in simple sentences like those above.
Buster, (JanMichael Vincent) is the big stud of Greenwood High's graduating class.
He likes to do things like pretending to be a racecar driver and spewing dust all over the school bus's windshield, playing hooky from school with his sadsack albino friend Whitey , beating up the bus driver, and — well, you know all the things studs can do since they are as popular as all get-out.
The ""Buster's"" in this world are used to getting their own way and this one is no exception.
For reasons not totally explained by the movie he begins to fall in love with Billie.
He falls so badly, in fact, that he buys her an Orange Crush because of her distaste for beer and takes her to church.
This is settled simply, however; he breaks up with her — calling her from bed at one o'clock in the morning, alarming her parents and breaking her heart.
This breakup is to the dismay of the townsfolk, for Margy is from an uppercrust family.
This all might sound a bit trite, but one wants to like the movie so much that its triteness is overlooked.
Enjoys it that is, until the end begins to hit you in the face — rather sloppily.
This violent ending is a grotesque tragedy that is pseudomeaningful, besides being far easier to write than an actual resolution of the picture's central relationship.
Before things get so serious, however, there are some funny and touching sequences concerning the vagaries of adolescent behavior.
One scene about school day pictures is so simple and true that you catch yourself laughing at memories as well as the picture before you.
As I have said before, the movie is pleasing, but much of it is borrowed.
In the violent ending there is a redneck sheriff with the first name of Buford.
The performances, with the exception of Robert Englund wh gave a moving and touchingly amusing portrayal of Whitey, are like the movie — fair.
JanMichael Vincent might be the ""world's greatest athlete"" but he is certainly not in that category when it comes to acting.
His Buster is too depth-less (not quite shallow), and one doesn't really believe he can fall in love with Billie.
Jean Goodfellow may not be an actress, but she was perfect as the sublingual town slut.
She gives to the role with her hushed voiced and child-like stares that mystic virginity that Billie i Pamela-Sue Martin is Margy.
However, I would save the drive across town and go see ""Summer of '42"" at the Deville Cinema.
Sept., 1974 Page 7 Majors Edge Lynx 6-0 As a nervous Doug Brindly anxiously paced the sidelines, his defensive teammates succeeded in killing a last-second scoring attempt on the part of the Southwestern Lynx, to preserve a sluggish 6-0 Millsaps victory.
With two minutes remaining and coach Harper Davis sitting upon a slim but seemingly safe 60 lead, Southwestern quarterback Mike Hanna and the hometown officials went to work on the Millsaps secondary.
Taking a Millsaps punt deep in their own territory, Southwestern on the strength of two Hanna passes and a questionable pass interference call on Major safety Bob King, found themselves on the Millsaps 40 and driving.
But three plays later the Lynx faced a crucial 4th down and 14 with 1:18 left to play.
With no time outs on his side, Hanna dropped back and neatly hit Rik Talley for a first down of the Majors 18.
The officials once more stepped in and ruled the next pass incomplete at the 10 on a dual possession call . another questionable decision, but this time in favor of the Majors.
After the southwestern fullback bulled his way to the 11, Hanna was once again faced with a crucial 4th down situation.
But once more the Majors defensive line stiffened, stopping Southwestern at the one, and while the Majors lazily unpiled uiraHuiiHnnuiHiiiumiiiiiiiiiiniimnifiuiuiiiiuiuiiiiuiiiiniuiiiunuiiuiiiuiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii by Ward Emling and the Lynx frantically set up, the horn sounded.
And the only thing louder than the KAnnon was the sign of relief from Brindley.
Except for those final minutes and a handful of other instances, this season's opener for both schools was about as exciting as a 0-0 tie.
Punting and defense was the name of the game, each team's defense methodically forcing the other to punt, sending a total of 17 punts into the overcast sky above Newell Field.
After a somewhat sluggish first quarter, Millsaps drove to the one yard line only to have tailback Don Fredricks straightened up at the one foot line.
But five minutes later the Majors put their first and only points on the board on a 21 yard touchdown pass from quarterback Ricky Haygood to a wide open Dees Hinton.
Brindley slipped on the turf sending his PAT just wide of the uprights.
A later Millsaps drive powered basically by passes to Sonny Aldy and Hinton, who were open all afternoon, was halted by a fumbled hand off at the Lynx 20.
After intercepting a Haygood pass in the third quarter, Southwestern drove to a first down at the Majors' nine, but an incomplete pass on 4th down at the seven killed the drive.
On their next possession the Lynx mounted another drive only to see it stopped as a feeble 40yard field goal attempt fell short.
The game then settled into the rut of the first half, with only a roughing the kicker penalty against Southwestern to break the monotony until the waning minutes.
Although quite boring in appearance, it provided some fine football, fundamentals-wise.
The offensive line of David Turner, Mike Huoni, Steve Whatley, Bryan Flint and Paul Walker opened enormous holes all day long.
And Aldy, Hinton, and Don Richards were continually finding seams in the Southwestern secondary.
The entire defense, needless to say, defeated every challenge and emerged with a hard-fought shut-out tucked under their belts.
The Majors next game is against Georgetown College at 1:30 pm this Saturday at Newell Field I NTRAMU RALS got off the ground as the Pikes beat the TEAMS Pikes vs.
Lambda Chi's MEN'S SOCCER SCHEDULE ALL GAMES AT 4:00 P.M. ivon DATE September 18 September 19 September 23 September 24 September 25 September 26 September 30 October 1 photo by Walter Wofford DON FIELDS , Major tailback, is stopped at the line of scrimmaae by Southwestern in the season's opener. photo by Walter Wofford Lambda Chi's, 3-1, under the officious eyes of Earl Aycock.
DEVILLE CINEMA SHOWTOWN WEST Dl TOWN AND COUNTRY Dl #1 CAPITOL PLAZA Runs Week of September 1 6 Page 8 Cows, Pigs, Wars, grease and equipment were the secrets of material wealth.
They insist that the material wealth of the industrial age is really created in some distant place not by human but by supernatural means.
Harris tells of one such prophet, Yali, who was taken on a junket to Australia, the authorities hoping that his personal observations of the production process would get the message through to his fellows back home.
Instead, what impressed Yali more than the smokestacks and machines and assembly lines was the keeping of dogs and cats as pets and the rapt attention paid to native New Guinea artifacts (""which the missionaries had called the 'works of Satan' "") by welldressed visitors to the Queensland Museum.
Later, attending a government conference in the capital of Australian New Guinea, ""Yali was shown a certain book which contained pictures of apes and monkeys becoming progressively more similar to men.
The missionaries had said that Adam and Eve were man's ancestors, but the whites really believed their own ancestors were monkeys, dogs, cats, and other animals.
The implication is always that natives are too backward, stupid, or superstitious to grasp the principles of civilization.
It was not that Yali couldn't grasp the principles in question, but rather that he found them unacceptable.
His tutors were amazed that someone who had seen modern factories in operation could still believe in cargo.
But the more Yali learned about how Europeans produced wealth, the less was he prepared to accept their explanation of why he and his people were unable to share in it.
This doesn't mean that he understood how the Europeans got to be so wealthy.
On the contrary, when last heard from he was working on the theory that the Europeans had gotten rich by building brothels.
But Yali always had the good se^rise to dismiss the standard European explanation, ""hard work,"" as a calculated deception.
Anyone could see that European big men — unlike their native prototypes — scarcely worked at all.
The remainder of Cults of Unreason deals with a variety of mostly harmless adventurers into the murky realms of mysticism.
Evans treats them all kindly, even when — as with the Ufologists who worship the extraterrestial beings who for eons have coddled planet Earth (More comfortable with Latin than with English, they call it Terra.) — he clearly regards them as kooks.
I should perhaps mention — and you may consult Erich von Daniken if you doubt me — that it was from those benign extraterrestial beings that we Earthlings received all that is good on our planet.
The renovations have been seen as extremely necessary by many students for some time.
Among the planned renovations is the moving of the grill from its present location to the basement where it would be expanded to include a patio stretching beside the recently completed swimming pool.
The present grill is to then be made into a lounge with speaker facilities present.
Funds for the renovations were included in the Capital Funds drive . . . which has been successfully completed by the administration.
Hinman stated that it seems to have received a low priority, though some work has apparently begun in the basement level.
Just as the exact plans have not been made public, it now seems evident that no students were involved in the planning.
As in the past few years, the activities of Homecoming will be combined with the annual Alumni Day, thereby providing a variety of events in which both students and graduates may participate.
The activities will begin on Wednesday the ninth, when the Millsaps Players open their 51st season with a production of Jean Cocteau's The Infernal Machine.
The play will run through Saturday in the Christian Center with curtain time at 8:15.
On Thursday night at 7:30, the Millsaps Film Series will present The Producers, a good comedy starring Zero Mostel and directed by Mel Brooks.
On Friday, the alumni should start trickling in for the homecoming activities.
This informal lecture will involve some of the past history of Millsaps, and no doubt Dr.
Moore's speech, the alumni will be taken on guided tours of the Activities Center by representatives of the junior class.
At 6:30, an Early Days Dinner will be held for graduates of 1925 or earlier.
Mr Livesay, Director of Alumni Relations, states that this "". . . is one of the highlights of the annual Alumni gathering.
During a break, the homecoming court will be announced, and a beer raffle will be held.
Those not in the mood for dancing can once again avail themselves of The Infernal Machine.
Saturday morning at 8:30, alumni and student representatives will meet for a Continental breakfast.
This is to be followed by an Alumni Board meeting attended by student and faculty representatives.
Following more guided tours for newly arrived alumni, the Picnic will be held at noon in the bowl.
Last year's event was a pleasant success and this year's should be no different.
At 1:30, the Millsaps football team defends our honor against Principia College at Newell Field.
At halftime, President Collins and Judge Joseph Roten, President of the Alumni Association, will crown the new Homecoming Queen.
Following the game, the Greeks will hold open house for their alums to come around and visit.
At 5:30, the Golden Anniversary Class of 1925 will get together in the Rogers Room of the Student Union.
Mr Livesay said that 30 or more graduates are expected to attend this particular reunion from as far away as California.
Judge Roten will be the Master of Ceremonies and the Troubadours will provide the entertainment.
During the ceremonies, the Alumnus of the Year will be named along with the Distinguished Professor.
Last year, the Alumnus award was given to Charles N Bradley, the editor of The Chattanooga Times.
Charles Sallis was the recipient of last year's Distinguished Professor Award.
At 8:15, the Millsaps Players give their final performance of The Infernal Machine.
Those who do not wish to go to the play can go snipe hunting on the golf course.
The play is a modern adaptation of the Greek Oedipus mythis, the story of the young prince of Thebes who unwittingly murders his father and marries his mother — much to his later chagrin.
Ward Ending, a junior English major from Jackson, has been cast as Oedipus.
He played John Worthing the year before that in ""The Importance of Being Earnest,"" and has acted in shows at Murrah High School, the Jackson Little Theatre, and the Mississippi Center for Educational Television.
In addition to that, he worked on and appeared in the APJAC production of the film ""Huckleberry Finn"" at Natchez in 1973.
Jocasta, the wife and mother of Oedipus, will be played by Lynn Pledger, a senior theatre major who is a native of Jackson, although her parents now live in Memphis.
She has appeared with the Players since 1970; when she was in ""Damn Yankees,"" while still a student at Wingfield High School.
She worked in summer stock at the Town and Country Playhouse in Salem, N.H., l continued on page 12) Job Chances Revealed by Dean Pittman Millsaps, in a never ending struggle to aid its students, has initiated a careers day program set for October 10, in the Academic Complex.
The much needed program's basic purpose is to relate the student with job opportunities applicable to his or her field of study.
PURPOSES OF THE PROGRAM ARE FOUR FOLD The careers program is outlined in four main purposes.
The other two aspects of the program will allow students to explore the tensions between liberal arts and career-oriented styles of education and to identify sources of information concerning current and projected possibilities in various fields.
COUNSELORS PICKED THROUGH STUDENT SURVEYS Counselors invited to the program were chosen on the basis of a school survey taken at the beginning of the fall semester.
FIELDS AND COUNSELORS RANGE FROM SOCIAL WORK TO BANKING A wide variety of fields will be represented during the program.
Other counselors include Harris Sargent of Mississippi Valley Gas Company, James Whittington, the (continued on page ed, tes ■ris las ge2 Oct., 1974 A Flaming Shame Nero stood at his office window, deep in thought.
From his window watching them pass to their studies Nero chose a few likely torches — the bastards who had given him trouble in running the government.
But all of this was a bit depressing (what with the smell of flesh and all) and he dropped the shades only to have money fall from the blinds.
Feeling better about the green and the outlying nations he had taxed with wondrous slogans, he began delighting in his travels to parts of the empire to collect revenues — it was relaxing and paid for his burning binges.
This flash of anger brought images of flames again and Nero began to smile as his master plan surfaced with the imagery.
There in his mind's eye was the most vivid picture of the whole city in flames and he revelling in this ecstacy by playing his violin.
Yes, perhaps he would one day. o Paul Pittman OUTLOOK Once again the age-old struggle between the legislative and the executive branches in Mississippi government has surfaced, this time over what some legislators regard as an effort by Gov.
At issue is Waller's Executive Order Number 183, issued in July, in which he directed several state agencies to merge their merit systems under one central agency.
The issue is a touchy one, dating in modern times back to the administration of former Gov.
Coleman, widely regarded as a strong administrator, ran afoul of the legislature on the issue of a constitutional convention to upgrade the 1890 relic under which the state now operates.
The bitter opposition from the legislature was generally regarded as the handiwork of the late Walter Sillers and his chief lieutenants.
At the time, Mr Sillers was Speaker of the House of Representatives, and he had led that body into becoming a very cohesive and effective group.
Waller's order established a five-member panel to coordinate the state's six merit programs under one unified system.
His press aide, Charles McKellar, told this reporter that this type of organization is required under the guidelines of various federal programs.
First of all, they doubt that federal funding will be effected, regardless, so long as some type of viable merit systems are maintained by the various agencies.
Waller has other motives for the move, namely to gain a tighter control over state employment practices.
Thirdly, they point to a 1966 ruling by the Mississippi Attorney General's Office in which it was found that such a merger would be in violation of state law.
In short, the governor's opponents to this particular action feel that it is a matter of legislative action to create such a body and not properly a matter that should be handled by executive order.
Whether the governor will win what is shaping up as a battle on this particular issue remains to be seen.
Oct., 1974 'Visits with Vinaruhu The Bummer Of '74 JEZER PENDERGRASS In everyone's life there's a bummer of '74.
A time when everything right becomes wrong, when the unspeakable becomes spoken.
A time when you ache for a chance to belt the sonofabitch that caused it.
The ""one way"" sticker had been removed and in its place hung a new sign.
Here, assembled in Vinaruhu's cabin was the Millsaps College administration.
It was bad enough selling out, but selling out to fast Eddie and his double talking delegation was a bit much.
But before I could get away, there was Collins, pumping my hand and making small talk.
Vinaruhu then proceeded to explain Cte four rules of sound college administration.
Attacking a student movement at Millsaps is like killing a dog with terminal cancer.
Curriculum reform bounced from committee to committee for twelve years and no one has ever complained about too much progress on that issue.
The Board of Trustees approved a plan to renovate the Union and they want the administration to move on it.
It was clear that in the life of Ivan Millsapovich there would be a bummer of '74, with more to come.
Rob McDuff Pages r i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i What the Hell"" It seems that the flowering college ""generation"" of today is looking for an identity.
There are those who lament the passing of the activist momentum generated during the 1960's glory days.
These people argue, perhaps justifiably, that the non-activism, the apathy of today labels the present university youth as a bunch of ""lackeys"" — or at the most, students who are turned inward toward their own education and their own future, nobody else's.
Neither are we cloud-dwelling philosophers, or student dupes intent on maintaining the status quo, or even goldfish swallowers.
Maybe we are spiritual descendants of those glorious literary intellectuals of the 1920's who travelled the world drinking and writing and experiencing life until they wondered what was left.
Certainly we can't compare a Millsaps pop-top intellectual who is guzzling beer in CS's with a Hemingway who spent hours writing and drinking wine in Parisian sidewalk cafes.
But as the days and weeks of the conference dragged on, hopes became dimmer.
One idealistic U S. diplomat was particularly angry as President Wilson compromised point after point at the meetings.
Quitting the President's Versailles staff in an outrage, the young man was asked what he was going to do.
This seemed to keynote the spirit of disgusted resignation which existed thereafter for more than a decade — a spirit of disillusion with the realities of the world which permeated the Jazz Age and probably caused the Lost Generation to be so lost.
Except for a bit of lip service, it seems that this generation is not worrying too much about such problems — ""taking it with a grain of salt,"" as the phrase goes.
And so, like those spiritual forefathers of the Roaring Twenties, our group is turning to good-timing and pleasure-seeking — plus an inwardness which is concerned with one's own local sphere, giving the outside world little more than academic attention.
This good-timing is manifested in the freewheeling spirit that has overtakencollege campuses in the last couple of years.
It's a spirit that shows itself quite often when a person asks a friend to go drinking or smoking or partying or swimming or whatever.
And the reply, ""Well, I've got a thousand things to do, and a thousand more that I ought to do, but It's not that today's students have lost all sense of social awareness.
Last year's Nixon impeachment rally is but one local example to the contrary.
However, it is true that students are just not as concerned as they used to be.
They rarely organize, they rarely protest, they rarely demonstrate, and they rarely do any large-scale bitching.
The public, it seems, would rather not have to contemplate the horrible circumstances that exists in the California fields or the plight of the migrant workers who live on incomes of one-half of the national poverty level.
The remarks we hear of — ""I don't want to hear about it"" — bear out the fact that ignorance is bliss.
And there are the ""Have you ever worked on a farm?"", said mostly by big-time farmers who worked on the farm for their fathers and were paid very well and now resent being told that farmworkers are underpaid.
Some consumers who stop to talk to the picketers are, or appear to be, concerned with the farmworkers and the poverty and exploitation involved in their lives.
The infant mortality was 125% iinniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiinnniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiMiiiiiiiiiiiiii higher than the National rate* Maternal mortality: 125% higher than the national average* Flu and pneumonia: 200% higher than the national* TB: 260% higher than the national average* Accidents: 300% higher than the national average — farm work is the 3rd most dangerous occupation* Average per capita care expenditures for total population $200: average per capita health care expenditures for migrant workers $7.50.
We, as consumers, can help by not buying lettuce or grapes that are not labeled with the UFW Label, and by not shopping at stores that refuse to buy UFW produce, mainly the Sunflower Stores and Kroger.
Europe Still Available to Students Some low cost student air fares to Europe are still, in effect.
As always, students living in the eastern and southern states have less to pay than students at western schools.
Also, lower winter rates offer skiers, and other, winter resort , visitors inexpensive trips to Good Neighbor to Honduras Victims by Jan Wildmon Under the encouragement of federal and local officials, the people of Mississippi responded quickly to aiding victims of the recent Hurricane Fifi in the Honduras.
Last Friday, Sept., Governor Waller appointed Jim Reese of Gulfport as State Coordinator for Disaster Relief Efforts.
Robert L Robinson, director of State Agriculture and Industry Board, was appointed to assist in relief solicitation efforts.
The two coincided to persuade Mississippi bankers and the State Jaycees into cooperation with their program.
The banks agreed to act as collection points for badly needed contributions and funds.
The necessary money went to medical supplies, such as penicillin, and for basic food items, such as 50 lb. sacks of flour and rice.
The state wide Jaycees, coordinators of the relief program, were responsible for the collection and transportation of supplies from local communities to Gulfport.
They began mobilizing goods immediately after approval by state and federal departments to use national guard aircraft.
Waller, on Sept., issued an assessment team to the disaster area, where they conducted a survey of medical and food needs, in order to obtain priorities on supplies.
Rotella, general manager of the Standard Fruit Company, Honduras Division, wrote the State of Mississippi a letter expressing his sincere gratitude to its citizens.
Mississippi has reportedly sent a total of 4 C-130 planes carrying 40,000 lbs. each to the victims and several ships are presently waiting at Gulfport to ship an additional half million lbs.
Other states seem to have been impressed by Mississippi's quick response.
Wayne Edwards, a previous Millsaps student employed as the governor's aide, remarked on this matter.
The whole project, in effect, was a ""tremendous outpouring of humanity by the people of Mississippi helping to alleviate some of the Honduran suffering."" niimiiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiimiiiniiimniimiinniN Austria and Switzerland.
As a result, many European resorts are dropping their rates for the winter ski crowd.
The steady climb of the United States dollar against falling European currencies further decreases the cost of a trip to Europe.
Thursday morning during Convocation period Ken Dean, a candidate for the 4th Congressional District election, will speak in the bowl in front of Millsaps Student Union.
Alveno Castilla, a senior at Millsaps, has been awarded the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Scholarship for the fourth consecutive year.
Hubert Thompson who is a political science major at Millsaps is studying abroad this semester.
He is attending the London Semester in London, England, where a specially designed curriculum of comparative politics is being taught.
The Clinton Library has invited Millsaps students and faculty to attend two exhibits on display throughout the month of October.
A concise, common sense, layman's language introduction to the intricate world of insurance coverages is now available through a major insurance company.
The booklet, entitled ""Guide"", was designed intentionally as a consumer's guide to the best suited policy for the young person, ""Guide"" is obtainable in limited quantities, by contacting the Public Relations Department of the Kemper Insurance Companies, Long Grove, Illinois, 60049.
The National Poetry Press has announced its Spring Competition for College Students' Poetry Anthologies.
The closing date for the submission of manuscripts is November 5, 1974.
There is no limitation as to form or theme but shorter works are preferred by the Board of Judges due to limited space.
Each poem must be printed or typed on a separate sheet, and must bear the name and home address of the student as well as the college address.
These materials should be sent to the Office of the Press, National Poetry Press, 3210 Selby Avenue, Los Angeles, California, 90034.
The Ford Foundation has announced the beginning of fellowship programs aimed at helping minority students gain access to graduate level education and to increase their opportunities for careers in higher education.
Black Americans, Mexican Americans, Native Americans and Puerto Ricans.
Those interested in applying should come by the P&W Office for the necessary information. iiimiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiimii iiiiiiiiiuiii mil also available.
Most openings are in restaurants, hotels, and ski resorts, and no experience is required.
Standard wages are paid, which is an opportunity to earn back most of the trip costs, but the big saving is the free room and board that goes with each job.
Job processing can be speeded up by obtaining and holding 3 passport size photos and a letter of recdifthiendation from a teacher or school official.
During the riot that occurred at Ole Miss in September, 1962, two people died and hundreds were injured.
Meredith stated that to him personally, the riot at Ole Miss was not important.
What happened at Ole Miss didn't really affect my life in any major way.
When asked how this African experience was important, he explained, ""Africa had an impact on me in the way that it exposed me to my roots.
He felt that the dispersement of the blac>. race was very important to the African blacks.
However, black people throughout the rest of the world don't miss Africa — they know nothing about it.
After returning to Mississippi, Meredith ran for office as a Republican in a statewide senatorial primary in 1972.
After winning that primary, he dropped out of the democratic race to run as an Independent.
But I was playing politics with the system of political structure in the state.
But most of the white students in Mississippi go to private schools, so all the black students are taught by white teachers.
He doesn't see an improvement in the educational system in Mississippi until the racial question is eliminated as an issue.
He alleges that the white politicians base their power on white racism, while never mentioning race as an issue.
He believes ""The white power structure knows as long as the structure doesn't change, the outward appearance doesn't matter.
But the race issue is like the sand in cement — you try to take it out and the whole structure collapses.
He elaborated this further when he stated ""The district lines in Mississippi are drawn so that there is always a white majority in each district.
As he looked back over his years in Mississippi, Meredith noted that he had been through a lot.
ERA Organizes on Campus by Donna Howell In the past two weeks, a number of students have been formulating an organizational group for the ratification of the Equal Rights Amendment in the Mississippi legislature.
The first meeting of September 18 and 25 were concerned with creating procedural methods of information gathering and the basic structure of the organization.
The ERA is concerned with governmental policy and subsequent actions in regard to sexual distinctions inherent in the legal rights of men and women.
The ERA seeks recognition of the fundamental dignity and individuality of all human beings.
It would implement a legal perspective that would protect and defend both sexes in the most beneficial manner.
Thus, present laws that discriminate or violate the rights of people due to sexual distinction would be eradicated.
The ERA would penetrate all levels of government, federal, state, and local, in order to enforce this new perspective and require uniformity to its principles.
This will give the campus organization some vital and relevant material with which to pursue its purposes.
A meeting will be scheduled in the near future in order to involve all other interested persons into the promotional ERA campus group. me si will hathe the drooping spirits in delight, heyond the Hiss oj dreams Milton's Conuu Milton must have peered into a crystal ball to write these lines.
And God blessed them, and God said unto them, ""Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it; Until recently no one noticed much disturbance of this seemingly straightforward biblical law of sexuality.
Now, however, with the presence of television, radio and the news media in general, the exposure of so-called sexual deviance has been much more widespread than ever before.
Suddenly, bursting forth in public entertainment spots, in theatres, and on home television screens come bisexuals, transsexuals, and homosexuals.
The vast majority of those with, what shall be called in this article, sexual abnormalities, do not appear on television or in the theatre.
Still, many of them want recognition of their rights as American citizens.
Often society, whether from ignorance or just plain ill will, refuses them these rights, and many, especially homosexuals, have been badly mistreated.
In this series of articles I will try to relay information to help the reader more fully understand the problems of abnormal sexuality and what some people are attempting in order for many of the existing problems to be eliminated altogether.
For time and space, I will mainly deal with the sexual abnormality that seems to be getting the limelight most these days — homosexuality.
Countless definitions of what homosexuals really are have been propounded by countless numbers of individuals.
There is the Church, the psychologist, the doctors, lawyers, Indian chiefs, mothers in law, and on and on.
There may be one clergyman who will say the homosexual is sick, needs treatment, and if he or she refuses treatment, should be thrown in jail or at least kept off the streets so as to keep his children safe from this loathsome form of sodomy right in his back yard.
Another minister may join the Gay Liberation Movement himself and support the Gay's quest for rights and freedoms of equality, believing the homosexual to be a normal person who has been cast into the role of an abnormal by a misunderstanding society.
Gene Bennett is the Director of Counseling at the Pastoral Counseling and Consultation Center here in Jackson.
Mr Nelson Guthrie is a consultant in program and development and one of the staff members in their Human Sexual Workshop.
Neither man looks at the homosexual as being different because of his homosexuality.
Rather, they both tend to have about the same view as Pittinger, who holds that a homosexual's expression of love is the same as the heterosexual's, but just in a different manner.
Bennett seeks to counsel homosexuals and heterosexuals alike concerning the problems each encounters in his sexual relationships.
The workshop seeks to advise all the participants as to how to alleviate all these problems.
From participating in this workshop, many heterosexuals realize that the homosexuals have the same problems they encounter in their everyday lives.
Bennett, who is also an Episcopalian minister, has his own views concerning the biblical passages supposedly condemning homosexuality.
The Leviticus story of Sodom and Gomorrah is a story about a Jewish law of hospitality and what happened to two cities which did not obey this law — who failed to make welcome a Jewish sojourner, Abraham in this instance.
Unsure of whether they want to remain homosexuals or not, many seek Dr.
He talks with them about their problems, together they weigh all the evidence pro and con, and a decision is made.
They find one, and they usually walk out satisfied with the decision they made themselves.
AN INTERVIEW WITH A GAY LEADER Eddie Sanderf ord is a middle-aged gay person.
Having been an announced gay for a quarter of a century, Mr Sanderford has seen the Gay Liberation Movement come a long way.
He is an active member of the Mississippi Gay Alliance and is a very outspoken member of the gay community.
Recently I had an interview with him on campus, and the following is most of that interview.
We seek to carry on in Mississippi an educational program for the improvement of, and understanding about, attitudes toward homosexuals; to provide counseling and other needed services for gay men and women and their families; to promote better relationship between the gay communities and the larger communities in which they exist; and cooperate with local, state, regional and national agencies in the attainment of these dire goals.
How was your organization attempting to carry out those purA: Right now we have talked with quite a few groups.
Our meetings have been attended by people from the Youth Court Center and also by members of the Parole Board.
In fact, the members of the Parole Board have recommended our organization to gay people under their jurisdiction, and we have been contacted by penal institutions and have eagerly talked with them about their situations.
Thus, the publicity and direct contact with individuals enables us to carry out our goals.
Most calls we get, however, are not from people who are openly homosexual, but from those who are closet cases.
That is a conservative estimate and does not even come up to the percentage many national reports claim there are in the entire nation.
We usually have about 70 people who attend meetings regularly and who have expressed a desire to work for the Gay Alliance.
The people who are closet cases are the ones who have the most problems.
Usually, these people have a sexual desire penned up inside and they sneak and do things or perform acts of homosexuality and love-making when they are out of town, not in a city where they are known.
They get into black mail situations and have many other troubles if they are closet cases, and will not openly accept their life.
Most are adamant homosexuals as I am, and I am the administrator of a nursing home.
In fact, I have never accepted a job without telling my employer that I was a homosexual before I was hired.
Most of the members of the Gay Alliance have jobs where their employers know they are openly homosexual.
We accept it as our problem that there are other homosexuals in the community who are not able to get jobs because of their femininity, because they are transvestites and wish to wear female attire, makeup, and so forth, and thus do have a problem.
When we speak of a problem, however, we don't necessarily mean it is ours as an individual, but rather a problem of the gay community.
Under the word ""gay"" and in an alliance we usually include homosexuals, both male and female ; bisexuals; transvestites, and transsexuals.
Most of them are dance bars where the gay can go in and dance with members of his or her own sex without any harassment.
Usually on the weekends they have drag shows with female impersonators.
Now, in the past, sometimes the police would walk through every hour or so with their sticks, but we felt that was just fear brought on by lack of understanding by young rookies on the force.
Earlier you mentioned that some homosexuals, especially the transvestites, have some problems finding jobs.
These cases involve discrimination in hiring in the city and in city services.
No, there is a Starkville chapter and we have had a request in Hattiesburg, Meridian and on the Gulf Coast to open other chapters.
Also, we have had requests from some people in Louisiana and Tennessee seeking our aid in getting chapters started for them.
Sometimes by teenagers or kids, yes; but it has been years since that has happened.
Some people here at Millsaps still look at homosexuality as a sickness.
I had rather admit and run the chance of being harassed occasionally than to wear a false face.
Many of the homosexuals here at Millsaps are likely to go to the bars or they may go out of town to a bar on the Gulf Coast or somewhere.
I chose homosexuality when I was about sixteen or seventeen, and in fact, I had been going out with girls and had never gone out with a boy until the time I made my decision.
Basically, though, I felt I never wanted to be tied down with a family.
But I did fall in love — with a married man, and I am still in love with him.
There are some homosexual males, for instance, who do not even want a female in their apartment.
I believe every human being has a certain amount of male and female about him, and there must be a balance.
If a male is more feminine, he will have to have a more masculine woman, etc.
But to answer your question directly, I do not find heterosexual affairs offensive or repulsive.
Well, the young gays tend more inclined toward having a relationship with other young gays, and I have never done this.
The guys I have always gone with have been married men, and straights — or supposedly straights.
In December, 1973, the government announced that all federal employees could be neither hired nor fired on basis of sexuality.
The National Organization of Women has come out in favor of equal rights for homosexuals.
The Council of Bishops of the Roman Catholic Church has passed a resolution calling for a theological task force to study homosexuality.
Of course, the American Psychiatric Association has voted to remove homosexuality from the list of mental disorders.
There are gay bills of rights in Columbus, Ohio; Berkeley and San Francisco, California; Boulder, Colorado; Seattle, Washington; Detroit, Michigan; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Washington, D.C.; and Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
We did talk to a class on deviation here at Millsaps just before school was out.
Well, at the time I made my homosexuality open, I was living in McComb.
I just had trouble keeping people from wanting to go with me all the time.
FDA Nears Decision on Dalkon Shield By NANCY HEINE — No one has ever known exactly how the intern terine works to prevent pregnancy.
On June 27 of this year, the United States Food and Drug Administration called a halt to the sale and distribution of the Dalkon Shield until it could investigate the matter further.
The facts are now in, according to Mary Carol Kelly of the FDA Press Office, and a statement on' FDA findings and conclusions will come late in September.
Meanwhile reports of heavy bleeding, painful insertion, uterine perforation, higher than expected pregnancy rates and pregnancy complications began coming in from women using the Dalkon Shield as well as other IUD's.
A physician's survey by the United States Center for Disease Control revealed that IUD use led to more than 3500 hospitalizations during the first six months of 1973.
Robins sent out letters to 120,000 physicians advising them that six deaths and 36* septic abortions appeared to have been caused by the Shield.
By June reports of more deaths and abortions forced the FDA into action.
On August 21st, the FDA opened a two day public hearing to gather facts and professional opinions about the Shield.
Physicians testified that 1 out of every 25 IUD pregnancies occur outside of the uterus and must be aborted.
Over the Labor Day holiday, members of the FDA Special Advisory Sub-Committee met to assess information gathered at the hearing.
Because the FDA regards the IUD as a ""device"" rather than a drug, it hasn't the authority to require premarket testing of the contraceptive.
Neither can it require the reporting of adverse reactions associated with the device, the registration of IUD manufacturers nor the attachment of warning labels to each IUD package.
Once marketed, however, the agency can assume a regulatory function if it is capable of proving in court that the product is dangerous to health when used as directed or is improperly labeled.
In California the Coalition of Medical Rights for Women is not waiting for the FDA decision.
They've filed a petition calling for a ban on all' further sales and distribution of IUD's until they can be further tested for safety and the adoption of a regulation that would require manufacturers to take all steps necessary to inform women of the potential dangers.
It consisted of a number of unbound pages, a hundred or so, which the reader was to arrange in sequence.
It was claimed — with some justification, as I recall — that the book's statement would be developed equally well no matter what the order of the pages, while the ordering of them would permit the reader active participation in the creative process.
Those of you who subscribe to the cyclical theory of history and who persevered to the end of my last column will already be aware that this sort of thing is coming into vogue again and can take pride in finding the P&W in the vanguard of this renascent movement.
The P&W's editor has graciously refused praise for what happened, so we must give it, I guess, to the gremlins instead.
What happened was that the paragraph order as written was reordered as published.
Keep it in mind, though, that these instructions will be reliable only if this column is not subjected to the gremlins' further attentions.
Since I intend not to say another word about the matter, you may never know.
That ;t has ""lost something in the translation"" has long been a ready defense for a work of literature he likes by someone privileged to have read it in the original language.
I wonder, though, if it does not 'occasionally happen that a work gains something in the translation.
I do not mean necessarily that the translator has a greater gift in the second language than did the author in the first; I mean that some constructions, translated, may be rendered less pontifical or more powerful.
None too comfortable in any language, I cannot provide convenient examples to bolster this conjecture, but, though not an example of what I mean, Hemingway's ""For Whom The Bell Tolls"" may serve as an illustration.
Presumably, the guerrillas in that book did ""this and that"" in the milk of each other's mother because the book was written at a time when prevailing standards did not permit the author license to say in plain English what the ""this and that"" were.
Still, vigorous though Spanish insults can be, this awkward translation has always seemed to me more potent than the ostensible original.
Schwarz-Bart is, like her heroine Telumee, a native of Guadeloupe and a Negress.
To judge from her jacket photograph, she herself is as sensitive and beautiful as her writing.
Her husband is a French Jew of Polish extraction, a survivor of the Nazi holocaust, an ex-Maquis and a winner of the Prix Goncourt.
And Updike, of course, is the best of the last of Harvard's literary Establishment.
Her lyrical, stocking-overthe-lens, soft-focus evocations of the paradise Guadeloupe might have been but for the inhuman institutions of the white men who brought her unwilling ancestors to the site of that potential paradise are individually brilliant.
Cumulatively, though — and not to dispute the obscenity of slavery or that of the peonage which replaced it — they constitute an argument akin to that of the ungrateful child who tells his parents that he never asked to be born.
At that, it is because neither as child or woman is Telumee ever ungrateful that the book is unconvincing.
The woman named Solitude lives also in a Guadeloupe where wisdom is cheap, the one in which she is born a slave ""about 1772"" and dies a martyr in 1802.
But the wisdom here impedes neither the development of the novel nor the cataclysmic events against which the heroine is portrayed — now as the mulatto pet of her white masters and mistresses, now as a zombie feared and scorned by whites and blacks alike, now as an unlikely symbol of valor for the doomed but undeterred insurgents scrabbling after a will-o'-the-wisp named Liberty.
Asked her name long after she has paid with her very soul for the whims of liberals and libertines, she cannot answer.
She didn't know, she said, because no one had called her by name for many years.
Taking her pipe out of her mouth, an old woman observed that that wasn't a human name, no, certainly not.
Later, an old Congo woman is startled to find that this pregnant and disheveled creature is the machetewielding Winged Victory who figures so prominently in the legends which sustain the insurrection.
She seemed astonished and a trifle disappointed at finding her so pitiful, so frail and yellow and naked, so unlike the stories that had been told in the cane fields.
Oct., 1974 There are glimpses of a potential paradise here, too, but the peaceful landscapes are quickly cluttered with severed heads, and the rivers soon run red.
It is a subject Andre Schwarz-Bart handles by turns coolly warmly, tautly, easily, without trace of mawkishness — until the very last sentence of an unnecessa epilogue.
Some intelligence having been demanded of him, the reader will have grasped the universality of the author's message.
He will suppose that the indomitable spirit of which Schwarz-Bart seems to be writing is that displayed alike by the people of Guadeloupe resisting Napoleon's French, by the French at Dien Bien Phu resisting Ho's Vietnamese, by the Viet Minn resisting the Japanese, and so on — a quality not held in reserve for any people nor denied to any people.
It is, therefore, embarrassing to come upon that last V and to discovery, after all, that S warz-Bart either has not credited his reader with the intelligence he demanded or holds a very different vision than the one his reader corded him.
Well, perhaps not many readers would recall the details of what happened in the Warsaw ghetto (An uprising against Nazi Germans resulted in the killing of 40,000 Jews in immediage reprisal and in the systematic reduction of Warsaw's Jewish population throughout the war years from half a million to about 200.), but fewer would fail to count its courageous Jews in that catalogue of examples of indomitable spirit.
If he finds it necessary to explain his meaning with that single example or, for that matter, with any example or examples at all, we are back in the world of good guys and bad guys.
And, once we are back in the world of good guys and bad guys, we are back in a world preparing for slaughter and destruction, slavery and oppression, severed heads and bloody rivers.
I suspect that Simone SchwarzBart's book has gained something in translation.
I hope that her husband' — moving and magnificent as it is has lost a little.
Oct., 1974 Page 9 Entertainment by Kevin Sessums If you are tired of studying or cramming or whatever Millsaps students do in their valuable spare time, there are a few things happening during the next few days that you might find enjoyable.
At New Stage Theatre Thoreau is spending some time in jail — a night to be precise.
Carl Davis portrays the farmers prisoner and is supported by Jack Stephens, Ellen Marshall, Frank Hains, Virginia Fox Metz, etc.
I saw ""The Night Thoreau Spent in Jail"" at USM a couple of summers ago and hated it.
That is, I hated it until I was so numb with boredom that any feeling or emotion whatsoever was impossible.
But if anyone can redeem the show, New Stage can; and I think it would be worth checking out just to see what they can do with it.
The Jackson Little Theatre is presenting UTBW sometime within the next few days with somebody or somebodies or some bodies in the cast.
I have no idea what the play is about; but, relatively speaking, judging by their first production of the season, I would suggest that you proceed at your own risk.
This Mike Nichols film starring Jack Nicholson, Art Garfunkel, Candice Bergen, and Ann-Margret has been hailed as a modern Classic by some critics.
But don't be fooled, the subject is not treated lightly even through Nichols is the director.
This is a very hard, realistically depressing story about men and women — their lives and their sex — and their failure to differentiate between two.
Urban Problems The Elderly by Mike Stevens In the U.S., it is customary for the elderly to retire from the working force at age 65.
Therefore, an ever increasing subpopulation is being created, a subpopulation consisting of more than 20 million Americans.
As a group, they are economically and socially segregated from society.
This is a result of being jobless, and being jobless, they are no longer needed or wanted by the productive economy.
These 20 million Americans are the one group in our society whose transportation needs have been ignored.
Because of the small collective voice of the group, their transportation needs usually go unheard.
Although public transit systems exist and many of the elderly own cars, the problem still pervades.
Variables affecting the likelihood of elderly transportation are health, income, sex, residential location, and car ownership.
These variables are interdependent but most city planners are concerned with the 2/ 3 of the elderly who can't provide their own transportation.
Probably the most fundamental variable affecting the elderly is the issue of health.
Poor health makes personal locomotion hazardous for some and impossible for others.
Age limits walking range, access to public transit, and the ability to drive.
As age increases, sensory and motor skills required in driving gradually dimish.
The usual income decrease that accompanies retirement forces many of the elderly to rely on social security payments.
The elderly females transportation is further inhibited because many never learned to drive a car; driving was a male role.
The problem is magnified when we realize that 73% of the elderly are women.
Although the elderly of the inner city have access to public transportation systems, those in the suburbs and rural areas are cut off from their basic transportation needs.
As a solution to the problem, city planners have discovered the minibus concept or jitney system which can be specially tailored to the needs of the elderly.
The flexibility and routing of the jitney system offers transportation for such personal needs as shopping and medical services.
In Jackson, a jitney system called Project Mini-Bus is being developed to provide transportation for senior citizens.
The primary concern is to make life easier for those 60 years or older, by making all areas in Jackson more accessible.
For the project, Jackson will have in operation I five small buses exclusively for the use by the aged.
One mini-bus will be equipped with a special side hydraulic wheelchair lift, with clamps and straps inside to accomodate 6 wheelchairs.
Anyone 60 years or older is eligible for mini-bus services, free of charge.
This service, provided by the City of Jackson, will take the elderly to places medically, technically, or socially related.
Rides are available from eightm. to fivem., Monday through Friday, and the buses will pick you up at home.
Similar programs for elderly transportation have been enacted in New Jersey and Missouri.
Many other communities are offering reduced fares on bus rides as.a means to help elderly transportation.
However, the ultimate answer to the problem of transportation for the elderly is to remove the need for transportation.
It would be more practical to import the needs of the elderly rather than providing access to them.
A workable, but perhaps idealistic example is the retirement neighborhood.
This community cc ild offer adequate services and a supply of peers having a common background.
However, many of the elderly can not afford to live in a special retirement neighborhood; and, it segregates them from the rest of the population.
The problem of elderly transportation is a real one, but the problem of transportation embraces more than just the elderly sector of the United States All cities need an integrated public transit system which will adequately meet the needs >ef all citizens.
Dear Ms. by Eloise Lurid Dear Ms., Recently the school policy concerning visitation in the dorms was changed to allow 12 hours of visitation during the week and 14 hours of visitation during the weekend.
Please don't feel that I am against visitation because I'm not, but I am very uncomfortable late at night and cannot sleep just knowing that there are men roaming the halls of the dorm.
I can't sleep late at night, either, knowing there are boys in the dorm when there's not one in my room.
Dear Ms., The other day I was shocked and appalled to hear it floating around the cafeteria that there was a dead roach in the chocolate cake on the dessert table.
Nauseated Dear Nausie, Yes, unfortunately I myself was a victim of the vicious rumor.
When I heard that there was a roach in the chocolate cake I rushed over to the dessert table to check it out.
Dear Ms., I was pleasantly surprised upon arriving at Millsaps this year to find out about the dorm visitation system, but I have a problem concerning it.
I don't mind at all that boys use our bathrooms during visitation but I feel uncomfortable whenever I use the bathroom in the boys' dorms.
Nervous j Dear Nervie, I can fully sympathize with your uneasy feeling in the boys' dorms bathrooms.
I, myself, sometimes find it uncomfortable to go to the bathroom in a urinal.
Try to think of another team that plays more tricks on their crowd and keeps more people guessing about what's going to happen next.
Seventeen points in the first quarter, that's more than a typical Millsaps game.
Why, they even scored another touchdown in the second quarter, building a magical 24-7 lead by the end of the first half.
The Millsaps legerdemain began early in the game, with quarterback Ricky Haygood levitating passes in the direction of Sonny Aldy and Paul Benton.
Benton turned a four-yard Haygood pass into a touchdown and Doug Bundly transformed a kick into an extra point and the magic show was on the road, Millsaps 7-0.
A temporary roadblock appeared, as the Tigers performed a trick of their own, coming back with a 44yard touchdown pass and extra point, knotting the game at 7-7.
But the curtain was up again, and this time the Majors wasted little time.
Brindly, up to his old tricks, was true on the point after, and Millsaps was up, 14-7.
Linebacker Philip Maples appeared in front of a Tiger aerial returning it to the 30 yard line for his offensive tricksters.
Despite an amazing catch by Dees Hinton at the 9, the drive stalled and in the blink of an eye Brindly had booted a 27 yard field goal, Millsaps 17-7.
Second quarter play was dominated by the Millsaps defensive wizards, led by safety Bob King who had one interception (the first of three) and a key fourth down play.
The defense handed the ball to the offensive repeatedly, but time was running out before the Majors could work their magic again.
Sustained by Haygood passes to Aldy Hinton and Kirby, the drive was capped by a four-yard touchdown pass to Charlie Goldberg.
Brindley's foot provided the finale for the first half as his third P.A.T. gave the Majors a 24-7 half-time lead.
Following the festive intermission, the crowd saw the Majors first half efficiency pull a disappearing act, or perhaps it was the old ""transfer the momentum from one locker to the other"" trick.
Midway through the quarter, King intercepted again, but a Haygood pass on the next play turned up in the hands of a Tiger defender at the Majors' 25.
With less than 10 minutes to play, King materialized in front of his third Tiger aerial, transporting the ball to the offense.
But their magic was again elusive and Kirby's punt sailed to the now-deft Tigers.
Following the kickoff, the Majors offense looked into their bag of tricks and came up empty.
The game ended with a large, talented Georgetown team proclaiming their 3-0 record, a disappointed 1-1 Millsaps squad looking ahead to Sewanee, and a befuddled Millsaps crowd that had been tricked again.
Editor's Apology The Sports Editor of the Purple an White would like to offer a writt apology to Millsaps safety Bob King.
This is a promised written retraction of statements made in regard to King's play in the Majors' openin game against Southwestern.
King was falsely accused of two questionable fourth quarter pass interference penalties when neither one of them was his doing.
The credit rests instead on others in the defensive backfield (who will go unslandered) and perhaps the o* ficials.
Why, Bob was so infuriated that he promptly intercepted three passes in the Majors' next game against Georgetown.
Pikes, KA's, lead first week of soccer action By DAVID ANDERSON After the first week of men's intramural soccer, the undefeated Pikes and KA's lead the league, both with 2-0-1 records.
The Pikes began the season by defeating the Lambda Chi's 3-1 behind two goals by Richard Edgerton, one on a penalty kick.
Kent Van Skiver scored two goals for the KA's to lead them to a 3-0 victory over the Independents.
One goal came on a penalty kick, the other on an assist by Cooper Morrison.
The Pikes won their second game of the season with a 4-1 win over the Sigs.
Steve Laney, Richard Edgerton, Jeff Cook, and Bill Mann all contributed for the Pikes.
Rob Nichols and Earl Aycock scored for the KA's, each assisted by Kent Van Skiver.
Bryan Miller, on a penalty kick, and David Hardin combined to lead the Sigs to a 2-1 win over the Independents.
The final game of the week saw the Pikes and KA's battle to a scoreless tie after two overtime periods.
Well, the Millsaps Majors found it profitable to believe in themselves as they used a third quarter touchdown and their typically fine defense to shutout the Tigers 7-0 on their home field last Saturday.
It was, in fact, the defense that kept the Majors in the game, as the offense was beseiged by bad-luck mistakes, preventing them from scoring numerous times.
One drive was stopped an inch short after a backfield in motion call, another was killed by an interception, and the other was foiled by a ""missed"" field goal.
But, while the offense was making their mistakes, the defense was' impressive, holding the Tigers to ten first downs, 37 yards passing, and 78 yards on the ground.
In fact, Sewanee's deepest penetration came early in the game after they recovered a Millsaps fumble at the 30 on the Major's first running play of the day.
Halfback Frank Shaw was the bright spot in the defensive backfield this week, intercepting two passes, returning one for a near 40 yard gain.
With the whole defense shining, there were also some glistenings on the offensive side of the line.
It was senior fullback Charlie Goldberg, however, who emerged as the offensive star of the ball game.
Goldberg's seven yard touchdown run in the third quarter gave the Majors the edge it needed, with Doug Brindly's point after making the score 7-0.
He soared a few long ones ending up with a 42 yard average for the afternoon.
The first hald was close, mostly because of Major penalties, but the second half was completely Millsaps dominated.
But, it was once again the Millsaps defense that took up the slack when needed and provided the spark that gave the Majors their second shut out in three games.
The election for the Homecoming Court will be held Tuesday, October 8, in the Student Union.
Students do a lot of belly-aching about (and because of) the cafeteria and the food committee would like to hear it.
For EVERYONE fidelity Bank UTICA NORTH WEST STREET, JACKSON 1894 The BankThat Cares X OT C3fl.
Representing industry will be Ken Waggoner of the Research and Development Center, and Russel Dridu and Ken Lundguest will discuss elementary education.
Doug Brindley of Knoxville, Tenn., will play Tiresias, an old soothsayer and a companion to Queen Jocasta.
He is also a native of Jackson, and is surprise of a graduate, after years of college, finding he has no job.
It will also open the eyes of uncertain students to the necessity of changing his field of study to one more open to job opportunities before it is too late.
Further information, if needed, can be obtained through Don Fortenberry.
I think some mention should be made of the egg-throwing incident that occurred during the Kappa Sigma serenade of last Thursday night.
The participants were all independent meats, and this immature behavior has been exhibited by these clowns before.
There were five jocks in particular who got their rocks off by throwing eggs.
Two of them gave a sophomore coed an unsolicited egg shampoo, and then three of them heaved eggs at the Sigs, who had congregated in the Bacot courtyard to serenade.
This kind of childish behavior should not be tolerated by the college community, and appropriate action should be taken, whether by school or student authorities, against these cretins and anyone else participating in malicious and/ or destructive acts.
There really is no room for such antics by anyone at Millsaps, jock or non-jock.
And, hopefully in the future, these particular meats will exercise some self-restraint and grow up.
I would like to clarify a statement which appeared in an article entitled ""Student Union To Be Remodeled"" September 19.
There were, however, three student members of the committee which studied the union and made proposals to the Board of Trustees.
In addition, questionnaires were distributed to a diversified group of students and a number of faculty to solicit their opinions about renovation and change.
The report was not a final one; the Board of Trustees, of course, has the final decision as to implementation of the proposals or further study.
I am quite sure, however, that more solicitation of opinion and discussion of the proposals will be made with faculty and students before final approval is given.
Sincerely, Frances H Coker Chairperson, Committee on Spare Utilization of the Student Union. a junior theatre major.
He appeared in Players' workshop productions during both his preceding years at Millsaps.
The role of the Sphinx who plagued the town of Thebes with her famous riddle will be played by Cindy Seng, a junior theatre major from Morris, 111.
She also played Ruth in ""The Effect of Gamma Rays on Man-in-the-Moon Marigolds"" in a little-theatre production.
For his performance in the latter role, he was named Best Actor in a Workshop Production for the Players' Fiftieth Season.
The Young Soldier, one of the three characters Cocteau has included in the play to aid in the telling of the myths, will be played by Steve Rankin, a sophomore accounting major from Columbia.
It's his first appearance with the Players, although he worked in theatre extensively during high school, and participated in acting and stage craft workshops throughout his childhood.
Oct., 1974 Jim Matheny, a sophomore English major from Jackson, will play the Soldier, another of Cocteau's utilitarian characters.
Robert Gaston of Greenwood, a junior political science major, will appear as the Chief, captain to the two soldiers.
Bob Morgan, also from Greenwood, will double in ""The Infernal Machine"" as Creon, Jocasta 's brother, and as the Phantom of Laius, Oedipus' father whom he unwittingly killed.
Morgan, also a transfer student, is on the Dean's List; and, like Gaston, has had no prior dramatic experience.
Miriam Lambert, a junior sociology major from Biloxi, will play Antigone, the daughter of Oedipus and Jocasta.
Though this is her first appearance with the Players, she has acted in ""The Chalk Gardern,"" ""The Mousetrap,"" and as Nellie in ""South Pacific,"" all within the past two years.
Jimmy Thrasher, another graduate of Murrah, is a sophomore theatre major who will play the Messenger from Corinth.
In addition, he was stage manager for ""The Sound of Music,"" and received the Players' Freshman Award as the most outstanding freshman member of the company last year.
The Millsaps Players' production of ""The Infernal Machine"" opens Wednesday, Oct., at 8:15m. in the Christian Center Auditorium.
Performances will be at that time Thursday and Friday next week; on Saturday, Oct., however, the play will start at 8:30m.
It will be directed by Goss, who is also Chairman of the Department of Theatre and Professor of Theatre.
The sets have been designed by Jackson Daily News Arts Editor Frank Hains, with lighting by Stanley Graham.
Robert E Bergmark, chairman of the Philosophy Department, was chosen Outstanding Professor of the Year during Homecoming activities.
A keg party given earlier in the semester in Ezelle by Rob McDuff met with frowns and disapproval from Dean Woodward.
However, no action was taken and page 22 of Major Facts does not specifically prohibit beer.
Since everyone living on the party end of the hall was either at the party or not present, no one was annoyed by the noise — annoyed enough to complain to the party.
The following day it was brought to the attention of the group that they had been reported to the Dormitory Board for disturbing the peace and property damage.
Several days later the independents and Rob McDuff were tried by the Dormitory Board without being confronted by the accusors, Ward Emly and Stacy Jenkins, dormitory assistants; without any chance to crossexamine.
The basis for the conviction came from a letter from Dean Woodward (who was never at the party) to the Board, describing the events The conviction was based entirely on hearsay evidence.
Even though Jackson Harper, the head of the Dormitory Board, had told him not to, Scott , the Board's recorder, wrote in his report to Dean Woodward that the Dormitory Board had convicted, or rather that the freshmen had plead guilty to a charge of conducting an illegal beer party.
The Judicial Council saw fit to include this new charge and to try the independents for it on an original jurisdictional basis.
However, the manner of the conviction was sloppy and not according to the Constitution of the Millsaps Student Association.
The disturbance charge was very flimsy and still based mostly on a letter from Ms.
The person living closest to the party, David Reece, came in that night at 12:00 and slept peacefully through the night.
Dean Woodward has recently stated that Major Facts is not the real set of rules.
Millsaps students have aborteaiy nesigns Homecoming Court Under Pressure by Gla^hKMcInnis ■v.
This was not the first such contest in Millsaps history as some five years before a male ran and lost for, reportedly, similar reasons.
It seems that both he and the recent contestants, Alan Brehm and James Galloway, according to a friend of both ran to prove the ""bogus"" nature of the elections and the court.
The two male students were chosen over a crowded field with eight female students for a runoff election the following day.
Jenny Bates, Nancy Lang, Maura Mcintosh, Brenda Twyner, and Emile Wofford.
Sources within the election committee have revealed that James Galloway was elected to the court in the runoff, but resigned before the announcement of the maids.
The unannounced election totals have lead to speculation on campus that pressure was exerted to force Galloway's removal and acquiescence.
According to the same source it is possible that administration officials secured the supposed resignation.
Other speculation suggests that Galloway as a third semester pledge of Kappa Alpha fraternity was pressured, through his status, to resign from the court.
There were no deals made with the administration and no backroom politicing.""' remarked James Galloway in reply to the forthcoming article.
VI t was obvious from the election that Millsaps is not ready for a male Homecoming attendant.
Galloway is an SEB vice president and chairman of the election committee.
The elections were also marked by widespread dissension among female students over the unexpected occurrence of the two male candidates for the traditionally all-female court.
Alan Brehm remarked that there were quite a few people ""upset "" and that he was verbally accosted more than once by irate coeds. solutely no rights, except as Mississippi citizens.
Even as state citizens the students are inferior, for if Clifford Ammons, head of the Judicial Council, and Dean Woodward are correct, there exists a Mississippi statute prohibiting alcohol from any institution of higher learning.
But David Fleming, Jackson attorney and Millsaps alumnus, feels that all logic and reason are against the existence of this law.
There is possibly such a law that exists governing state institutions but it would not apply to private institutions.
If at some future date the Administration decides to inform the Millsaps students of the real rules, this drinking matter can be settled.
THE DOUBLE STANDARD The fraternities and sororities enjoy the favored half of a double standard on this campus.
For their ennumerable violations of tranquility and rules the fraternities receive reprimands and warnings, while independent freshmen, forced to live in Ezelle. are fined heavily.
If from President Collins s expected ruling to the appeal Dean Woodward is filing.
Millsaps students realize that they have no rights but by Administrative indulgence, there remains one unalienable right, the right to confront and challenge. ,e 2 October 29, 1974 College Is Where 'Ratfucking' Began In Chile the administration burned the books that misrepresented the"" 'truth' — at Millsaps someone confiscated, or as one professor said, ""sequestered"" the campus newspaper.
It is the mentality of men afraid of criticism, who feel that the 'rightness' of their cause is justification for their actions.
It hardly seems a matter for one to drop his books and take the banner of freedom, but one is reminded of the account given in All the President's Men of those who eventually became the recent administration's zealots.
These men and the mentality they embodied would obviously approve of such mildly clandestine operations as playing hide-and-seek with the P&W — Bill of Rights notwithstanding.
That they attempted to destroy supposedly inherent freedoms in this country is no small matter, neither is the fact that they were part of the supposed guaranteer of those freedoms, and the parallel here drawn is by no means veiled.
We shall never claim that the opinions contained herein are ordained by the creator, but we consider them valid and insist on the right to express them.
The purpose of this paper is not to report insignificant happenings in the manner of a city daily, but, hopefully, to be an actor in the creation of a Millsaps community, in which in these crazy serious, wasted productive years we can ejoy what a college can and ought to be.
There are ways to dissent other than mindless petty larceny — those on this campus who would abuse the students' rights to secure their own imagined rights have neither the intelligence nor the humanity to see them.
David Anderson, Earl Aycock, Janette DeBoever, Sharon Edwards, Flinda Feurgeson, Mike Forester, Carmen Gettis, Pat Gleason, Mark Jones, Doug Minor, Cathy Passailague, Dean Pittman, Bill Ray, Derrick Shields, Mike Stevens, Susan Weill, Jan Wildmon Paul Pittman OUTLOOK Gov.
Bill Waller's abortive effort to get control of the state's Alcohol Beverage Commission has not gone unnoticed by some legislators who regard it as another effort on the part of the executive department to increase his power and his patronage.
A report by the Legislative' Audit Committee, which barely skimmed the surface of the story, edited down as it was by members of the committee, is only the tip of the iceberg.
And Waller's effort to get control of it could have far-reaching effects in state government.
The original intent of the legislation which established the ABC some eight years ago was to blunt the governor's influence over how the operation was handled.
And during the period, Mississippi's ABC has been considered an efficient model, possibly one of the best operations of its type in the nation.
What brought this all to a head was the effort of State Tax Commission Chairman Charles Brady to fire three key men from the ABC's law enforcement division.
Brady charged the three with taking liquor that was seized in raids for their, personal use.
But, those close to the situation say that there was no evidence to substantiate this charge.
Obviously, the State Tax Commission chairman is in a powerful position, able to influence appointments and the hiring and firing of state employees.
William Lee Parker of Washington, D.C., but is under a long-term lease to Gov.
A side issue is the connection between Brady and Jackson insurance man, Harold Busching.
Waller wrote a tetter to Occidental Life Insurance Company of California, directing them to send commissions on insurance policies to Busching.
Walter called the State Commission to a meeting iq which he insisted that Garner, Mashburn and Cote be dismissed.
So far, Robert Biggs and Bobby Vaughan, the two other commissioners, have foiled the Governor and his friend Brady in their efforts to make the changes they want.
Whether the Governor will persist in his quest is a matter for conjecture.
Letters to the editor, especially those which disagree with any article or editorial appearing in the P&W, are strongly encouraged.
Such letters should be neatly typed, double spaced and should not be over three pages in length.
All letters will be published as they are written, providing there is no libelous of obscene overtone, and should be submitted with the author's name and signature.
Names will be withheld upon request, providing proper identification is made to the editor.
We trust you will bear with our inexperience in these too often occurences.
I was only trying to get on the Millsaps faculty, but they turned me down.
Vinaruhu mounted a nearby chair, peered upward at the heavens, and began a strange chant.
What proceeded was a bizzare story that explains in detail, why Mississippi is like it is.
While on a fact finding tour at the Port of Gulfport, Wilbur was kidnapped by a couple of disturbed sailors from Panama.
No one knows what became of him, but rumors have it that these sailors had a fondness for young men.
Lubofuno searched the state population for the most outlandish fool available and charted his course to the Governor's office.
It seems that the Ole Miss incident was only the beginning of Mississippi's humiliation.
Lubofuno decided that to break the racial barrier, he needed a black man who was a bigger fool than Ross Barnett.
So to this day Mississippians are persistantly peltered by the nonsense, banalities and assorted verbal garbage of James Merideth and Ross Barnett.
GRAMMA, Cuban By Nidia Diaz Any SELF-RESPECTING drugstore, pharmacy or retail medical supplies distributor in the United States sells a wide variety of the latest pharmaceutical products.
Pills of all colors and shapes in fashionable plastic containers wait on shelves for purchasers who will religiously swallow them whole as good believers of Yankee propaganda.
Nevertheless, these pharmaceutical companies — Baxter, Johnson and Johnson, Parke Davis and others — are also a part of the enormous United States monopolistic octopuses which suck the life out of the underdeveloped countries and price medicines out of reach of most of the people in the United States.
In 1950, the total cost of medical care amounted to 12000 million dollars.
It is estimated that, by 1976, it will go up to 132000 million dollars.
This sudden rise in the cost of medical expenses is a considerable factor, one which reflects the tremendous inflation running rampant in the United States.
His last request will be to keep putting him on the ballot after he's dead and gone.
Page 3 expressed in individual terms, the burden of medical costs is even greater.
The picture gets even darker when we add that, according to the United States Department of Labor, 15,800,000 people in the United States will be on welfare by 1975.
The high cost of medical care hasn't produced any program of preventive medicine.
On the contrary, every year the health services that are available to the people of the United States get even worse.
The Disease Control Center of the United States Department of Health, Education and Welfare has often said that the immunization index of the people in the United States is dropping steadily.
In the United States, where the Pentagon has presented a program calling for the appropriation of 21,000 million dollars for new weapons, only 60. percent of the children between the ages of 1 and 4 were vaccinated against polio in 1973.
In 1964, some 78 percent of the children in the same age bracket received polio shots.
The diphtheria, whopping cough and tetanus vaccine was given to 75. percent of the children in 1972, but to only 72. percent in 1973.
And these low immunization indexes exclude all the families living in the United States ghettos, which lack all kinds of facilities for getting disease prevention measures.
This is, of course, a high ratio when contrasted to that of Guatemala, where there is one doctor for every 6300 inhabitants, or Ghana, with one for every 25,000.
Doctors in the United States are unequally distributed throughout its population.
The California millionaire suburb of Beverly Hills can boast of having a doctor for every 50 residents, while Watts, the Black ghetto of Los Angeles, has one for every 1000.
As a result of this inequality, the development of public health services in the United States has gone down the drain — especially when contrasted to that of other industrialized countries.
In 1950 the United States had the fifth lowest infant-mortality rate in the world, but by 1971 it had slipped down to 23rd place.
The high cost of medical care, lack of preventive medicine, uneven distribution of doctors and overall deterioration of the people's health are self-evident.
The United States has made man's most basic right, the right to preserve his life, a profitable business for the large pharmaceutical concerns and others who have made medical care the privilege of the few/""*"""""""" 1 ""* age 4 Cafeteria Cooperates With Students by Susan Weill Because of the concern for the plight of the farmworkers shown by the Millsaps students and faculty and administration, the school cafeteria is, or will be shortly, serving only United Farm Worker picked lettuce.
These feelings were determined by a petition that was circulated a few weeks ago that received more than four hundred signatures, twenty of which were interested faculty and administrative officials.
This was a great percentage of the students on the cafeteria meal plan, almost fifty percent, and the cafeteria manager, Mr Loftus, was impressed, as much as the petition circulators, with the large amount of signatures.
Murray representing the faculty, presented the petition to the cafeteria administration who readily agreed to begin looking into available sources for the desired types of UFW lettuce.
The concerned attitude of the cafeteria management was promising, and it has been pondered whether the threat of a cafeteria boycott (only rumor, of course) or of picketing the alumni picnic the weekend following the petition perhaps had just a small bearing upon the ready approval for the change in lettuce.
The school administration, when presented with the request by Mr Loftus, was willing to absorb the small extra cost, because of the large amount of concerned persons who showed an interest in the farmworkers, that would accompany the special ordering of the UFW brands of lettuce from California.
Hopefully, other school cafeteria's around Jackson, and the state, will follow suit from Millsaps and ask for a change in their lettuce policy.
With the help of the Millsaps Student Organization for the Farmworkers, which will soon be set up, maybe we can get petitions circulating in the other area schools.
He will discuss with a panel of students and faculty his new work, A Nation of Strangers.
Mr Packard has authored several widely-read books on trends and problems of American society, including The Hidden Persuaders, The Naked Society, The Waste Makers, The Pyramid Climbers, and The Status Seekers.
At 1:30 he will be on the Millsaps campus to discuss with the panel the substance of the lecture and A Nation of Strangers, a study of the lack of roots in America.
SHORT SHOTS Dear Ms., I am a new student to Millsaps this semester from a very different part of the country, but I didn't think that the feelings of people could vary so drastically from one area of the United States . to another as I seem to have found.
Just yesterday I actually heard a girl proclaim overjoyed that a guy had dropped her, or that she was dropped.
Baffeled Dear Baf., People in general in the South do not find pleasure in the dumping or 'dropping' you described, but there is a strange group of 'Greeks' who seem to be masochistic in this aspect.
These people are seen roaming in packs with brands acrossed their chests and even sit at meals in segregated groups.
Dear Ms., I was disgusted and angered to see a petition circulating on campus asking for universal amnesty for the cowards who desserted duty in Vietnam or ran away to hide with their tails between their legs to avoid being injured for their country, or just having to serve their nation and way of life.
Patriotic Dear Pat., It is more frightening to me that anyone would go who did not agree with the United States of A's policy in Vietnam.
The 'new Canadians' of the 60's seemed to know more about the war than any of us did who supported it.
And maybe universal amnesty would be one way of making right the wrongs we committed in a country that did not want us or our 'free' way of government, by being ""patriotic"" to our own people who want to come home.
Those inducted were David Anderson, Claire Chastain, Janet Dykes, Ward Emling, Lloyd Gray, Ann Hendrick, Mark Herbert, Charlie Hinman, Maty Lowe, Mona Perry, and Dee Dee Woroner.
Marsha Brock, Lorean King, Jan Lansing, Janet Love, Suzanne McWilliams, Dale Guild, Edna Holbrook, Harriet Tucker, and Pam Vincent.
An opportunity to learn snow skiing will be offered this winter by USM the week of Feb.-Mar. in Park City, City. $230 includes all expenses except meals for the professionally-taught program.
At Princeton, he was a Danforth Fellow, a Princeton Fellow, and a Ford Fellow.
Thompson, whose major field of interest is BlackAmerican history from the 19th century to the early 20th century, has numerous publications.
The correct answer is Arizona and New Mexico; they were explored by the biology group this summer with special interest paid to the Sonoia Desert.
Yensen and his wife, were Charlie Hinman, Alan Brinson, Susie Roberson, Chris Wilberson, Phyllis McVaden, Jeff Tolbert and Bill Hardin.
During the course of the trip, they not only observed nature, but also visited several places of interest.
Among these were the American Museum of Natural History, Carlsbad Caverns, Tumacacori National Monument, Tuscon Mountain Park, Grand Canyon National Park, and the Petrified Forest National Park.
Yensen has spent a year of research in the desert, during which he has studied the habits of the surrounding wildlife.
Among the rarities that were found was the Copper-Tail Trogan, which is a tropical bird noted for its brilliant plumage.
Two other rare birds that we sighted were the goshawk and the red-faced warbler.
For those who are interested,, there are field trips such as this offered two to three times a year.
For information leading to the recovery of loot taken in a house burglary on Old Canton Road Saturday night Sept., consisting of a large collection of guns both antique and modern.
Also a considerable amount of silver flatware and serving pieces, a coin collection, jewelry and 2 furs.
In order to combine all the feelings of the black population this article is told by a fictional student.
Many of the statements are based on feelings and emotions and not entirely on fact.
If anyone would like to offer any corrections or explanations the black students would gladly pt them.
Being a student here makes me kind of unique, but there is something else about me that makes me even more different.
THE DIFFERENCE There is a distinct difference between being a student at Millsaps and being a black student at Millsaps.
One of the things that I have to encounter since I'm black is that people constantly study me and watch my actions.
From their studies of me they try to tell other people how I feel about this school.
Now that is all right except for the fact that few of these people ask me how I feel about Millsaps.
This can be very frustrating — especially if someone misquotes me or misinforms the people.
So this week I am going to explain how I feel about the administration, athletic program, student government, and the Greek system here on campus.
WHERE BLACKS SERVE The administration has one fault that is so glaring that I must say something about it.
In order to understand the civilization and culture of our community, the community should be pictured on campus just as it is off campus.
However, I feel that this is not done because blacks are pictured as cooks and maintenance workers.
It must be noted that there are blacks serving in other positions here on campus such as the library and business office.
I feel that the administration would be made complete if black professors were added to the faculty.
It is my understanding that the athletic policy of Millsaps is based on the premise that athletics exist for the benefit of the students and not primarily to enhance the prestige and publicity of the college.
The athletic program of Millsaps College has not benefited me as much as I think is possible.
Derrick Shields, to relate to black players on the team and performing together with the white players on an equal basis.
If the reason is something that cannot be changed (such as the academic requirements) I will accept the lack of blacks on the team.
But until a reason is given I cannot be fully satisfied with the present athletic program.
I feel that the lack of participation in a variety of intramural sports is 100% the fault of the black students.
Other than basketball, blacks have not Nothing seems simple now, . on a regular basis in sports such as soccer, tennis, golf, etc.
KAREN GLADNEY exceptions, however, and I think the trend is gradually changing.
As members of the Millsaps Student Association, I don't think the black population gets enough representation.
This statement is supported by the fact that there are no blacks in the Student Senate.
I realize that there was only one black running for a position in the last election, but the reason there were no others was becuase it is felt that it is really no use in trying to get elected.
All the candidates who won have some group — usually a Greek organization — behind them.
The members of the BSA cannot begin to compare with the Page 5 membership of even the smallest fraternities and sororities.
In order to illustrate this fact, look at what happened to our only black candidate in the last election.
Therefore, it is evident that a black cannot be a part of the senate by power of the vote.
A few years ago, blacks were automatically given a position in the senate.
I think that it should be renewed in order to get black representation, at least until the black population on campus will be great enough to run a candidate successfully.
THE GREEKS The last issue that I want to tell you about concerns the Greek system.
We really don't care for the Greek system and don't consider it as an issue.
However, there have been some who have asked why there are no blacks in the fraternities and sororities.
The main reason is that as a whole, no blacks were interested in getting into the Greek system.
To use the Greek system up with the Greeks just as long as they don't begin to disturb us.
We, as a group, hope that many more young, intelligent blacks come to Millsaps and get from this school what they can.
Just as in anything, Millsaps is not perfect, it has many imperfections.
That McDuff and his buddies high on Boone's Farm may be bewildered, I will readily admit.
And don't, appropriating apathy as your watchword, try to muscle into the Do-Nothing Generation, either.
We may not anytime soon see a return to those glorious days of the last decade when New Left student activists monopolized the FBI's ""Ten Most Wanted"" list.
But, McDuff, you and your generation are going to leave this world — and this campus — a better place than you found it.
Your doing so will signify to the Dean that you do not apathetically accept a long-existing problem which poses a serious obstacle to your obtaining a quality education at Millsaps.
I refer to the practice — or policy, hereabouts — of ordering textbooks in quantities smaller than the numbers of students enrolled in courses for which those books are assigned reading.
It is a practice which has intruded on my happiness and wellbeing during each of my four years here.
To comprehend how poignantly this practice can intrude, consider this situation.
As I write, I am looking forward within the week to a mid-semester examination in a demanding course.
Once it was clear that the twenty-some students had not enrolled while suffering delirium, the books were re-ordered.
Supplies of four of them were replenished before the semester was more than a month old.
The two more significant titles, however, were still unavailable a week before the exam.
And the copy of the most important title which was to have been placed on reserve in the Millsaps Library somehow never found its way there.
This affliction is an affliction for the faculty, of course, as well as for the students.
In the present instance, the instructor could not in fairness prepare an examination that would penalize the losers in this variation on Musical Chairs; but to accommodate them would be to penalize those students who had labored through the often laborious required reading.
Well, you might suppose that the practice is intended to prevent the overstocking of books which might become obsolete.
But even such sacrosanct marvels of longevity as The Norton Anthology of English Literature have not gone uns pared.
Finally, it would seem more consistent with Millsaps College's strivings toward excellence if the possible loss of money on book sales were construed a lesser evil than the obstruction of its constituents' pursuit of knowledge.
In short, there is no good reason why this sort of thing happens, and only your apathy, McDuff, will permit its perpetuation.
Apathy is mine, vengeance the Lord's, and rose is a rose is a rose is a rose Gertrude Stein's.
It will do you a world of good to get off your duff and do something, McDuff.
On January 2, 1959, in a little rundown saloon on San Francisco's lower Market Street, a young man and one-day-to-be student activist, in the company of some fellow members of the Railway Workers, raised his glass of redeye in a toast to Fidel Castro.
A day earlier, the forces coalescing around the 26th of July Movement, of which Castro was the leader, had sent Cuban dictator Fulgencio Batista packing for the Dominican Republic.
At that time, it was still possible for rich Americans to gamble and to watch or participate in bizarre sexual games in Havana, and it was still permissible for impressionable young Americans to idolize the dashing rebel, not then known to be an instrument of the Communist Menace.
In the months following Castro's takeover, one could read of his eating hot dogs and ice cream cones at the Bronx Zoo, and latenight television entertainment was frequently to feature Jack Paar showing home movies of his daughter Randy splashing about in a swimming pool with Castro's son.
Rich Americans who wanted to go kinky had to go elsewhere than to Havana, and Randy didn't swim with Fidelito anymore.
Castro had become another dupe for Soviet Russia and was busy sowing the seeds of dissension throughout Latin America.
Indeed, that is why it is obligatory today for the CIA to interfere with orderly democratic processes, to support the most undemocratic revolutions and to help freedomloving peoples of Latin America enjoy any system of selfdetermined government of our choosing.
Well, Castro was exporting revolution, all right — with what success may be reckoned by the fact that Che is not alive and well in La Paz — but doing so to the embarrassment and consternation of the Soviet Union and of all organized Communist parties except the Chinese.
The Communists in Latin America were faring far better in working through the system than was Castro in promoting violent revolution.
Castro came to see the error of his ways after abortive Cuban-directed revolutionary adventures in Venezuela and Boh via.
By 1968, he had shucked on his earlier flirtation with China and had returned, wagging his tail behind him, to the Soviet fold.
Now, I wouldn't trust a Russki any farther than I could throw Chuck Connors, but, setting aside my chauvinistic prejudices, Castro's courtship of the Commies seems to me to make sense.
From its very beginnings as a geopolitical entity, Cuba had lpnged for some measure of that independence of which other nations boast.
Raped and ravaged by several empirebuilders, pre-Castro Cuba came closer to enjoying the spirit of independence when a Spanish colony than when, after a grueling Cuban-fought war of liberation, it became — with the ""help"" of an expansionist United States — a republic.
Jose Marti, the Washington/ Lincoln/ William Tell of Cuba (with some of whose poetry you are familiar if you know the song ""Guantanamera""), staunch admirer of the United States that he was, nevertheless warned his followers against domination by the United States.
To put Cuba on anything approaching a sound and selfsufficient economic footing, the nationalization of industry (i.e., the sugar refineries) was of paramount importance.
But, the refineries being Americanowned, to nationalize industry was to antagonize the United States.
And to antagonize the United States — without first making sure that its bullying postures would be matched by those of a powerful ally — would certainly have been once more to surrender Cuban independence.
The remarkable thing is that Castro has consistently manipulated the Soviet Union more ably than it has him.
Even today, with Castro chastened and Cuba ruled by a Communist party, the party is at least 80% dominated by Castroites who earlier rallied round many another flag than the Red banner;' old guard pro-Soviet Communists are pointedly excluded from leadership roles.
As an example of spunk, Castro's maintenance of Cuban integrity in the face of increasing economic dependence on the Soviet Union rivals Franco's remaining aloof from the turmoil of World War II by refusing to let his erstwhile ally Hitler use Spain as a corridor to the Mediterranean.
The true believers would doubtless dismiss these as the blib, forked-tongue sentiments to be expected from a warmongering Commie.
But, to judge by his fall from power not so very long afterward, Khrushchev was thought to be quite sincere by the war-mongering Commies themselves.
It does not, however, as someone else in another blurb indicates it does, read like a novel.
The first phase consisted in assassinating a prominent government official, and the second in blowing up, with buried explosives, the Havana cemetery during the official's funeral, thus killing all the top government leaders, including Machado.
Suchlicki has permitted himself a single exclamation point in the entire book, and that one comes so unexpectedly, and inappropriately, that it is a thunderclap shattering the calm of pages and pages of cane production figures which only Earl Butz could find exciting.
Suchlicki has succeeded admirably at what he set out to do which was to write, not a novel, but a short history of Cuba.
I should point out that his account of Castro's Cuba is a good deal more balanced and less approving than my own remarks.
The book comes at a timely time and makes excellent reading for anyone who wants to know more about our tempestuous Caribbean neighbor.
M en's Intramural Soccer Nears End of Season; Pikes Lead by David A Anderson With just one week left in the soccer season, the undefeated Pikes led the Men's Intramural Soccer League with a 6-0-1 record.
The Lambda Chi's bombed the Independents 7-1 behind a 3 goal effort by George Krebs.
The other Lambda Chi goals came from Don Hall, assisted by Krebs, Ricky Price, by David Anderson; Eyrich, assisted by ;e Krebs; and Dean Foley, assisted by David Anderson.
Earl Aycock scored two of the KA goals, assisted by Rob Nichols and Steve Haygood.
Doug Minor, Steve Laney, and Richard Edgerton contributed goals for the Pike victory.
George Krebs scored two one assisted by George , to help pace the Lambda Chi's.
Don Hall, assisted by Krebs, and Ricky Price, assisted by David Anderson scored the other LXA goals.
Rob Blount, assisted by Bryan Miller, and Jim Watts provided the scoring for the Sigs.
Richard Edgerton scored two goals in the Pike victory, one assisted by Doug Minor.
Mickey Wallace, assisted by Edgerton, and Bill Mann scored the other goals.
Lambda Chi goals came from Ricky Price, John McVey, assisted by David Anderson, and George Krebs.
David Hardin provided two of the Sig goals, the other being scored by Rob Blount with an assist from Bryan Miller.
Earl Aycock, assisted by Bruce McKihley, and Bill Stii, assisted by Rob Nichols provided the scoring for the KA's.
Earl Aycock and Rob Nichols accounted for the KA's scores, each scoring a goal and assisting the other.
George Krebs, assisted by David Anderson provided the scoring for the Lambda Chi's.
The Pikes dropped the Sigs 4-0 behind two goals from Richard Edgerton, one assisted by Bill Mann.
Have Your Doctor Phone or Bring Your Prescription In BankAmericard and Master Charge Accepted.
While the Majors moved handily up and down Newell Field, the impressiveness of the victory becomes extremely evident in view of the statics.
George Eyrich scored two of the goals for the Lambda Chi's, the other one coming from George Krebs.
SOCCER STANDINGS TEAM W L Pikes 6 KA's 4 Lambda Chi's 3 Sigs 3 0 In addition, punter John Kirby sent four punts towering into the October skies for a 42 yard average.
Fullback Charlie Goldberg and tailback John Kirby handled the running chores, with receivers Sonny Aldy and Dees Hinton taking care of the catching chores.
As the game opened Millsaps' offense looked a little rusty, producing little more than a fumble, and interception, and a fine 57 yard rush by Kirby in the whole first quarter.
The defense kept the Majors in the game, repelling the Indians on countless occasions.
The defense opened with yet another brilliant goal line stand, holding Principia on the one yard line.
After hitting Aldy for a 20 yard gain, Haygood found Hinton, who broke three tackles on route to a 71 yard touchdown pass-run play.
A second Millsaps drive was killed by a fumble at the seven, but the Majors quickly followed with a score.
After runs by Goldberg and Skip Wieniewitz, Haygood hit Kirby with an 11 yard touchdown toss.
Bridley added the PAT, and with two minutes to go in the half the Majors led 14-0.
The halftime ceremonies, highlighted by the Callaway High School Band and Chargettes, was topped off by the crowning of Jenny Bates as the 1974 Homecoming Queen.
Early in the third quarter Brindley hit on a field goal from 22 yards out to push the score to 17-0.
From this point, the game took a somewhat lethargic turn, as the defense was continually called upon to rectify offensive miscues.
Later, Millsaps held again, after Principia had earned a first down at the 10 yard line.
Greg Freeman awakened the crowd with 40 seconds left to play as he picked off a Principia ariel and returned it 60 yards for the Majors' final touchdown.
Mr Smith was one of the South's few progressives in the Civil Rights torn years that he served.51-62.
Considered too liberal and chummy with the Kennedys, his district was gerrymandered and he lost to James Whitten in 1962.
Born in a village south of reenwood, Sidon, in 1918, Mr Smith was in his early years an avid reader and amateur journalist.
Eventually returning to Mississippi in 1946, Mr Smith politics through jourand after working in Senator Stennis's first campaign was the senator's legislative assistant for the years 1947-49.
In this capacity he was director of the KennedyJohnson Natural Resources Advisory Committee in 1960, director of the Tennessee Valley Authority after his Congressional career until 1972, and a member of the Public Works Committee in the House.
Another trait Mr Smith portrayed untypically as a Southern congressman in the 60's was an advocacy of internationalism and for the last seven of his Congressional years he was a member of the United States Delegation in the NATO Parliament.
Frank Smith's subject for this Friday's program is one which has occupied much of his public career and permeates his writings, that of his state's place in the world.
In reply to speculation that appeared in the P&W recently, Lloyd Gray, president of Kappa Alpha fraternity, stated that the fraternity in no way influenced the alleged resignation of James Galloway from the Homecoming Court.
Millsaps Hosts Mime Theatre The second attraction of the 1974-75 Millsaps Arts and Lecture Series will be on stage at the Millsaps Christian Center Auditorium Saturday, Nov., when the local series and S Hurok present the Claude Kipnis Mime Theatre.
The genius of Claude Kipnis has been savored by audiences in many countries through many media.
Hailed by Newhouse Newspapers critic Byron Belt as ""one of the giants, of contemporary theatre,"" he has created works for solo mime, mime troupe alone and mime troupe with orchestra; has performed on television; lectured on mime and published a book on mime.
Claude Kipnis was born in Paris and after studying with Marcel Marceau. founded a school of mime in Tel-Aviv.
He has appeared at many colleges and universities as well as the Ravinia Festival and the Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival.
His numerous television appearances include NCB's Today and programs on the BBC in Londs.
College Senate Holds November Session by Glade Mclnnis The third session of the College Senate was more tense and more active than the preceding two.
With all seven student representatives present, the senate handled six items in an hour long meeting.
Frank Laney called, "". . . the only body on campus that represents everybody on campus"" proceeded to approve an amendment providing that the registrar be on the Admissions Committee.
The second item called for a report from the Student Committee on Parking which had not been prepared.
The student senators were unsure as to what proposal, if any, had been accepted by the Student Senate concerning the enforcement of parking violation rules.
Laney, joined by several other faculty members, were anxious to see the situation corrected, expecially in front of the Library and Ezelle Hall.
Mr Howard Bavender then sought statements from the administration concerning Administrative Functions Committee and plans for renovating the Student Union.
Collins had issued no statement in reply to the request Dean Saunders stated that both items were under consideration.
The dull buzz pervading the senate room left as Mr Bavender addressed the matters that concerned the Purple & White.
The Publications Committee rejected proposals that 'outside' writers not be allowed to participate in the paper and that no unsigned articles be allowed, but did not respond to requests for an investigation the confiscation of the P&W or guidelines for publication.
Now, as a part of the Millsaps community, if such a thing exists, I am making a serious and hopefully productive attempt at presenting an alternative view of what a college newspaper can and ought to be.
I completely agree that the P&W should not report in the manner of a city daily.
All good newspapers follow the conventional format of including, usually on one or two inner pages, an editorial page.
We all agree that editorials are of vital importance to a newspaper, but the P&W follows the extreme reverse with a surplus of editorialized articles to the extent of making them front page stories.
You included the imors and speculations from unannounced sources ""within the elections imittee"", but then you quoted the chairman of the committee and the person >n as denouncing the rumors completely.
To include varied accounts obviously opinwiated article is one thing, but then to slap a head on the story that is exactly NOT what the ""Male Reportedly"" did is not only misleading and deceiving but also sacrifices all ethics that any worthwhile journalism ever attempts to have.
Another issue that has acted to destroy, rather than create, any sense of community at Millsaps is the poor use of cartoons, particularly the attack of President Collins.
Let me first light a torch of loyalty and appreciation for President Collins and ten I'll continue the singe. ine minute you bitch about students' rights, you say let us do it ourselves, and len you turn around and bitch because the administration doesn't get involved, md you make its raising money look sinful.
By the way, the fund raising campaign happens to be in the interest of the entire Millsaps community.
You're ambiguous, or maybe your goal is ""to bitch is to bitch is to bitch"", but whatever the case, you do have the right — in light of our freedom of the press — to editorialize.
This letter is in response to the Purple and White of October 29, 1974.
Bergmark for winning the Distinguished Professor Award, and the almost nonexistent reporting of tap day.
Possibly some people might wish to be so corny as to send a clipping from the campus newspaper to their parents about being tapped into an honorary society.
Still we must all keep in mind that these things are insignificant, and that we should rivet our attention to important examples of campus conflict such as male homecoming maids.
If we do this often enough maybe we too will be able to tell the difference between significance and insignificance; and maybe, just maybe, if we're good, we'll be able to decide for ourselves.
The paper staff, in particular the editor, castigated the administration for lack of concern for the students.
From my observations, the paper staff could use some brushing up in this area also.
Even with the unsatisfactory features that I have enumerated, the rece paper had some bright spots.
Of especially high quality were the articles black students at Millsaps, and the article on student rights by Dennis Mcintosh.
I should feel quite inadequate were I asked to express the attitude of all members of any race, such as all Millsaps students of Jewish or Irish origin who feel oppressed by an atheist majority.
And to suggest that people should be chosen arbitrarily for an office or position merely because they happen to be members of a certain race or group is beyond belief.
Granted, the majority is usually full of it, but anyone can get elected if he or she uses the right propaganda techniques and can smile all the time.
Convincing the majority of just about anything is easy as Amerikan pie, if you know how.
Your salary and position are as editor, not king, and this paper is a Millsaps' paper, one that should satisfy the Millsaps community, which the P&W seems to be trying to tear apart instead of create.
The only sense of community the P&W inspires is by creating a common enemy for the students once every two weeks, or whenever.
Inexperience has been your excuse for lousy layout and tardiness, but you need an original excuse for proofreading errors.
Correct spelling and grammar would make even a pitiful publication a little more appealing.
As business manager, it's really none of my business what you choose to include in the P&W, so let me submit this letter not as a staff member but as a member of the Millsaps community.
It won't be necessary to publish our names because it will exceed your three page limit.
Its utter lack of knowledge as to the guiding rules by which Millsapians should abide is only superseded by its extreme lack Page :s of -procedural due as I atte any Fi 1 c bj Pat Gleason process, i cue the infamous ""Spillman Report"" as the necessary evidence for my allegations.
Scott Spillman, was acting as an independent entity, that is, without actual approval of The Dormitory Board, as he utilized the Board's trust in him, as Board recorder, to insert into the decision in the ""Leroy Case"" rovision which was not decided by Board.
Such a usurption of power itself abominable, base and disrespectful; but to complicate this calamity with outright insanity, the Judicial Council proceeded to rule n the Leroy Case, in part of the its of this report.
It is apparent that the Judicial Council is both a lackey to injustice and a lackey to those in the administration seeking a definitive ruling on the status of alcohol on campus.
If it is justice that is sought, I Visits with Vinaruhu The Rite of the Sterile Packiderm by Ebenezer Pendergrass I had just begun to appreciate Vinaruhu as a source of profound wisdom and divine revelation.
He had been on my mind for several days now and on this cold, dark Saturday night I was making my trek to his cabin to make apologies for the cala Judi upor mer will work within their distorted visions to pursue equal and exact justice.
I believe in actuality that this entire subject calling for informing on your neighbor is ludicrous; but if it is ludicrousness that is called for, it is ludicrousness that will be attained.
As I dodged the cow dung in my path I reflected on how not unlike this cow dung, the experiences of the material world often clutter the path to spiritual truth.
I could see a light on inside and could faintly hear some strange noises.
Vinaruhu's cabin was cluttered with empty wine bottles and positioned in the midst of this awful mess was Vinaruhu himself, lying in a pool of wine.
He was barely conscious, rolling around in a stupor muttering the words to a strange song.
In cotton fields, ain't nothin' so evil As Planter man's foe, ole boll weevil Hell or high water we'll get 'em all Ninety-eight bottles of wine on the wall The farmin' business show ain't funny 'Cause talkin' bout cotton's talkin' bout money Cain't argue with that greenback call Ninety-seven bottles of wine on the wall.
Then all of a sudden Colonel Mim appeared from nowhere, prancing across the room leaving a trail of money in his path.
Then in a fleeting moment Clark Reed appeared, scooped up the money and all concerned disappeared, including Colonel Mim and the boll weevils.
That left only myself and Vinaruhu who was now struggling to remember the words to the next verse.
I felt Vinaruhu owed me an explanation, so I asked the crucial question.
First you orchestrate the ongoing manipulation of the Millsaps peons, now you're financing Clark Reed.
Every year I conduct the ancient dance of the boll weevils to guarantee the cotton crop.
A goood cotton crop means money in the delta economy, new homes, and a prosperous year for Clark Reed.
Clark Reed is the best thing that ever happened to the Mississippi Democrats.
Page 4 SHORT SHOTS ""The War Between Men And Women"" is this Friday's movie.
It stars Jack Lemmon and Jason Robards and is one of the funniest movies Jim McCafferty has ever seen.:30 in AC-215 ' Thirteen students have been invited to join Alpha Epsilon Delta premedical honorary.
They are John C Barber, Don Carpenter, Jeff Cook, Thomas Derbes, Richard Edgerton, Rickey Graham, David Johnson, John McVay, Jackson Harper, Randy Carleton, Hale Bryd, Owen Patterson, and Chip 3 Sadka. os have b Seven students at Millsaps have been tapped for membership in Alpha Psi Omega, a National dramatic fraternity.
They are Lynn Pledger, Diane Wiltshire, Kevin Sessums, Jan Dickson, Cassandra Fowlkes, Jean Moore, and Jimmy Thrasher.
Lloyd Gray, a junior political science major, was selected as one of 50 outstanding young leaders and college students to participate in the Mississippi Economic Council's Human Resources Seminar in Jackson last week.
The National Teachers' Exam will be given in the AC Recital Hall Nov., from 8 am to 5 pm.
The Mississippi Modern Language Ass. will hold its convention at Millsaps on Saturday.
Richard Baltz, chairman of the department of Economics, Accounting, and Administration, has been studying tuition data for the last five years, and has come up with some proposals on tuition and increasing the number of students at Millsaps.
Baltz has found that while tuition has risen from $2,160 to $2,496 over the last five years, total enrollment of full-time students and the full-time equivalent has fallen by less than 5 students.
Thus, the increase in tuition has discouraged few people from attending Millsaps.
Lower out-of-state tuition (instead of raising it like other schools do) in order to attract more out-of-state students.
Develop new programs and degrees to increase interest in the various departments, thus attracting more students.
One such new degree is the Bachelor of Business Administration degree which has already been proposed to the administration.
ERA Opens Membership Rolls Fearing unisex toilets, female drafting, and homo sexual marriages, many people mistrust the Equal Rights Amendment support group on campus.
But the Millsaps supporters of the Constitutional amendment are not a women's lib pact, but, rather, a soon to be chartered organization seeking the ratification of the ERA in Mississippi.
In its efforts to achieve ERA ratification in this state, the organization has launched a letter-writing campaign.
These letters to legislators will simply show the senders' support for the amendment.
This evening, group members will present their objectives to two fraternities on campus.
If you are unsure about the ERA question, take the following quiz provided by the group.
States now have the right to regulate the separation of sexes in prisons, dormitories, military barracks, ets.
David Anderson, Earl Aycock, Janette DeBoever, Sharon Edwards, Flinda Feurgeson, Mike Forester, Carmen Gettis, Pat Gleason, Mark Jones, Doug Minor, Cathy Passailague, Dean Pittman, Bill Ray, Derrick Shields, Mike Stevens, Susan Weill, Jan Wildmon Editor Business Manager Assistant Editor Sports Editor Cartoonist Photographers Columnists Hft*\s Panhellenic Performs Service hamburgers and cokes af terwards.
Although the Panhellenic members who participated in this social service found the afternoon to be tiring, the experience proved to be very rewarding.
Panhellenic Counsel, under Mary Lloyd, is planning another social service project with Willowwood for later this year.
The school is a developmental center for mentally retarded children of all ages. o The Mississippi State Fair became the setting for a funfilled afternoon with the children of Willowwood School for the mentally retarded.
On October 10, the members of the Millsaps Panhellenic Association took a field trip with sixty children ranging in age from 6 to 16 and from slightly retarded to mentally and physically handicapped.
The Shriners of Jackson provided the children with free rides for the afternoon plus Read This The Stylus is alive — it thrives.
Who or what is The Stylus — Why, it is Millsaps' literary magazine and it will come out this year — it is on the way — and that phrase ""Millsaps' literary magazine"" means just that with ""Millsaps"" standing for ""the students of this school"" ... the funding has come from the student activity fees and the magazines will be completed and distributed to all students free of charge next spring . . . so write — that's right.
When submitting any work, please type it if at all possible but otherwise write it very legibly in ink.
No exact deadline has yet been set for submission of works but it will probably be sometime in late January or February.
If anyone desires to work with the Stylus in any way, or make any comments of any sort, or ask any questions, or say anything at all, please contact one of the people just mentioned . . . they are trying to help you so write something today and turn it in.
Henry Patton, a successful businessman well acquainted with many phases of economics on a global scale, will visit classes during the week arid give personal interviews to students by appointment.
Mr Patton is a 1935 graduate of Princeton, and has since been involved in securities and investment banking enterprises spanning the Western Hemi45Sfe.
At various times during hWcareer, he has served as president of such firms as Fredrick H Hatch and Co., Deltec — an investment banking firm with branches in Latin America — and American Overseas Finance Co.
In 1955, with several college friends, Patton took part in the uranium boom in the famous Four Corners area in the Midwest.
Through good luck, this group discovered one of the major uranium ore bodies in the United States.
This business venture is know known as the United Nuclear Company, currently worth about $100 million.
He is there involved in various cultural projects and is devoted to the peaceful development of nuclear energy.
The Woodrow Wilson National Fellowship Foundation is an organization devoted to increased communications between liberal arts colleges and the nonacademic worlds of business, diplomacy, and the professions.
Margaret Chase Smith visited Millsaps as the Woodrow Wilson Senior Fellow for last spring.
John Hughes, astute political observer and author of THE LIVING PRESIDENCY, will visit Millsaps under the same program in the coming spring.
Mr Patton will visit numerous classes during the week, particularly in economies, sociology, and political science.
He will also be available for personal appointments with students throughout the week.
Appointments are to be handled through the office of Dean Saunders. i Entertainment Page 5 by Kevin Sessums Most weeks in Jackson there is nothing to do except gripe about there being nothing to do.
She is the model with the gap between her front teeth; the actress with caps.
Scott is the first man to direct, star in, produce, and DISTRIBUTE his own movie — and the studios don't like him for it.
Also Scott doesn't like the Motion Picture Rating Board because they gave the picture a Restricted Rating.
He contends that the worst word said is ""damn,"" that there is no violence, and that there is very little sex.
There are two stage shows coming to town this week — one at the city auditorium, the other here at Millsaps.
The stars that stud the cast include Myrna Loy, Ricardo Montalban, Edward Mulhare, and Werner Klemperer.
The Claude Kipnis Mime Theatre will be at the Christian Center Auditorium on Saturday at 8:15 thanks to the Millsaps Arts and lecture Series.
Byron Belt of New House Newspapers said that Kipnis is ""one of the giants of contemporary theatre.
I know I'm therider, can't run away; invisible hands rise from black ground, tossing me into vapour; thighs grip beating clouds.
A great sword falls glitters from stars; Someone whispering THERE IS NO LAW A torch appears at my side; mouths laughing THERE IS NO LAW Something holds the world, knows what I want, thrusts it bleeding against my sword.
If the motion picture ""The Graduate"" is, as it was adertised for its recent TV showing, the ""most talked-about comedy of our time,"" I have lost, along with my sense of humor, all conception of what comedy is.
I remain perplexed that so few people should recognize the character of Mrs.
Robinson to be the only one in the film worthy of sympathy ; if her code isn't a very ice one, she at least has one, and he alone moves with purpose and integrity in pursuit of her goals.
An observant man, he succinctly parodies Spanish manners and mannerisms while setting his scenes.
But, once he puts his characters in motion, he descends to the kind of low burlesque suggested by their names, names like Paco Machismo and Alfredo Gazpacho.
While some of the situations (especially those inolving El Chicote, who suffers — in the bullring — an unbecoming fear of bulls) are nevertheless almost very funny, failing to be very funny they are not very funny at all.
His novel is at once a nonnovel (in which incidents relate to each other only in the sense that all incidents relate to each other — Europe the less if one clod be washed away by the sea sort of thing) and an exquisitely exasperating exhibition of the author's impressive erudition.
Suffice it to say»that it is peopled with detectives, dwarfs and ecdysiasts, and that nothing is ever what it seems.
Not by Barth, Barthelme, Borges, Kafka, Pynchon or Bonnegut, all of whom and more, along with Raymond Chandler, Dillard has read.
One wishes that Dillard, if he feels he must spin intricate webs to entice the reader into giving up hours better spent in the contemplation of navels, would realize his obligation to the reader and would deliver a payoff less cutesyarcane than the assertion that that's-all-there-isthere-isn't-anymore.
Finally, one wishes Dillard would put his appreciable talent into a conventional novel — or, anyway, into a novel of conventional structure — and leave pyrotechnics to poorer writers who need them to be noticed.
Some people already do — George Garrett, Wright Morris, Louis D Rubin, Jr. and Colin Wilson among them.
Having observed how, in the affluent industrialized nations, each generation of humankind grows bigger than the previous one, Resnest, who calls himself an ""environmental geneticist,"" proposes a novel solution for the population explosion, the energy crisis, the food shortage and most of the other troubles besetting this troubled world.
Or, anyway, we must employ what we know about nutrition and genetic engineering in such a manner as to insure that succeeding generations of humankind will be progressively smaller.
His brain enabled Man to control his environment; now, says Resnest, his bulk threatens to destroy it But make Man smaller and in effect you enlarge his world and multiply his resources.
The know-how and technology for this bold approach already exist, but Resnest acknowledges that its implementation poses problems, some even thornier than those forestalling universal nuclear disarmament because the case for miniaturization touches individuals as well as nations.
John Q Public (and, we can assume, Ivan Ivanovich Ivanov) really doesn't want to be smaller.
Even though the attainment of some optimal size would mean that his condominium home was — as advertised — truly spacious, even though a single Big Mac would make dinner for two, even though a VW Beetle would be the equivalent of a Winnebago, John Q Public wants to be a big man.
There is another kind of problem, too, to which Resnest has not addressed his fertile mind.
Assume for the nonce that all mankind has recognized the worth of his proposal and has submitted to becoming a race of pygmies.
EL GRITO Rather than disguise the following paragraphs so as to insinuate them more cleverly into what purports to be a book review, let me, openly admitting that what I have to say next has nothing to do with books, beg a modicum of your attention from those of you who are concerned about inflation in general and about the outrageously rising prices of foods in particular.
And now let me beg from you as well a little help, a little sacrifice and a lot of commitment.
Interested persons are asked to assemble at 8:30m., Thursday, November 14th in the Colloquium Room of Elsinore for an informal meeting to discuss a program of action intended to encourage local foodstores to reduce their prices on selected food items.
Initial participants will select and specify four food items and determine the prices they are willing to pay for those items.
Bulletins will be sent to headquarters executives of local foodstores (and press releases to local media) announcing the number of participants pledged to the program and their determination to refrain from purchasing specified items at prices higher than those they have determined.
Each week, each participant in the program will be expected to recruit one more participant.
Each week, four additional food items will be selected, prices will be set and updated bulletins will be circulated to foodstore executives.
Quixotic as this scheme may seem at first appraisal, the very sophistication of the food marketing industry's inventorycontrol and buying procedures makes food marketers highly sensitive to the slightest changes in consumer buying patterns.
Consequently, even a small number of dedicated nonconsumers can, acting in concert, make their demands heard and their non-consumption felt.
To make a go of the program, people with specialized knowledge — of similar consumer actions, of the food business, of possible legal ramifications, etc. — can be especially helpful, as can people with media and/ or foodstore contacts (no double agents, please) and others willing to type, run mimeo machines, address envelopes and the like.
Lacking any special qualifications, however, you can still be immensely valuable so long as you can offer your support.
Players Director Lance Goss has said that he has waited to present the play — which is the story of Robert and Elizabeth Barrett Browning — for a solid decade; but that, because of legal problems involving Robert Goulet and the rights he claimed to any American musical about the Brownings, the owners of the copyright were unable to release the play for production in this country.
However, Goss said, the play has just become available, after its highly-acclaimed run in London from 1964 to 1967.
The Millsaps production will not be the first presentation in the U.S.. however, because a professional company in Chicago has already opened its production, which is to run until late November.
Millsaps students and faculty will be admitted free on Wednesday and Thursday nights only, upon presentation of their identification cards; Thursday and Friday, they must pay the regular price for admission — as yet unannounced.
The play is a large musical, set in Victorian London — and in Florence — in 1845.
The play will be directed by Goss. who is professor of theatre and chairman of the department.
The elaborate sets will be designed by Jackson Daily News Arts Editor Frank Hains, with musical direction by Leland Byler, chairman of the department of music and conductor of the Millsaps Singers.
Lighting will be designed by Stanley Graham; and a special ballet will be choreographed by Albia Kavan Cooper.
Kevin Sessums, a sophomore theatre major from Forest, and Diane Carroll, a senior music major from Oxford, have been cast in the title roles, following Keith Michel and June Bronhill, who appeared in the original London production.
Sessums is one of seven recent initiates into Alpha Psi Omega, the national honorary dramatic fraternity.
Initiations were held Nov.; joining with Sessums were sophomores Diane Wiltshire of McComb, Jan Dickson of Jackson, Jimmy Thrasher of Jackson, and Cassandra Fowlkes of Jackson; and seniors Lynn Pledger of Memphis and Jean Moore of Jackson.
November 7, 1974 Page 7 Sports In Sight m by Ward Em ling P&W Sports Editor Due to significant sports happenings, limited information and ample space, a sports column of this nature becomes necessary.
The last time such a feature appeared in the Purple and White escapes memory, and this one is extremely I will probably also escape memory.
The first order of business is the Majors' football team's return to their winning ways, avelling to Maryville ollege, Millsaps handed the hometown Scots a 21-7 defeat in a game marked by particularly unnecessary physical roughness.
After a scoreless first half, Frank Shaw scored on a short burst which, when coupled with Doug Brindley's extra point, gave Millsaps a 7-0 lead.
However, a 95-yard return of the ensuing kickoff knotted the score at 7-7.
Shaw, al«ng with the Majors, came rushing back, scoring the go-ahead touchdown on another short run.
Don Richards put it away in the fourth quarter with a 30-yard interception return to paydirt.
Brindley connected on his 12th consecutive extra point, but only after one Millsaps player and three Maryville players were ejected for fighting.
Also worth mentioning is an interception, his first of the year, by experienced halfback Steve McAllily.
Winning their fourth game of the year against two losses, the Majors assumed Head Coach Harper Davis of his eighth nonlosing season in a row.
Texas on 9 for la bout with tin College, and returns home their season's finale against Trinity College, a week later.
Moving down the Millsaps sports ladder, the tennis Majors host the Mississippi State netters Friday, November 8.
Hopefully, Coach Jim Montgomery and his racquet persons will attract some merited success, status and perhaps even a few spectators.
Anyone watching NFL Monday Night Football was in for a treat during half-time.
First, for all of you sports fans who enjoy the best in any and every sport, the surprise was a fine interview with the newly crowned and deserving heavyweight champion Muhammad Ali.
Secondly, for you women's libbers, a girl, the first ever in San Francisco 49's area history, participated in the Punt, Pass and Kick Competition.
Millsaps 24, Austin 10 Mississippi State 21, Auburn 16 Alabama 31, L.S.U. 9 iw Orleand 48, Miami 2 Miss 0, Open 7 Wofford 37, Catawba 26 * Well sports fans, that wraps it up for this week.
Oh, before this column escapes your memory, try to get out to the Deville Cinema for ""The Longest Yard""; it's definitely worth seeing.
As far as the scoring went, Millsaps was the first to light up the scoreboard.
The Majors executed a five play, 56-yard scoring drive in the second quarter.
The big gainers in the drive, an 18-yard pass to ace receiver Sonny Aldy and a 19yard run by fullback Charlie Goldberg, were complimented by the 15-yard touchdown sprint of quarterback Rick Haygood.
McMurray replied to the Millsaps tally with a touchdown of their own, knotting the game at 7-all and late in the second quarter the Indians eaptured the lead on a 37-yard field goal which had been set by a pass interception deep in Millsaps territory.
The scoring drive was capped by a 35-yard touchdown toss to wingback Dees Hinton in his only reception of the day.
Millsaps remained in control of the game, however, until late in the fourth quarter when McMurray mounted their go-ahead touchdown drive with little over five minutes to go.
The drive was ended by two possible interference calls drawn by the Millsaps backfield, one inside the 10-yard line and the other in the end zone.
A few minutes later, the Indians ambushed John Kirby in Millsaps territory on a mixed-up punt.
Not looking at all like the Millsaps of previous games, the Majors were outgained in every department.
The size and strength of the McMurray defensive line is evident by the lack of rushing yardage and the fact that Haygood was dumped behind the line for a minus 61 yards.
Skip Wieniewitog and Goldberg led what rushing attack there was with 48 and 44 yards, respectively.
The receiving department was led by Aldy who hauled in four passes for 50 yards.
Kirby also had four receptions for 11 yards, added 26 on the ground and sent nine punts into the air for a 37. yardaverage.
Haygood hit on 11 of his 21 passing attempts, suffering one interception.
Linebacker Phillip Maples led the Majors' defensive charge, with 12 tackles, seven assists and one interception.
Greg Freeman and Jeb Dominek each added eight tackles, and Howard Smith sacked the Indian quarterback twice.
The loss was the second of the season for the Major's against three shutout wins.
After an open week the Majors were to travel to Maryville College for a November 2 bout.
Pikes Win Soccer; Volleyball Begins by David Anderson The men's intramural soccer season ended this week with the Pikes winning the championship with a 7-0-1 record.
Bill Mann, Doug Minor, and Richard Edgerton provided the scoring for the Victors.
George Krcbs scored two unassisted goals and assisted on the other to lead the Lambda Chi's to a 3-1 victory over the Sigs.
LIFE 15 NOT LIFE AT ALL WITHOUT DELICHT Victory in Defeat ' | l Punctuate your life with pleasures.
A short pause for a Coke means a full stop to tiring work and a fresh start refreshed.
Allen Bishop stated that he was upset with this approach and called for facts — a debate between faculty members ensued.
The Publications Committee was at the end of tense debate directed to conduct an investigation, to consider guidelines for publication, and to present its report before the committee in motions proposed by Doctors Padgett, Bishop, and Laney, respectively.
Fidelity Rank UTICA NORTH WEST STREET JACKSON 1894 The BankThat Cares < November 7, 1974 possibility of developing a Placement Office at Millsaps to aid students in finding jobs and entering graduate schools.
Dean Saunders stated that the proposal would be handled through established procedure, but Dennis Wells of the senior class was concerned about its future.
Robert Shive ended by calling for a study of the efficiency of the scheduling process.
We've got Pancakes, over 20 different kinds, from Georgia Pecan to French to BananaNut Pancakes.
Plus fabulous Waffles, such as our Strawberry Waffle heaped with fruit and ringed with whipped cream.
According to the plan, wheellocks will be placed on all cars in no-parking zones, making them immobile.
The owner must then pay a $5 fine to the business office in order to have the lock removed.
If after 24 hours the owner has not paid, or arranged to pay, the fine, the car will be towed away and kept in lock with an additional $5 fine.
Faculty members of the College Senate praised the plan which originated in the Student Senate for its ingenuity and simplicity.
Student senators had been concerned that the registration of cars was an unworkable method and that the tow-away method (entailing a $25 fee) was unreasonable.
OTHER ACTION In the same Senate meeting a committee was established to study the feasibility and rationality of having football at Millsaps.
Two years ago a proposal to eliminate the program failed in a student referendum.
In a meeting last week, Nov., the Student Senate considered several proposals by Senator Dennis Wells as the main order of the day.
The first, a letter of congratulations to the football team and coaches, was adopted.
The second proposal called for the monetary regulation of the P&W with regard to the article ""Visits with Vinaruhu"" and any other such writings that might appear in the student press.
After short statements of disbelief by Senator Diane McMullen and Senator Mike Stevens at the Millsaps College Volume 90 Number fi the ""obvious censorship"" the motion failed unanimously.
Four other proposals introduced by Senator Wells in absentia through substitute Senator Mark Eppes failed unanimously also.
The final proposal to appoint a committee to study the tuition plan of Dr.
In final action, a motion to direct the Publications Committee to conduct a survey of student opinion of the P&W was introduced by Senator May Lipe Zehnder.
The motion passed as a survey to study what students -i. want in a school paper.
Bill to aid private college students supported ai w St by Robert Gaston For the past three or four years, Millsaps College, along with all of the other private higher educational institutions in s state have been lobbying in ie state legislature for what is commonly called a tuition equalization bill.
Nine accredited institutions (Millsaps, Belhaven, Blue Mountain, Clarke, Rust, Tougaloo, William Carey, Mississippi College, and Wood Jr.
College) have organized the Mississippi Association of Private Colleges.
In brief, the tuition equalization bill would provide cash renumeration to the Mississippi students of private colleges in the state.
The rationale underlying this grant of money from the state is that parents of students from Mississippi pay state taxes higher education without eiving direct benefit from these taxes.
Also, since the private institutions take part of the burden away from public schools, bill proponents argue the grants will make the more exve private schools more cessible.
Currently, the state supported colleges are receiving more than three times the amount per student which the bill would provide for private college students.
The association stresses that it the individual student who must apply for and receive these grants.
The private schools of ssissippi are experiencing the economic crunch like all of the colleges across the nation.
The bill was defeated in our state legislature in past years for several reasons.
Amendments were tacked on, one of which expanded the bill's coverage to private elementary dary schools.
The Supreme Court has ruled that state aid to segregated schools was unconstitutional, and most of these schools in Mississippi fit into this category.
The original bill would not have been unconstitutional, as several states already have such a program.
Another argument against the bill was the separation of church and state controversy, since most of the schools are church related.
Here, it should be recalled that the aid is to go to the student, not to the school directly.
Tuition assistance will permit middleincome students to choose an Commentary on the Concert Complex There have been numerous rumors flying about as a result of the October 19th Concert held in the Athletic Complex.
Apparently there has been a great deal of misunderstanding both on the parts of students and faculty.
The agreement between the Senate and Bebop was that Millsaps students would be admitted free upon presentation of a current Millsaps I D.; all non-students would be charged $5.00 in advance or $6.00 at the door; the Senate would be responsible for rental of the gymnasium, procurement of security guards, and providing liability insurance for a 24-hour period; the Senate would receive none of the financial profits obtained.
The Senate rented the gymnasium (rental was necessary due to a College policy that in the event of off-campus organizations participating in events where admission is charged, sponsoring organizations must pay a standard rental fee to Millsaps College) and two additional rooms in the building for approximately $530.
Use of the gymnasium for the purpose of a musical concert was approved by the Administrative Council.
Major officials (including Dean Saunders, Dean Woodward, Mr Wood, Coach Montgomery, and President Collins) had been informed of the event and approved it.
Verification of the supposed indestructability of the floor came from the Director of Services.
It was asked by one or more members of the faculty why the concert was not stopped when certain acts were discovered or when so many ""outsiders"" attended.
To have ended the concert early would have been a violation of a legal contract, and a suit could have been filed.
The crowd of over 2,000 would have not responded favorably to a premature abortion of the show which they had paid, and I need not discuss the sociological implications of an angry crowd in a small area.
Now that this problem has been discovered the danger of more serious accidents will be prevented.
Further damage that could result from future events (basketball games, rodeos, etc.) can now be prevented.
There were several complaints about this concert, and many were deserved.
One must remember, though, that this event was a trial run for that building — the acid test.
Everyone watched to see just how much it could take, and saw what it couldn't handle.
To use the promoters and sponsors as whipping boys for the event is entirely out of place.
To those persons who were legitimately inconvenienced by any part of the concert and/ or its effects, I offer my most sincere apologies.
To those persons who have maliciously instigated and perpetrated rumors which cast aspersions on the Student Senate and the sponsors of this concert in order to prevent future concerts from occurring on the Millsaps campus, I offer no apologies but rather my right middle phalanx.
Gathering $6 million in one deft sweep is an awesome accomplishment and secures at least the physical existence of Millsaps for some time.
The conqueror is, of course, President Collins who merits the applause of the Millsaps community for bringing home the bread in troubled times.
But we are forced to wonder how much time one has for the actual administration of a school while engaged in such an effort.
It has been our contention that the administration under President Collins has devoted almost no time to the problems of the student or faculty member — even those wno seem veheme""tly devoted to him.
The utter lack of social or intellectual stimulation outside the classroom with a few exceptions is astounding.
Most seem to have a vague sense of being cramped at Millsaps and the problem is physical (e.g., the Student Center) as well as social.
The administration runs the school so that nothing is done without moving mountainous institutions.
Student government is part of the problem because it becomes bogged down with small matters, ignores innovation, and rarely challenges faculty or administration.
Millsaps functions as a collection of communities, not a college community.
This obvious segmentation is a product and promoter of the other problems.
Only the administration with its monopoly of power can approach these problems effectively.
Unfortunately, they fail to see that students and faculty are the life of a college, not contributors and administration.
Emily Wof ford's attack calls to mind Scarlett O'Hara's confrontation with that Yankee soldier on the stairwell of Tara: she shot him.
I think our Miss Emily brought it off with more panache than Miss Scarlett.
Not content with emptying her derringer into him, she then goes on to pistol whip his corpse and heave it over the banister.
One has a hunch that Miss Wofford, in this best of all possible worlds, would resent whatever disturbed the status quo.
Until then' you drift languidly with the stream, fondle the water lilies, keep your crinoline umbrella twirling.
In a world bounded by the banalities of the Greeks and the breathless insipidity of elections to the court of a Homecoming Queen the editorial policy of the P & W is no doubt equivalent to crocodiles in rut in the lily pond.
Nowhere, though, amid all the furor and Miss Woff ord's shrieks of frustration is there any talk about what the P & W should be.
True, we have student publications committees at both the College Senate and Student Senate levels but beyond glowering and rumors of censorship that would do credit to the KKK they seem as bereft of Jdgas as everybody else.
The editorial objectives of the Editor, as I understand them, are to educate, inform and in the process create some excitement.
Laudable objectives regardless of what is thought of his means io achieve them.
What is needed here is a P & W Advisory Committee to whom the Editor may turn for intelligent advice and counsel.
With such a device responsible and informed elements in the Millsaps community — administration, faculty, students, including Miss Wofford and her smoking derringer and bent and twisted umbrella, might with their cooperative efforts produce a college newspaper worthy of the name.
Sincerely Howard Bavender To Alcohol Fans Dear Editor, For now, Millsaps alcohol fans can breathe a sigh of relief.
The administration is aware that the Mississippi State Law prohibiting beer at educational institutions does not apply to private colleges.
Defending the right of Millsaps tudents to drink grain made beer in he middle of a'&strophic famine might allude to misplaced priorities, but something else here is involved.
The underlying issues are certain reasoning processes, and the prevalent attitude, reflected through administrative policy and Judicial Council rulings, concerning the mentality and maturity of Millsaps students.
They reasoned that since beer was forbidden to Mississippi citizens under 18, they as policy makers shared this responsibility of prohibition.
The Council also implied to the defendants that the administration and the Board of Trustees shared this feeling.
Under-eighteens are not forbidden by state law from drinking alcohol in private homes.
The State law does not seek to shield under-eighteens from exposure to alcohol, but only to restrict its sale.
The Council did not rule on the legality of beer on campus, but President Collins will.
Dean Woodward said President Collins is sure to rule against having it anywhere on campus.
Collins and no doubt the Board of Trustees must feel that the under-eighteens on this campus are of such fragile moral fiber and so incapable of reasoning as to need shelter from the lures of alcohol.
But there is now living on this campus a seventeen year old Millsaps student who, at the age of fifteen and sixteen, first tutored^ anfa rhWtdSTo^er as 6 head of the English Workshop at Miami-Dade Community College.
Even if some students under the age barrier do need ""protection"" is it correct to compromise the rights of the vast majority of over-eighteens for the ""benefit"" of these few.
If certain students are found to have disturbed the peace of other students by holding loud beer parties, to use this as a reason for banning beer is incorrect.
A ""beer"" party that disturbed the peace and damaged property should be tried for disturbing the peace and damaging property, not for being a ""beer"" party.
A reexamination of the archaic attitudes that seem predominately influential in administrative actions is definately in the near future.
I rushed to the door as fast as I could, hoping that the fire had not devoured my beloved tutor.
I knew I had to hurry, when the flames hit the Mad Dog it would be all over.
There was Vinaruhu, standing in the middle of the floor carefully tending a small pile of burning papers.
But I don't know why you think Collins or Saunders had a thing to do with it.
Vinaruhu was getting nervous, but I could see he wasn't going to break.
Freedom, freedom of the press There's no theory I love less Always free, the press must be So long as it agrees with me There are those who must dissent They have feelings they must vent They should say what they please Long as it never disagrees Vinaruhu Does the Rose Mary Stretch lob McDuff Always show responsibility The word applies to you and me Keeps ideas flowing free As long as they agree with me ""Stop, stop this instant,"" I shouted.
And for the next fifteen minutes Vinaruhu once again showed his profound grasp of the workings of Millsaps College.
Vinaruhu began by explaining why there was nothing to fear from the students.
Vinaruhu explained that just because Dennis Wells had studied Constitutional Law, doesn't mean that he believes the First Amendment has any business being practiced at Millsaps.
The attitude of the many faculty members was well expressed several years ago by Dr.
Vinaruhu explained that while Saunders had over reacted and applied early pressure on the P & W editor, that he and Collins would not presume to oppose freedom of the press.
They would give their encouragement knowing that even if evidence led to the top no one would have the balls to point the finger.
I left with the realization that in that great educational effort to shape well rounded individuals, Mothre Millsaps was once again showing her penchant for rectangles.
A Setback at Millsaps be concept of academic and intellectual freedom, uninhibited by censorship or external pressures, is ne of the most vital components of a je education.
It cannot be abandoned in any degree, even when such abandonment would be expedient at the time.
This concept has usually been maintained most admirably at Millsaps, even in the face of very hostile external pressure from local environs.
However, it received a slight — but potentially dangerous — setback last week when RNA President Imari Obadele was denied privilege of speaking on the Millsaps campus this semester.
After Gay advocate Eddie Sandifer spoke on campus several weeks ago, President Collins began receiving complaints from ""concerned"" citizens, alumni, and various other people — some of whom give money to the College.
All of these folks were a bit freaked out because we had a homosexual here, with the potential of filling us full of perversion and immorality.
Not long after Collins caught this heavy flak, it was requested from outside that Imari Obadele be allowed to speak at Millsaps to explain the concept of Black nationalism and the RNA to a predominantly White audience.
The Public Events Committee approved the visit, but decided that, in the face of all the trouble caused by Sandifer's presence, it should check with the President to make sure he had no objection.
However, Collins did have an objection and, although not ordering the Committee to reconsider their action, he requested that they do so and temporarily deny Obadele the opportunity to speak.
Collins opposes such control and wants to deal with the Board before the situation becomes even more inflamed by something like the Obadele speech.
Acting on his recommendation, the Public Events Committee decided not to invite the RNA spokesman, temporarily.
Although other factors influenced the Committee members, it was obviously Collins' discouragement that caused the denial since the Committee had earlier approved the speech.
It is to Collins' credit that he did not order the denial of the Obadele request.
However, there exists a certain apprehension that he would even try to influence the selection and prevention of a speaker on campus — particularly because of fund-raising and Trustee-dealing expediencies.
Who does and does not speak at Millsaps is really not any business of alumni or financial donors — even if they are paranoid about their money being used to support homosexuality and the takeover of Mississippi by bomb-hurling Black nationalists.
Collins' business either, even when other factors such as money are involved.
Although this incident is not of dramatic import — and although Obadele might come to campus in the spring — it still sets a precedent for what could become a practice that inhibits the freedom of the education here at Millsaps.
When raising money and pacifying alumni begins to influence the scope of information and speakers allowed on this campus, the very value of that education is endangered.
Jl' s a Page 4 The City Jackson Urban League by Mike Stevens related citizenship treatment.
The ultimate goal of the League is to achieve parity for black Americans in all areas of human life.
The League recognizes divisiveness as their greatest obstacle and it tries to function as a bridge across the gaps which divide people.
The League is a bridge between black and white, the powerful and powerless, the informed and uninformed.
The Urban League moves with the times, and is always in a state of reassessment and redesign.
The Jackson Urban League is Jackson's only full time voluntary social service organization working to further the allimportant cause of equitable and just relations between people of all races and classes.
The purpose of the League is to eliminate the existing differentials in life chances between black Americans and others.
The current gap in life chances is enormous and reveals itself in the quantity and quality of income, health, education, housing, and The Jackson Urban League is organized under a board of Montgomery Centers on Soccer Proposal By EARL AYCOCK Recently, there has been a lot of talk around campus about making soccer Millsap's sixth varsity sport.
As it stands now, intercollegiate soccer is played by a team of Millsaps students on an extracurricular basis.
That is, there is no credit for those participating and no requirements concerning discipline and attendance.
This inevitably results in a weekly make-shift team of the intermittently interested which, needless to say, has a difficult time in holding its own against most rivals.
But where there is a will, there should also be a way and that is what the varsity proposal would produce.
The Millsaps campus is full of persons who are very interested in participating in intercollegiate soccer but because of the lack of organization do not.
Athletic Director Jim Montgomery's proposal would give it that organization.
For one thing, there would be a permanent coach probably in the person of Albert Lyle of Jackson, who, through his voluntary unpaid coaching, has been responsible for what little organization the program has had thus far.
This would end the tedious process of waking persons up on Saturday mornings in an effort to field a team.
Varsity soccer would provide the incentive that is needed to make the program function properly.
There would probably be a ten game fall schedule, five games being played here, that would be worked around the football schedule.
The proposal, at least until it reaches maturity, would allow the members of the varsity team to also compete in intramural soccer.
Coach Montgomery, who is the former president of the Mississippi Soccer Association, is highly optimistic about the idea.
Montgomery further claimed that it would induce some parties to play for reasons other than pure love of the game, which is how it is now.
Coach Monty also said that other colleges in the Jackson area are planning to take this step.
Belhaven and Tougaloo are almost assuredly going to adopt it and Mississippi College and Southern Mississippi will probably follow.
Stressing the need for a quick approval, Montgomery says, ""We want to get in on the ground floor.
The proposal would surely enhance Millsaps' ability to recruit students.
As Coach Montgomery pointed out, Atlanta, which is one of Millsaps' prime recruiting areas, inhabits an estimated 8000 soccer players.
A good soccer program would surely be a plus for the Millsaps Admissions Department.
So far this year, Millsaps has played about five or six soccer games at a total cost of about $30 dollars.
Upon receiving varsity status, the sport would, of course, incur its required costs but little over and above that.
The proposal would have the Student Government fund the program for the remainder of this year through its control over the intramural budget.
Coach Montgomery says however, that Student Senate funding would only be for this year and that in subsequent years, he hopes to have it allotted for in the varsity budget.
To be recognized as such, the proposal first must be brought before the College's Intramural Committee which is composed of three faculty, two students, and Coach Montgomery as an ex office member.
Here, preferably early next month, hearings would be held and the conclusive recommendations would be made to the Administration and President Collins.
With the beneficient results that could probably be obtained and with the absence of any major problems, there should be no reason why this proposal should not be actualized.
It would benefit many and would inconvenience, at most, very few. directors which is strong, active, and interracially mixed.
It represents varied segments of the Jackson community and supports the concept of sound professional leadership in the execution of its program.
The full responsibility for selection and direction of its staff is in the hands of the executive director, Irwin C Walker.
Overall, the membership of the Urban League has a ratio of 2:1, black to white.
As far as service goes, the League implements programs designed to assure and protect the equal rights, privileges, and opportunities of blacks and other minority groups in the community.
The League operates in such areas as economic development and employment, housing, education, health and welfare, and community organization.
The major challenge facing the black population is to broaden employment opportunities.
To solve this problem, the Jackson Urban League maintains close contact with industries and city, state and federal agencies for employment opportunities for its clientele.
Up-to-date files are kept on job seekers and matching places individuals in the proper jobs.
The League is currently sponsoring the Labor Education Advancement Program which places young minority men in the construction field as apprentices.
In the area of housing, the League works with public and private agencies to bring needed relief on an individual collective basis.
The League works for neighborhood improvements in rehabilitation and construction to blighted areas.
Additional help is received from various HUD-FHA assisted programs and rent suppliment programs under the National Housing Act.
Recognizing that education is vital for the survival of the black community, the League continues to support integrated public education.
It also offers special G.E.D training programs and evening adult education.
In the area of health and welfare the League operates with various health and welfare agencies for more effective communication.
Counseling service aimed at improving the life chances are offered as well as planned parenthood counseling.
The League also operates a Big Brother program in which adult men offer to be the ""big brother"" of fatherless boys.
For more community organization, the League has initiated a New Thrust Program.
In this way you aid community residents in recognizing their problems and then help in developing programs to meet the particular needs.
Throughout these and other efforts the Jackson Urban League strives to be a community organizing tool.
Grilled Frank 1.29 1.29 ORLEANS PARISH HOT DOGS Hot Dog 65 Chih Dog 80 Chili Bun 75 NEW ORLEANS HOT PLATES WITH FRENCH BREAD Red Beans.
The completion of the much talked about Millsaps swimming pool is re-scheduled to be completed, hopefully, with the first snowfall.
Since its ground breaking, this Millsaps building project has been literally beseiged with common and not so common construction problems.
The foreboding of possible doom to the project came earlier in the school year with the rain, delaying construction on numerous occasions.
Although late, the swimming pool project seemed back on some sort of schedule, until recently.
In actuality, surmounting problems, not blatantly noticeable, have hindered any further progress in achieving ""perfect"" completion of the pool.
President Collins and others involved are striving for completeperfection before opening the pool in order to weed out possible future problems.
In a recent interview with President Collins, he explained the basic obstacles facing the pools construction and listed efforts in negating these problems.
Perhaps the most crucial problem is that of the fundamental construction of the pool.
For the past few weeks efforts have been directed at locating the place of ""seepage from the pool.
This obstacle outweighs the others, although no direct blame has been laid for its cause.
Two other problems figure in the delay of the Septemberplanned opening.
The school claimed that the original contract provided for a drainage ditch by the pool to stop alien water from contaminating the chlorinated water in the pool.
However, disputing the clause, the constructor refused to fulfill this questioned obligation.
The past few weeks were spent on negotiations, of sort, which ended in favor of Millsaps, although no action in beginning the ditch has begun.
A second problem will delay the pools opening date at least three months more.
The heater, however, cannot be installed until all ""the bugs are out of the pool"" and the independent agency can move in.
Any question concerning dorm rules may be directed to Dee Dee Woroner, Brenda Millstead, Sue Humphrey, Celeste Draffen, or Evalyn Bishop.
The proposal contained certain provisions describing what a placement office should do.
The primary goal would be to help place Millsaps students and graduates in worthwhile job positions or the best graduate schools attainable.
These files could be sent to any firm or graduate school that a Millsaps student requested.
Secondly, a placement office, according to the proposal's definition, must provide for, coordinate and publicize major job and graduate school interview session on this campus regularly throughout the year.
This year such sessions were held under the direction of the Sociology department and the Chaplain's Committee.
Finally, the placement office would constantly maintain relations with industry in the Jackson areas so that the students on this campus could easily find out about job opportunities in the Jackson area by just checking with the placement office.
These are things that are done by placement offices at other schools and large universities with thousands of students.
The registrar's office maintains files with regards to the scholastic records of Millsaps students.
The Office of Alumni Relations and Church Affairs, headed by Mr James Livesay and located in Whitworth Hall maintains files with information about the various achievements of the college's alumni.
But the problem exists that the information maintained in these two offices is not coordinated for the use of trying to place Millsaps students in good job positions or good graduate schools.
What is needed is an office that can take this available information and put it to use.
The heart of the proposal approved by the College Senate tries to meet this problem by proposing the development and funding of a separate placement office, adequately staffed and under the control of the President's office only, as are the other departments on this campus.
At present there is a kind of placement division with the Office of Alumni Relations and Church Affairs.
The staff for this division is too small and is primarily used for the work involving alumni and church relations with the college.
These are problems which require solution by the development of an independent placement office.
Such an office will be recognizable and known and can put its funds and manpower to use iii helping place Millsaps students and graduates where they wish to be.
First, with the growing demand for seats in graduate schools, students at Millsaps need to know what are the best schools they can get in, what these schools will cost and what they can provide.
Secondly, because this is a liberal arts college and because job positions are few for liberal arts majors, students from this college need to know the best job opportunities available.
But more importantly, a placement office can provide a student with a good and effective introduction to the graduate schools and good jobs.
The administration and faculty do recognize that there is a need for a placement office.
However, there is always the problem of funding and, of course, at a private college, money is always scarce.
The second part of the proposal approved by the College Senate attempts to alleviate this by stipulating that the college administration consider trying to work with Belhaven, Tougaloo, Mississippi College, and Jackson State in setting up a Jackson college's placement office.
Proportional funding by each of the colleges might not have to be so great and the quality of the office would not have to be sacrificed.
Well, I hope that you are convinced that there is a need for a placement office for Millsaps students and that there is a way to provide for such an office.
Now, if there is an issue that the student body of this college could and needs to actively rally behind, it is this.
Remember, academic freedom, beer in the dorms, visitation and other issues are minute compared to what graduate school or what job you are going to be in after you graduate or leave this school and a good placement office can make a big contribution in getting you at the best position you can have after you graduate.
It's insane to think that some Millsaps students who are supposed to be a cut above the other students in Mississippi and are supposed to be receiving one of the most expensive and best educations in this state wind up as waiters or gas station attendants or even janitors after they graduate.
So if you're concerned about the need for a placement office, write the Purple and White, talk to a class officer or even go by and see President Collins and tell him you're concerned.
The more people that express the need for a placement office to President Collins or a member of the Board of Trustees the more important the idea of a college placement office will be and the more likely a good placement office will become a reality.
Page 6 Entertainment by Kevin Sessums George C Scott has always been surrounded by controversy.
He once starred in a television show, the name of which escapes me at the moment, that tried to deal honestly with race relations in a big city police department before such subjects were chic.
He has always spoken freely on talk shows about his crazy business and the people in it who make it that way.
And, of course, his criticism and subsequent rejection of the Oscar brought condemnation from many of his peers and shocked outcries from that vast part of the American populous that reads movie magazines.
He has now gone one step further and thumbed his nose at the entire movie industry by taking it upon himself to star in, direct, produce, and distribute his current motion picture.
After seeing the results of his efforts, ""The Savage is Loose,"" I think the strain was too much.
The movie is about a teacher who is shipwrecked on a desert island with his wife and baby son.
The tension slowly, slowly builds until she finally gives in at the very end of the film.
That is, she kisses him on the mouth, and we are led to believe she gives in.
Instead of searching the horizon for a ship to pass like we do in most desert island movies, we simply search the screen for some action to take place.
There were so many chances for character development, plot development, etc., but nothing ever came of them.
In fact, the only thing I recognized developing was a sense of boredom in the audience.
It seemed as if Scott, so brilliant in other pieces, was so busy with his other duties that he had no time to memorize his lines, so had to read them from cue cards.
L Abroad at Millsaps by Cathy Passailague The student who seeks an education in a foreign country is destined to encounter cultural barriers as well as the obvious language varriers and differences in customs.
Inescapable as these barriers are, they can be overcome, or at least understood so as to make an opportunity to study abroad profitable.
Marisol and Carmen Luz Valenzuela, natives of Chile, and students at Millsaps, have overcome the natural language barrier.
But they have encountered what they believe to be defined differences in the social cultures and customs of the USA and Chile.
Marisol, a freshman, and her sister, Carmen Luz, a sophomore, agree that people are basically the same everywhere and that environment is what makes such striking differences in people of different countries.
Specifically, they have found that the people in the United States tend to be more indifferent than the people in Chile.
The two girls, who have lived in the United States for three years, seem also to agree that due to co-ed schools, in the United States, United States men have a tendency to treat women with less respect, than Chilean nen who respect women greatly as women.
Marisol and Carmen Luz lave made the distinction that the family unit in Chile is much more closely knit than that in the United States Though slightly disturbed by some things, the two girls seem generally pleased with their opportunity to study in the states.
Millsaps students have similar opportunities to study in other countries, and while here, have a chance to experience something of another country through her citizens at Millsaps.
Holiday Pangburn's Candies Large Selection of Millionaires JOHN D WILLIAMS, R.Ph.
In a return to the form that brought talk of bowl bids to Millsaps, the Majors rejuvenated eir scoring offense and relied once again on their stellas defense to post their fifth victory against three losses, and end their season on a happy note.
The game was somehow reminiscent of the Texas jtheran game of two years ago; 2 final score then was 12-7, with the Majors pulling it out in the final minutes before a standing Homecoming crowd.
As far as the first half went, the ime was some what redundant both teams battling and getting practically nowhere.
Trinity, however, on their first possession, did move the ball well, methodically driving, until a diving Jeb Dominick captured an end zone interception to stop the drive.
The only scoring threat of the half by either team came in the second quarter when Millsaps kicking specialist Doug Brindley booted a 32 yard field goal attempt wide of the uprights.
Second half play resembled considerably the first half — a couple of good plays for first downs, stall, and punt.
Early in the fourth quarter, however, Trinity put the first points on the scoreboard when their rugby playing, soccerstyle kicker Duncan Pringle boomed a field goal.
The 3-0 score held for most of the quarter, until the Millsaps offense went to work — with less than two minutes remaining, and after a beautiful Ricky Hay good to Dees Hinton pass play, Sonny Aldy grabbed another Haygood pass, falling into the endzone for the winning points.
Amid the jubilation Brindley calmly split the uprights with the cake-icing extra point.
Hinton and Aldy each had three catches for 57 and 59 yards respectively.
Domineck hauled in two interceptions, with Philip Maples and Steve McAlilly adding one each.
Pikes Lead ""A"" League, Tennis Team and KA""B""S Lead ""B"" League By David Anderson Three weeks into the men's volleyball season finds the undefeated Pikes leading the ""A"" league, and the undefeated Tennis team and KA""B""s leading the ""B"" league.
KA""C"" W 4 4 2 3 3 2 0 0 0 0 0 L 0 0 0 1 1 3 2 2 2 3 4 SCHEDULE Tuesday, November 26 6:00 Chemistry Dept. vs.
Division III national championship, the Majors traveled to Sherman, Texas where their chances were numbed by the cold and rain and a 10-0 loss to Austin College.
Rebounding the following week with a win against Trinity College, the Majors set their season's slate at 5-3, handing head coach Harper Davis and assistant Tommy Ranager their eighth straight .500 or better season.
Another little known fact is that there is a new coach (to go along with the new gym, I guess), former Millsaps standout Bob Booth.
Providing for such an arrangement is a provision stating that the athletic director may assign his assistants with the permission of the Dean and the President.
Despite what the record might show, Booth has assembled a fine team, and is especially pleased with their latest effort against Co-Lin, last year's junior college state champs.
With the offense picking up and the defense steadily improving, the Majors should be ready for their season's opener against Birmingham-Southern on December 2.
Booth's greatest area for disappointment, at this point, is the inability of the better players to play because of injuries.
The spotlight has shifted from player to player during the pre-season, and solid play has been turned in by Mike Collins, Michael Ethridge, Mike Flautt, Bill McGuire, John McVey, John Paden and John Tedder.
The ceremony will begin at 8:00 pm with remarks by ""significant people,"" whomever they might be, and the game will beginat8:30.
So, if you're in the neighborhood, drop by the P.A.C. on December 2 to initiate a new gym, a new season, and a new coach.
It was an exciting game, despite the almost non-existent officiating and the omnipresent horrible weather.
I'll have some more and interesting news on soccer at Millsaps next week.
With a measly two correct picks out of six last week, my batting average stands at .333.
MOSS POINT 21, LAUREL 10 — The state's top team beats the Tornados again to remain undefeated.
PITTSBURG 21, NEW ORLEANS 10 — The Saints won their one for the month last week.
Tuition assistance benefits the independent colleges thus providing a continuing diversity.
The state can pay 1/ 3 of tuition for a student at a private school, or be in danger of having independent colleges close, then being forced to pay the total cost at a state school.
The grant could be awarded to any student who applies for the grant and is a citizen of the state of Mississippi and has been domiciled in the state for twelve months prior to enrollment in a independent college, is attending an independent Jr. or Sr. college located in Mississippi that is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools and does not have a program consisting principally of secetarian instruction, and is not enrolled in a course of study leading to a professional degree in theology or divinity.
The bill authorizes that the amount of the grant would be 25% of the average per pupil appropriation for public senior colleges.
Mississippi students at Millsaps interested in this legislation should tell their parents about it over the Thanksgiving holidays and get on their legislator's case.
Our trained consultants will help you select the bridal gown and veil of your dreams, as well as those of your attendants.
They will answer questions on etiquette; guide you in selecting your trousseau, invitations, music and flowers.
Our Gift Registry records your china, silver and crystal, so friends and relatives may avoid duplications and select gifts you'll treasure.
We also offer a special Trousseau Account for all those prewedding purchases.
No service charge if paid in 30 days, or extend over 12 mos. with service charge.
MQRAE' JACKSON HATTIESBURG MfcRlQ'AN VICKSPURG GREENVILLE PENSACOLA ~ Millsaps College December 6, 1974 Volume 90.
Number 7 66 Kids like this are on a dead end street. 55 — by Danny Bowling ""I robbed my first house when I was nine.
My old lady, she didn't ask where I was gettin' my money — she stayed drunk most of the time.
The first time the cops caught me, I stayed in the DC (Juvenile Detention Center) for six days.
The judge put me on probation and I started bustin' cars around Jackson.
The name and the face is different, but the story is reminiscent of countless others.
This is a thirteen year old child; in the eyes of the law, a juvenile delinquent.
He comes from a three room plank house one block off Mill street, three blocks from Millsaps College.
The paint on the side of the house is cracked and weathered, and there is trash in the front yard.
His mother is an alcoholic; his father left his family to the ravages of slum life years ago.
The people in a position of authority who could mold them into responsible adults are nothing more than human wrecks.
These kids are subjected to racial prejudice downtown and social prejudice at school.
Last year in Jackson alone, a total of 2295 children appeared at the Youth Court, an institution established for the handling of juvenile offenders from the ages ten to seventeen.
Clearly, these statistics indicate the presence of deep and dangerous cracks in our social fiber.
What is even more significant is that certain social and economic factors can be singled out as propagating this rise in criminal behavior.
And the thing about it is, these high-crime areas are also the areas of greatest poverty in Jackson.
Crime becomes a way of life for a lot of kids down there by the time they're ten years old.
Millsaps Players production of the musical ""Robert and Elizabeth"" will be presented Wed. thru Sat.
Regular admission prices are $3.50 for orchestra and $2.50 for balcony.
Millsaps students, faculty, and staff will be admitted on their I.D. cards for Wed. and Thur. night performances.
Since all seats are reserved we urge you to pick up your tickets in the Players office as soon as possible.
If youj don't want youn name printed, we'll \ use a little more; discretion.
If you, after being in Millsaps for several weeks or even a year, have found a faculty member whom you want for an academic adviser, come by the Registrar's Office for a change of adviser form.
You can then secure the new adviser's signature and the Office will notify your former adviser.
As soon as a student has chosen a major, he should sign a major card in the Registrar's Office and thereafter his major professor becomes his academic adviser.
Page 2 P&W Prophecy Paul Pittman ""We hold no illusions about the proposed College Senate.
Students have not been offered a meaningful role in college government.
It would add another step to an already complex decision-making process.
These are the words of then editor Hal Malchow — they have proven to be true.
The College Senate is a faculty dominated organization that has produced no constructive results in the two years of its existence.
The only way for the College Senate or any student participatory group to be effective is for the students to elect representatives who are willing to challenge the stifling powers of the faculty and administration for the benefit of the students.
The people we could elect are present, able, but unsupported — the productive senator is the exception rather than the rule.
We must either restructure the present college organization, elect senators who are willing to challenge it, or support the senators now elected.
Our thanks go to Chaplain Don Fortenberry whose slide program was demonstrative of the intelligent, moving concern he and his committee have shown.
And to the > Singer with awesome power and ability filled the cafeteria of all places with a thrilling movement.
Without the slightest coyness we confess that we expected several members to rise in rapture during the performance.
The feeling pervading the room was rather like a Southern revival when one wishes to go to everyone there, friend, enemy, and stranger, and thank them for sharing the experience.
Like revival momentums, that sense of community can never be maintained, but it is something to build on, for it was absolutely OUTLOOK The withdrawal last week of Yazoo City businessman Gene Triggs as a 1975 candidate for governor, only weeks after he had announced he would run, underscores one painful fact of life that is dogging every potential in the gubernatorial sweepstakes.
And that is that the cost of conducting a serious campaign for the office governor in Mississippi has risen drastically in the past decade.
Mor specifically, for 1975, the political atmosphere is not at all conducive for the type of risk capital that has traditionally been forked out by would-be power brokers who have an interest in a specific candidate.
There are a variety of reasons for this, and evidently Triggs got an inkling of all of them, as well as a few cold political shoulders, as he made the rounds in the past few weeks, touching the bases that he might have expected to help him in funding a polished media campaign which has come to be traditional in successful races.
Watergate, for instance, has cast a longer shadow than some casual observers might think and campaign finance reforms, even though at the federal level, have given heavy political donors in previous state campaigns pause for reflection.
As for Triggs, who had the look of an attractive candidate, his entry and subsequent withdrawal in so short a time has to be regarded as significant.
Of all the potentials, the amiable, pipe-smoking Triggs should know who the money men are.
He has been intimately involved in two gubernatorial campaigns, having managed one for Paul Johnson in 1963 and another for William Winter in 1967.
More than that, he has statewide exposure, good contacts with state agricultural and industrial leaders and has demonstrated an aptitude for organization.
And, despite the knowing nods of the political wisemen who are always available, there was no deviousness involved in his ploy.
In the windup, this reporter is convinced, it involved simple arithmetic.
Ironically, Triggs' move unwittingly may have given still another boost to the candidacy of Lt.
Triggs entered the race by his own admission, because he did not think Winter, the current frontrunner, could win.
Most observers agree, however, that Winter has available a financial, as well as a strong political, base.
There is still another facet to the campaign financing problem that is a subtle one.
That is that the present uncertainty about the economy may also be influencing the political atmosphere here within the state.
A further downturn in the economy on the state scene, an almost certain prospect, could further tighten the purse strings for political campaigns.
Such a development would also tend to tighten the field of potential candidates in contrast to the wide-open donneybrook originally seen as the outlook for 1975.
David Anderson, Earl Aycock, Janette DeBoever, Sharon Edwards, Flinda Feurgeson, Mike Forester, Carmen Gettis, Pat Gleason, Mark Jones, Doug Minor, Cathy Passailague, Dean Pittman, Bill Ray, Derrick Shields, Mike Stevens, Susan Weill, Jan Wildmon Page 3 Conflict But No Change For Sallis ob McDuff Dr.
Charles Sallis is continuing an effort to get his recently published Mississippi history text on the state's public school ""approved list"" after it was denied such status in a controversial decision by the Textbook Rating Committee for Mississippi history.
Sallis plans to meet soon with Governor Bill Waller and the director of the state textbook purchasing board to see if there is some way to get the book approved despite the rating committee's rejection.
Hopefully we can arrive at a compromise,"" remarked the Millsaps history professor.
Chairman of the Social Sciences Division at Millsaps, Sallis co-edited book along with Dr.
Conflict and Change, the text takes a fresh look at the state's history with an unusually open appraisal of racial oppression and the civil rights movement in Mississippi.
The book has been widely acclaimed by educators and southern historians.
By Mississippi law, for the Purchasing Board to put the book on the approved list — which means that public school teachers have the option of using the text and buying it with state funds — it must first be recommended by the rating committee.
Only two books were presented to that committee — the Sallis-Loewen edition and the Dr.
J K Bettersworth text, which has been used in the state's Mississippi history courses for years.
Although there is room for five books of Mississippi history on the final approved list, only the Bettersworth work was given the go-ahead by the rating committee.
That committee is composed of five whites and two blacks, all secondary school teachers.
Conflict and Change have not been given to Sallis and Loewen — ""they won't even talk to us,"" remarked Sallis.
However, press reports disclose that the book was dismissed because 1) of its candid treatment of slavery, Reconstruction, and the Civil Rights movement and 2) it contains a picture of a racial lynching in Mississippi.
State law holds that the book cannot be reviewed by the rating board for another six years.
A number of letters in support of it have been sent to the Governor and other officials and many teachers have contacted Sallis and Loewen saying they would like to use the book in their Mississippi history courses (it is primarily a ninth grade text; however, it can be used in other courses — Hinds Jr.
It is with this support that the editors are going to the Governor and the Purchasing Board director to try to work out a way to get the book on the list.
Teachers who want to use the book should have freedom to the access of its information — that is, be able to use it in their classrooms and pay for it out of state funds, not their own pockets.
In defending the legitimacy of the text, Sallis noted, ""This is not a new interpretation of Mississippi history.
Neither of the editors are accepting personal royalties from the sale of the book and both, in fact, will end up losing money because of extensive expenses.
It is published by Alternatives, a nonprofit group located at 1500 Farragut Street N.W., Washington, D.C. 20011 which seeks to create new models for personal and family lifestyles.
By JAMES HOLLAND The massive money-grabbing of the administration to ""Expand the Resources"" of Millsaps should have some needed improvement on our college-world.
What President Collins called ""a definite priority"" of the almost seven million dollar program is the renovation of the Campbell Student Union.
This project would involve recreational facilities for students and expand services already located in the Center.
Great progress was made with the appointment of a committee to do research concerning the renovation.
They presented their recommendations to the President, who in turn reported to the Board of Trustees, where it became bogged-down and progress came to a standstill.
The delay results from confusion over the usage of the money already obtained of the 6. million dollar fund raising drive.
Until the Board of Trustees decides to allocate the necessary funds, the Millsaps students will have to endure the present conditions.
From the information collected, they learned that the suggestions sounded a common need.
Some of their recommendations were to enlarge the bookstore, moving it to what is now the grill, thus transfering the grill downstairs to that barren room.
There, where once enthusiastic students danced after Millsaps games, we couid use the patio to awe at the back of Sullivan Harrell.
A recreation room with pool tables and the like could be used by students to pass the time.
Delegations from Southern, Ole Miss, State, and several counties combined with Millsaps to total nearly 65 delegates, a tremendous improvement over last years showing.
Amendments to the Young Democrats Constitution, state and district officer elections, consideration of several resolutions, and a speech by Governor Waller took most of the afternoon.
The resolutions passed included support for ethics and open government bills introduced by Common Cause, support for the ERA and pay raises sought by the Mississippi Teachers Association, a request of the state legislature that the citizens of Mississippi be allowed to vote on hether state officers could succeed themselves in office or not, and emphatic support for the proposed designation as wilderness areas Horn Island and Petit Bois Island, off the Gulf Coast.
These two islands are presently in grave danger of irreparable commercial exploitation.
Two Vice-President offices were abandoned and a reorganizing of Congressional District and College District representation in Young Democrats were the basis of the Amendments to the Constitution.
In the elections of state and district officers, the Millsaps delegation did particularly well.
The amendments created a 24 seat Executive Committee, consisting of state officers, college and congressional district officers, and two National Committee persons.
The Millsaps delegation won 14 of the 24 offices, including chairperson, Eddie Jaynes; vice-chairperson, Teresa Liles; treasurer, Daryl Plunk ; college rep. , Alan Brehm ; 2nd district chairperson, Lyne Governor Bill Waller announced a new service of State government this week — a tollfree, direct telephone line to the Governor's Office that any citizen in the State can use.
The Governor said, ""With government services growing more complex and complicated, the average citizen sometimes feels lost because he doesn't know where to go or how to get . help.
This toll-free Hotline will allow calls to be placed at no cost, from anywhere in the State, directly to the Governor's Office in Jackson.
The staff, manning this telephone 24 hours a day, is trained to put the caller directly in touch, in a matter of a few hours, with the State agency or department that can help solve the problem.
Waller, who has an extension of the Hotline phone on his desk, said, ""Our initial emphasis will be with our young people, but we expect to handle a full range of service related calls from the elderly and, naturally, we expect our share of gripes and complaints.
Gamble; 2nd district reps., Bill Blair and Mark Herbert; 4th district chairperson, Glade Mclnnis; 4th district reps., Barry Cockrell and Jimmy Dempsey; 3rd district reps., March Jones and Lisa Lumsden; 5th district reps., Rob McDuff and Dennis Mcintosh.
The second organizational meeting will be on Tuesday, December 10, at 7:00 pm in AC-334.
Philip Nolan, played by Cliff Robertson, accepts a sword from a United States Naval officer for bravery Nolan displayed in a sea battle against a foreign nation.
Robertson stars in the ABC-TV telecast of ""The Man without a Country,"" sponsored in part by Kodak, set for December 6 at 8:30m.
Saunders Conducts Survey by Pat Gleason At the beginning of this semester, the administration of Millsaps noticed a curious occurrence regarding enrollment.
It seems that quite a number of students who were eligible to return to Millsaps had chosen not to do so.
Dean Saunders, in an effort to uncover a reason for this discouraging trend, initiated a survey whereby these students could give their reasons for not returning.
The purpose of the survey was to give the administration some idea of the problems of grievances such students have at Millsaps, and to eliminate, or at least alleviate them for other students.
Dean Saunders implies that such information would be of considerable influence in any decisions regarding requirements, finances, and the availability of a wide range of subjects.
T The information obtained from the comments on the cards covers a broad range of subjects.
Of the 51 students who responded, 11 stated that their decision to leave Millsaps stemmed from financial reasons.
Several of the students stated that they had been offered jobs too attractive to refuse.
One student flatly said that Millsaps was ""too expensive,"" and that for this reason he had been forced to look for a cheaper education elsewhere.
Saut addr SE reai Mill limi fina bott The survey took the form of an explanatory letter from Dean Saunders, along with a selfaddressed post card which could be ily filled out and mailed.
The student was to check There was also a space at the iottom for any explanatory comments.
The majority of the former students complained that Millsaps was too limited in its offering of courses.
Departments singled out in the survey were education, physics, psychology, and art.
These students moved to larger universities which offered a variety of subjects in those fields to be taught each semester.
One card had ""joined Air Force"" scrawled across the bottom, as if in desperation.
Reasons for not returning — 1) academic difficulties: ""I had my share"" 2) limitation of courses offerings: ""partly true"" 3) finances: ""no major difficulty"" 4) other : ""A few teachers that do not come up to the quality of Millsaps' motto AD EXCELLENTIOM"" Saunders in his study The information contained in this survey suggests that there are needs which must be met by the college community — both the administration and students.
Ideas must be developed to increase student awareness of and participation in college events.
The administration must realize that only through innovative measures can Millsaps attain the reputation it so richly deserved in the past.
No, it seems to have deeper roots than these, roots which could very well threaten the academic life here. ave heard it said many many times by students that Millsaps is a dead place.
Indeed, it would be difficult to refute this claim, considering the lack of direction among students.
There seems to be no sufficient cause (ecology being now more or less passe) for which the angry students may scream in outrage.
Everyone is well aware of the shift from activism to relative conservatism on college campuses.
However, the lack of awareness of the student to the problems of the world is going De a detriment in the future to all ases of society.
What we lack at Millsaps conr sists ironically of the basic purpose of higher education — ideas.
The student government here is effectively dominated by faculty and administration, the faculty is completely ineffective due to petty internal bickering, and the administration is totally immersed in the technical aspects of keeping this behemoth moving.
Sadly, the ideas necessary to make Millsaps into a moving, living, institution again must come from the students.
We have a ready forum in this newspaper, and we should avail ourselves of it.
It has been said, and often said, that a liberal arts education is more of a Sisyphaen than an asset in today's technological world.
However, I do not wish to create an argument here, subjecting the idea of this article to a witty rejounder in the next issue.
There will be objections, but considering the value of the end result, I believe the only complaints to be heard will rise from delirious bombasts possessing no grasp of the very real problems facing this community.
I propose a series of programs to be held at least every two weeks, presided over by department professors, and concerning aspects of their fields which would both be of interest to students and beneficial to their academic life.
Such a program would provide students with the opportunity to hear expert opinions on important subjects of interest outside their major fields.
For example, the political science professors could give the history of terrorism as a political weapon, focussing on Algeria's use of it against the French, the I.R.A.'s use in Ireland, and its use by both Israelis and Palestinians in the Middle East.
Personal opinion could then be given on its effectiveness, followed by a general discussion with the audience.
The Economics department could present, in layman's terms, the causes of the Depression in the 30's, and the ways in which economic stability was eventually re-established.
They could then give the reasons for the present economic debacle, and, since they are certainly qualified to be experts, they would benefit the audience by giving their solutions . to the problem.
Discussion would follow which, I believe, would not be depressing, but encouraging.
The English department could present a program pinpointing the role of the writer today.
Current trends in literature could be discussed which would possibly open fields of interest to nonEnglish majors.
At least it would provide them with some form of exposure to an important part of life — art.
The creative process could be explored, along with the problems of the artist today.
This idea could be developed so far as to have authors come for future programs — Eudora Welty, Barry Hannah, and Margaret Walker are but a few of the remarkable talents that the South has supplied to the field of literature.
The Psychology department could give a report on the increase in the cases of schizophrenia in today's society.
The professors could explore the cause of this mental disorder, certain to be of interest to the Millsaps student.
Avenues of cure could be explained to the audience, defining Freudian and Jungian psychology.
The Physics department could present a program on atomic energy power plants, focusing on their necessity and problems.
The professors would be performing a valuable service to the community through enlightenment in this field.
Given in layman's terms, this program could present the argument so miserably handled by Henry Patton and the panel discussion on nuclear energy held on November 14.
Anthropology, history, sociology, and the other departments could provide fascinating programs designed to enlighten the student to problems of society outside of their chosen majors.
It might help to improve the student who is an ""authority"" in his own field, but a functioning vegetable in others.
It would promote discussion not just between the students, but also between faculty members, hopefully precipitating a thaw in that glacier, which has crept so very slowly in recent years.
And, perhaps best of all (for the administration), this program would cost very, very little.
Because the subjects for discussion would not be extremely difficult to comprehend, but of interest of the general student body, no extensive research would be required on the part of the teachers.
Being the cream of the South's professorial crop, they should be able to speak with some competence on basic topics related to their fields of study.
Also, I would think that they should relish the chance to improve relations within this community.
I sincerely hope that what I have said in this article has not amounted to dropping the idea into a well, wishfully hoping that it will materialize, and all but excluding the possibility of retrieving it.
But at least it is an idea, and there are pitifully few moving around the campus these days.
Lying amid the bent rushes the young girl writhes; the sheen of her perspiring body reflects the afterglow of a momentary flash of dazzling white light.
Her hands flail out flindly, wrenching tall rushes from the marshy ground as the emotional Hell inside her bursts and awareness floods her mind.
The constellation Cygnus looks down upon her mockingly as a single white feather — indifferent to her suffering — floats gently to Earth settling in a webbed imprint beside her trembling thighs.
Before we send football to the wers, let me assure you that there will be a 1974 Major's football wrap-up in the near future . . . promise . . . complete with cartoons.
Now that basketball is upon us, the spotlight is a bit brighter on Millsaps intercollegiate sports, roundball always seeming to draw more support than the other sports on campus.
Not able to attend, I solicited some after-game comment from another major newspaper sports columnists, who will remain anonymous.
He didn't say too much about the second half, but I guess it's selfexplanatory considering the score.
He did mention that the return of Van Skiver would be a helpful addition to the team.
Moving on to upcoming games, the P.A.C. is to be the site of the Magnolia Classic Basketball Tournament, December 5-7.
A major hardwood encounter, the Classic will feature eight Mississippi College Division teams.
From this point the ladder gets confusing and quite hectic, especially in the losing brackets.
Each team is assured of three games, although it is not a double elimination tournament.
The tourney will provide a look at perhaps some of the best teams in the state.
Jackson State, with Ail-American Eugene Short, is ranked nationally in pre-season college division polls.
Tennis is alive and well at Millsaps, but in a winter hibernation after a first rate fall season.
Jim Montgomery, everybody improved during the fall workouts which saw the tennis majors practicing 2 1/2 hours a day, five days a week.
Closing with a 5-3 record, the netters won two matches over Delta State, two over Southwestern at Memphis and one over a local tennis group.
The losses came at the hands of Mississippi State, Ole Miss, and Southeastern Louisiana.
With both men's and women's events, Coach Monty expects participation by eight men's and four women's teams.
For the past couple of years many Millsaps students have shown an interest in soccer as an intramural sport.
But now soccer is beginning to interest a tot of Millsapians as an intercollege sport.
Belhaven and Tougaloo have already declared soccer a varsity sport with Miss.
Coach Monty feels that with the right approach a varsity soccer league could be established with Millsaps on the ground floor.
Last week, I said I couldn't get much worse, and I didn't; I stayed the same — two for six.
This first basketball game of the year also marked the dedication of the Physical Activities Center.
Montgomery gave speeches in which they recognized many people that helped make our new facility a reality.
Our Alumni Association President spoke emphasizing the support continuously given by alumni of the college, and then the dedication prayer was made.
President Collins closed the ceremonies wishing this year's basketball team a successful season.
The first official field goal made in the new PAC was by John Paden 45 seconds into the first half.
This basket sparked a hot streak for the Majors as they jumped to a 10-4 toad.
Paden picked up his third foul with 9 minutes left in the first half and Dan Richards came off the bench to complete the half.
Greg Hickman, nursing a bad ankle, also came off the bench in the latter part of the half and brought more quickness to both the offense and defense.
The Panthers came out gunning in the second half and scored six quick points to grab the lead, a lead they would never relinquish.
Mark Lynch brought the Majors within nine putting two well-aimed free throws through the hoop with 9:50 to go.
Southern practiced stalling techniques forcing Coach Bob Booth to pull his team out of the zone defense they had played up to that point.
Millsaps, attempting desperately to pull the game out, had to double-team and really move on defense but, the Panthers began hitting open men under the goal who in turn began hitting the basket.
Paden led the Millsaps scoring with 16 points followed by Mark Lynch with 12.
John McVay had seven rebounds followed by Tedder and Paden with six a piece.
Winston Davis had 14 points for Birmingham Southern followed by Jon Boydston and Jimmy Harris with 10 each.
The Majors next outing will be in the Magnolia Tournament to be played at Millsaps December 5, 6, 7 after which they will play Mississippi College here December 10.
CHI's, GDI's Win Women Volleyball By David Anderson With very little action in the past two weeks due to the Thanksgiving holidays, men's volleyball goes into its last two weeks with the undefeated Pikes leading the ""A"" league and the undefeated Tennis team leading the ""B"" league.
O's amassed a perfect 6-0 record to win the ""A"" league crown, while the GDI's defeated the KD team to win the ""B"" league crown.
LXA ""A"" MEN'S STANDINGS ""A"" LEAGUE TEAM W L PKA ""A"" 5 0 KA ""A"" 4 I KS""A"" 3 3 LXA ""A"" 1 5 Tracers 0 4 ""B"" LEAGUE TEAM W L Tennis 5 0 PKA""C"" 3 0 Huns 4 1 KA""B"" 4 I LXA ""B"" 3 2 PKA""B"" 2 4 Tri-Beta 1 3 KA""C"" 1 4 KS""B"" 0 2 Independent ""B"" 0 2 Chemistry Dept.
Designed to help and guide a child rather than blankently punish him, it works to fill the supervisional void existing in most troubled children.
An intricate system of counselors, probation officers. social workers, halfway houses, and correctional institutions exist in and around the system and offer a wide variety of options for the individual child's disposition.
The court may return the child to his home with a set of social rules and behavioral guidelines; it may place him in a foster home, a group home, or halfway house; or it may provide him with continuing psychiatric and medical help.
Each of the kids we see is an individual and must be dealt with as such.
In extreme cases, such as repeated or serious offenders, the Court may require that the child be sent to one of two juvenile training schools in the state for intensive rehabilitive training, or it may refer him to Adult Court.
No matter how effective the Juvenile Justice System may or may not be, the fact remains that more and more of Jackson's young are turning to crime as a way of life, as a means of attaining material possessions, achieving a reverse sort of peer status, and expressing their contempt for the system they feel has wronged them.
To undermine the basic causes of youth crime, I contend, we must strike at the environmental and psychological strains that cause juvenile delinquency.
We must provide and improve Scenes from the Millsaps area. housing conditions and recreational facilities in lowincome areas; we must work to involve young people in community activities and community organizations in youth programs.
We must equalize vocational opportunities among the young by improving the quality of the urban school system and vigorously fighting economic as well as racial segregation in all schools.
Finally, efforts should be made to create new job opportunities and prepare our youth for future employment.
As we enter into the second half of this decade, the growing problem of juvenile delinquency stares each of us directly in the face.
Unless we strive to implement effective means of salvaging the young of the inner city, and work to insure the success of these measures, we will be forced to live with the consequences of wasted youth, a grim and constant reminder of the failings of our society.
Dennis Wells in a motion that called forth the defense of personalities in the senate proposed that a letter be sent to President Collins requesting clarification of his actions in the exclusion of Imari Obadeli from the campus.
The letter would further state that ""the students feel this is not in the best interest"" of the school or students, the action was unjust, and the first speaker of the spring semester would be Obadeli.
Senators Janice Johnson and Jim McCafferty immediately defended themselves as members of the deciding committee and concluded that the article that had appeared in the P&W was unfair to President Collins.
Senator McCafferty expressed doubt about allowing a ""convicted murderer"" speak.
In a reversal of his earlier stand Senator Wells proposed that the senate fund the P&W article Visits With Vinaruhu.
Later in the session Senator Wells reintroduced two _ motions that had failed in the previous meeting, but with the opposite result.
Directed toward the SEB, the motions called for a report of unused student funds explaining why they were unused and what was to happen to them, and a study of proportional representation in the senate as a more equitable form of student government.
One of the most hottly contested actions was a resolution introduced by James Galloway stating support for a program of delayed rush for the Greek societies on campus.
He asserted that the senate had the responsibility of chartering these organizations and must be responsible for judging them in the interest of the students.
The senate, whose members are, with two exceptions, all Greek, rejected the resolution.
Mark Jones introduced four proposals in the session, the first calling for expansion of the committee established to study the feasibility of football to include an investigation of the proposed PE major and the costs involved.
The motion passed as did his motion to create a committee to investigate and make recommendations on tuition costs and the allocation of tuition funds.
His final proposal was made on behalf of a student and called for a study of the Judicial Council in the areas of undue administration influence and selection of members.
McCafferty 's Entertainment committee announced a concert in February; Jones's Visitation committee announced a poll of freshmen attitudes; and Steven's committee approved four charters which were accepted by the senate.
The charters were those of College Panhellenic, Junior Panhellenic, the ERA Support Group, and the Interfraternity Council.
All senators were present or had substitutes with the exception of David Bourgeois and Donna Doorenbos.
Millsaps College December 17, 1974 Volume 90, Number 8 the P&W MAR Y N E I LL and the Governor saw eye-to-eye in a recent press conference.
Butting My Head Sometimes when people are so damned close-minded, I feel like butting my head against a wall.
If someone could reach this selfcentered group and use their hands — which are stuffing their faces and patting themselves on the back — for the improvement of our society, there would be no one dying from obesity while others are dying from starvation.
Students Pass BBA Proposal in College Senate After an effective presentation by Dr.
Richard Blatz, and heated discussion among faculty members, the College Senate voted to send the BBA proposal to the faculty.
In the session of the semester Dennis Wells as vice-chairman presided in Dean Saunder's absence over the often unrulely faculty and student senators.
The Bachelor of Business Administration degree had failed in a faculty committee and was being considered again for recommendation to the faculty.
Baltz of the Economics Department the proposal came under attack from faculty members.
Frank Laney in the focal point of debate pointed to the reality of a BBA degree and the benefits it would have students.
Only SEB President Charlie Hinman responded, speaking in favor of the proposal.
In the end, however, it was the vote of students in the senate that won approval of the proposal.
For I am not an ""individual"" ; am not a separate entity in This conglomerate realm of butting bodies and headless prodigies.
But function as a product of vast social whims, Reflecting everyone, but no one.
I am vunerable because of my totally open awareness in Seeking the answerable avenues of existence — a poetic patsy.
Barry Cockrell Page 2 The Crash of Endeavors Well I met Ashton in a dream her tentacled dark-blonde miasmas made you plead to me — in dream, made you confess her as your wretched concubine.
The crash of endeavors, braked sentiments, the splinters of windshield perfection downshift For now, you are going home to Ashton who slaps you into monoxide laughter and drags you daily into crushed rodent sleep.
OUTLOOK The thin patina of unity talk coming from both loyalists and regulars on the heels of the Kansas City Democratic mini-convention only partially veils the fact that landmark changes in the party and its procedures are an established fact of life.
To be sure, the time is pregnant with hope for an accommodation between the two political factions.
For one thing, the loyalists are more receptive to cooperation and unity than ever before.
Bill Waller has effectively deranged the more militant of the loyalists by appointing them to state boards and commissions.
Bill Waller attended, the first governor to attend such a meeting since Ross Barnett was nominated for president in 1960.
In addition, all three of the state's Democratic congressmen showed up, along with Wilson Golden, a personal envoy from Lt.
Thus, the national party probably faces its most crucial test here in 1976 when the political philosophy of the new governor and the composition of the Democratic presidential ticket will provide the acid test as to whether Mississippi's political power structure will rejoin the party or take another walkout as they have since 1960 plus the third party Dixiecrat gambit in 1948.
At least two elements, however, have altered the face of the national party.
The first major change is the end of the unit rule which previously gave all the delegate votes to the slate which got the most votes.
Oddly enough, this was a rule which was insisted on by both the left as Well as the right.
George Wallace of Alabama, for instance, maintains that he would benefit greatly by getting a share of the delegates, based on the votes he might receive in a state primary.
In the fallout of the Kansas City convention, Mississippi Regulars have concluded that they need legislation to provide for a statewide preferential primary as opposed to Mississippi's present district caucus and state convention system.
This is the second element involved in the state's future with the national party.
Although national party requirements are only minimal, there is a question whether the legislature can pass a law which would result in the selection of a qualified delegation.
Yet, the present mood is in stark contrast to 1968 when the high hopes of the loyalists were dashed in Mississippi when the state went overwhelmingly for Richard Nixon.
In spite of their self-conscious efforts to include whites in their organization, the loyalists ended up predominantly black.
And while they bore the national Democratic mantle in Mississippi, they have always been on the outside of the state's political power structure.
One thing to look for in the months ahead is how many of the vacancies in the loyalist organization will be filled with regulars.
There are several slots open now, and Democratic National Committeeman Charles Evers may be stripped of his post early next year.
Almost everyone agrees that only one Mississippi delegation will go to the national Democratic convention in 1976.
But whatever detente may have been achieved among state Democrats is still subject to numerous stresses and certainly, more pitfalls.
The State of Apples There is a busy street in Jackson, Mississippi, which runs through town and along the sides of Millsaps and the Medical Center.
Sometimes at night a siren, be it police, ambulance, or firetruck, can be heard upon the hour.
One night in particular a certain person, namely me, was driving toward this street and was about to turn onto it; being the rather absentminded person that I am, at first glance me thought the sign to read Apple Street.
Instead, State Street loomed before me like a vision out of Middletown, Amerika.
Let's change the name to Apple, a sound more pleasing to the ear and the instinct.
An apple is a mediumsized semi-round red fruit which tastes very nice and is healthy (if without DDT or Halloween razorblades) and good for the digestive process.
And when you get right down to it, it's really nifty to sit in a big tree on a beautiful afternoon and eat a red, juicy Apple.
I have thought late into an afternoon upon a golden leaf or the blue dome o'er me and could find nothing there of State.
I have looked upon the material world of people and other things, and neither there could I find the wretched thing.
In fact, they might even seem to conflict, or to not ""jive"", as they say.
And it seems that these concept are always fighting it out, as when I saw Apple, which I wanted to see, but then was imposed upon by the sight of State, a material object naming a concept which I despise.
State is but a human concept, while Apple is an idea which the Self receives and interprets from nature, the unknown and beautiful world from whence come Ideas.
Roberts >m in, Is its with Vinaruhu Page 3 Vinaruhu's Last Stand by Ebenezer Pendergrass Before beginning this column, I must ask each reader to prepare for a profound emotional shock.
Sit down and imagine the most painful, horrifying revelation that could confront any intelligent decent-thinking Millsaps student.
I extend my deepest and sincerest apologies to all my faithful readers who have, week after week, looked to Vinaruhu for inspiration and guidance in the daily affairs of life.
I have no doubt been party to the greatest sham since the Destiny of Excellence.
My suspicions were first aroufced only a week ago, and only under the most bizzare of circumstances.
The sky outside my window became black with clouds and the thunder rolled.
Then my window mysteriously opened and a bolt of lightning flashed through, striking my copy of The Greening of America.
The next thing I knew, the book was gone and in its place stood a three-legged elephant and a giant python with the head of a man.
As I looked more closely, I could see that the python had wrapped himself around the neck of the elephant and was squeezing tighter and tighter.
With that the serpent tightened his grip on the elephant's neck and the mighty pachyderm stumbled to his knees.
At this point the serpent loosened his grip and snapped the elephant with his tail.
Vinaruhu is no seer Let me make this crystal clear You've been made the foremost fan Of the State's most worthless charlatan Fake religion 'ruhu teaches False dissension this man preaches The supervisors pay his check Morality, he's out to wreck By egging on our moral flaws He fights the cause of ethics laws And State dissension he does brew So County Unit won't go through.
Then the serpent tightened his vise and the giant elephant fell moaning to the floor.
Sure Vinaruhu had never advocated the supervisors' cause in any of our conversations.
And then I remembered his glee when he told me Theodore Smith would never be governor.
I have been using your wretched column as an outlet for supervisors' propoganda.
I have employed your clumsy satire as a weapon to alienate progressive minded Mississippians away from the call of positive political reform.
No longer will I be a cog in the heavy equipment of political corruption.
No longer will I be a capitalist culvert on the manhole of corporate imperialism.
But worse yet, he had seen ""The Trial of Billy Jack"" and thought there was still a revolution.
I knew that I should never speak to him again, but my affections proved the stronger instinct.
Burning torches lit night as sky pig circled above, i asked someone in the crowd what was the matter.
What he didn't know was that there was a Baptist revival going on inside.
Just as the preacher shouted, ""Satan is near,"" Vinaruhu comes charging in screaming obscenities and hurling wine bottles into the crowd.
Next thing anyone knew, Vinaruhu was fleeing for his life with the crowd in hot pursuit.
Suddenly, the thunder rolled and the skies parted and a strange voice shook the earth.
At these words a giant culvert fell from the heavens and crushed my wayward friend.
A tale that begins with the promise of divine revelation and ends in an expose of evil and a heavenly demise.
For those who do not grasp the profound lessons that this story teaches, I say to you I have no time for dullards.
But for those who grasp these inner truths and seek further reading in their metaphysical basis, may I suggest'the literature of Kafka, the teachings of Billy Graham, and above all, readings on the Destiny of Excellence. mm © mi% 'mi u®m.
Grilled Frank 1.29 1.29 ORLEANS PARISH HOT DOGS Hot Dog 65 Chili Dog 80 Chili Bun 75 NEW ORLEANS HOT PLATES WITH FRENCH BREAD Red Beans.
To the right is a single door at which, from time to time, harried individuals pause to peek in, their eyes focusing first on the coffinlike desk which dominates stage center, then on the nine tiers rising, rising, rising into and beyond the wings.
Each tier is lined with desk-seat units which, fulfilling no esthetic standard at the moment of their creation, have nevertheless been rendered less beautiful by the passage of time.
Some of the harried individuals enter the dungeon to take their places at vacant desk-seat units and themselves begin scribbling.
Others shake their heads in perplexity, wander away and are never heard of again.
For one man, Gerard Manley Hopkins is a modern poet; for another, Rod McKuen is; and, for yet another, the first two men are wrong.
After nearly two and a half hours during which, although the assembled scribblers have committed to paper almost as many words as are to be found in Dostoyevsky's Crime and Punishment, nothing much (from the viewpoint of the Absolute) has happened, MAX enters.
He is of ageless middle age, and he wears a sober suit with narrow lapels.
SCOTT detaches himself from one of the desk-seat units and, jostling the elbows of other scribblers as he straightens the seams of his plus-four's, makes his way to stage center, there to present to MAX a sheaf of papers.
MAX studies them, trying to restrain the involuntary movement of his lips, then adds them to a larger stack already on his desk.
I know you did, Scott. 50,044 words by my count — though we certainly won't quibble about that.
But what does bother us a bit is that there are some glaring inaccuracies in this material you've added.
But, of course, in accordance with your notes toward an articulation of an attempt to codify some of our practices toward the ends of a greater clarity of purpose and uniformity of execution, I quite naturally assumed that not securing any assistance (either from an individual or from a book) was preferably to merely getting my facts straight.
Anyway, I figgered if I dazzled 'em with my fustian footnotes no one would even notice that I hadn't got my facts straight.
I do hope that I am not detecting a note of distemper in your tone, Scott.
The which, I hasten to say, your writing is without — utterly lacking, as it does, the special excellencies for which we look.
In your ""notes toward a whatever"" you somehow neglected to complete your sentence in paragraph 4, Max.
Well, be that as it may, Scott, we clearly could not permit our imprint to appear on the book as you might write it.
Fearing the commandments of God or the laws of men, most of us seldom seriously entertain thoughts of killing a fellow human being ; still, most of us can conceive of circumstances which might justify our doing it.
It may be the comforting feeling that the set of circumstances which, for Rodion Romanovich Raskolnikov, provides justification for hammering in the head of a harmless old crone (Harmless to us, she is to him a fitting symbol of a society which fosters the mediocre and the meaningless while abandoning the superb and the heroic.) is not the set we would deem mitigating which makes bearable the reading of Crime and Punishment.
At that, the reader, if he is anything like me, finds himself developing such compassion for Raskolnikov that he comes to share Raskolnikov 's guilt and must eventually come to wonder about his own capacity for capriciously doing dark deeds.
Previously, he has supposed he would kill to defend himself or the people he loves or, if it came to that, his country.
But would he kill also for a principle so abAmerican Social Values between the Great Wars.
Instead of your whiskey-runner, we now have an English professor name of Ellsworth Touhy who smuggles copies of Kathleen Winsor novels — (SCOTT beats MAX to death with his ball-point pen, stuffs the body into the coffin-like desk and immediately takes to drink.
Let him leave the abstract now and ask if, after all, he might not kill in order to preserve, or to multiply, his possessions.
Petersburg and move a third of the way across the world to the hotter ones of Mexico's Sierra Madre Occidental in the 1920's, as depicted in a strange and powerful novel by one of the century's strangest and most powerful writers.
Taking a story of three vagrants ""on the beach"" in Mexico who pool their scratchy resources and go hunting for gold in the desolate hills, Mr Huston has shaped a searching drama of the collision of civilization's vicious greeds with the instinct for selfpreservation in an environment where all the barriers are down.
And, by charting the mood of his prospectors after they have hit a vein of gold, he has done a superb illumination of basic characteristics in men.
In one of the few vehicles deserving of his talents, Humphrey Bogart played the role of Fred C Dobbs.
Unlike Raskolnikov, who looked upon ordinariness as a curse to escape, Dobbs sees it as a blessing to aspire to.
Down-and-out through no real fault of his own, warming public benches and panhandling for small change, Dobbs is guilty of nothing more sinful than lewd thoughts and the propensity for passing on to the very few people whose stations in life are higher.
Given a change of clothes and something to jingle in his pockets, however, even these petty inclinations towards evildoing evaporate; Dobbs becomes, even as you or I, generous to and considerate of his fellow man.
Having learned how like us he is, it then comes as a shock to discover Dobbs capable of gunning down a defenseless partner.
But, though we may plead that at this point he is clearly off his bean (and that we would never do such a thing), there is an earlier and more chilling episode in which Dobbs and his partners — honest, hardworking and reasonably rational men — calculate the various ways of dealing with the intruder who seeks to join in their enterprise and coldbloodedly reckon shooting him to be the most efficacious.
And, given the circumstances, here it is not easy to say we would reckon otherwise.
The details are fast and electric from the moment the three prospectors start into the Mexican mountains, infested with bandits and beasts, until two of them come down emptyhanded and the third one, the mean one, comes down dead.
Most shocking . . . will likely be the job that Mr Bogart does as the prospector who succumbs to the knawing of greed.
The Traven mystery, insofar as there is one, resides in the question of how Mr Traven has been able to make himself a reputation with writing of this order, even if only in the wide and windy open spaces of Texas and the Southwest, where he had become the subject of a cult in university English departments.
In the twenties, when this writer, a native of Chicago, was settling himself into his newly adopted Mexican habitat, his work, unpublished in the United States, was being lapped up in Germany.
An immense vogue for adventure stories in general, and for Westerns in particular, swept over Germany in the postwar decade.
Dreamstuff about free zone beyond the dvancing frontiers of civilization, a place outside the urbanized world of rules and restraints where there was elbowroom and where action was allimportant, had an enormous appeal for disillusioned and frustrated people in Europe.
Mr Traven's West is a egion of the mind, wholly related to the West of reality — an un-place that might best be described as its creator's anti-Chicago, Chicago being what he wanted out of when he was owing up there at the rn of the century as Berick Torsvan, the discontented son, or so he would now have us believe, of Norwegian-Swedish immigrant parents.
One of the things Mr Miller tells us about this boy in his introduction sheds further light on the nature of the Traven cult.
Young Berick idn't like going to school, id became a dropout at an early age.
This piece of information helps one to understand why Mr Traven's heroes are what they are — men who know more medicine than most doctors, more Indian lore than any anthropologist, and n""ore of the true wisdom than is to be found in any library, all without ever having cracked a book.
They are the natural consolers of the ignorant and of those who wish to make virtues of the narrowness and inconsequence of lifetimes spent in headlong flight from every difficulty and responsibility.
Another theory is that he is Bendrich Traven, a Scandinavian, who came to Berlin in about 1920 and associated with an anarchist-syndicalist group led by Rudolf Rocker.
It even has been suggested that he is a deserter from the American navy, also that he is a Negro who had to flee from criminal prosecution in the United States.
The design behind the attempts to represent Traven as an American who writes in English, and who is still writing, is no less intriguing than is the unsolved mystery of the identity of B Traven.
In his introduction to The Night Visitor, Charles H Miller offers, and refutes, still more solutions to the mystery.
It has been said that my sister . . . was B Traven, and that she wrote the books, while actually she was his secretary and translator.
But the mystery of B Traven does not exist simply because he refuses to state or clarify the facts of his adventurous life.
It exists because the nature of his obscure origin and his embattled career as philosophical revolutionist induced him to choose ""exile, silence, and cunning"" for his personal defense.
Decades ago Traven's seclusion was a wise habit when Germany's Third Reich officials banned his books, confiscated his German earnings, and threatened his life.
Even in his chosen land of Mexico, Traven's life was threatened by various landowners who considered his detailed accounts of guerrilla warfare (published in some of his ""jungle novels"" yet to appear in the United States) as threats to their vested interests.
They are strongly laced with Wobbly sentiment, heavily laden with contrivances of the kind which occur in real life but which are not permitted in fiction, and sometimes seemingly translated from the Venusian.
And, of Sierra Madre, let me say that the reader, if he is anything like me, will suffer with Fred C Dobbs precisely as he suffers with Rodion R Raskolnikov.
This book deals with the West of reality and with that region of the mind where even today the lust for gold possesses men and sends them with their spurious maps and tall tales to seek lost mines and lose their minds.
The most celebrated mine, the ""Lost Dutchman,"" has already figured in magazine stories and articles and books almost as numerous and almost as spurious as the maps which pinpoint its location.
But, while he confesses that his early infatuation with the gold mines was as brainless as that of all the other questers, Jennings has done his homework — and his legwork — Well.
Were it not that these matters are made understandable and enjoyable, there might be too much of the magma and continental upheavals — not to mention the flora and fauna.
Government and the occupants of some 18,000 square miles of Arizona and New Mexico that, by virtue of an old Spanish grant, that land was his.
The reader who hopes to find directions to a gold mine in this book will be disappointed.
And so I leave the Superstitions, knowing — not just believing, or hoping, as so many do — knowing that there is a treasure here.
It consists in some intangible compound of the mountains' terrible beauty; their awesome grandeur; their aloofnexx from both mastery and mockery; their vast,»empty, echoing wilderness; their strange and wonderful inhabitants, both past and present ; the legends and mysteries and hungers and wishes and very real blood-stains that have permeated their rocks.
My critical judgment is, of course, unaffected by this fact, but I feel I should mention that Gary Jennings is my brother.
While people cry out for social justice and food for their families, We demand lettuce.
Little has been written about our team and its losses ; we have only read of Jackson State and its ""sky-king"" leapers.
Millsaps opened against William Carey in the Magnolia, with hopes of getting on the winning track.
William Carey shot 52% from the field while pulling down 38 rebounds to our 29.
Two freshmen led the scoring for Millsaps, John Paden had 24 while Mike Collins put in 16 points.
Millsaps kept with Rust through part of the second half, but then faded quickly.
Three players were in double figures Millsaps, Mark Lynch with Paden with 13, and Bill McGuii with 13.
Rust had four players in double figures while the team tied in rebounds, 38 apiece.
McGuire led all scores with 19 points, Paden had 15, and Greg Hickman scored 14.
Not only did we clinch last place with this loss, but we also dropped to an 0-4 record.
So Millsaps is off to a bad start with an 0-4 record, and the whole season ahead.
Coach Booth has tried many players but has not found a winning combination.
Several Majors have done well individually with Paden leading in scoring with 67 points and 16. average, while McGi leads in rebounds with 28 for per game average.
JACKSON 1894 The BankThat Cares Member FDIC ad no wish hut — to he glad jNfor want hutwhen he thirsted The JoUy Beggar Each frosty bottle of Coke is the answer to • thirst . . . each frosty bottle is a bargain, too.
Crawford is leading a coalition of Black club owners in an effort to publicly combat alleged harassment by the Jackson Police.
Crawford Tells Of Police Harassment Against Black Clubs by DANNY BOWLING Community Affairs Editor Jackson is becoming a city.
Business, industry and population rates are rapidly expanding, transforming a quiet and affable town into a complex metropolis.
The crime rate is soaring out of proportion, with a recent flurry of armed robberies bringing the Mayor's office and the Police Department under heavy attack from several predominantly white business and citizens groups.
In response to pressure from above, Police Chief La veil Tullos issued a series of directives, declaring a virtual ""war on crime"" to combat the surge of lawlessness.
Charges have now been filed, however, that the Jackson Police may have overstepped their legal authority by trampling personal and civil rights in their increased efforts.
Janiella Crawford, claims that large juads of non-uniformed olicemen have been harrassing owners and patrons of black htclubs in the Jackson State without just reason or cause.
Concurrently, several charges of police brutality in the same area have been leveled st the police department. portunity to talk with Ms.
She was more than willing to vocalize her feelings and the feelings of the black community regarding alleged police harrassment.
They just walked around shining lights in peoples' faces and demanding to see I.D.'s.
All of a sudden, they grabbed one guy and beat him (See POLICE HARASSMENT, 11) SEB Elections to Open Amidst Dissension by DEAN PITTMAN News Editor Annual Student Executive Board elections are scheduled for tomorrow at Millsaps.
James Galloway, Chairperson of the Student Election Committee, announced late last week that nominations deadlines would be Tuesday with the elections the following Thursday.
At this writing, Allen Brehm, a junior here, plans to challenge the SEB elections schedule in the student Senate Tuesday night.
The basis of Brehm 's challenge rests on the lack of time between the deadline for nominations and plans to point out the unfairness of possible candidates on the Student Election Committee having access to the slate of declared candidates.
Brehm has hinted that if the Senate is unresponsive to his request he will attempt iniation of a campus-wide boycott of the election.
The recommendation comes on the heels of a resolution passed unanimously by the faculty calling for a tuition increase to provide money for full cost-ofliving raises to teachers and other college employees.
Collins has included the proposed tuition raise in the college budget for 1975-76.
It will be presented for approval to the Board of Trustees in their meeting on February 7.
The president feels that passage of the increase by the Board is very likely, in which case it will take effect next year.
The proposal comes at a time when double-digit inflation has caused the administration to tighten its financial helt, the faculty to collectively request a cost-of-living increase, and the students to shudder at the thought of the third tuition iniiimmmmfflmfliiiimtttflw crease in as many years.
It was hiked to $730 in 1973-74 and then to the current $805 in 1974-75.
Also feeling the squeeze of inflation, the faculty has been trying to secure an across-theboard 12% cost-of-living increase to supplement what is widely considered a very low salary level.
Whether they will get the full 12% is yet to be determined by Collins and the budget-makers.
According to the president, a tuition increase is the only way to provide the money for faculty pay raises.
The Board of Trustees instructed him to keep the college deficit at its current level , which apparently means that no more money can be spent from usual sources of income.
Therefore, a new source must be found and — in this case — it is escalated tuition. limillllMIHIIIItlllllllllllliMIIIIIIIIIIHWMl JOHN TEDDER leaps for a rebound in last Monday's home game against Tougaloo, while John Paden looks on.
Supreme Court, following a federal appeals court decision that denied them any of the $13. million they were seeking in damages.
The lawsuit was initiated ■ inst members of the issippi Highway Patrol and tti 'a ' son Police Department as weil as the State of Mississippi, the City of Jackson, and various other officials.
Despite the fact that the appeals court felt that law enV forcement officers had used ""excessive"" force and fire on the J-State campus, it nevertheless upheld a trial jury's decision to exonerate the lawmen from liability.
The court also agreed with a trial judge's rubng that the city and state were immune from suit.
Therefore, the Jackson State plaintiffs and relatives have sought recourse by petitioning the Supreme Court for a writ of certiorari which, if granted, means that the Court will review the case.
SAYS COLLEGES STILL SEGREGATED Department of Justice officials complain that twenty-five colleges and junior colleges are still predominantly segregated.
This comes after five years of effort by federal officials who now threaten court action. 94th CONGRESS OPENS WITH REFORM The ninety-fourth Congress started the new session on a note of promise, stripping several prominent committee chairmen — including Wright Patman, Edward Hebert, and Bob Poage — of their posts.
The move was seen as an indication of increased vigor by younger congressmen and a decline of the congressional seniority system.
The C.I.A. left behind two decades of unaccountability this week with the opening of committee hearings in the Senate.
The hearings were to investigate domestic spying, which is strictly prohibited by the National Security Act of 1947 that established the C.I.A.'s operational functions.
POLL SHOWS FORD ON POLITICALLY SHAKY GROUND A Louis Harris poll released on January 20 shows President Ford on shaky ground concerning the 1976 race.
STATE OF THE UNION President Ford in his State of the Union message to Congress revealed his plans to halt the deepening recession.
His plans centered on fuel price increases, a 12 million dollar rebate on income taxes, and a recycling of the money earned by the fuel increases back into the economy.
DETENTE SUFFERS SERIOUS BLOW Detente suffered a serious blow last week when the Soviets rejected a U.S.-Soviet Trade Bill which took three years to formulate and put into law.
CHINA SEEKS TO STABILIZE GOVERNMENT China took a step toward stabilization of its political structure during the first meeting of the National People's Congress in ten years.
They also placed continued desire for detente with the United States in accordance with the Communique of 1972. o ceptance or rejection of the writ could come any time between now and June.
The killings came after two nights of turmoil had rocked the virtually all-black campus.
As a force of 69 policemen confronted a crowd of students (estimated variously to be between 40 and 400) in front of a dormitory, a sharp sound was heard, several cried ""sniper"", and the officers > ■ opened fire.""One dead student was found behind the police line across from the dorm where the sniper was supposed to be.
Both local and federal grand juries held deliberations on the Jackson State tragedy, but both refused to indict any law enforcement officers.
State News LLOYD GRAY State Government Writer REED CONFIRMATION HEARINGS RESUME The Senate Corrections Committee was scheduled to resume public hearings yesterday on the confirmation of Jack Reed as Superintendent of the Mississippi State Penitentiary at Parchman.
When the inquiry opened last Thursday, Reed charged that Corrections chairman Sen.
Corbet Patridge of Schlater had used political pressure tactics to interfere in the operation of the prison.
Bill Waller, who has charged that the move to block Reed's confirmation in the Senate is politically motivated.
The Corrections Committee voted 5-2 against Reed January 15, but the full Senate voted 3022 to refer the matter back to the panel.
Bill Burgin of Columbus, after ejecting 16 news people from his Appropriations Committee meeting last Tuesday for the purpose of excluding one — veteran reporter Bill Minor of the New Orleans Times-Picayune — rescinded his order the following day and let everyone back in.
The clash between Minor and Burgin stems from a series of articles written by Minor last year which suggested that Burgin had possible conflicts of interests.
SENATE PASSES DELEGATE SELECTION BILL The Senate passed a bill which provides for a primary election to select 75 percent of the state's delegates to national party conventions.
The other 25 percent would be chosen by the state party's executive committee, which currently picks them all.
Terming the American Student Union ""the originator and propagater of the germs of Communism,"" he said he had received a telegram from the Millsaps chapter of the union asking him to support the Cavagan Anti-Lynching Bill.
He said the sentiment was contrary to the attitude of Mississippians and other Southerners who felt lynching legislation should be State and not Federal.
The campus largely respected the Hinman administration for its motivations, efforts, and general efficiency, and to Mark Jones the change he instituted was a new optimism in students.
Unaffected by the new optimism is Mike Stevens, who sees student government as ""basically ineffective,"" full of good intentions and sinking ships.
FRESHMEN VISITATION Several metters will be carried into the new administration most promising is the freshmen visitation proposal.
After a predicatable questionaire to upperclassmen, and consultation with the deans and the housemothers, Jones will ask for either second semester or full year visitation on a permanent basis.
His report will go from the senate through President Collins to the Board of Trustees, where he expects a favorable outcome Jones is also head of a committee on tuition that will ""check into everything the student pays for"" and the rumored $200 tuition raise.
FOOTBALL FEASIBILITY Later in the year the com mittee to study the feasibility of football and a P.E. major will report to the seante.
Their report will determine if the P.E. department should take the squeeze of rising costs, if emphasis should be placed on other sports, if the coaching is good, and the possibility of reducing, or even .cutting, the football program.
An opinion poll was taken around campus to scout out students' opinions on a possible em tuition in order to finance culty salary increase.
The ral concensus of those polled emed to be against an increase in tuition.
Mariann Williamson — They'll have to increase the tuition or they'll loose the faculty.
Robert Kersh — I wouldn't want to work on the faculty here, but the tuition is high enough as it Deirdre Mayes — I'm against raising tuition for any reason.
Bruce Fairburn — From an onomic standpoint the increase tion would be right, but I to see it go ud.
Carolyn Skinner — I'm in favor of increasing tuition if it is not raised too much because the faculty needs more money.
Ann Hendrick — If the tuition equalization bill was passed then tuition should be raised, but if not, I say Don't raise tuition.
The professors are putting too much into their work and not getting enough out of it.
Maura Mcintosh — To keep up the high quality here the salaries need to be raised, but tuition shouldn't be raised.
We need to find out what happened to all of the money Collins by OBIE CLAYTON Assistant Editor A proposal recommending the creation and institution of a Bachelor of Business Administration degree will be presented before the Feburary meeting of the Millsaps faculty.
If it receives the favorable vote of the faculty, passage by the President and Board of Trustees will be just a mrer formality and the Degree will be instituted.
The proposal isn't new having already gone before the Curriculum Committee and the College Senate.
It was rejected by a vote of four to three in the Committee but received support and won in the College Senate.
Richard Baltz, orginator and designer of the degree, it has been designed to meet the liberal arts criteria of education.
He stated that the degree is not intended to change the status of Millsaps as a liberal arts college, but is designed to offer a great deal of flexibility which is needed if Millsaps is to attract more business students.
Proponents of the degree are of the consensus that if Millsaps does not attract more business students, they will have to attend other institutions to receive their education.
Frances Coker stated that the degree is an excellent opportunity to meet the special needs of students entering the business world as well as graduate study Jn the fields of accounting and a'dministration.
Peggy Hightower — I think they'll be cutting their nose off if they raise tuition.
Pat Cooper — I'm all for a salary raise, but we need another alternative rather than tuition • increase.
David Bourgeois — I don't see how we've kept the teachers here' as long as we have, but a tuition increase is not the means by which salaries need to be raised.
John McVay — Salaries need to be raised, but if tuition is raised the enrollment will drop.
Those in favor of the degree are also quick to say that it will not cost the school any money and, in all likelyhood, could bring in an additional $100,000 annually.
The B.B.A. does not represent a change in the department's course offerings.
It would not require additional staffing, unless at a later date the degree program attracts sufficient enrollment to justify additions.
Frank Frohnhoefer said the crucial point of controversy appears to be whether or not a B.B.A. degre belongs in a liberal arts college.
He added that, according to the purpose of a college, professional and preprofessional studies are an integal part of the school.
So logically the degree would be in keeping with the philosophy of the college.
Frohnhoefer explained that the question of the B.B.A. degree is especially crucial at this time since many liberal arts colleges which haven't adjusted to the needs of students have either closed or will soon be forced to do so.
There is a better than even chance that the faculty will approve the degree proposal when it comes before their meeting, but there will be opposition.
Opponents of the bill feel that is is a curriculum change without going through the already existing channels.
Others in opposition to the proposal see it as setting a bad precedent of moving to departmental degrees and thus breaking the backbone of the .liberal arts education.
Robert Padgett stated that the degree doesn't offer anything new, but is only a way of getting around the foreign language requirement, since the proposal as it now stands doesn't include language as a requirement.
Others oppose the degree on grounds of its acceptance in the academic world.
He too felt the degree was a way of getting around the language requirement without really offering anything new.
Not only do you fly with us at half, but you can iust about have your choice of dates for 4, 5, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10 week duration during the summer.
And all you have to do to qualify is reserve your seat now by sending $100. deposit, plus $10. registration fee.
Government regulations we must submit all flight participants names and full payment sixty days before each flight.
If you take the June 21 August 19 flight to London for example, deposit reserves'your seat and April 15 you send the $199. balance.
Just one price for all flights whether you pick a weekend departure or peak season surcharg% date.
So send for our complete schedule, or to be sure of your reservation now, mail your deposit for one of our 3 to 5 weekly departures from June through September.
You will receive your exact date confirmation and receipt by return 'mail.
From London there are many student flights to all parts of the Continent, frequent departures and many at 2/ 3 off the regular fare.
It doesn't knock you out with its looks but you also don't get forks stuck in your upper pallette because of whistles blown in your ears while you're trying to eat.
You don't get to listen to live music, but you don't pay sixty-five cents per beer for it, either.
You also don't get draught beer that tastes like tap water poured out of an old beer can.
Built in 1912 as (you guessed it) the George Street Grocery, the upstairs was used off and on as a rooming house.
At one time the building housed a dancing school and was rumored to carry a side-line business of prostitution.
This was never proven, but certainly adds a bit of zest to the history.
The restaurant itself first started in August of '74 and is most palatable.
Its atmosphere ce nts a draught might be described as rustic or j f . f i * * * * * ******* * i§* * ** *** * * * ft ft f ft ft ft * * -kl tf antique — sort of a nostalgia triple -|c with a touch of class.
You don't have to ' worry about keeping up with the Ole Miss crowd at the fooseball table or the swinging singles crowd at the bar, because they're not there.
They're off getting whistles blown in their ears or shouting over the sounds of dance bands.
The Dutch Bar crowd is unique in their common affection for what has become an institution, religiously attended.
It is frequented by the young and the old, the alcoholics and the ""just getting started"", the fooseball nuts, the freaks, and the not-so freaks.
They are all here because they like the friendly service, the best food at the best prices in town and, of course, the beer. o indeed delectible and sensibly^ priced.
The beer is served in big,* frosty mugs for 600, which isn't J BA bad judging that each mug holds* about 12 ounces.
Normal ^4149 Northview Drive meals (po-boy plates, red beans ^. and rice, etc.) cost about twojfrBig Mike's dollars.
J So next time you want to make *The Recovery Room a big score with your date or 342820 North State simply feel like pouring some * booze and good food down your Jrhe X-Ray Room neck — you can't go wrong at *01d Canton Road George St.
Grocery ^255 George * Ireland's ^925 Lakeland Drive * r***-***************** HOURS 5:30 6:30 pm Mon.-Fri. 4:30 6:30 pm Mon.-Thurs. 5:00 6:00 pm Mon.
Broke and disillusioned, Quake offered to sell us a series of stories about his days spent with the remarkable courtroom wizard.
All we had was a hot sixpack of PBR, which he readily took in exchange for his services as the P&W's Bayonne, Alabama Legal Editor.
What follows is the first installment in his serialized account of the one and only Oscar T Fornbush, Attorney at the Bar.
BY MILLER QUAKE P&W Bayonne, Alabama Legal Editor My name is Miller Quake.
I am now nothing more than a gutter bum, with a pocketful of memories my only possessions.
This is my story, a tale of how a small college named -loofer and a alcoholic lawyer amed Fornbush destroyed one of the great investigative reporters of our time.
But when I found out that the legendary Oscar T Fornbush, Attorney at the Bar, was named the defendants' lawyer, I felt that the story had the potential of a pregnant rabbit.
I arrived in Bayonne, Alabama, the home of Hoofer College, on a quiet Tuesday morning.
I decided to get right down to business, so I asked the first person I met where I could find the famed defender, Oscar T The hairy young man chuckled rather loudly, then pointed to a heap of trash lying behind the cafeteria.
Thanking him, I strode excitedly over to the smelly mess, certain I would find the legal-eagle uncovering clues in a place no other man would dream of looking.
For an infintesimal second, time and space stood still; then with a shriek, out of the trash heap exploded a human form.
If the apparition standing in front of me realized my surprise, however, his face didn't snow it.
He stared blankly at me for a moment, then fell ignobly back among the bottles from whence he had sprung.
It was evening and I was sipping brandy on an abandoned pier with a partially revived Oscar T The sun was setting across the bay as the quiet waters gently lapped dead fish against the pylons.
We had spent the afternoon diligently reviewing the Hoofer case from the relative quietness of Uncle Pete's Bar and Grill, as Oscar T had polished off a case of his own, one of Dixie Beer.
It seemed that several Hoofer students had been in open rebellion against the will of the Lutheran church, the governing body that controlled Hoffer College.
Led by ""Fire Breath"" Barker, editor of the notorious campus newspaper, the Blue and Yellow, this Godless group of anarchists had ridiculed everything the college stood for.
Pursuits of Greatness, respect for elders, quests for clean living, i OSCAR T FORNBUSH POURING OVER HIS LAW BOOKS RECENTLY CHOSEN CAST members of the saps Players production of Hamlet include Mona Perry surrounded clockwise from left by Eileen Hawkins, Bill Leech, Kevin Sessums, Jim Matheny, Doug Brindley, and Ward Emling. o the sanctity of women's housing, Sunday School; nothing was sacred to this iconoclastic group of subversives.
After a petition, written by the loyal business manager of the paper and signed by a ""lot of concerned people and Hoofer students as well"" was published in the paper, calling for the public hanging of ""Fire Breath"" Barker as a deterrant to others who would be ""sarcastic or sacreligious or unfair to the administration while in print"", the administration acted, feeling it had the popular support it needed for a crackdown.
Their only hope for justice, they knew, lay in the hands of the renowned defense lawyer, Oscar T Fornbush.
But now, as I sat on the lonely pier and gazed into vapid eyes that resembled raw oysters, I admitted to myself that I had serious doubts as to this man's ability.
This story was all I had, and this story was dependant on Oscar T Fornbush.
Fate had cast my lot with his, and our only hope lay with a power far greater than ours.
Unfortunately, the only greater power Oscar T would recognize was a bottle of Jack Daniel's.
I think that I must certainly be crazy, but I suppose a neutral observer would just suppose we were two old friends relaxing on a quiet pier.
With those words, spoken as the last rays of sunlight disappeared from the horizon, he slipped to the deck of the pier.
I picked up his empty brandy glass and was reminded of the famous quote from his greatest case, The State of Alabama vs.
I rose from the table and slowly walked off, not knowing whether to laugh or cry.
Vice Admiral Frederick Turner, the Sixth Fleet commander, added to the furor by saying the Navy didn't want to invade any oil sheikdom but was ""prepared"" to do so.
They are telling Arab leaders that Kissinger's views have been misrepresented by the press.
We can reveal, however, what the Secretary of State told associates during a recent secret discussion.
He said President Ford would not stand by while the Western world was destroyed by an oil squeeze.
If oil should be used as a weapon to destroy the free world's economy, Kissinger said, it would be just as serious a threat as a Soviet military move against the West.
Of course, Kissinger stressed that the oil crisis can be solved without war.
And in the secret policy councils, he has vigorously opposed the idea of military intervention.
Meanwhile, Kissinger has been scheming secretly with the Shah of Iran to find a solution to the Middle East mess.
Kissinger has persuaded the Shah that another Middle East war would increase Arab dependency upon the Soviets and, therefore, strengthen Soviet influence in the Middle East.
The Shah has secretly agreed, therefore, to supply Israel with the oil she would lose by giving up the captured Egyptian oil fields.
The Shah is also willing to join the United States in guaranteeing Israel's survival.
This is significant, because Iran is emerging as a military power in the Middle East.
Egypt's President Sadat has told both Kissinger and the Shah, meanwhile, that Israel must give up more than the oil fields.
There must also be withdrawals from the Golan Heights on the Syrian front and the West Bank on the Jordanian front.
Sadat explained that he could never accept a deal that didn't also include his Arab brothers.
Kissinger is now bringing pressure on the Israelis to come to terms with the Arabs before it is too late.
A mimeograph of a handwritten letter was received by the Purple and White in an envelope bearing only a Brooklyn, NY postmark.
Every time the American People voted for a President to end it, we were lied to, bomboozeled, and finally betrayed.
When the college students were in danger of being drafted and sent to Vietnam, then we heard from you, that it was wrong.
But sometimes in the quiet, if you listen carefully, you can hear the disgusted voice of God — Fink Paul Pittman Congressional Purge Hits South The implications of the recent ~ge of key Democratic committee hairmen in the United States House of Representatives have ominous overtones for veteran southern congressmen and conceivably a significant impact on the future of the Democratic party in the South.
For years, in fact since 1911, the most charished of all political icons in the Deep South has been the vaunted seniority system which has elevated southerners to positions of power on key committees.
Simply put, the one-party South had a tradition of returning its congressmen to Washington year after year.
In the process, they developed an unusual skill in parliamentary maneuvering, added to the near sacred seniority which kept elevating them in committee positions, power and prestige.
But in one fell swoop last week the House Democratic caucus, fueled by new and liberal Democratic congressmen, cut the ground from under the seniority system and opened the door for more reforms in legislative machinery for the future.
Poage also from Texas, who was chairman of the agriculture committee, and Edward Hebert of Louisiana, who was chairman of the armed services committee.
Jamie Whitten, Mississippi's senior representative in Congress survived the purge, but it was a questionable victory.
He had to relinquish two of the four areas over which his subcommittee on agriculture appropriations held jurisdiction.
Another senior southerner, Wilbur Mills of Arkansas, did not seek reelection to the powerful ways and means committee chairmanship, a development which was foreordained by the notoriety he received following an obviously off-key involvement with a strip tease artist.
Even Mississippi's flamboyant William Miller of Pascagoula was deposed after years of service in the prestigious position of House doorkeeper.
Two questions loom about the final significance of the congressional bloodletting.
Should it, Mississippi's two senators conceivably could find their power on two top committees, military affairs and judiciary, in jeopardy.
So, developments in Congress could have a potent effect on the state political scene.
No longer can Mississippi's Democratic congressmen stake their re-election campaigns on their power, gained through long tenure in their offices.
No longer can they defend their fidelity to the Democratic cause on the basis of a vested interest in retaining their power through the route of seniority.
Senator Jim Eastland's decision, to seek another term in 1978 is less predictable.
Senate will not eventually be touched by the mood that has finally come to fruition in the Democratic Caucus in the House.
It is, in fact, the end of an era lamented by some, greeted with high hopes by others.
Some state education leaders have questioned Outlook's assessment of the teacher pay raise, NESDAY, JANUARY 29, 1975 PAGE 7 By the fruits of integration we have learned that it is destructive — Medford Evans Some of you think toe are American citizens.
We're not Imari Obadele Race Relations Symposium Segregation . . . is a social and political production which is unnatural Melvyn Leventhal Blacks are distrustful of white America — Aaron Henry From the Editor now facing a conference committee to resolve differences between the ause and Senate versions of the legislation.
This column has verified the cost of the program as reported here last week.
The Senate bill would cost more than $31 million plus the built-in cost-of-living increase of about $15 million.
The House bill would cost aout $28 million, added to the cost-living amount.
When contacted, some legislative leaders admitted that there is confusion about the cost, even among legislators.
But they also verified that the outlay would make any new money appropriations highly unlikely this session, and they would not be surprised if the governor vetoes the ay increase so that other programs be considered.
The diversity, the prominence, andj — in the cases of Evans and Obadelel — the extremity of the speakers led tol a really fine week-long program, thej likes of which can rarely be seen in| this area.
State Government Student Government National Sports Photographer BILL RAY Business Manager DeanPittman James Holland Doug Levanway Danny Bowling BillBlair WardEmling EarlAycock Lloyd Gray Glade Mclnnis Doug Brindley Jimmy Dempsey Staff: Derrick Sheilds, Kevin Sessums, Beth Edwards, Ralph Wells, Susan Tsomoras, Gale Mallette, Liz Waldner, Teresa Liles, Lee Howell.
PAGE 8 P&W Communal Bathing Replacing Streaking WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 29, 1975 By BILL SIEVERT Karth News Service BERKELEY, Calif. — If there is to be a fad to replace ""streaking"" as the national campus pastime for 1975, it just might be communal bathing.
Following a hard day of classes, student neighbors here now take to big back-yard tubs to sip wine, exchange tales of the day's woes, read poetry, and soak their troubles away.
But, says Scullion, group bathing is a far healthier form of tensionrelease than simply running across campus nude.
For many of the participants, communal bathing has become a vital part of their social schedule.
Scullion himself adds that the community-tub is a great way to get to know your neighbors.
Since the former acid ""visioner"" and high guru turned government informer last summer, he has been the subject of a smear campaign by former friends, the focus of a major Justice Department investigation of the Weathermen, the epicenter of gale-force rumors, and — most significantly — virtually incommunicado.
For six months, either the United States Bureau of Prisons, or Leary, or both, have resisted efforts by Leary's friends and associates to sit down for a face-to-face meeting.
The Justice Department and the Bureau of Prisons insists that Leary does not want to see anyone.
Says United States Bureau of Prisons spokesperson Mike Aun, ""Leary is singing.
The latest word on Leary's whereabouts was that he was being held under ""extreme security"" somewhere in the Los Angeles area.
In a recent letter to the Los Angeles Free Press, Leary's former associate and known drug informer Dennis Martino insisted that he had seen Leary ""several times"" and that he was content and happy.
Martino assailed those who had conducted the so-called smear campaign against Leary, including Jerry Rubin, journalist Ken Kelly, and Leary's son Jack.
The latest twist in the increasingly Kafkaesque case was revealed this month by a small newspaper in Vacaville, California, home of the notorious Vacaville Prison where Leary spent some time.
According to the Vacaville Reporter, Leary is scheduled to appear as a star witness for the state in a case involving a former prison psychologist, Dr.
Hiler was fired last fall for allegedly smuggling a tape recording made by Leary out of the prison and delivering it to a magazine editor.
Hiler says that if the state won't produce Leary for his reinstatement hearing on January 27th, he'll have him subpoenaed as a defense witness.
Hiler maintains that Leary sought financial aid for the project from numerous backers, and actually received some support.
He says that Leary's decision to turn informer was a result of his determination to get out of prison and undertake the space journey.
This is being reprinted from the March 7, 1969 issue of the Purple and White.
It may, or may not offend the fraternity men of the campus, but we really don't care.
They come in assorted sizes, weights and states of inebriation; and they can be found anywhere, in fraternity houses, on dates, in arguments and always in debt.
Girls love them, campuses tolerate them and their parents support them.
A frat man is laziness with a deck of cards, bravery with his fraternity paddle and the protector of the girls' dorm with a copy of Playboy magazine.
He has the energy of a turtle, the slyness of a fox and the ingenuity of a con man; the stories of a sea captain; the sincerity of a liar; the asperations of a Cassanova and his desires are for women, booze, money, and always a diploma.
Some of his likes are co-eds, women, girls, ladies, dames, broads, birds, chicks, and members of the opposite sex.
His dislikes are writing papers, chapel, wearing a suit, Deans, W.S.G.A., cafeteria food, yellow cards, and getting up for an 8 o'clock class.
No one person, except a fraternity man, can stuff into one pocket a little black book, a pack of crushed Marlboros, a picture of Ann Margaret, a comb, a church key, his draft card and what's left of last weeks' allowance, and be out of the dorm seconds after getting up for that 8 o'clock class.
He spends his money on women, booze, poker, and the rest he spends foolishly.
A frat man is a magical creature; you can lock him out of your dorm, but not out of your heart; you can scratch him off your list, but not out of your mind.
You might as well give in; he is your one and only good-fornothing bowl of joy.
I was hoping for a quick look at some fire and brimstone or a lot of outhful index fingers pointing pward and I could report to my litor that the story wasn't wsworthy; then I would be off to other pursuits.
What I saw instead was an auditorium full of people with their arms above their heads and their hands stretched out to the side as if they were holding up a tremendous weight.
Some were translating what the tongue-talkers were lying and still others just waved ieir arms in ectasy.
On stage was the reason for all the jabbering and hand waving ; a middle-aged couple named Charles and Frances Hunter.
Standing next to them was an angellic-looking twenty-year old who was leading the singing.
Meanwhile, I found a seat in the balcony and settled securely into my agnosticism.
Frances was talking about how the power of God was too much for some people, how they just keeled over when they felt it.
A whole row that had been standing collapsed when she touched the hand of one of them.
Behind me two ten-year old boys were in a trance with their eyes closed and their arms around each other.
In front of me a pair of housewives swayed to the organ music between intermittent bursts of crying.
Frances made her way through the last rows on the floor and began climbing the steps to the balcony.
But Frances kept on waddling up the stairs and that angel on stage kept singing louder and louder.
My heart returned to its normal pace, my breathing slowed down, color returned to my face.
As a matter of fact, the Bible, according to Frances, tells us that we'll get back one hundred fold what we put in.
And they told stories about people who give $10.00 one night and find $20.00 in their mailbox the next day.
It's the part about the old man who came in on crutches, gives $20.00 for another chance and then leaves, still on crutches.
It's about all those who thought they had been cured of smoking cigarettes and realize that they had been unconsciously smoking one for five minutes on the drive home.
And it's about all the rest who are willing to pay Charles and Frances Hunter their hardearned money for a few hours of false hope. o Loyalists Take Bolder Position DEAN PITTMAN News Editor The Regulars of Mississippi's split Democrat party apparently will have to come ""under the Loyalist wing"" if the two faction's uniting ever becomes a reality.
Aaron Henry, speaking candidly after the Friday Forum at Millsaps last week, projected a new feeling from the loyalist side of the fence, almost a laissezfaire attitude towards the Regulars.
Henry, who is chairperson of the Mississippi Loyalist stated that the Regulars are going to have to come to them (the Loyalists) if unification is to be realized.
One reason for this attitude, of course, is the Loyalist's national recognition as the state's only Democrat party.
This, however, has been compounded by the recent Supreme Court decision making the state Democratic party laws void if they contradict national party rules.
This particular action strengthened the Loyalist's position in the state.
When asked about Governor Bill Waller's recent trip to the Democratic mini-convention at Kansas City, Dr.
However, although the Loyalists are enjoying a feeling of euphoria, they realize that as far as state politics go, their position is weak.
Pat Derian, Democratic national committee woman from Mississippi, recently commented that unless Loyalist candidates in state elections had Regular support, they would be forced to run as Independents.
Henry pointed to the recent appointment of Jack Harper, a Regular Chancery Clerk from Sunflower County, to the Loyalist Board of Directors.
Henry also hinted that he had hopes that Congressman David Bowen would be the initial Regular to lead his faction to the Loyalist camp.
With or without obstacles, the intermingling already of Loyalists in the Regular hierarchy and vice-versa will probably soon result in total integration of the two factions.
Tuition Bill Doomed The Tuition Equalization Bill, designed to save students attending private colleges in Mississippi up to $400 a year, appears doomed for the third straight year in the state legislature.
Bill Alexander of Cleveland, and has been referred to the Committee on Universities and Colleges of the Senate where it will probably die an unnoticed death because of strong opposition by some members of the panel.
Woodward has been Millsaps' primary lobbyist for the measure, which is sponsored by the Mississippi Association of Private Colleges.
The bill passed the Senate last year, but was amended on the floor to include private secondary and elementary schools in the state aid provisions.
The chief argument against the proposal in the Senate was that it represented a violation of the constitutional separation of church and state.
No, this beat is not one of joy but one of frustration for the young Millsaps Majors, as Monday night saw another step in the wrong direction.
For the record, the Majors were facing a highly regarded group of Bulldogs from Tougaloo College who have been known to play very good basketball.
Many people expected this to be the biggest rout' of the season since the Choctaws of Mississippi College came calling last semester.
But the Majors, who have a reputation of doing things backwards, seem to have gotten the information a little mixed up.
Shooting a torrid 86% from the throw line and an equally pressive 50% from the floor, lsaps challenged Tougaloo throughout the evening, staying close to the Bulldogs until the final two minutes when inexperience and a little bad luck nee again took their toll.
Expected first-round choices J included quarterback ^ Steve Bartowski of *» * California, linebacker j J Randy White of Maryland, J )f and running back Walter J Payton of Jackson State.
J According to some exjf. perts, Wepner is the *• seventh rated heavyweight J in the world.
It is widely believed that Ali will * 34. eventually give rematches + to former title-holders Joe J Frazier and George Foreman-possible on the )f same card during the same * night.
Freshman John Paden led the Majors in scoring, blistering the nets for 26 points, Mark Lynch added offensive spark with slick ball handling and 12 points.
Millsaps now faces a Friday night rematch in the PAC with Louisiana College, an easy victor over the Majors last week in their initial' meeting of the season.
Although Millsaps has yet to find victory, the Tougaloo game showed that they can play good basketball on occasion.
The team includes freshmen Nancy Barksdale, Shawn Evans, Isabelle Ezelle, Karen Gladney, Gail Gober, Carol Humphreys, Carol Middlestead, Mary Jo Milling, Ellen Sessions, and Cindy Wilson, sophomore Marcia McKee, junior Elizabeth Allen, and seniors Janet Dykes and Valerie Hodgens.
The game showed inexperience in handling the ball and working as a team.
Constant turnovers during the first half proved fatal as did the outside goals by Belhaven.
The women have had to adjust to the new rules of five-member team, full-court play, and twenty minute halves.
They plan to use a strategy of quick offense and effective defense to compete with the experienced teams of Tougaloo, Jackson State, and Unifirst.
According to Miss Mary Ann Edge, coach of the team, extramural basketball offers an excellent opportunity for women to participate in organized competitive sports.
Commenting after the first game, she was optimistic that the full potential of the team will be accomplished in future games. by EARL AYCOCK Assistant Sports Editor Probably the most competitive and surely the most participatory intramural sport on campus is basketball.
This can be verified by noting that, starting Tuesday, there will be no less than fourteen teams vying for the championship in one of the two leagues.
The ""A"" league will be composed of one team from each of the men's fraternities, KA, Pike, Lambda Chi, and Kappa Sigma, and four independent teams, the Turkeys, representing the Black Student Association, the Tracers, last year's champions, Chalk, and the Masterballers.
Athletic Director Jim Montgomery also informed team captains of the new rule concerning the referees —e. if the team scheduled to play does not have at least five players present at game time, then, according to strick high school rules, a technical foul will be levied against that team.
If the team remains inadequately numbered, then two other technicals will follow which calls for a forfeiture.
If a forfeit is called, then the team forfeiting will be responsible for paying the officials.
Each team will also be required to have at least two other persons attending each game to act as score keepers.
Chalk Volleyball, which finally ended last week, saw the Pikes whip the KA's in a two out of three contest for the ""A"" league championship and also saw the Pike ""C"" team put the KA""B"" team easily under in two straight games for the ""B"" league championship.
Crawford was arrested for violation of state liquor laws — specifically, illegal possession of alf pint of gin.
They were just looking for an excuse to arrest When I got to the station, I found that several other nightclub owners — all from my neighborhood — also had been arrested, each on charges as flimsy as mine.
We had a meeting the Sunday night before our court hearing and one the next night.
He wouldn't even talk to us at first — said he didn't want to involve himself — but after a group of us planted ourselves outside his office the next day, he gave in and agreed to meet with us.
When asked if the incidents concerning the police officers were isolated occurences, Ms.
The night I was arrested was the third consecutive night the police had been in my place.
Crawford related numerous accounts of police harrassment in black nightclubs across town.
Anyone hesitant in complying with the order would be immediately arrested.
When asked about her appearance before the City Council January 20, Ms.
Crawford spoke angrily, 'They weren't ready to listen ot us; they just didn't care.
As a result of the meeting, Mayor Davis and Chief Tullos promised a complete investigation into the allegations and a report within two weeks.
This was not enough to satisfy the coalition of nightclub owners, however.
I'm not going to have anything to do with it, but sooner or later somebody's gonna get pushed in a corner and fight back.
Crawford described tne effect the police techniques were having on community morale.
My business, it isn't one quarter what it was three months ago, and I can't blame people for staying away from here.
Governor Bill Waller, discussing ""K Jf the possibility of having their £ J book reconsidered for approval + ^ as a state recognized textbook. -fc Without this recognized status, £ the schools of Mississippi would £ J not be allowed to purchase the jj. book with state or federal money, * jf making it's wide use virtually £ * impossible.
Both Sallis and Loewen are * )f pleased and encouraged by the £ J governor's decision.
Nobody has talked torts and physiology and Tagore and handball and rush and IDA and cramming and Dryden and Faulkner and Heller and good dates and new movies and skiing in Steamboat Springs and Joni Mitchell and Chinese 50 in a long, long time.
We want to hear you talk about what you did over the holidays and what you're going to be taking next and just anything else you may want to talk about.
Don Fortenberry, speaking in behalf of the committee, said that they felt freshmen need time to indoctrinate themselves into Millsaps life before they should be thrown into the situation of first semester rush.
Realizing the sensitivity of the issue, the committee hopes to incorporate the support and assistance of the IFC in making an official decision in regard to second semester rush.
The idea of second semester rush is not new and was, in fact, discussed in the school senate last year.
However, members of several of the Greek Summer Aspen Lodge, Estes Park, Colorado.
Employ college students and high school seniors from June 1 to September 10.
Need 6 waiters, 6 cabin boys, 2 kitchen help, 2 dishwashers, $130 plus equal split tips, room and board.
Need 4 costume assistants, 12 actors and actresses, 4' technicians, salary commensurate with experience.
For more information on over 90,000 summer jobs around the United States see the Summer Employment Directory in Dean Woodward's office. organizations were so vehemently opposed to the idea, its failure was not a surprise.
Without the income of new pledges during that first semester, several of the Greek organizations claim they will literally ""go under"", financially.
Another important objection to this issue is the burden of what will probably result in a semester of undeclared rush for both the Greek member and the potential rushee, a situation that could prove detrimental to all involved.
If the IFC agrees to work with the Chaplain's Committee on this issue, these and other pitfalls of both first and second semester rush will be aired.
The committee's hope is that with IFC's assistance, an agreeable school position can be reached.
The deadline fori [entries is February 5, and I [these may be turned in to [Dr.
The I manuscript should not bel signed, but a separate card I with the author's name, I [college, division, and manuscript title should be I I turned in with the entry.
I Winning manuscripts in I I each category will then be I submitted to the 19751 [Southern Literary Festival | eneral competition.
Exam Schedules Listed below are the dates of graduate and professional exams given in the Spring Semester.
David Watson need a student to visit hospitals all over the state of Mississippi to collect abstract information from hospital records.
She has one child attending the School for the Emotionally Disturbed Children, and needs someone who owns a car to pick the Child up from school at 11:30, take it home, feed it lunch, etc.
Pay is 2.00 per hour, and anyone interested in babysitting only will receive $.75 per hour, plus gas.
El Palacio Restaurant on 1-55 North is taking applications for waitresses and day bus boys.
Please apply in person between 10:00 A.M. and 5:00 P.M., and ask for Chuck or Debbie Singletary.
THE REPORTER needs someone to work about three hours every Wednesday delivering papers, and collecting money from local stands.
Operation of the new gym has come under attack from individuals and campus groups alike.
Limited access comes as a result of the complete gym floor often being occupied by Millsaps intercollegiate teams or by outside groups who have rented the facility.
Complaints about the way the PAC is being operated have become so intense that both the Student Senate and the College Senate have formed ad hoc committees to look into the nation.
Headed by Mr Steve Wells of the Accounting Department, the College Senate panel is supposed to draw up guidelines for use of the new gym.
The committee includes athletic director Jim Montgomery, although his appointment by Dean Saunders was challenged by several student members of the Senate who felt that a conflict of interest existed.
While preparing for their February 21 indoor tournament, the Millsaps tennis squad has practiced in the gym around 50% of the afternoons this semester, often occupying all three courts from around 1:30 to 3:00m.
On at least two occasions, the football team has moved inside from bad weather and taken up the whole floor with spring training drills from about 3:00 until 5:00m.
The courts are naturally used on a regular basis by the mens' and girls' basketball teams and the P.E. classes.
This all combines to leave the gym open for normal student use four hours during the day on Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, and Sunday, three hours on Monday, and two on Friday.
This semester, the facility has been used approximately thirteen nights for high school basketball tournaments, ac75-76 Tuition Raise asses Board Easily by ROB McDUFF Editor Little controversy or discussion surrounded the Board of Trustees' recent passage of a tuition hike which will increase the average students' cost of attending school by $100 per semester.
Beginning next September, the tuition will be charged on an hourly basis — $60 per semester hour.
For the average 15 hour load, that will be $900, which is nearly $100 over the current level. hours will cost $720 and 18 will cost $1,080.
The Board action followed exactly the recommendation of President Ed Collins for a tuition increase.
Coming close to collective bargaining for the first time ever, the faculty asked for a 12% costof-living increase in salary and passed a resolution several weeks ago recommending a tuition raise to provide the revenue.
Their increase came out to be only 10% but from all indications, the faculty is pleased with that.
The vote comes after months of deliberation on the BBA proposal and virtually insures the institution of the degree on campus.
Richard Baltz and other proponents of the measure feel that it will do much to help attract new students to Millsaps.
Board Denies McCafferty Vote By OB1E CLAYTON Assistant Editor The Board of Trustees of Millsaps College held their winter meeting on campus last Friday amid speculation of tuition increases and freshman visitation.
The meeting got rather heated when the ex-officio status of S.E.B. president Jim McCafferty was brought into question; McCafferty was denied the right to make proposals and to vote during the Board business.
Controversy over the student body president's position came during an argument over Freshman visitation, which the Board approved for implementation next fall.
The word given by the administration prior to the meeting was that the S.E.B. president would be an ex-officio member of the Board of Trustees with the power both to make proposals and vote.
However, Board chairman Jim Campbell, in the midst of considerable confusion, temporarily ruled in the middle of the meeting that McCafferty could do neither.
Campbell said that a permanent decision would come after the Trustee's next executive committee meeting and consultation with the school's lawyer.
President Ed Collins apologized to McCafferty after the meeting for misleading him, although Collins himself never said anything to the Board in behalf of the student body president's position.
Dean Harvey Saunders, who was not present during the controversy, stated that, in his mind, McCafferty 's ex-officio right to vote is indisputable.
In the Board's Student Affairs Committee, freshman visitation on weekends was approved for this spring, pending a favorable response from 60% of the affected girls' parents.
However, the committee's motion received heated opposition in the board meeting.
Methodist Bishop Stokes and George Pickett were two members who led the discussion as to why visitation should not begin this year.
The Bishop went on to say that he would have to face people and explain what is going on here.
Pickett suggested that the visitation we have now is the cause of the declining female enrollment here at Millsaps.
David Mcintosh, whose student affairs committee presented the original motion, followed up the opposition by amending the motion to provide for weekend freshman visitation (continued on page 6 SEB PRESIDENT Jim McCafferty sitting during the Board of Trustees meeting last Friday.
He was later barred from making motions or voting on Board of Trustees meeting last Friday.
In brief, it requires high schools and colleges to let students have access to their records.
The impetus of the law is the removal of the control of student records from administration officials and placing control into the hands of students and their families.
Millsaps College, as of this date, has failed to come into compliance with the law.
Certain sections of the statute, primarily those concerned with faculty recommendations and also those informing students fully of their rights, have yet to be dealt with by Millsaps.
The law specifies that unless a student formally waives his right of access to letters of recommendation, then he may see those letters.
Such recommendations, written in confidentiality, are vital to the cooperation of graduate and undergraduate schools and unless Millsaps initiates action to obtain waivers, they could become meaningless.
Aside from this problem, the new law states that educational institutions must inform students (or their parents if the student is not yet 18) of their complete rights accorded by the statute.
After discussion with Dean Harvey Saunders, who voiced concern for the far-reaching effects of the law, it became evident that the Millsaps Administration needs to start work on a policy to bring the school into compliance with the law.
Saunders stated that the matter had not been fully considered yet, but since the law went into effect January 1, 1975, it did seem that consideration should begin quickly.
He suggested that he may call a council meeting in the near future to discuss the matter.
On the matter of full disclosure of student rights accorded by the law, Saunders suggested that this article serve that purpose.
It is the opinion of this newspaper that it is not an official administration publication and should not be used to convey official notifications.
National News by BILL BLAIR National Affairs Editor FORD RELEASES DISMAL BUDGET Last week President Ford released his budget outlay for fiscal year 1976 which officially begins in July.
According to figures released with the budget, Ford's struggle against recession/ inflation fails on both accounts.
Unemployment is expected to hover at 8.1% for 1975, 7.9% for 1976, and plus 6% until 1980.
On the other hand, inflation will continue at a double digit rate, 11.3% in 1975 and drop to 7.8% in 1976.
The actual budget proposes a record $349. billion in federal expenditures with a proposed deficit of $51. billion — the highest peac time flow of red ink in United States history.
It has been reported by Time Magazine that former President Richard M Nixon has speculated that he wouldn't mind being the ambassador to Red China, if the position were to be offered him in the future.
ABORTIONS BECOMING COMMON PRACTICE Planned Parenthood announced last week that 892,000 legal abortions were performed in the United States since the operation was ruled legal by the Courts.
This figure is an increase of over 300,000 from last year and makes abortion the second most prevalent major surgery, next to tosilectomy.
OIL TALKS CONTINUE The Shah of Iran offered continued hope in an eventual breakup of oil cartel by announcing that the Western World should not fear economic strangulation and that any further embargos would have only minimal effects.
Students Elect Gov. — Demonstrating the power of the 18-year old vote, California students appear to have provided the margin of victory for the state's new governor, Edmund G Brown, Jr.
The student lobby based its student vote figures on a survey of more than 18,000 students and 70 campus precincts.
About half the state's 800,000 registered student voters turned out for the election.
He did concede, however, that — as late as the freshman year of this year's seniors — Millsaps did have records of a confidential nature.
Dean Paul Hardin said the Registrar's office is in full compliance with the law and will not reveal any information without the request for such by the student involved The law requires that, on request, the school must provide personal records to students or their parents within 45 days.
If the information is deemed inaccurate or misleading or in violation of the student's privacy, the student may challenge the contents in a hearing and have the records corrected.
No release of information, except to highly restrictive sources, without written consent of the student or parent is permitted.
All of the contents of this law apply to high schools as well as colleges and each student is urged to check his records.
Job opportunities can be easily missed by inaccurate statements that one never knew existed.
All schools, public and private, who receive federal monies must comply with the law.
FLEEING STUDENT has no chance against the deadly aim of Security Guard ""Buster"" Whammle in recent panty-raid at Franklin Dorm.
Students Killed Seven Millsaps students were killed early Tuesday morning and another three left injured when Security Guard ""Buster"" Whammle opened fire on a group of ""panty raiders"" as they streamed out of Franklin dorm.
The seven dead were identified as members of various fraternities on campus, participating in one of their periodic ""raids"" on womens' housing.
President Collins issued a statement Tuesday afternoon expressing ""deep sorrow"" over Officer Whammle's ""regrettable lack of discretion"" and promised a full investigation into the matter.
State News by LLOYD GRAY State Government Writer JUDICIARY ALTERS ETHICS BILL The House Judiciary En Banc committee okayed a drastically altered version of an ethics bill reported out of a special subcommittee last week, deleting the opening six sections of the legislation dealing with mandatory financial disclosure by public officials on the local, district and state levels.
The remaining portions of the proposed legislation deal with conflicts of interest and registration of lobbyists.
Bill Waller's fued with the legislature simmered again last week as committees of both houses killed proposed constitutional amendments which would have allowed a Mississippi governor to succeed himself.
Waller tried unsuccessfully to eliminate the issue of personalities by removing himself as a potential future gubernatorial aspirant, but it was clear that the state's lawmakers — most of whom find no love lost between themselves and Waller — simply could not divorce the issue from the governor who has made it one of his primary legislative priorities.
Other constitutional amendments also died in committee, including a measure calling for a constitutional convention and the proposed Equal Rights Amendment to the United States Constitution.
Fear and Loathing with the Board by MILLER QUAKE P&W Bayonne, Alabama Legal Editor.
It had been three days since I had last seen Oscar T and no one I talked to had any idea where he was.
In vain, I searched every honkey-tonk and bar and gutter and ditch between Bayonne and Mobile.
Even Uncle Pete (proprieter of Uncle Pete's Bar and Grill and Oscar's chief legal consultant) hadn't seen him.
I think it gave him a kick.) whenever Oscar T drops from sight like this — and damned if he don't do it a lot — he's up tuh one of two thangs.
Since I had exhausted every other possible alternative, I agreed to accompany this character on what I knew would be a complete waste of time.
Pete and the truck got us to Hoofer, however, and as we sputtered across the desolate campus, I saw a miraculous sight.
Running toward us, dressed in a baggy old suit, was the famed attorney.
I called out as we sped toward him, close enough to see he wasn't just running for his health.
Behind him, armed with pitchforks, stakes, rocks, and tire tools, was a howling mob of faculty members and alumni.
And leading the raving pack, cursing and spitting and screaming worse than any of them, was the dreaded Dean himself, that Achilles heel of the academic world, J Harvey Sandbrain.
I was terrified and ready to leave a hundred feet of rubber between us and the nearest exit.
The angered look in Sandbrain's face was rapidly replaced by one of terror as he saw the battered half ton pickup bearing down on him.
I crossed myself and closed my eyes as Pete leaned out the window and let fly.
Pete had no need to warn the crowd, however, for they were cowering along both sides of the road, terrified to look upon the face of the Prince of Darkness.
After three circles through the mob, Pete slammed the ""Cruiso"" in reverse, slung open the door, and in jumped the cause of all the commotion, Oscar T Fornbush.
It was later that afternoon and I was sitting in a quiet booth in UnclePete's bar, listening to Oscar T relate his actions of the past few days.
I dropped out of sight for a few days — make 'em think I had left town — then showed up at the Board meeting incognito, disguised as a wealthy minister from Anniston, Dr.
President 'Slick Eddie' Coolins and Dean Sandbrain were standing at the front, laughing over some private joke.
Numerous alumni were scattered about the room with vacant looks on their faces.
The only people in the whole place sitting down were three members of the Student Senate.
After, of course, we jam a few more tuition increases down their dumb little throats.
J Harvey will keep 'em shut up in the Senate and Coach Haughty will keep 'em from getting our new gym dirty.
So, encouraged by righteous indignation, stirred by monumental injustice, and warmed by a pocket flask of Jack Daniels, I decided to act.
While Coolins was mumbling something about 'huge bazongas', I snatched the incriminating tape, told the spellbound board exactly what I thought of their ancestry, and made like Bob Hayes for the nearest exit.
A minute later, with what seemed like half the campus after me, I saw you two.
The whole case against Barker and the others a front for a conspiracy to subvert justice, abuse campus agencies, supress dissisents, and misuse tuition revenues.
Now that may make sense to me, but most people, trapped in their own pedestrian morality, find the concept abhorrent.
When we uncover more of this web of corruption, find the 'smoking pistol' that will prove 'Slick Eddie' wasn't just talking in his sleep, there will be such a wave of public indignation that Eddie and his whole gang will be swept from office.
It's that militant bunch of Christian loonies, The ""One Way Street gang.
He started out the door, hesitated momentarily, grabbed a six of Dixie, and was gone.
Uncle Pete and I followed close behind, but I had a sick feeling in the pit of my stomach.
I knew that quicker than Oscar's six of Dixie, our case — and our client — were about to go down the drain.
The place looked like a typical redneck beer joint, and I was in no mood to get my fool head busted by a couple of local honchos out to impress Cindy Lou and Wanda.
Still, if I was ever to break out of the ol' North Jackson Big Mike/ X-Ray/ Recovery Room/ C.S. syndrome, I had to take a few calculated risks.
On most weekends (if you shell out a small cover charge), you can hear a decent band and dance if you feel the urge, though most people prefer to just sit and listen.
The game room is like game rooms everywhere, with a few beer-bellied pool junkies endlessly racking balls and polishing cue sticks.
And on Sundays, all the beer you can drink for a two buck cover charge, which in this day and time can't be beat.
The kind of guys that have shoulder length hair, beards, and customized Camaros.
Especially if you happen to have long hair, a beard, a customized Camaro, and manage to walk out with one of those cute chicks wrapped around your arm.
Page 4 P&W/Opinion WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 12, 19 From the Editor Student Voice Means Even Less The voice of the students doesn't count for much at Millsaps.
Whatever meaning is still attached to student representation and recommendation was dealt a severe blow last Friday, when SEB president Jim McCafferty was refused the right to vote in the meeting of the Board of Trustees — the same Board of which he is an exofficio member.
McCafferty had been led to believe that he was a full voting member of the Board.
Yet when the tudent body president began to assert himself in the Board meeting by making a parliamentary move on ihalf of students wanting freshman visitation this semester, he was told by Campbell that he could not make motions or vote because he was only an ex-officio member.
No copy of the by-laws was on hand to clarify the situation and considerable confusion resulted.
Throughout this all, Collins — who was so sure that the students had a vote on the Board — remained silent.
He later apologized to e SEB president for the misunerstanding and promised to look into the by-laws for future clarification of the situation.
The Student Senate committee on Freshman visitation — spearheaded by Beth Edwards, Mark Jones, and McCafferty — as well as several campus freshmen, had spent considerable time and effort to present their proposal to the Board; to work it so they could enjoy freshman visitation themselves this semester.
To their credit, President Collins, Dean Woodward, and Dean Corder were willing to go along with it and do the work required to bring it about this spring.
Even the Student Affairs Committee of the Board recommended an attempt at weekend Freshman visitation to begin as soon as possible.
So David Mcintosh amended the motion of his own Student Affairs Committee to postpone visitation until next year.
McCafferty, on behalf of the students who had worked so hard, then tried to maneuver around that amendment.
The Board then went through the motions of approving freshman visitation for next year.
And so, the public relations considerations which have increasingly permeated the way things are run at Millsaps came to bear on this decision and denied the visitation right to those who had toiled most for it.
McCafferty's lone effort to represent the students and himself in front of the Board was most admirable.
He asserted himself and was forceful when several Board members tried to shove him into the background.
President Collins is estimating that the school will lose only ten students as a result of the tuition hike.
But if the student voice continues to be ignored and if student efforts to change keep meeting with disillusionment, there is no doubt that the total will be much higher.
Senate Needs Independents In tomorrow's election for two Senators-at-Large, we urge that — personalities aside — you vote for independents.
Greeks now hold all five SEB offices and a substantial majority of the Student Senate seats.
Fortunately, Millsaps is not like many universities where the whole social and political system revolves around Greeks — where it's the frat or sorority first and the college second.
But the independents are in somewhat a different position from Greeks as far as the social situation here is concerned and they deserve to be represented.
Letters Since 1925 Alpha Phi Omega has been the one persistent service oriented organization on college campuses.
It is a student organization national in scope but campus-oriented in action.
It is unique in being a true fraternity in fellowship, but one inclusive in membership, respecting each man's right to be proud of his race, his color, his religion, his political preferences, and his national origin.
Any male student duly enrolled on the campus where a chapter exists, who joins with chapter's members in service projects, accepts its principles, and meets the standards of the chapter concerned is eligible for membership.
At present a committee of Millsaps students are seeking a charter from the Student Senate to be recognized as a campus organization.
If the request is accepted by the Senate, a petition for a charter will be made to the national board of directors of Alpha Phi Omega.
An initiation fee of twenty dollars and reasonable chapter dues are the only costs.
Bill Waller, faced with the frustrations of an intractable legislature, blew his cool last week, confronting legislators, classing a group of perhaps unruly students from Jones county, jumping the lieutenant governor for what he said were his tactics of delaying the progress of the governor's program and you name it.
He, in the dying days of his term, is up against the insoluble proposition that the legislature, based on a tradition artfully constructed by the late Walter Sillers is a power of its own, not really amenable to the governor's wishes.
Coleman, as governor of Mississippi, tried to implement reforms that were needed.
Don't Count Waller Out He incurred the wrath of the sheriffs, constables and justices of the peace.
All of this probably contributed to his defeat in 1963 when he made a second try for the governor's office.
The one thing Waller has going for him now, and which he has used rather well, is the federal funds that come into the state and can be dispensed by the governor or his appointees.
Waller took himself out of contention for another term in his bid for a gubernatorial succession bill, he was in effect drawing down.
And, in the meantime, he is dabbling in the governor's race, determined apparently to get a strong opponent for Lt.
At this point, it looks like attorney Maurice Dantin of Columbia is that man.
But political ambitions sometimes go awry, dashed on the rocks of time and the contradictory issues that belabor a man who has been in office.
He keeps hanging in on the inside turns in spite of the rebuffs he has consistently gotten from the legislature and his other critics, most recently identified as the news media.
It was particularly interesting to note that only this reporter came forward to investigate, and finally defend, Sen.
Eastland against charges of accepting a bribe which was reported by national columnist Jack Anderson.
State Government Student Government National Sports Photographer Staff: Beth Edwards, Ralph Wells, Susa Steve Terrell, Kevin Sessums, Mikt Jeanette Deoever, Lee Howell, Laur WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 12, 1975 Page 5 W f New SEB Officers 1st VICE-PRESIDENT MARK JONES 2nd VICE-PRESIDENT JULIET DANTIN PRESIDENT JIM McCAFFERTY SECRETARY PATSY PHARR As a service to Millsaps students, The Purple and White will run all reasonable classified ads for free.
JERRY JEFF WALKER BILL RAY Business Manager DeanPittman James Holland Doug Levanway DannyBowling Bill Blair Ward Ending Earl Ay cock Lloyd Gray Glade Mclnnis DougBrindley Jimmy Dempsev i Tsimortos, Doug Minor, Gale Mallette, Stevens, Liz Waldner, Theresa Liles, Jrown, Mike Hunt. ie Brown, M Jack Anderson Joint Chiefs Oppose Arming Israelis Washington — Behind the scenes, the Joint Chiefs of Staff have been bitterly resisting arms deliveries to Israel.
At first, they opposed the rapid rearming of Israel, which has now been completed.
They complained that the United States was in such a hurry to restore Israeli military strength that some of our own units were short of arms.
Lately, the Joint Chiefs have argued against sending the sophisticated weapons that Israel is now trying to get.
They strongly opposed supplying Israel, for example, with the deadly, 70-milerange Lance missiles, and other laser-guided weapons.
Some of these are so effective they can knock out enemy antiaircraft missiles before they can reach the planes.
Once again, the Joint Chiefs have complained that United States units would have to be shortchanged if these weapons are going to be made available to the Israelis.
President Ford has been persuaded by Secretary of State Henry Kissinger that these weapons will help him bring peace to the Middle East.
Not until the Israelis had full confidence in their military power, Kissinger argued, would Israel make the territorial concessions that are essential for a Middle East settlement.
Despite the Pentagon's resistance, the truth is that it is not only Israel which is depleting our defense stockpiles.
The United States is arming rival nations around the world at an alarming rate.
That iwas about twice as much as the Soviet Union, our closest competitor, exported.
A secret General Accounting Office study reveals, for example, that the United States supplied a full 60 per cent of the arms needs of the Persian Gulf states last year.
One of the most effective weapons in the United States arsenal is the TOW antitank missile.
Some 18 of them will soon be on their way to Israel's Arab neighbor, Lebanon.
In fact, the United States is either selling or giving away TOW missiles to 17 nations.
Yet believe it or not, this missile is in such short supply that our own armed forces can't get enough.
Page 6 Student Government by GLADE McINNIS Student Government Writer On the Tuesday before SEB elections, Alan Brehm initiated a drive in the Student Senate to delay the voting.
He claimed that Tuesday deadline allowed no time for the candidates to be known before Thursday's election, and that the same weHknown people would be elected.
Actually, Brehm did not fail completely — the reforms he (not a senator) initiated were finally passed and may be seen in tomorrow's election.
And ^ronical^ttie^sjjec^ a direct result of the musical chairs election of student officers.
BATTLE LINES Another Millsaps political game is BATTLE, and, like the card game for minors, it is tedious, precarious, and of questionable value.
Its setting is the College Senate and its players are 7 students, 10 faculty members, and the unequivocal Dean Saunders.
In last weeks match, a committee was appointed and approved to study PAC policies.
To the student's dismay the committee included Coach Montgomery whose policies, they assumed, were to be scrutinized.
They were assured that he would be the most knowledgeable person in these matters.
In other College Senate action, a motion for each division to study class scheduling passed, and the body sent the BBA Proposal to the faculty with a recommendation for approval.
Tomorrow's Candidates Senatorial Candidates Robin Robinson Hubert Thompson Chris Wilkerson Steve McAlilly Stennis Watson Dennis Mcintosh Royce Garvin Class Junior Junior Senior Sophomore Senior Sophomore Junior Candidates for Sophomore Class President Paul Watkins Gayle Doss Bryan Miller Organization Kappa Sigma Independent Independent Kappa Sigma Independent Independent Lamda Chi Alpha Organization Lamda Chi Alpha Independent Kappa Sigma Tuition ridden times and keeping the yt tuition low enough to attract ^ students.
P&W WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 12, 1975 ¥¥¥ ¥ ¥ J^MM^* ¥¥ ¥ ¥ * W JACKSON ENTERTAINMENT J POETS yl *r Michael G Brown, Nightly H )f JACKSON CITY AUDITORIUM J yL Feb. — Jackson Music Association Presents Walid)^ between raising enough money to J Howrani yL operate the school in inflation-)^ p e 21 — Holiday Hippodrome Small Animal Show H Feb., 25 — Jackson Symphony Concerts J Mar., 4 — Mass Piano Concert )^ Mar. — Jackson Browne, and Phoebe Snow.
BeBopji Mar. — Fiddler on the Roof Mar. — Gospel Sing: Inspirations Mar. — ""Daughters of the Regiment"" — Miss.
T % GEORGE STREET GROCERY J yt Cassandra Fowlkes and Alan Cameron, Mon.-Thurs., 8:00-^ J 11:00m. yi *T THE POOP DECK 3 Stephan Anderson, Tues.-Sat., 8:00-12:00m.
J yL THE YANKEE DIME )f"" M Dance Band, Wed.-Sat., 9:00-12:00 yL. jl***^****¥*¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥* only ten full-time students. i However, speculation among students around campus is that yL Millsaps will lose a lot more.
Therefore, to raise money for teacher salary increases, a new source of income had to be found.
Probably the only other means of obtaining the revenue right away would have been to dip into the endowment fund of the college.
That fund is invested moeny, the interest from which is used to help support the college.
Dipping into the principal of that fund is often considered bad business practice, although it has been done by Millsaps over the past several years to cover operating deficits.
However, Frohnhoefer went on to say that the Board would never have approved taking more money out of the endowment — therefore, the faculty recommended a tuition raise instead.
Opera ^ * * * * J Board Meeting next fall and standard visitation in the second semester.
At this point McCafferty rose to move that the original motion be voted on and he was told that he could not make motions.
A lengthy argument followed, Campbell temporarily ruled that McCafferty could not vote or make proposals, and McCafferty's motion was out of the way.
In other Board action, a tuition increase proposed by President Collins was passed (see separate story), the athletic budget was trimmed from $73,000 to $56,000, and a recommendation was approved that the Physical Activities Center not be rented to outsiders while school is in session — unless the administration deems it necessary.
Collins disagreed with the latter motion strongly, hinting that the school needs the revenue from the gym.
It's not only the answer to thirst, but a refreshing pleasure any time.
And all you have to do to qualify is reserve your seat now t,y sending $100. deposit, plus $10. registration fee.
Just one price for all flights whether you pick a weekend departure or peak season surcharge date.
The high point of the Majors' game came when a fight erupted in the second half.
Boxing, however, was not the purpose of the Millsaps trip to Livingston and the Majors once again went down in defeat.
The last time a progress report was made on the team their record was 0-14 but there were signs of improvement.
Those signs of encouragement were short lived as Millsaps continued to drop games at a hectic rate.
They really didn't look terrible in either of these contests and actually lead Louisiana College for most of the game.
Then came the trip to Birmingham where Birmingham College rolled past the Majors for an easy victory.
Next up were the Choctaws of Mississippi College, a team experiencing a frustrating season.
This defeat was one of the worst to be suffered by a Millsaps team in recent history.
The Majors are down to their last five games of the season and victory still remains at least a hope.
They will face Belhaven on Feb., Southwestern on the 15th, , Tougaloo on the 18th, Rust on the 20th and will end the season against Lambuth on the 22nd of February.
Football Underway ""ennis Tourney Feb. by DOUG MINOR The first Mississippi Intercollegiate Indoor Tennis Tournament will be held at Millsaps College February 21, 22, and 23.
Jim Montgomery, director of athletics and tennis coach for the host Majors, has invited all of the state senior colleges to participate in the event which eludes both men and women earns.
This will be the first indoor collegiate competition to be played in the state.
The new Physical Activities Center will provide the site for the event which is hosted by the Millsaps Tennis Club and the Millsaps Patrons Association.
Singles and Doubles matches will be played on three courts which have an uniturf surface, and the center has a seating capacity of 1600.
The PAC will be the same site for the Mississippi Adult Tennis Tournament which is to be held later this spring. o National Sports by DOUG BRINDLEY National Sports Writer MILLER WINS AGAIN Johnny Miller has won for the third time in this young golfing ear, winning the Bob Hope Classic by three strokes ob Murphy.
In four tournament appearances this season, Miller has earned $108,343, a record pace.
United States DAVIS CUPPERS LOSE The United States was defeated last week by Mexico in Davis Cup competition.
The loss marks the second year in a row that the U.S.A. has lost in the early rounds of the international tennis event.
Most observers feel that our Davis Cup squad is not stocked with all of our top players, most notably Jimmy Conner INDIANA STILL UNBEATEN In college basketball, the Indiana Hoosiers remain unbeaten and the unanimous number one team in the country; they are followed by UCLA with a 17-2 record.
Last season, the Majors' defensive squad ranked sixth in the nation in scoring in Division III football.
Nine seniors will graduate this spring leaving six absent positions in the interior offensive line and three spots on defense.
Returning defensive linebackers include Dan Richards, Phillip Maples, Ronnie Jurney and Robert Earl Granderson at rover.
The offensive line will consist of Paul Benton at right end, Sonny Aldy-split end, Mike Harrison-quick tackle, Paul Walker-strong tackle, Billy McAllily-quick guard, Hunter Lundy-strong guard and Mark Ikner at center.
The backfield places Ricky Haygood at quarterback, John Kirby-tailback, Stan Axsmith-fullback and Dees Hinton at the wingback position.
Bob King and Granderson sustained leg injuries during the last season and will be returning for starting positions, as will place kicker Doug Brindley.
During these games, Millsaps students are not allowed to even enter the gym without paying.
The Board of Trustees passed a motion that the facility should not be rented to outside groups during the school year.
However, that action was watered down by the proviso that it could be violated with the approval of the administration.
The new gym is available for use by student groups and Methodist groups, but they must pay a rental fee if they plan to collect admission for an event.
The local Kappa Alpha chapter, looking for a place to hold its annual charity marathon basketball game , was originally quoted a price of $300.
After talking to President Collins and Pete Wood, the figure was lowered to where the KA's only had to pay for the cost of the lights — $100.
Regarding the situation of limited access to the gym, Collins said, ""It ought to be for every student on this campus.
He also mentioned that ""the gym ought to be so scheduled where any organization, any group of kids, can get in there at a reasonable hour and do their Local Happy Hours BARS Dutch Bar and Lounge 4149 Northview Drive Big Mike's North State Beer Garden North State Poets Corner The Quarter The Recovery Room 2820 North State The X-Ray Room Old Canton Road Friday's Highland Village HOURS 5:30-6:30 Mon.-Thurs.
PRICES $.25/ glass $1.00/ pitcher $.25/ draft $1.25/ pitcher/ $.20/ Bud $.25/ Michelobl 16 ounce glasses everything half price $.15/ glass $1.00/ pitcher $.25/ glass $1.25/ pitcher I 10:30-12:00 all drinks half price Tues.
Ireland's 2:00-6:00 1925 Lakeland Drive Mon.-Fri. highball $.70 mixed drinks half price beer $.30 and $.35 Financial Aid Students who will apply for financial aid for the academic year 1975-76 should pick up applications in the Student Affairs Office.
Those applications received by April 1 will be the first ones to go before the committee for action.
Applications received after the April 1 deadline will be considered after those received by April 1.
Please sign the list on the bulletin board in the student center to reserve your place.
Further investigations by the city into specific charges of police brutality and harrassment are necessary, insisted Walker, for discussions between the groups to continue.
If not satisfied with the progress of the investigation, warns Walker, the owners may seek remedy through legal, administrative, or legislative action.
When Colston attempted to escape, Barnes fired one shot, killing Colston.
Police reports state that Colston was shot once in the back with a .38-caliber pistol.
RNA CONVICTION UPHELD The murder conviction of a Republic of New Africa member was upheld Monday by the Mississippi Supreme Court.
The conviction was appealed by Offogga Quaddus, or Wayne Maurice Jones, who was charged along with several others in the 1971 slaying of Police Lieutenant Louis Skinner.
Most of the blacks employed on campus seem to be in custodial positions such as this man on the right. ace Discrimination Cited In Hiring by OBIE CLAYTON Assistant Editor In the past ten years, Millsaps College has shown a very definite lack of concern for the hiring of black faculty members and administrative workers.
The school's student body has been racially integrated since 1965, but nothing has been done in the way of integrating the faculty and very little in the way of integrating the administration.
At the present time, approximately twenty per cent of the school's employees are black; but when the jobs are viewed, discrimination becomes noticeable.
Only one Black is employed in the business office; none are in the Development office, Registrar's office, admissions department, or the other administrative offices on campus.
So we find a total of only three Blacks in administration and none in teaching faculty.
The ture changes completely, wever, when the custodial staff, the ground crews, and other low-paying marginal jobs are looked at.
The custodial staff is all black, the ground crews are mostly black — except for the while supervisors.
Of the present Millsaps faculty, twenty-seven have been hired since the school was integrated in 1965.
The Millsaps administration has done little to correct the faults that exist in the school's hiring policy.
Primarily in charge of that policy are Dean J Harvey Saunders, who is responsible for hiring faculty and academic personnel, and Director of Services Pete Wood, whose concern lies in the nonacademic arena.
He added that sometimes a post is filled from unsolicited applications.
The Dean said that, if at all possible, a Black-faculty member would be hired at Millsaps, but added that it was hard to get prospects.
D could pick his school and name his price, thus making it hard for the low-paying salary scale of Millsaps to attract qualified applicants.
Sociology professor Paul Murray, who has been pushing to get a black faculty member hired, said many of the administration's excuses are myths which they hold on to.
He noted that other institutions such as Tougaloo and Jackson State can get black Ph.
Murray remarked that the main problem was the way the administration goes about More Construction For Campus Tuition Revised Again After some objections from students, faculty, and administrators, President Collins has decided to change the plan for charging tuition next year.
It will now be an across-the-board fee for regular students of $903 per semester, beginning next September.
As originally planned by Collins and approved by the Board of Trustees, there would have been charged on a basis of $60 for each academic hour taken.
However, many felt this plan was inequitable, particularly to the student forced to take over 15 hours.
Therefore Collins has reverted to the flat-fee method of charging and says that its approval by the Board is a mere formality.
Students taking from eight to 20 hours will be classified as regular students and pay the $903 tuition, with a small additional charge for going over that amount.
For those taking under eight hours, it will cost $60 per hour. by DEAN PITTMAN News Editor Up ""in the air"" and in Millsaps' backyard are plans to divide the North campus with a large byway connecting the parallel State and West streets.
Although constructing details have not been finalized, President Collins recently stated that the road would be built, probably within the next month.
Who will contract the project and the important question of who will finance it, however, are not quite as certain.
Collins continued saying that the Chairman of the Board of Trustees and he had been in contact with the city of Jackson in an effort to enlist their aid in financing the project.
The city remained uncommitted and gave the two school leaders what can only be called a conditional maybe.
Possibly, aid from the federal government will materialize if the project generates a sufficient amount of new jobs.
The president listed two major reasons for undertaking the building of the new road.
The first is to remove city traffic from the present thoroughfare in the main area of the campus.
Second, and more important in Collins' mind, is to allow commercial development of the area north of the road, presently the Millsaps golf course.
Uhis is not bad. only necessary) also an affinity for politics, and the petty power struggles that accompany it.
The new SEB president and vice-presidents fit this description easily, even admirably.
In addition, they even seem concerned about betterftfg the plight of the student.
Their objective is to gain control over purely student affairs, and influence in matters that affect students, which includes about everything on campus.
Looking back on the wreckage of every concerned student administration, the prospects are indeed grey.
And as if to prove his point he has organized a study of the total campus structure.
One inviting alternative for the committee is a unified college government giving students 50% representation.
The major impediment to any student thrust for influence in the workings of Millsaps is that students have the cohesiveness of a thousand cat-eve marbles.
Second Vice-President Juliet Dantin feels we must first become ""aware of the different groups on campus"" and bring them into the system with a more equitable method of representation.
In the senate, this movement has shown beginnings with the last two meetings.
First VicePresident Mark Jones pushed through a motion to cut off student funding of College Senate committees, with an eye on the Public Events committee which has been spending studentprovided funds before any others.
He was also working with President Collins on a new tuition proposal (recently adopted by Collins) providing a flat $100 raise instead of the earlier $60 per hour.
Our fledgling elected voice has great hopes for the improvement of student life.
As the months wear on it will probably die under the crushing inertia of the Millsaps administration — unless students take an unexpected interest in their own well-being jyd^f | f | e^^ittle^ugDorL^ iBB( ^ SENATE ACTION In other student procedures, committees were appointed and the charter of Alpha Psi Omega, a service organization, were considered.
The latter action produced a surprising controversy when Diane McMullen blasted the group for its all-male policy.
To deny a charter (and so, the use of campus facilities) would be to deny their right of association.
This very interesting and provocative matter will continue in the next meeting.
It was introduced by Alan Brehm and rephrased the constition to allow members of the Millsaps community the right to speak before the senate with majority consent.
The interpretation given the previous wording had allowed one senator to deny this privilege to anyone, and had been used to keep a student with a complaint from addressing the body.
Race Polarization Noted In Elections by ROB McDUFF Editor Despite some attempts to alter the situation, Black representation in the Millsaps student government still remains at zero.
It all points up a controversy hich has surfaced on and off ver the past three years about creating a Student Senate post which automatically goes to a representative of the Black Students Association.
Prior to 1973, all campus -rganizations, including the BSA, elected one senator.
That was changed with the new constitution and senators became chosen by class or atlarge.
Many black students and some whites continued to argue, however, that the BSA still needed representation in the student government; that Blacks could not get elected through the normal process here.
This argument surfaced, among other times, at a Chaplain's Committee session last year where racial polarization was being discussed.
So, during this academic year, Blacks were candidates in four elections and lost in all of them.
Although these candidates acknowledged possible peripheral factors in their defeats, they all felt that race was the main underlying reason.
Hubert Thompson ran for 2nd vice-president early this spring and then for senator-at-large in the special election.
All of the black candidates advocated automatic inclusion of at least one minority race member in the student senate, possibly by BSA election.
Financial Aid Students who will apply for financial aid for the academic year 1975-76 should pick up applications in the Student Affairs Office.
Conflict and Change placed on the state textbook commission's approved list.
James Loewen of Tougaloo made a presentation for the book at a special session of the commission called by Governor Waller.
The commissioners heard the presentation and then ruled that they had no legal right to approve the book because of an earlier rejection by their own Mississippi History Textbook Rating Committee.
Conflict and Change presents a frank and accurate account of slavery, oppression of Blacks, and the civil rights movement in Mississippi.
Apparently because of such frankness, the rating committee voted 5-2 last fall not to approve the book.
This action, according to state textbook commission by-laws, would mean that the regular commission would not get to review the text, that it would not go on the approved list for Mississippi public schools, and teachers could not use state funds to purchase it.
The authors then went to Governor Waller, who said that they had a right to a hearing before the regular commission and ordered such a hearing.
But the commissioners, citing their by-laws, refused to pass judgement on the book.
Sallis feels that he and Loewen have a very good court case which will result in the book getting placed on the approved list.
Major would be available this semester, but according to athletic director Jim Montgomery, the program will not be realized until the 1975-1976 school year.
The faculty, the curriculum committee, and the academic council have all approved the basic format with one exception; the department may not hire any new staff members until a complete study is made.
Montgomery says, ""If we have the same program with the same staff, it will be impossible to add a new course of study.
To meet state requirements, a student would have to take 15 hours of health education and 15 hours of physical education.
This would include courses in biology, anatomy, kinesiology, philosophy, history, and organization administration.
All basic education certifications would be required as well as practice teaching.
But since there is no forseeable study of the staffing issue, the major will probably be shelved for this school year.
Montgomery believes that ""the general economic situation is the key factor.
So it seems that the proposed P E Major will remain a rumor for yet another semester.
Even so, Montgomery is pleased with the attitude of the school towards a more open cirriculum.
Deans were not permitted to a me their own schools or rank e choices in order.
State News by LLOYD GRAY State Government Writer A compromise teacher pay bill passed both houses of the legislature unanimously last week and awaited only Gov.
The bill was worked out by a Joint Conference Committee of both houses after each chamber passed separate pay raises for teachers during the first week of the legislative session.
According to proponents of the compromise legislation, which would cost the state $24 million, Mississippi teachers will become the second highest paid in the Southeast during the 1975-76 school term.
The increase averages some $1,335 per teacher, and was accepted by leaders of the state's two education organizations despite objections by some members of the profession that the raise was not enough.
The Senate was scheduled to vote on the confirmation of Parchman superintendant Jack Reed this week after the Corrections Committee wound up its month-long hearings on the matter.
The panel voted 5-4 against recommending confirmation to the full Senate, with two abstentions.
The 55-year old penologist has served in his present capacity since he was appointed by Gov.
Time was running short this week for the Senate Judiciary Committee to take action on a strong ethics bill passed by the House of Representatives two weeks ago.
The bill that passed the House calls for complete financial disclosure by all public officials, and also contains provisions dealing with conflicts of interest and registration of lobbyists.
In addition, a section of the bill prohibits legislators from receiving payment from any other public source, on the local or state level.
Other Judiciary members said they expected the committee to report a revised version of the House measure before the Tuesday deadline, with disclosure deleted.
East Ask For Milbaps Discount SERVICE Guaranty Merida National News by BILL BLAIR National Affairs Editor WALLACE ANNOUNCES PRESIDENTIAL BID George Wallace declared Wednesday that he was ready to make his fourth bid for the United States Presidency.
He also stated that he will form a third party if Democratic leaders reject him again.
FORD'S BUDGET LABELED ""UNREAL"" Many economists publically scoffed at figures released with President Ford's budget.
STOCK MARKET INDICATES BRIGHT FUTURE The Dow Jones Industrial Stock Market continued its upsurge in the face of a recession by closing with another stray week.
The market is considered an early indicator of expected economic conditions and its rise, to close at 745, was a positive indication for the future.
PRICES RISE AS THE GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT FALLS The Commerce Department released figures this week that showed prices climbed at a record 14.4% rate during the last three months of 1974 while at the same time the Gross National Product fell at a 9.1% rate.
FIRST WOMAN NOMINATED TO HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT This week President Ford nominated Carla Anderson Hills to fill the vacancy of the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.
Hills will become the third woman Cabinet member in United States history.
Henry Kissinger offered continued hope in ""his"" stepby-step Middle East diplomacy after announcing progress in last week's shuttle diplomacy.
Sources expect Israel and Egypt to come to terms before the shift back to the Geneva conference table is made.
In the title role is Ward Emling , joined in this practice scene by Mark Samsel, Jean Moore, and Robert Morgan.
The play will be run every night in the Christian Center through Saturday.
It will be running every night through Saturday in lie auditorium of the Christian ter.
The following is Lynn ireene's review of the Tuesday night dress rehearsal of the production. by LYNN GREEN A lack of cohesion is the principle flaw in the Millsaps Players' production of Burton's Hamlet.
Produced in the same manner as the well-known Burton's Hamlet, this adaptation employs the language of hakespeare in modern costume on an austere set.
There is no refuge vhen things go slowly in a roduction that is virtually devoid of scenery and costume.
Emiling's Hamlet vacillates in a somewhat jerky manner but you have to admire his zeal.
Eileen Hawkin's Ophelia provides us with one of the strongest characters in the play, especially in her mad scenes.
Sessums provides direction for the other actors in his every scene and does more to dispel the productions inadequacies that any other participant.
Brindley's Claudius is not as dispassionate as we would like to see him.
In the same regard, Mona Perry's Gertrude is not as conniving and cold as her actions in the play imply she should be.
Jim Matheny's Polonius is unfortunately nothing new, although it is an adequate portrayal, nonetheless.
Joe Reiff's Ghost has the expected melancholic dead-man drawl, while Rosencrantz and Guildenstern don't say much of anything but do a commemorable job of bowing.
Of the minor characters, two fresh appearances by Jean Moore and Robert Morgan Good Friday Forums Friday Forums for the next two weeks offer some fairly sharp and unusual speakers.
Christian is to arrive on campus today and spend some time in informal meetings and classes.
The author of three scholarly books on religion, Christian will speak on ""Religious Doctrines and Insights"" at the Friday Forum.
A week from tomorrow will see Barry Hannah, witty author of Geronimo Rex.
As far as a nights' entertainment goes, despite all the aforesaid dramatic brilliance, the Millsaps Players' production of Burton's Hamlet is awfully long and pretty uneven.
Time, here, remains ""out of joint"" for about three and one half hours with two much needed intermissions.
However, if you have never seen a production of Hamlet, or any of Shakespeare, in general, you should, as Claudius counsels ""strengthen your patience"" and stroll over to the CC and see whats offered.
Movie List Announced The SEB's Friday night campus movie series has been scheduled for the remainder of the semester.
Strangelove March 7 — American Graffiti March 14 — In Cold Blood March 21 — The Way We Were April II — Fritz the Cat April 18 — East of Eden April 25 — The Life and Times of Judge Roy Bean May 2 — Executive Action aooogoooexwoocwooQ a p o aaBc P & w Travel Guide On March 28, school lets out for a ten-day spring break — Easter holiday.
For those who would consider vacationing and good-timing during this break, we offer the following suggestions.
PANAMA CITY, FLA. — This beach town is about six hours south of Jackson.
It is usually full of college and high school students — and a lot of neon signs trying to attract their business.
Fair beaches and the famed Miracle Strip can lead to a lot of mass youthful partying — but it can also get too crowded and too commercialized.
It will definitely be warm enough for laying on the beach, although the swimming will be rather chilly.
Surprisingly good bars are those belonging to the Holiday Inn, the Admiral Benbow (opening at 10:00m.), and the Old Dutch Club.
DESTIN, FLA. — Thirty miles up the coast from Panama, it is noted for deep-sea fishing and some really beautiful beaches.
PENSACOLA — For more of the traditional night life, with a beach thrown in, Pensacola offers a good setting.
It is an hour southeast of Mobile and is beautiful and somewhat rustic.
It has good camping and a couple of bars with unique reputations — Dirty Joe's and the Tiki House.
It is a 28-hour drive straight through, but the Keys are beautiful, warm, and won't be too crowded.
It is kind of a quiet, old fishing village — a kind of reflection of the type thing you would expect from Ernest Hemingway, who lived there for so long.
There are few beaches, mostly coral reefs for good scuba-diving and snorkeling.
A place on a small deep-sea fishing boat can be rented for around $15 a day.
Hotels in Key West are expensive, but a commercial campground rented out for $3 a night last summer.
The local people are friendly — many in their 20's — and can show you to some nice places.
The Green Parrot open-air bar and Hemingway's old hangout, Sloppy Joe's, are really good.
SMOKY MOUNTAINS — For colder weather, mountain air, good scenery, and some fine camping, this national park in Tennessee-North Carolina is nice.
The regular campgrounds are around $3 but they tend to get overcrowded and full of family trailers.
Ask at ranger stations about permits for the free trail campsites, where you can camp in privacy near some beautiful streams.
The crowds may be piling in by early April (roads in the park get awful congested) and we're not sure how the colors will be on the trees.
Gatlinburg has gotten to be a drag as it is now wall-towall hotels, restaurants, and cheap family traps.
There are far less tourist traps here and campgrounds are, as a general rule, genuine and unspoiled.
Canoes are easy to rent almost anywhere in the Ozarks for around $12 a day.
A few of the better spots are the Buffalo River, which is a seven hour drive from Jackson and offers good rapids and fishing, and the Spring River, which is especially good for beginning canoers.
Devil's Bend State Park offers the Mulberry River, also good for canoeing along with excellent camping facilities.
Further up in the Ozarks are numerous cabins for rent — some as low as $14 a day — although you have to drive a while to find them.
We hope to add some more spots in the next issue, focusing on larger cities around the southeast and also on a couple of Mississippi state parks.
A cloud of dust and smoke floated where only moments before Uncle Pete's truck had been standing.
We imediately spotted Uncle Pete's truck parked over near the guard shack, but the famed defense attorney was nowhere to be seen.
A large mob of students had gathered around the shack where the student radicals were being held.
I noticed iat the speaker was dressed differently from the rest of the crowd.
He had on a dark blue jersey with the letters MQ printed on front, as did, I now noticed, several other young men ho ringed the crowd.
They're a student organization of militant Christians dedicated to the ideals and principles of beatin' the hell outta everybody on campus who don't live right.
They do whatever 'ol ""Slick Eddie"" or J Harvey Sandbrain wants 'em to do.
We felt the time had come to make our exit, but as we headed for the truck, we heard a bottle smash and a scream fill the air.
The speaker was lying on the ground, a smashed whiskey bottle near his head.
He was, strangely enough, dressed in a football uniform, the blue and yellow of the Hoofer Ducks.
He gazed placidly at the silent crowd for a moment, then began to slowly rotate.
Oscar T shot fast the stunned mob, hopped into Pete's truck, and took off in a cloud of blue smoke.
They had sneaked out of the guard shack and hidden in the truck while Oscar T diverted the mob's attention.
Oscar T was driving the truck like a drunken mad man — which, of course, he was — when he suddenly pulled alongside Pete and me and motioned for us to hop in the back.
Since the bloodthirsty crowd was about to grab us, we didn't argue and in a moment were speeding down Bay Highway toward Uncle Pete's Bar and Grill.
I could hear ""Fire Breath"" in the front, ranting and raving about something.
Oscar T was sitting beside him, silently shooting Jack Daniel's with a bemused smile on his face.
My picture is going to be on the cover of every magazine in the P&W Bar Review X-RAY ROOM by DOUG LEVANWAY Features Editor The X-Ray Room reminds us of the harlot who looks like a million dollars from across the room, but upon closer examination, looks more like fifteen bucks an hour.
You are struck by the cheapness of the appearance and by the insincerity of the product being sold.
It is a large place, covered with padded black vinyl and mirrors, crammed full of pool tables, fooseball tables, pinball machines, other electronic games, and a jukebox which is always set just above the safe level for intact eardrums.
All of these offenses could be overlooked if it were not for the beer they sell.
A draught costs 40 cents and comes in an eightounce plastic cup with a head that just won't quit.
We don't know for sure that they water down their brew, but for some reason it always tastes like the last swallow in a can of beer and you seem to spend at least half of your time there in the bathroom.
Like so many other places that try to create an atmosphere with cheap plushness (instead of letting the atmosphere create itself), and like the harlot who thinks the make-up hides her wrinkles, the X-Ray Room fails.
And, like the harlot, what is beneath the appearance is SCROOGES by JIMMY DEMPSEY Scrooge's is currently featuring some of the finest live entertainment currently available in Jackson — in the music of Julie Carr and Billy and Barney Chadwick.
Cale, John Prine, and Cat Stephens; they are a pleasing compliment to the food, drink, and relaxed atmosphere of Scrooge's.
All three sing well, with Julie and Billy trading most of the leads and Barney singing harmonies.
I reached into the front seat, grabbed Oscar's bottle of Jack Daniel's, and took a long swallow.
The annual Omicron Delta Kappa Tap Day will be held March 13, during the convocation period in the AC Recital Hall.
The U.R.E. tests will be given Saturday March 1, at 8:45m. in the Recital Hall.
Students who have two majors will take their second test the following Tuesday at 9:45 in conference room of the Student Center.
PAGE 6 Paul Pittman P&W FEBRUARY 27, 1975 Carmichael Moving Towards Governorship Candid and extremely attractive, Meridian businessman Gil Carmichael is making the rounds, quietly touting his plans to run for governor of Mississippi as a Republican.
As he speaks to civic clubs and other groups, Carmichael is saying some things that may echo the temper of the times.
It is a new and open politics, the like of which has not been seen in this state in a long time.
The first is the fallout from the Watergate affair, which tended to send a number of Republicans down the drain in the recent congresssional races.
The second is the enmity that Carmichael doubtless incurred when he ran for the senate against Sen.
James O Eastland, the established godfather of Mississippi politics and a man who does not take intrusions lightly.
Finally, Carmichael has been working to resolve the cross currents which he thinks developed in the Republican party back in the Nixon days when, without doubt, pressure from Eastland literally put him in the back of the bus, even when such dignitaries as the vice president of the United States came to Jackson and endorsed other GOP candidates for office.
He never reacted to the snubs he got from his own party members that year.
He has stayed in the ranks and worked, and he says he thinks that the political magic has come full circle.
In fact, the glamour and aura of being welcomed at the White House, which apparently afflicted hard-nosed Republican operatives like fund-raiser William D Mounger, oilman Fred LaRue and even Clarke Jack Anderson New Embargo Possible WASHINGTON Despite the shah of Iran's recent pledge not to go along with another Arab oil embargo, the State Department is quietly preparing for such an emergency.
Even as Secretary of State Henry Kissinger was exchanging toasts with Arab leaders on his recent ninenation tour, his aides were meeting behind closed doors with oil company representatives.
The scheme calls for the Western nations to share energy resources in case of another embargo, but in reality this means the United States would provide most of the fuel.
Yet Kissinger may have more trouble negotiating with our own allies than he has with the Arabs.
Several key points of his worldwide energy blueprint have raised hackles in France and England.
The peripatetic Kissinger may also have trouble with the United States Justice Department.
His oil-sharing proposal would require the major oil companies to swap vital information.
This, the Justice Department's antitrust lawyers fear, would lessen competition between the oil giants and give them even more dominance over the American market.
So, if there is another oil embargo, the consumer may be picking up three tabs — one for himself, one for the European nations and one for even higher oil company profits.
In his private conversations with aides, he now talks confidently of winning the economic showdown with the Democrats.
He believes one-third of the populace supports his economic program and another third opposes it.
The battle, he has told aides, is for undecided third. e has been encouraged by the response he has received on the road.
He has an advantage over the Democrats, he has suggested, in being able to concentrate on a single program.
There are too many disparate Democrats in Congress, he believes, ever to unite behind an economic policy.
The President has acknowledged to aides, however, that he can't completely control the economic forces.
His re-election will depend, in his opinion, on whether the economic outlook is brighter in 1976.
Much has been written about Secretary of State Kissinger's slipping popularity on Capitol Hill.
What hasn't been written is that Secretary of Defense James Schlesinger is also in trouble with the lawmakers. , Basically, it boils down to personality — or lack of it.
Senate sources who deal with the defense secretary tell us he is too professorial and condescending.
Schlesinger has made the situation even worse by appointing aides to handle Congress who are as unsocialbe as he is.
His top assistant for legislative affairs, for example, is John Maury, who was a CIA man for over 20 years.
He is a man who is used to speaking in whispers and is singularly unsuited for the gregarious role he is expected to play on Capitol Hill.
As one Senate source put it, Schlesinger was a strike against the Pentagon.
The appointment of his two legislative assistants means he has struck out.
If anything, the White House, President Gerald Ford and all have finally come to be anathema to Mississippi Republicans.
Carmichael thinks that the time has come for the Republican party in Mississippi, and he comes close to getting evangelistic on this issue.
He thinks the Democratic party in the state is in disarray, and he may be right.
Recent attempts to unify the party between the loyalists and the regulars have largely been abortive.
The regulars fail to realize on the one hand that there is a new ballgame in the works, and though, for the first time, the loyalists are sincerely trying to pull the party together, it remains fragmented.
So, here comes Gil Carmichael, a native of Columbia whose family was driven there by the 1927 Mississippi flood.
He is talking, perhaps a bit vaguely, about the new politics, candor from public officials, business problems and finally an injection of honesty in government.
If, by some miracle, I were a candidate for governor, I would not take Gil Carmichael lightly.
Cassandra Fowlkes, an Independent, said, ""Their human development is exclusively for white Anglo-Saxon Protestants.
Ricky Graham, a member of Pi Kappa Alpha, stated, ""The Greek system offers another phase to college life.
Everyone is entitled to his own way of life and should be treated with equality in all respects.
Carol Middlestead, another Independent, stated, ""Most people benefit from it because it helps them to adjust to college life more quickly.
Chi Omega, May Lipe Zehnder, said, ""The Greek system promotes higher ideals on campus and does a lot to promote school spirit.
Eva Roby, an Independent, remarked, ""I don't think that the system is beneficial at all.
State Government Student Government National Sports Photographer BILL RAY Business Manager Dean Pittman Beth Edwards DougLevanway Danny Bowling Bill Blair Derrick Shields Earl Aycock Lloyd Gray Glade Mclnnis DougBrindley Jimmy Dempsev Staff: Beth Edwards, Ralph Wells, Susan Tsimortos, Doug Minor, Gale Mallette, Steve Terrell, Kevin Sessums, Mike Stevens, Liz Waldner, Theresa Liles| Jeanette JDeoever, Lee Howell, Laurie Brown, Mike Hunt.
Carey opens against Belhaven tonight at 7:00 and Millsaps plays MC at 9:00.
The consolation game will be at 7:00 Friday night and the championship at 9:00.
The game, played in Tennessee, was never in doubt even though Millsaps stayed close until the final minutes.
But too many turnovers and poor shooting (38% from the field) sealed its fate.
Belhaven came from across the street to whallop the Majors — a low point of a very low Millsaps season.
But on Friday, February 14, when the Lynx of Southwestern dropped in on the Majors, they did just that.
Down by two with six seconds left, the purple-men got the ball down the floor and Mike Flautt was fouled.
The Deltan Flautt calmly sand two free KA 's Lead Intramurals by EARL AYCOCK Assistant Sports Editor With the first round of ""A"" league action near completion, the KA's appear as though they will be the team to beat this year in intramural basketball.
With an untarnished 5-0 record, the KA's are tied for the league lead with the LXA's who also have a perfect record at 3-0.
The Pikes and the Tracers, last year's undefeated champions, are tied for third at 2-1, followed by a 3-way tie for fifth among Chalk, the Masterballers, and the Wild Turkeys, and finally the KE's, who have yet to experience the thrill of victory.
In the ""B"" league, the lead is held by the Pike ""B"" team with a 1-0 record.
In second are the Panthers at 2-1, then a 6-way tie for third among the KA ""B""; Pike ""C"", KA ""C"", LXA ""B"", the Chemistry Department, and the Blazers.
Competition has been bitter so far in both leagues, with many of the games being determined only in the last few seconds.
For instance, the KA's defeated the Tracers by one point with only eight seconds remaining; the Panthers defeated the KA ""B"" team by one point with only three seconds left.
This fact can be further validated by noting that of the 26 games that have been played thus far, at least nine of them have been determined by four points or less.
Down to eight players by the Tougaloo game, Millsaps looked like it might pull another victory in the first half.
The newly-formed Millsaps team's short season put it at a disadvantage due to the lack of time available for developing fundamentals.
It was further disadvantaged by the overwhelming experience of the opponents.
With only a light game season the Lady Majors did a creditable job in holding their own.
Members of this year's team are Shawn Evans, Donna Sullivan, Valerie Hodston, Ellen Sessions, Carol Middlestead, Elizabeth Allen, Karen Gladney, Nancy Barksdale, Carol Humphreys, Isabelle Ezelle, Marcia McKee, Mary Ann Edge, coach, Mary Jo Milling, Manager, and Janet Dykes, statistician.
National Sports by DQUG BRINDLEY FOUR TOP-TEN TEAMS LOSE Four of college basketball's top ten teams lost over the weekend, some embarassingly.
Number two UCLA suffered its worst defeat in over ten years, as Washington beat them 10381.
All-American David Thompson fouled out of that game with more than 15 minutes left.
Fifth ranked Alabama was upset by seventh rated Kentucky in their shootout at Tuscaloosa; with the loss, Alabama dropped into a tie with the Wildcats in the SEC race.
The eighth rated Sun Devils of Arizona State lost to unrated Texas-El Paso, leaving them with a 20-3 mark.
Number ten Southern California lost earlier in the week to Washington, regitering their sixth loss of the season.
Top ranked and undefeated Indiana won twice this week, increasing their record to 26-0, but they suffered the most crushing loss of the year when their team leader, Scott May, broke his wrist against arch-rival Purdue, a game won by Indiana by one point.
Simpson was most effective in the sports requiring a particular skill, such as bowling and baseball hitting.
However, the former world-class relay sprinter at USC easily won the hundred yard dash in a new Superstars record of 9.69.
Added to other high finishes, such as a second place finish in tennis, O.J. edged former champion, Bob Seagren, and last years winner, Kyle Rote, Jr.
The league will play three round robins, the first of which was completed last week.
This week the league will expand to include three ""B"" teams which will play each other twice.
Hiring looking for faculty prospects — it starts with the negative assumption that Blacks won't come here and then works from there.
He said that the informal channels used to contact many applicants rarely yields Blacks since most of the Millsaps faculty members' contacts are white.
This system needs to be supplemented with contacts that will locate more black candidates, added Murray.
The sociology professor also remarked that another myth held bv the administration is that a black Ph.D. would not want to come south to teach — with the professorial job market as tight as it now is, the prospective teacher will go where the job is.
A lack of Black faculty is supplemented by the other form of hiring discrimination here — namely Blacks in common labor positions and whites in administrative posts.
Pete Wood stated that all of the applications he received for custodial and similar positions were from Blacks.
Such jobs not only offer a meager salary but Non-Credit Courses The Millsaps College Community Enrichment Program has been expanded this year to include Millsaps' students.
The program, that is for ""enrichment and enjoyment"", consists of a variety of noncredit, five to eight week night courses with no grades or records.
Dean Harvey Saunders, one of the organizers of the program stated, ""Millsaps is offering its students wishing to participate in the program special half-price rates.
If the student preregisters, by February 28, the cost will be ten dollars per course, except the Beginning Piano for adults and the Travel Abroad courses.
Beginning Photography George Johnson, Academic Complex 222, 7:30 -9:00m.
Connie Beardsley, Academic Complex 310, 7:30 9:30m. , Supplies Fee $5.00.
Travel Abroad Paul D Hardin, Academic Complex 215, 7:30 9:00m. ., $4.50.
Lisa Kilgore, Academic Complex 218, 7:00 8:30m. . promise little hope of advancement to supervisory roles.
The cafeteria is the same way — all the supervisors are white; all being supervised are black.
The hiring is done by Mississippi Valley Food Service, but the school could apply pressure and demand more Blacks in supervisory roles.
Golf Course Construction The tenative plans for the road, call for a wide boulevard to connect North State Street at the Riverside intersection and curve slightly ""S""-like across campus and connect North West Street at the Duncan intersection, near the observatory.
This will place the road in the general proximity directly behind Franklin dormitory, the tennis courts, and the Physical Activities Center.
The soccer and baseball fields, now in the path of the planned new road, will eventually be reconstructed on the west side of the football practice field, after that area, including the utilities shack, has been cleared.
However, the baseball field has just had considerable work done on it in its present location.
Long range plans for the project will result in the complete closing of the North State gateway onto the campus and establish the new road as the main campus entrance.
When pressed about student reaction to the destruction of a ""favorite"" part of campus, Collins replied, ""I don't want to cut down trees and tear up land either.
Mar. — Holy City Temple Concert, 8:00 Mar. — Mass Piano Concert, 8:00 Mar. — Jackson Browne and Phoebe Snow, 7:00 and 10:00 Mar. — Fiddler on the Roof, 8:15 Mar. — Gospel Sing with the Inspirations, 8^:00 Mar.
Daughter or Regiment; Mar. — Jackson Music Association — Jerome Hines, 8: 15i Mar. — Bill Gaither Trio, 8:00 Mar.
Feb.-Mar. —State Girls' Basketball Tournament Mar.-8 — State Boys' Basketball Tournament Mar., 9 — Flea Market Mar., 15 — Overall State Basketball Championship Mar. — Mississippi State Kennel Club Dog Show Mar. — Earth, Wind, & Fire in concert.
This second problem, however, has been set aside for the moment in order to dealwith the first.
At the most recent meeting of the Chaplain's Committee, held February 25, discussion of second semester rush was somewhat evaded.
Rather, it leaned toward the void present on campusthe lack of involvement.
If the committee can stimulate involvement in the students, it is felt that perhaps a ""community"" atmosphere can be developed.
A letter to President Collins was also drafted supporting extended library hours.
A motion to buy ticket lots from Bee-Bop Productions was raised as an alternative to staging Joe Lee Gibson Constitutes a Saps Institution in Himself by GLADE McINNIS Student Government Writer Major thrusts have been made in two recent Student Senate meetings to establish student influence in Millsaps affairs.
From the remodeling of the Boyd Cambell Student Center to buying beer for a Community Week picnic, the senate under the capable Jim McCafferty expressed its discontent — and willingness to act.
Ex-President Charlie Hinman engineered the approval of seven kegs of beer for the April 12 campus picnic.
The motion was preceded by an affirmation of its legality under the Millsaps constitution and state law.
Though several senators voiced apprehension, only Royce Garvin and Paul Stephens voted against the measure.
President Collins has reportedly stated there will be no beer in public on campus.
A unanimous resolution was passed to urge the speedy renovation of the dilapidated student center.
The revamping has apparently received low priority from both the Board of Trustees and the administration.
Senator May Lipe Zehnder in the earlier meeting voiced objection to the planned destruction of the golf course.
She urged that a letter be sent to President Collins acknowledging the administration's failure to consult the students on this matter.
Senator Zehnder also initiated an investigation into the book store's pricing methods on the request of a student.
The Thursday referendum on the addition of three students to the Academic Council was brought before the senate by Chris Wilkerson.
The council currently has no formal student input in academic decisions.
The tickets would be issued to Millsaps students for chosen concerts free or at a reduced price, before being available to the general public.
The charter of Alpha Phi Omega was reintroduced and became a more complicated issue when the national service organization decided to open its doors to all students but would not permit women to vote or hold offices.
The arguments remained unresolved though the group received less support than in a Feb. meeting and the motion on acceptance was tabled.
LIBERAL HISTORIAN, columnist, and author Max Lerner squared off with conservative political journalist-commentator Reid Buckley in debate last week as part of Millsaps' Arts and Lecture Series.
Currently under the guidance of a core group of around eight founders, the party plans to undertake a campus-wide membership campaign and organizational rally during Community week in early April.
This ail stems from an effort to marshal independent voting strength and direct it toward getting more independents elected to what is now a Greekdominated student government at Millsaps.
Hubert Thompson is one of the key figures in the formation of the party.
According to Chris Wilkerson, another prime mover in the organizational efforts, independents ""are about the only group that is not organized in any fashion"" on the Millsaps campus.
He said that the party would not only get more independents elected to student government, but would also increase the general involvement of independents in campus political affairs.
He said that the party would probably have the same overall goals as the Greeks have concerning issues before the student government, with the exception of social matters.
Both organizers felt the idea would do much toward getting more Blacks involved in student government and furthering race relations on campus.
It would have a core central committee of ten to twenty members, each of which would represent a large group (twentyfive to thirty) of independents in party affairs.
This plan is not concrete yet and could be altered, dependent on the nature of tomorrow's rally. by STEVE GERMANY Millsaps is an institution of institutions.
Things like the Major's tomb, the U.R.E.. an unfriendly Business Office, and some of the faculty have been around for so long that they almost seem to be a physical part of the college, virtually an institution in themselves.
Joe has been here since he was 17, beginning the year before Mr Roosevelt's War.
He is paid the salary of $2.10 an hour which, even for a school in severe financial straits, is unjustifiable after 35 years of work.
He evidently takes pride in it for complaints are very rare when Joe is working, in comparison to the situation after Christmas break when he was on an extended vacation and the fill-in janitor let the dorm go to hell and back.
He is an intriguing personality in some ways, appearing at times both simple and complex but he never seems to be too concerned about it which makes it all right.
At the risk of sounding moralistic, I would say that Joe is one of the few people at Millsaps to whom being kind appears to be a natu.ul action rather than a conditioned response.
Copeland and the JOE LEE GIBSON school, he nevertheless loves to complain and question just about everybody that will answer him, and most people generally do.
A suggestion has been made, perhaps jokingly, that this writer not only agrees with but would like to see come about immediately In return for Joe Lee's 35 years of work.
Since that announcement, he has become the man to watch — the favored dark horse, so to speak — in the upcoming campaign and many feel he is a key contender.
One of the reasons for Dantin's quick rise to statewide prominence in political circles is his hiring of political advertising wizard Deloss Walker of Memphis — the same man who engineered Governor Waller's successful media campaign in 1971.
It is speculated that Walker can shape the political image of the relatively unknown, unblemished Dantin to fit the requirements of this ""new politics"" style of running for office.
Formerly mayor of Columbia, the current district attorney has done well in local politics and is respected in his own area.
In an exclusive interview with the Purple & White, candidate Dantin discussed his own campaign and several of the issues now facing the government and people of Mississippi.
That is. your image will be presented to the public through advertising.
Walker will be doing my advertising, he will not be my campaign manager.
Now I've got my own program and my own ideas as to what I think needs be done for the slate of ississippi.
Now as good a man as Deloss Walker is. he cannot make chicken salad out of chicken feathers.
And I think he's the best, he's the best political advertising man in the business.
Thus far, it's been from friends and clients in a four or five county area.
It's been a personal support, but it's been substantial and it's been some people who really believe in me.
I think that would just encourage the use of it and commitment to the drug culture.
I think it's all we can possibly afford at the present time with the economy as it is.
I think now we should see just what resources we do have for the next step in education.
I don't know that right now is the time for it, . are most important right now are reorganization for economizing state government.
Number two, I think we have too many employees in the state, who, instead of being public servants, they're politicians.
I think that's the second most crucial issue, that we get more efficiency, we get better public servants if we don't require them to be politicians, if they become more professional.
The third thing that I'm particularly interested in is the need for a drug control center in the state.
We have taken the drug problem and treated it like we have done every other crime.
I'm not for decriminalizing drug crime, but I am for giving a response to it that fits the problem rather than compounds it.
If we had a center that was attuned to the problem, drug offenders could receive treatment, counseling, and handling which is responsive to their particular problem.
I'd like to give a little look at it, I don't really know what we're talking about in terms of what it would do to our educational system.
I understand that the number of black employees in the state government is very low.
I think if the person is qualified, it should not matter if he's black or white, male or Continuing on page 12 State News LLOYD GRAY State Govt.
Writer The --Mississippi State Senate, after nearly two months of simmering debate and a prolonged series of public hearings, resoundingly confirmed Gov.
Bill Waller's nomination of Jack K Reed as Parchman superintendent last week.
Reed, who has served as acting superintendent since being hired by the State Prison Board in December of 1973, came to Mississippi from California where he was employed for 12 years in that state's correctional system.
Supporters of his nomination claimed the 56-year old ex-Marine had greatly improved conditions at the Penitentiary, had minimized political influence in its operations, and was the first qualified professional peneologist the state had ever employed.
The Mississippi House of Representatives amended its rules to require its committees to have open meetings.
The move followed passage of a proposed state statute for the purpose of including all governmental agencies on the state, district, and local levels in the provision, which is currently before the Senate.
A legislative reapportionment plan was okayed by the House Elections Committee as lawmakers attempted to avert the possible court-ordered implementation of a plan that would require single-member legislative districts across the state.
Civil Rights forces, led by Fayette Mayor Charles Evers who visited the Capitol last week and dramatically siezed the Senate podium, have maintained that the present system of multimember districts prevents the election of blacks to the legislature.
The House's plan calls only for the election of legislators from supervisors' districts in the populous counties of Hinds, Harrison, and Jackson.
National News BILL BLAIR National Affairs Editor HOUSE COMMITTEE REJECTS AID FOR CAMBODIA The United States House of Representative's Foreign Affairs Committee voted to reject President Ford's request for a half billion dollars in aid to beseiged Cambodia.
On the same day Prince Norodom Sihonouk, deposed Cambodian leader, asked all countries with embassies in Phnom Pehn to close them down and evacuate the city.
His action hinted toward a Communist offensive drive to move actual fighting into the city.
ACTUAL UNEMPLOYMENT STILL RISING The United States unemployment rate remained at 8.3% in February.
However, the figures compiled by the Bureau of the Census revealed that 500,000 of the jobless had quit looking for work, as a result they are dropped from the official statistics.
SENATE PLEDGES TO HAVE TAX RELIEF BILL ""BY EASTER"" The United States Senate began to move swiftly on financial matters as the Senate Finance Committee voted to refund up to $2,000 dollars to persons buying new homes.
The Senate Democratic Caucus voted to stay in session until a general tax relief bill is in the hands of President Ford, even if it means no Easter break.
PATTY HEARST AGAIN IN THE NEWS A secret guard jury met in Hamisburg, Pennsylvania, to investigate sighting of Patty Hearst and her SLA companions, at a small farm outside Allentown, Pennsylvania.
SCANDALS PLAGUE THE CIA The charges of impropriety, leveled against the CIA, continued to mount as a House Investigation Committee drew an admission from Director William Colby that the CIA has been spying on Congresswoman Bella Abzug for the last twenty-two years.
In other CIA activities, Portugal's President Games linked the secret organization with an attempted revolt by a right wing group in Portugal this week.
MARCH 19, 1975 P&W PAGE 3 Student Government Challenging the Administration by GLADE McINNIS Student Government Writer President Edward Collins and the administration are facing their first student challenge in over two years.
As the spring malady spreads among the student body, they are taking on an appetite for change, and that means going through Collins.
What students are wanting this year, again, is a greater determination of their fate,e., more say-so.
Students realize they are not receiving all the college owes them, but are not sure what they want, what stands in their way, or how to achieve it.
The most poignant signs of dissent are not in the Student Senate, which has made great strides in its own right.
All of the Greek organizations to whom it has been presented have unanimously passed a resolution urging that high priority be given to the revamping of the student center.
College records (available from this writer) show that, while . in '71 and '72 Millsaps financed a $90,000 home for Collins, for at least 10 years no money has been put into the student center.
Nor has the Board of Trustees included the renovation in the first $2 million of the Capital Fund Drive.
Studies for an adequate center have been available for at least seven years.
This sense of priorities is repeated ad nauseum in administration policy.
And it would be fallacious to assume that President Collins has no authority in these matters, as he is wont to claim.
By reversing within one week the Boardapproved tuition plan, Collins demonstrated his overwhelming power in the most essential matters of college administration.
Collins is a man of abilities — even if leadership cannot be included among them — and is very adept at the art of persuasion, it is his work.
This is demonstrated in meetings with his recently-formed student advisory board where, we learn from its members, he easily avoids confrontation on any issue.
To assume that change occurs easily at Millsaps would be equally fallacious.
It is easy to blame a single person or small group for one's dilemma, perhaps too easy.
What is difficult, especially when one is used to a cozy hibernation, is the struggle that must accompany a change in circumstances.
Without this, it is apparent that Millsaps will not view the student as its reason for existence.
And this school may lose what little appeal it has left to enter a permanent winter.
Committee Submits PAC Alterations by DEAN PITTMAN News Editor Growing student concern over the availability of the Millsaps Physical Activities Center has led a student senate committee to submit a more flexible studentuse plan to President Edward Collins.
The committee, headed by Dennis Wells, presented a sixpage report outlining the needs of the students and the present availability of the PAC for individual student use.
The general report offered guidelines for the expansion and flexibility of the present gym hours.
In essense, the committee report called for the extension of open hours on Sunday from its present schedule, 1:00m. to 5:00m. to 1.00 to 8:00m., and the opening of the gym on Saturday from 10:00m. to 5:00 m.
In addition, the committee suggested the cancellation of the afternoon G period class in the gym to give students a guaranteed block of time from 12:00 noon to 2:00m.
Presently, there is an equivalent two hour open period in the morning and a one hour period in the afternoon.
Although President Collins has not given the proposals his bill of approval, Coach Jim Montgomery, also a committee member, recently stated that he saw little chance of the President vetoing the measure.
Montgomery also added that the PAC is already adhering to most of the newly proposed schedule.
As a further measure, Montgomery plans to lengthen the hours of tennis practice, and at the same time restrict the team's use to only two courts.
This will provide students one free court every week day from 12:00 noon to 6:00m.
As a monitoring agent, the committee plans to reactivate each semester to insure that no violations of the schedule occur.
Protest Swells Against Golf Course Access Road by BETH EDWARDS Assistant News Editor A growing number of students are protesting the proposed commercialization of the north campus, particularly the impendent ""access road"" which will divide the property from the rest of the campus.
The protest, however, has not been marshalled in any particular direction.
Exactly two hundred signatures are found on the petition, but Jigs doesn't know what to do with it, who to give it to.
The Kappa Deltas passed a resolution to request the senate set up such a committee — the measure has not been presented to the senate yet.
Possibly the strongest voice of protest thus far has come out of the student senate itself, where a proposal easily passed to send letters to the President and the Board of Trustees expressing opposition to the current golf course development plans.
Gale Mallette — ""I can't see how the road would make any difference in the traffic around campus.
David Womack — ""It is a big sacrifice to make because it is a beautiful place and a lot of money was just spent on the baseball field.
If it has to be developed it should be done closer to Woodrow Wilson which would leave us somewhere to go and the soccer and baseball fields.
ISew Profs to Join Faculty Two new professors with relatively good credentials will join the Millsaps faculty next fall.
Percy has concentrated his English studies in the field of Renaissance literature, with special interest in Elizabethan poetry and drama.
In addition, Percy listed exceptional competence in Chaucer and the Nineteenth-century novel.
The second new professor, Richard Freis, has been employed specifically as a full-time heritage director.
Freis, who has specialized in Republican and Augustan Latin Poetry, Latin Prose Practice and Theory, and Greek Tragedy, will also direct his efforts to revitalizing the Classics department here at Millsaps.
A RUSSIAN DIPLOMAT visiting Millsaps engages in exchange with Political Science professor Howard Bavendar.
This gentleman, whose job dealt with Soviet political affairs, was joined by two of his cohorts in the trip to campus a couple of weeks ago.
A ribbon-cutting, photographs, alumni, board members and such will all be part of an attempt to get some PR mileage out of the recreational facility.
The heated pool will open for student usage at least by then and possibly earlier.
Director of Services Pete Wood stated that details such as insurance and legal arrangements were being worked out at present and hopefully would be taken care of by the end of this week.
Wood said that once such details were taken care of, the President would make a decision as to when the pool would actually open for use.
TODD RUNDGREN TURNS BLUE — Singer, compose:, producer and glitter -star extraordinaire Todd Rundgren reportedly has just taken the glitter-rock movement one step further by dying his public hair blue. — PAGE 4 p&w/ MARCH 19, 1975 Features THE POOP DECK P& W Bar Review THE PEACOCK'S PUB Terry Road by ROB McDUFF Editor It is everything you would expect out of a Terry Road hot spot.
And so it's up against the wall at Peacock's Pub, where the clientele is just like the decorum — vintage redneck.
A 1 lot of , middle-aged country folks dancing and drinking with . spouses and friends.
There's a liquor store a block down the street and you can buy set-ups at the inflated price of 50 cents.
On most Saturday nights, Millsappers David Womack and Victor Hawkins take their band out there and the dancing gets started up.
It really can get rowdy-fun and Sammy Peacock has been known to keep the place open past twelve if the band is playing and everybody's having a good time.
THE POOP DECK in the Quarter, Lakeland Drive by LEE HOWELL For a person who rarely breaks the Hollingsworth and Dutch Bar tradition, the Poop Deck is one of the most appalling places on earth.
Instead of getting up from the table and going to the bar to get yourself a pitcher, real live barmaids bring beer, mixed drinks, and eventually the bill right to the table, as if that was the way a bar was supposed to be run.
The floor is carpeted, the paneling looks real, and the drinks are served in real glasses.
Even the entertainment is real with Stefan Anderson performing nightly. Perhaps the strangest thing about the whole evening was the fact that' it was very enjoyable.
This only goes to show that the Millsaps student, no matter what he thinks, is really prepared to cope wjth new and different environments and get along quite well.
If you're looking for a quiet evening with a few friends and a few drinks in a pleasant atmosphere, it might well be that the Poop Deck is the place for you.
To the vocal dismay of about half the 1,000 students in Alumni Hall, Dean had just made another $3,000.
Ahead was a $4,000 paycheck for another speaking engagement later in the day.
Americans remember him as the ramrod-straight pedant of the Senate Watergate Committee hearings in 1973.
Dean talked quietly about Watergate — a key remark was that President Ford ""didn't get an ounce of truth"" out of Nixon in return for pardoning him — and he handled the mixed audience with the aplomb one might have expected on the president's accuser.
The following poem is a reprint from ""The Vanderbilt Hustler,"" who reprinted it from ""The Quaker Campus,"" the student newspaper of Whittier College.
Tho I'm living like a king I'm always learnin' somethin' new 'Cause every year here at Millsaps is really Tough on you.
Oscar T took a long sip and tossed the empty can of Dixie in the corner.
The famed attorney was discussing the Hoofer case with his young clients over a round of drinks in the back room of Uncle Pete's.
Barker was wailing about his mistreatment at the hands of the Hoofer Security Guard.
The strain on his intellectual sensibilities had obviously been more than he could bear.
While Oscar T calmed ""Fire Breath"", Uncle Pete and I walked out on the pier that stood behind Pete's Bar and gazed at the muddy waters of Mobile Bay.
Quack,"" drawled Pete, ""this reminds me of one of Oscar's greatest cases, the State of Alabama the State of tississippi.
He kept moanin' and groanin' something T)oul having to give 'em Muscle als and Bear Bryant cause the itenant guv'nor had run off tuh Ipulco with Guv'nor Waller's even year old daughter, Fifi.
Stormed in half n hour late, interrupted Mississippi's lawyer with a, HAW-HAW Haw-Haw, rap on the head with a Jack Daniel's bottle, and made a motion to have the case dismissed.
Oscar T Fornbush, attorney at the bar, the legendary defender of truth and justice; just another shyster lawyer specializing in cheap courtroom antics.
We'll have to focus the attention of the trial on their accusors, 'Slick Eddie' and J Harvey ' Sandbrain.
Or that he's going to use its construction as a diversion while he starts a few places that are sure to be financial smashes.
Captain Eddie's Catfish Corner; Friendly Eddie's A-OK Used Cars; Colonel Coolin's Southern Fried Chicken; McCoolin's; and Slick Eddie's Finance and Loans.
I was glad, for in the weeks to come we were gonna need all the help we could get.
There is no limitation as to form or theme, although the judges prefer shorter subjects because of space limitations.
Each poem must be typed or printed on a separate sheet, and must bear the name and home address of the student, and the college address as well.
Manuscripts should be sent to the OFFICE OF THE PRESS; NATIONAL POETRY PRESS; 3210 SELBY AVENUE; LOS ANGELES, CALIFORNIA 90034.
OSCAR T CLOSING WITH THE SUMMATION OF A CASE Time and a Hobo by DOUG LEVANWAY Features Editor I saw him walking on the side of the road as I drove by.
A small old man, wearing non-descript clothes and a cap pulled down to shade his eyes, he was struggling with a large brown bag that forced him to lean over almost horizontally.
The same Mr George I had met over five years ago in some woods near where I was now driving.
Someone had heard about a hermit who lived in the woods — so being fifteen and determined not leave people alone, I went with some friends to find him.
Wandering through the sparse underbrush, we found him sitting on a large can turned upside down.
He talked for hours about the South Seas Islands he had been on, about how he knew Henry Ford and. had even shown Henry a few things about cars, about his life with the railroad and even about a night he spent in jail for hopping a ride on a freight car.
He showed us his hair, for he was very proud of it, which was thick"" and pure white despite his years.
So here I was on a warm March afternoon, searching in the woods for Mr George after five years.
I stammered out my name along with an explanation about why I was there, but he paid no attention.
I told him that I'd like to interview him sometime for the Purple and White.
That lady from the ClarionLedger told me she'd give me a cherry pic, but I didn't get nothing.
The blue had all but disappeared in his eyes, replaced by a general redness.
They catch you and you won't be down this way again."" 1 didn't know what to say to him.
I picked up a stick and drew circles in the dirt to avoid meeting his eyes.
They'll only get me in trouble, think you're giving me drugs or something.
Then he stood up, grabbed the funny papers and said, ""Well, it's obvious that you're gonna sit there until you get us both in trouble,"" and walked away.
I walked slowly back through the woods, stopping only once to kick over a large can that was turned upside down.
PAGE 6 P&W/Opinion MARCH 19, 19 Paul Pittman Winter Is Frontrunner In Governor's Race Slowly but surely the 1975 race for the governor's office is taking shape.
Bill Winter, the lieutenant governor and a veteran of more than 25 years in state government, ranging from the legislature to the present office, is the acknowledged frontrunner.
Dantin has Deloss Walker, the Memphis ad man, in his corner and apparently is going to have adequate financing to make a creditable race.
He has been hacking Winter at every turn and will probably play that role if he decides lo run for the top office.
The word out, not all-together substantiated at this point, is that he will have the backing of organized labor with possibly some substantial financing from that source.
Then there is Dave Perkins, a ackson oilman and former chiropractor, who has formally announced that he will run.
The indication is that the campaign will be much shorter, media oriented and geared primarily to television and the newspapers and radio.
One other aspect that should not be overlooked is that Republican Gil Carmichael is going to be a formidable candidate in the general election in November.
He is personable, attractive and is the type candidate who fits like a glove into the media situation.
Carmichael Strong With Auto Dealers t It is conceivable that he will have opposition in the primary.
But this reporter has learned that he is developing strong support among automobile dealers in the state.
Carmichael is a car dealer, holding the Volkswagen-Chrysler dealership in Meridian.
Still it is difficult to discount Winter's chances of making the big play this time around.
He made a strong race in 1967 and disappointed many of his supporters in stepping down to the lieutenant governor's race in 1971.
What it boils down to is whether he can put together the kind of campaign staff that will project his image in a positive, vote-getting way.
With Memphis ad man Deloss Walker in the picture, this might take some doing.
Letters Extend Sunday Lunch It is a known fact that not all students are rich and so it is not all who can afford to miss their Sunday afternoon meals.
I kind of have some misgivings about making this request, but I will go ahead and make it anyway.
This school is a church-affiliated one and so, one would logically expect that the school make some adjustments to certain things that concern students and their religious life.
The school's cafeteria opens to students between 12 noon and 1:00 m. on Sunday afternoons for their meals.
Many students go to church on Sundays and do not get back from there until around 2:00m., by which time the cafeteria is closed.
The extension of this period; by just one hour to allow these students to have their lunch when they get back is surely not anything that will harm the school or the kitchen management and staff in any noticeable way.
On the other hand, it will help the students immensely in that they do not have to go on empty stomachs until Monday morning — the Sunday evening snack rarely ever does much good anyway.
Other schools, including state schools around here, make provisions for these students who go to church and come back late to still have their meals.
One then wonders if state schools can do this, how much more should a church-related school be willing to do the same.
This action, if taken, might also encourage more students to go to church which is a thing that this school will be very much interested in.
It will also be another feather in the administration's cap to at least consider this — my modest proposal — in that they will only be seeing to the welfare of these God-fearing students.
My point, dear generalizing sir, is that I am one of 'those' who was under the impression that Greek was the way to go.
You should realize there are usually three sides to any such situation, or at least two.
Susie Weill Jack Reed, Parchman, Mississippi Politics, and a Crack in the Dunge by LLOYD GRAY State Government Writer Perhaps it is a few dozen years and an untold number of lost lives too late, but just the same, there is vidence that Mississippi may be emerging ever so slowly from the dark ages of penal philosophy.
The confirmation of Jack K Reed superintendant of the State enitentiary at Parchman last week was an event that created little excitement among students in Dr.
Borinski's criminal justice class, or with the average man on the street.
Parchman superintendants have been a dime a dozen the past few years, and the State Senate's approval of a 56-year old chest-beating, cigar chomping ex-Marine may hardly seem on the surface a cause for celebration.
It was a significant blow struck at the heart of the crumbling political power structure in this state.
For the politicians have run Parchman in the past, and the politicians have been responsible for its 15thcentury retribution philosophy of penal operation.
This philosophy has kept the penitentiary in the category of the nation's leading hell-holes over the years and has effectively prevented anyone's rehabilitation.
And, of course, the system has worked to the advantage of its farmers, who have enjoyed the benefits of cheap labor, the free use of expensive farm machinery, ""gifts"" of various kinds from previous superintendants, and an easily available supply of cooks and servers for those mammoth Delta barbeques.
After all, that's what those men had been sent to Parchman for in the first place — to pay their debt to society.
And the power-brokers would make sure that debt was paid, and paid to a chosen few.
But then along came a governor, who despite his immense faults, did have a few progressive bones in his body.
And something told him — perhaps it was the federal courts — that the time had come to hire a competent professional to run the penitentiary and clean out the political scum that infested it.
He is gruff and strong of tongue, quick to sing his own praises, a lover of stiff gin, and not the least bit tactful.
But, alas, he is a heretofore unknown quantity in Mississippi — a man who knows something about peneology and who has had some significant background experience in the field.
But he was an out-of-stater, and that upset more than a few folks to begin with.
As a result, when he began his attempts at puncturing the Parchman political football, he incurred the double wrath of some powerful people who didn't particularly like the idea of letting a trained professional run the prison.
They thought their suggestions in the past had worked quite well, thank you.
So they gave Jack Reed a lot of trouble from the very start — continued pressure and harassment were applied, even to the point of a couple of attempted frame-ups of the exCalifornian on public drunkness charges.
The chairman of the Senate Corrections Committee allegedly threatened to ""cut his throat"" as well.
One senator said the state was ""at a crossroads"" in its approach to the problems of the state penitentiary.
More than seven years ago, a committee started working on a plan to remodel the Union — they came up with a comprehensive and workable proposal.
So here's the deal — according to the administration, one of the first uses of money obtained from the massive funds drive that Millsaps is caught up in was to implement that plan and renovate the Union for maximum student use.
Over $2. million has been obtained or pledged in that campaign, but no one can say when the renovation will start.
President Collins has said maybe this summer, but it is very speculative.
This only seems to confirm what is often said about the way any problem at Millsaps is handled — give it to a committee, let the committee tie up the issue for a few years, and then forget about it.
We supplement that :all and ask that something be done, that the promise of high priority for Union remodeling be kept.
Perhaps there are legitimate reasons that the remodeling cannot be financed right now.
But we call on the administration to show an immediate effort toward making the student center more enjoyable for the students.
Fix the leaks in the basement, put in some ping-pong and pool tables, and start taking the steps which hopefully will culminate in Union renovation and at last — full use of the place by the students.
Jack Anderson Demand Declines, Prices Still Rise Washington — The economic pinch has caused consumers to cut down on consumption.
Despite declining demand, prices aren't coming down for aluminum, cans, steel, tires and certain industrial chemicals.
Most of the profits reaped from the high prices, furthermore, go straight into the pockets of the middlemen.
An Agriculture Department study reveals, for example, that the middle men add about 52 cents to the price of every piece of choice meat.
A congressional investigation has also concluded that higher profit margins, not higher costs, have pushed the prices up.
The congressional sleuths have already turned up evidence of meat pricefixing among the major chains.
High-priced food and consumer goods are not only depleting the housewife's budget, they are also hurting the poor.
Confidential figures show, for example, that 18. million Americans are now on food stamps.
Of these, 4. million have joined the rolls iust since last July, when the nation first began to feel the economic pinch.
Despite the negotiations with Russia to limit arms, the United States nuclear stockpile is proliferating wildly.
We are accumulating nuclear weapons so rapidly, in fact, that Congress is thinking of limiting production by legislation.
These can be attached to missiles, carried on submarines and flown in bombers.
New ""strategic"" bombs, meanwhile, are beine produced at the rate of three a day.
There are about 7,000 tactical nukes, for example, in Europe alone — including countries that are turning increasingly antiAmerican such as Greece, Turkey, Spain and Portugal.
Some members of Congress are worried over the frightening growth of the nuclear stockpile.
James Abourezk, for example, has told us he may introduce a bill that would limit production and call for the withdrawal of our nuclear weapons from Europe. n lumbers — that was obvious when a lumber of House members argued strenuously against the establishnent of a separate first offenders acility at the prison the day after leed's confirmation.
And there will )robably be, for quite a while longer, he folks who will hold to the theory xpressed by one representative that oung dope smokers should be scared out of a life of crime"" by xposure to repetitive murderers and apists.
But there is still a ray of light naking its way through a crack the lark dungeon of Mississippi penal perations.
State Government Student Government National Sports Photographer Staff: Beth Edwards, Ralph Wells, Steve Terrell, Kevin Sessums, Jeanette Deoever, Lee Howell, ROB McDUFF Editor BILL RAY Business Manager Dean Pittman Beth Edwards DougLevanway Danny Bowling Bill Blair Derrick Shields EarlAycock Lloyd Gray Glade Mclnnis DougBrindley Jimmy Dempsey Susan Tsimortos, Doug Minor, Gale Mallette, Mike Stevens, Liz Waldner, Theresa Liles, Laurie Brown, Mike Hunt.
In another two weeks, she ll be back at Columbia Training School for her third visit.
She doesn't seem overly concerned with this fact; she talks quite openly and cheerfully with me.
The Jackson Police Department apparently doesn't see anything so bad about it either.
While several brothels operate in and around town quite openly, police records show only 60 arrests for prostitution in all of l'.)74, with an even smaller number actually prosecuted.
While noting that the majority of prostitutes in Jackson are ""freelancers"" operating individually, Wilkins admits that organized prostitution does exist in the city.
He uses an establishment called Tim's Boarding House on North Farish as an example.
Tim's modus operandi doesn't hold true for other houses of prostitution in Jackson, however.
Customers enter the lounge and are then directed to specific cottages, where the girls await them.
The operation is quite slick, allowing for little waiting time before assignment to a cottage.
Most of the EIDorado's customers prefer to spend as little time as possible in the public lounge where they could easily be recognized.
This, as one local businessman confided can make things ""pretty sticky"" at home.
They are instead independent operators, struggling for business where they can find it.
Doing it for the Money ""Up on North Farish is where you find a lot of this activity,"" says Wilkins.
Downtown moieis and restaurants are other popular spots for ""hustling"", as Wilkins phrases it.
These men leave the wife and kids back home and find themselves stuck in a strange city with nothing to do in their spare time.
Most social observers take a more sophisticated approach, citing the lack of basic family ties, personal identity crises, and more recently, drug problems as One Acts This Week In partial fulfillment of requirements for their theater major, Doug Brindley, Eileen Hawkins, and Jean Moore will individually direct three one act plays, to be presented this Thursday and Friday nights in the Christian Center.
Doug Brindley will present ""Hands Across the Sea"", a humorous play by Noel Coward.
Cast in the play are Lynn Pledger, Ward Emling, Dianne Wiltshire, Steve McGraw, Bill Presson.
Jean Moore has chosen a play typifying the Theater of the Absurd and entitled ""A Game"" by Dennis E Nobles.
Appearing in the play are Cindy Thomas, Cassandra Fowlkes, Mildred Barrett, and Frankie Ellis.
Th Strongest Man In The World ELLIS ISLE CINEMA II : Airport 1975 CAPRI: Don't Turn The Other Cheek JACKSON MALL CINEMA: Murder On The Orient Express JACKSON SQUARE: The Front Page DEVILLE CINEMA: Young Frankenstein m pushing girls into the business of prostitution.
They come in all sizes, shapes, and colors from a myriad of personal backgrounds.
Others are like the inimitable ""Sally Redd"", an aged streetwalker who has been working the Capitol Street nightclubs for at least fifteen years.
So no matter who they are, or where they come from, the fact remains that there has been a market for the services of prostitutes since the beginning of civilization, and there probably will be until its end.
The ""oldest profession"" is alive and well in Jackson, and it's here to stay.
Tomorrow at Convocation period, controversial Parchman prison superintendent Jack Reed will speak outside the Student Union.
And Saturday night, the SEB has arranged for live entertainment in the Union basement, starting at 8 o'clock.
Next Thursday <M»r.), veteran Times-Picayune capitol correspondent Bill Minor is scheduled to speak on the upcoming Governor's race.
This will be held during Convocation Jackson Entertainment COLISEUM March 21 — Cystic Fibrosis Association sponsors motorcycl races.
March 24 and 25 — Jackson Symphony Concert with Susan Mildonian March 28 — Gospel Sing.
April 24 — Jackson Ballet Guild April 25 — Gospel Sing with the Oak Ridge Boys.
OeOgQgO QB BB B a O BBBOBOOP Vacation in State Parks As the second part of our effort to get students interested in traveling during the spring break we are presenting some basic facts about Mississippi's state parks.
All of the state parks have facilities for fishing and skiing, although skiing may not be available in the off season.
Cabins are furnished with a kitchen, including a refrigerator and stove, basic cooking utensils such as pots and pans, dishes and silverware, linens, pillows and blankets.
Park policy is that when reserving a cabin, you should make reservations for at least two nights.
The rates for cabins vary depending on the park they are located in and the number of people it sleeps.
C/jie sip of this ~±3 will bathe the drooping spirits in delU beyond the Hiss of dreams Milton's Coituu Milton must have peered uno a crystal ball to write these lines.
The Lambda Chi Alpha aternity and the Chi Omega sorority walked away with the coveted Scholarship Award.
The prestigious national leadership society, Omicron Delta Kappa, which sponsors the traditional event, added 14 new nembers.
Students, who are hosen on their skills and participation in leadership roles, include Patsy Pharr, Marsha McCarty, Don Wells, Pat Goodman, Diane Carroll, Clifford Ammons, Earl Aycock, Jim McCafferty, Eileen Hawkins, ' Elizabeth Holmes, Royce Garvin, Obie Clayton, Brenda Twyner, and Hubert Thompson.
Sigma Lambda, the women's leadership honorary: Bev Barnes, Cindy Guild, Elaine Henry, Mary Jane Mace, Marsha McCarty, Mary Dell McCoy, Rachel Wallace, and as alumni member, Mrs.
Charlene, Abraham, Connie Boozmani Diane Carroll, Claire Chastain, Jamie Chastain, Judy Guice, Marion Hathcock-' Anna.
Katich, Lynn Magee, Brenda Millstead, Janis Moore, Lynne Ross, Diana Sessums, Jack Sledge, Marilyn Thorton, Toni Walker, Belinda Watkins, Betty Weems, Linda Wells, Mena Zouboukos, and Toula Zouboukos.
Byron Brasseux, George Eyrich, Royce Garvin, Michael Humphreys, Steve Jenkins, Stacy Jenkins, Robert Lewis Owen Patterson, Michael Robertson, Scott Shows, and as alumni member, Dr.
Elizabeth Allen, Amelia Bordeaux, Laurie Brown, Gerda Carlson, Jiggs Dantin, Cindy Guild, Margaret Hemphill, Melissa Hudspeth, Sue Humphrey, Janice Johnson, Nancy Lang, Mary Lloyd, Deirdre Dell McCoy, Marcia McKee, Roberta Osborne, Lindsay Shallcross, Donna Sullivan, Peg Wahrendorff, Sue Beth Waring, Susan Weill, and May Lipe Zehnder.
Peggy Clayton, Elizabeth Holmes, Don Wells, Jeff Cook, Marsha McCarty, Hollis Tidmore, and Donna Tadlock.
Gale Mallette, Mary Jo Milling, Dennis Pratt, John Oliver Paxton, and Lisa Lumsden.
Elizabeth Allen, Joe Bennett, Janet Bergman, Royce Garvin, Brenda Millstead, Steve Germany, Pat Lucovich, and Paul Sumerall.
But now a growing number of Americans are thinking seriously about changing the present marijuana laws.
The state of Oregon has successfully de-criminalized the personal use of marijuana.
The American Bar Association, The National Council of Churches, Consumers' Union and The National Education Association have urged other states to do the same.
The organization is open to all students interested in deepening their understanding of the natural world and contributing toward its preservation.
The society is flamed for Aldo Leopold, a prominent American .conservationist,^ Leopold, is recognized as the . ""father of game management"" and wrote the first textbook on the subject.
Among other accomplishments, he was an environmental advisor to the United Nations at the time of his premature death in 1948.
Thames first sketched a profile of the large majority of regular pot users in Mississippi as . young white males of middle or upper social strata, and then pointed out that pot use and arrests have increased at a tremendous irate as pot becomes the alternative drug choice of this swelling minority.
Criminal felony sanctions have failed miserably for at least 35 years as a deterrent to use; these sanctions have only increased the individual and social harm.
He presented a recent article in the ""Reporter"", a weekly newspaper, that directly contradicted the assurance of Ken Fairley (head of the Mississippi Computers in the Classroom Urbana, 111.
Richard Anderson, professor of educational psychology in the College of Education, is supervising the project.
Anderson's course in basic economics offers no lectures or quiz and discussion sections.
Instead, students read fourto eight-page assignments, immediately take a test covering the material given and are graded by a machine.
After students finish a reading assignment, they type their names on a PLATO computer terminal and order the appropriate review quiz.
Whenever a student finishes all the quizzes in a unit of work, he can order PLATO to give a test which will require essay answers graded by teaching assistants, we well as multiple choice.
If a student does not achieve at least B work on a test, PLATO presents a list of times he can receive extra help from a teaching assistant before he takes another version of the test.
To make an appointment, the student types his name in the appropriate space on the display panel using the terminal keyboard.
Actually • the most pressure has been on the pot user possessing small amounts, according to the article.
A collection of essays from the ~, editors of Consumer Reports was . ..distributed which outlined many .' longstanding and several recent controversial health studies on >ithe scientific cases for and -.' against pot.
Stressing the general (inability of research groups to reproduce the startling recent •findings of marijuana dangers, Thames complained that the general public is often left with an unfounded impression long after the claims have been disproved.
The NORML spokesman listed a number . of orominant organizations supporting decriminalizations of pot, including the American Bar Association, the American Public Health Association, and the Board of Governors of the American Medical Association.
Thames also spoke of the many county and city level Mississippi law enforcers who favor decriminalization, and added that he has never been subjected to police pressures for his political beliefs and activities.
When asked why he became active in NORML, Thames replied that he grew tired of, bitter about, and finally angry at the constant felony threat hanging over his head, so he decided to work for reform.
He expressed optimism about the rapidly changing attitudes in Mississippi over pot and closed with a question and answer period.
Principia took the irst splitting game 7-5 and 'Saps won the second 6-3.
This year's 19 man squad consists of 8 lettermen who were the nucleus of last year's ball club.
The only position which was vacated, the catcher's position,is now being handled by freshman Keith Self.
Because of this exrience, the Majors have an cellent chance of improving on Iheir 9-8 record of a year ago.
The pitching staff will most likely hold the key to the success of this season.
The pitchers are Steve Haygood, Johnny Jones, Bill Ray, and Mike Harrison.
Other players who are most tely to start in their respective Dositions are first baseman Danny Bowling, second baseman Dees Hinton, shortstop Earl Aycock, third baseman Ricky Haygood, and outfielders Bob King, Rusty Buys, and Jeb Dominiek.
Other members of the team are third baseman Bruce McKinley, second baseman Rem McNealy, outfielders Johnny Maynor, Steve Hall and Ricky Price and catcher Don Bailey.
Howard Smith is the student assistant and Jimmy Ranager is the manager.
Millsaps will play another afternoon doubleheader with Principia tomorrow, here.
T MILLSAPS' HURLER Johnny Jones Pitching against Principia in last Monday's double-header.
With the second round of play now underway in the ""A"" League, the KA's remain to be the only unscathed team.
This should not, however, lead one to the conclusion that they are unbeatable.
The KA's have won their last three games by a combined margin of only nine points, seeing tough competition especially from Chalk and the LXA's last week.
Both of these games were see-saw battles with the KA's having the lead throughout the game no more often than their opponents.
Following close behind the KA's and soon to see a return match with the league leaders are last year's undefeated champions, the Tracers.
In third are the Turkeys, followed by the LXA's, the PKA's, Chalk, the Masterballers, and the KE's, respectively.
The ""B"" Leagus is much closer in that most teams are near the .500 mark in the standings.
It seems as though only five teams have any chance of copping the league championship, however, since that league is only playing one round of competition.
The present league leaders, the LXA ""B""s are closely followed by the Chemistry Dept. — which has a four game winning spree going — the Panthers, the Pike ""C"", and the Blazers.
The tourney is indefinite as of yet because of outside considerations such as girl gym times and tennis and baseball gym times which have not yet been set.
There will be no A League tournament this year. o ""A"" LEAGUE won lost KA 8 u Tracers 6 1 Turkeys 5 4 * LXA 4 3 PKA 4 4 Chalk 4 5 Masterballers 2 7 KE 9 ""B"" LEAGUE WON LOST LXA ""B"" 5 2 Chemistry Dept.
THIRD BASEMAN Ricky Haygood belts a Principia pitch in last Monday's game.
Not only do you fly with us at half, but you' can just about have your choice of dates for 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 week duration during the summer.
Charter flying is the biggest bargain in air travel today nr* n » « tf4 M4 tr* tf4 m u* v* u* tf* n n h « n n » «V«W» «W> <V< m VVriiVii » # W> < WtVti 4 p&w PAGE 11 Golfers Finish Second in Tournament The Millsaps golf team placed second in the Jackson State Invitational, held last Friday at Livingston Park.
Good Selection of Polaroid Cool Ray Sunglasses Across From Millsaps in the 1600 Medical Plaza Bldg.8-1027 The golfers competed in two earlier dual matches, but came up on the short end in both.
Against Delta State in Cleveland, Minor was low man with a 75, and Frye and Campbell finished with 78's.
With 10 tournaments remaining in the season, Coach Edge is hopeful that this year's team performance will be good enough for an invitation to the NCAA Division III Tournament.
The netters of Millsaps have shown potential but have been erratic in recent matches.
They have been close in all of their competition except for a match against Mississippi State, which was lost by the score of 8-0.
You can save many lives through CARE — the non-sectarian, non-governmental link between generous Americans and poverty-stricken people abroad.
CARE's experienced staff people are in 36 countries including many of the famine areas.
But without your help they cannot cope with the mounting waves of starvation.
Your ""empty plate"" will fill many empty plates overseas and send seeds, tools and equipment to help hungry people grow more food.
Please fill out the pledge coupon and return it with your initial gift today.
I will send the money saved to CARE for the emergency expansion of its programs to feed those families and help them grow more food."" each month □ I will send CARE at least $ each quarter □ If I save more, I will send more.
Here is my total ""Empty Plate"" contribution so you can rush more aid immediately, Name Address.
I Make your tax-deductible check out to CARE World Hunger Fund ■ ' send you regular reminder envelopes for your convenience.
Coach Montgomery, who sends seven netters into action, has designated Mike Woods to play the number one position for the Majors.
Brian Loper, Tarn Uhles, Miles Hill, Elizabeth Allen, Frank Buchannan. and David Carroll.
National Sports by DOUG BRINDLEY National Sports Writer The annual NCAA tournament, expanded this year to include 32 teams, began this weekend with 16 games being placed in eight cities around the country.
The Mideast regionals, played at Lexington and at Tuscaloosa, saw undefeated Indiana destroy Texas-El Paso.
Oregon State defeat Middle Tennessee, Central Michigan ease past Georgetown, and, somewhat surprisingly, Kentucky maul fifth ranked Marquette At Lubbock.
The other two games in the Midwest regionals at Tulsa were won by third rated Louisville over Rutgers and by Notre Dame over Kansas.
Far Western regional games were played at Tempe, Arizona and at Pullman, Washington.
In those late Saturday night games in Pullman, the winners were Montana over Utah State and UCLA over Michigan.
At Tempe, Arizona State outplayed Alabama.-94. and Nevada -Las Vegas got by San Diego State, 9080.
Arizona and Drake advanced to the finals of the year old National Comissioners Invitational Tournament, being held in Louisville.
Kentucky Alcorn State of Mississippi reached the semi-finals of the NAIA championship tournament at Kansas City, losing to the eventual champions.
I think we should see that there is not any discrimination on a man on the state payroll simply because he's black.
I certainly wouldn't reject anybody for a top level appointment because he was black, nor because the applicant was female.
I don't know that I would go out and seek someone just because he was black.
I want to seek the very best person for the staff that I would have and for the appointments that I would make.
I don't believe there should be districting to specifically exclude people.
I don't think it should be to just include people or to just give a chunk of territory to see that somebody is represented.
We've been moving in that direction, and we've got to continue moving in that direction.
Society can be protected, but also there can be more emphasis on rehabilitation.
I don't know, the information I have at hand is that we have one of the most advanced mental institutions in the nation.
And I think we keep grying to crowd too much in on Whitfield that's not Whitfield's responsibility, such as drug-related problems.
I think the open meetings laws should provide for some penalty if they're not complied with.
An open meetings provision for all state agencies that will provide for executive session in certain situations and not just at the arbitrary will of the commission or board involved.
What about the provision for financial disclosure of all sources of income by public officials.
Complete disclosure of all of a man's sources of income — I'm not saying I'm opposed to it, I just want to see how it has worked.
To totally show his entire resources, you might then be getting totally into a field of invasion of privacy.
There is an amendment to the House ethics bills that said legislators should not receive any state money from other jobs.
I think conflicts of interest — perhaps disclosure of it might be the best thing right now.
I think if you go into the governor's office with the attitude that you're going to tell the legislature what to do and how to do it, nothing is going to be accomplished.
But if you have a line of communication with them and sit down and convince them of the soundness of the program and the need of the program you'll stand a much better chance of getting the program accomplished.
It's got to be leadership which is also responsive to their viewpoint in order for there to be a coordination and cooperation between the executive and legislative branches.
Ken Hudson.6-1213, Northwest Mutual Insurance is looking for a receptionist.
The disastrous fire occured in the third act of a performance ridden with hilarious mishaps.
The mirthful tone of the play was set in the early going when Jimmy Thrasher, playing Jackson Fire Chief Burt McDing, inadvertently drove a fire engine into the orchestra pit to the guffaws of the sell-out crowd, crushing 13 members of the audience.
Nothing could compare, however, with the exciting grand finale, when stage hands lost control of the flame throwers they were wielding and started the dramatic holocaust that soon had the CC tower in flames.
Musical stars Ward Emling and Lynn Pledger, singing a moving duet, ""In the Tower of Our Love"", were rudely interrupted when they were roasted.
A further tragedy was narrowly averted by the quick thinking of football coaches Harper Davis and Tommy Ranager.
Sensing the imminent danger to Major Millsaps tomb, the ""Mecca of the Middle Campus,"" they sealed off all exits to the auditorium on that side of the building in a successful effort to contain the blaze.
These men are to be congratulated for the courage, self-sacrifice, and presence of mind they exhibited, heroically ignoring the pitiful screams of the trapped victims as they staunchly defended the Major's beloved bones.
Dean J Harvey Saunders announced this morning that a full investigation into the matter is planned.
When asked about the future of the Players in the wake of this collossal screw-up, Director Goss chuckled and revealed plans for the musical version of another epic drama, Gone With the Wind.
Funeral arrangements for the 23 identifiable victims are incomplete at this time.
Several of the top-level staffers jumped bail the following day and are reportedly hiding near Bourbon Street in New Orleans, where they are in consultation with their lawyer — Oscar T Fornbush, Attorney at the Bar, of Bayonne, Alabama.
Meanwhile, members of the national chapter of the Journalists Commission for Freedom of the Press have moved onto campus and . are continuing publication of the student newspaper from an underground location.
One of the newsmen in Jackson for the project, Walter Cronkite, said, ""We hope to keep the spirit of the P&W alive.
Of course, we plan to get rid of the shabby journalism so prevelent before and sensationalize the news a bit.
The raid on the newspaper offices was led by Chief Nichols of the Millsaps security force and included members of the Jackson Police Department, Mississippi Highway Patrol, State Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission, and the Secret Police Force of the United Methodist Church's Division of Morality and Decency.
George Boyd, a proponent of CRAP, announced that he was pleased with the success of his organization's efforts to rid the campus of the current staff.
Political Science professor John Quincy Adams noted that he too was satisfied with the departure of the student editors.
If I had been there, I would have done something to protect the students,"" he added just before ordering twelve cases of champagne for a facultyadministration celebration to commemmorate the event.
Several members' of the Journalists Commission for Freedom of the Press, including Paul Harvey, James Reston, and Glade Mclnnis, have already made plans for future editions of the Millsaps publication.
At press time, no substantial student protest had been mounted in behalf of the exiled staff.
Student Body President Jim McCafferty did express his dismay at the situation saying, ""I hate to see them go.
This follows an announcement by United States Army officials stating that the dining hall has long been used for the military's experiments with biological and poison-food warfare.
Both revelations come in the wake of six days of student terrorism which left five cafeteria workers dead and three more still missing.
Later that afternoon, cafeteria manager Stuart Roberson was forced to close the facility while being held at gunpoint.
Roberson, now being kept as a hostage in the basement phone booth of the Student Union, was in tears as he said to us, ""We tried, we tried everything we could to please the student.
In the interim, informed sources indicate, the Dutch Bar has been contracted to cater the Millsaps cafeteria.
Federal Bureau of Investigation agents have found no clues as to the identity of the six terrorists who were seen chainshipping a cafeteria worker to death in front of New Mens' Dormitory before escaping into the night.
Jackson policemen surrounded Murrah Hall following the Saturday night sniping of one ot the name-check girls . in the cafeteria on her way to work.
However, the sniper, who had fired from the roof of the building, has yet to be found.
Workmen continued today to repair the roof and walls of the cafeteria, where a mortar had been sent through on Sunday.
The single round unfortunately fell short of its apparent target, and marked a direct hit on the Sig table, sending fragments of food, bodies, and blood all over the partially shattered wall.
Troubadours Booed The Millsaps Troubadours were booed off stage yesterday during a lunchtime performance at a North Jackson grade school.
Students at Hoover Elementary School reportedly began throwing empty milk cartons and handfuls of mashed potatoes at the singers at the conclusion of a sugary Annette Funicello medley.
When asked why the outbreak of violence occured, second grader Mark Moon replied heatedly, ""We didn't have to sit there and listen to that shit.
A spokesman for the Troubadours said the remainder of the group's elementary school tour had been indefinitely postponed.
Two of the ""Tomaine Twenty"" Terrorists stand in front of the lifeless bodies of the three cafeteria workers who were hung Monday at the peak of the indigenous student movement against the cafeteria.
The student body has been bickering for years about beer in the grill, so we give it to them.
Woodward stated that drains would be available in the grill for the disposal of purchased beer.
The rare primate will be on public display free of charge Monday through Friday only at the zoo.
Special reservations for groups exceeding ten persons can be made through the zoo's public relations office.
Such an honor as this not only improves Jackson's image, but gives it national publicity as well.
Collins Comes Home President Returns to Campus in Unusual Visit Millsaps College professor Dr.
James Loewen, the textbook gained national attention last fall when the Mississippi Textbook Commission refused to authorize it for usage in the state's public schools.
The decision to rewrite the text comes, says Sallis' new publisher Flesh Press, in an effort to appeal to a ""wider and more diverse audience"" than those ""old panty waists"" on the textbook commission.
We decided it was ridiculous to waste gimmicks like that on a bunch of dip-stick juvenile delinquents.
The new version of Conflict and Change will be an epic novel entitled Passions of the Land, tracing the public and private lives of a family of Mississippi planters, the Beauregards.
The following is an excerpt from Passions of the Land, scheduled for publication this summer.
The bright Mississippi sun beat mercilessly down upon the rich Delat soil and bo's bare shoulders as he slowly turned and squinted into Maylou's pale, shadded face.
Maylou threw herself into Bo's sturdy arms and planted a moist kiss on the base of his neck.
VA' * ""Ohhh, Bo,"" she moaned, ""you know how much I lust for your tanned and healthy young body, toughened through years in the cotton fields working for your father; which, by the way, is customary activity for planters sons.
In one of the most unusual occurrences of the semester, college president Edward Collins returned to Millsaps yesterday for one of his rare visits to the campus.
Collins' arrival was interrupted, however, when his personal secretary Mrs.
I thought it was .somebody from Belhaven trying to break into our secret files,"" explained a highly flabbergasted Mrs.
Known as the ""Sam Yorty of the academic world,"" Collins had just come back from four months of extensive fund-raising for Millsaps College.
His two hours on campus following release from jail consisted of lunch, coffee, a nap, and a brief meeting with fund-raising consultants.
An attempt by the Student Advisory Committee to talk with the President was frustrated because his schedule was too tight.
The Committee did manage to arrange an appointment with him in mid-July.
However, with its usual quick, adept, on-the-spot reporting, the P&W attained a brief exclusive interview with Collins.
Therefore, my door is always open to students,"" he commented just before closing his door to leave for Acapulco, where he will engage in three weeks of campaign talks with the Southern Mexico Conference of the Methodist Church International.
Benefits of the endeavor, according to the development director, grossly outweigh the transient hardships which students may have to bear.
Among those advantages, Perkinson listed, ""Money, money, and more money"" from development of the golf course and toll bridge revenues.
I am sorry to say that it was with utter disgust that I sat here in my dorm room last week and swam through the muck and filth that is your excuse for a newspaper.
Well why don't you try Luke 6:14 on for size sometime when you're sober and see if it sheds any sacred light on your typewriter.
Verily I say unto you brethren, ""Lips that touch liquor shall never touch mine.
Both are obviously atheists or Pinko's at best, and we sure as heaven don't need their kind around here.
Yours in Christian Love, Martha Sneffie THE HERITAGE PROGRAM, continues to inspire and stimulate freshmen students, awakening their minds to the joys of learning, as it has since its inshown here i AC 215.
Thursday, March 27, 1975 Campus Literary Mag Previewed The Millsaps Stylus, the campus literary review, is to be published this year for the first time in recent memory.
Clandestine by Harvey Fuddle Sailing, I laught weepingly, Phaedre-like, I delve unto your nostril, Finding a dichotomy of failing effort, I travel the gaze of your voice.
Damonesque, my world exists, Through a collapsed picturesque, Sacred crest, I missed, Your sanguine whompo wong.
Stephen Foster Revisited by ""Anonymous"" Oh the sun shines bright, on my Old Kentucky Home.
Sitting It Out by DEAN PITTMAN News Editor The much heralded ""Golf course picnic"" will climax six days of Community week ""togetherness"" tomorrow beginning at noon.
The event will feature a menu of barbeque chicken with trimmings and the now infamous seven kegs of beer.
Saturday's activities will be capped off with a campus-wide dance in the Student Center at 9.00 pm featuring the band from Columbus.
At 2:00 this afternoon, the three sororities are sponsoring an icecream party in the bowl.
The beer issue threatened to turn the well-intentioned party into a strong polarization of the administration and the student body.
However, the administration has chosen to sit this one out and ignore the possible conflict between this student activity and the Board of Trustees' intended rules for the school.
In a recent meeting with his student advisory board, President Collins stated his position, saying that he would not make issue over the beer at this time unless the students abused this special privilege.
As long as there is no blatant unruliness and students quietly keep to the golf course area, Dr.
As far as the Board's legal position in the matter, Millsaps' attorney Jim Carroll stated that the beer on campus, ""did not violate the letter"" of the Millsaps rules but perhaps violates ""the spirit"" of the Board resolution on alcohol.
The only course students can follow now is to wait and see what the Board's reaction is, if any, to public consumption of beer when it meets in May.
Other community week events have thus far met with limited success; not, however, due to the fault of any of the planners and executors.
The long awaited swimming pool opening on Monday lost much of its pizazz due to damp and chilly weather.
This same weather rained out the scheduled construction of the ""Geodesic Dome"" on Tuesday and threatened the free carwash sponsored by IFC and Panhellenic on Wednesday.
MILLSAPS STUDENT PAUL WALKER highlighted the opening of the new swimming pool facilities by being the first person off the board and into the water.
Photographer Phillip Maples captured Walkers' graceful display of his diving abilities during Monday's ribbon cutting of the long-awaited pool.
Collins Will Recommend Immediate Union Remodeling to Board By ROB McDUFF Editor The college administration is apparently putting student union renovation back at top priority, as President Ed Collins said that he will go before the Board of Trustees in May and recommend that the first expenditure of monies from the current fundraising campaign go toward such renovation and that it begin immediately.
It looks like the school has the necessary money from the campaign to do the job, according to Collins, who made the statement to his student advisory committee during their meeting last Monday.
Students on the committee were also told by the President that there are no specific golf course development plans at present and that it will be at least six months or maybe longer before any construction begins on the proposed access road.
Collins had previously told the P&W that the road which will divide the north campus might be begun by April, but that is no longer a possibility.
As for the student union, formulations of remodeling plans began in 1968 under the auspices of a committee chaired by Frances Coker.
The administration gave high priority to the matter and said that one of the first uses of funds from the current campaign would be to undertake the project.
However, with over two million dollars pledged to the campaign as of last February's Board meeting, no mention of the renovation was even made by that body.
Collins thinks the school is ready to begin the project's actual construction now and plans to tell the Board so in May.
He noted that the campaign has now attained approximately $250,000 cash-in-hand, which should more than cover remodeling costs.
His mention of a recommendation to the Board this time around comes in the wake of protest from students who felt that the college was letting slip its promise of high priority for center renovation.
Unanimous resolutions recently passed by the Student Senate and all greek organizations on campus called for speedy rehabilitation of the building which, by most standards, is being poorly used at present.
Reiff , Shive, and Yensen Named Outstanding American Educators poooooooooooooo, ANNOUNCEMENT The Editor has decided not to re-apply for the position next Fall and the Student Senate is now requesting applications for P&W editor and business manager for that semester.
Interested persons should turn their name in to Publications Committee Chairperson Donna Doorenbos, Senate president Jim McCaffrey, or Dr.
Professors Lee Reiff of Religion, Robert Shive of mathematics, and Eric Yensen of biology have been named Outstanding Educators of America for 1975.
They will be featured in a national awards volume on outstanding American educators.
Reiff, a native of Newton, Kansas, holds the Tatum Chair of Religion and is chairman of that department.
He has been at Millsaps since 1960 and holds degrees from S.M.U., Perkins School of Theology, and Yale Divinity S chool.
Director of the computing center at Millsaps, Shive has also served as a computer consultant for Honeywell, Inc. of Minneapolis on projects relating to nuclear medicine.
PAGE 2 P&W Fred Harris Picked As Commencement Speaker by DEAN PITTMAN News Editor Millsaps' annual graduation exercises will attract national attention this year as school officials have designated Democratic Presidential contender Fred Harris keynote speaker for the ceremonies.
Harris, who lost his Oklahoma senatorial seat in 1972 and a weak bid for Democratic presidential nomination the same year, is being seriously considered as a strong candidate in 1976.
During his two terms in the United States Senate, Harris served on the Kerner Commission on urban unrest through appointment by Lyndon Johnson.
In 1968 he co-chaired, with Walter Mondale, Hubert Humphrey's Presidential campaign and later was selected chairman of the Democratic National Committee.
Harris, whose father was an uneducated sharecropper, has molded himself after the old style Populist, striking out against the evils of utility rate increases, high food prices, tax loopholes, and general neglect of the little man.
As a Populist, Harris' issues are familiar; he feels too few people have too much money and power, those who control the economy also control the government, the average citizen gets cheated in countless ways and farmers and food consumers lose out to corporate middlemen — to list a few.
In his latest book, ""The New Populism"", the 44 year old candidate pretty well outlined what he would do as President.
Unlike many serious contenders for public office, Harris is not an equivocator; he says what he thinks in strong folksy language.
When asked how he would control the CIA at a New Hamshire gathering, Harris responded, ""The read question is not how to control it, but whether we need it at all.
With Harris' liberal leanings, his Southern accent, his appeal to the working class and a strong rapport with Blacks, he will definitely be a candidate to watch and an interesting graduation speaker.
The maneuver involved an unplanned immediate retreat of South Vietnamese troops from the Central Highlands area of Vietnam that quickly turned into a chaotic stampede leaving three-fourths of the country in Communist hands and leaving the South Vietnamese Government little important territory in its control besides the] capital city of Saigon.
During the turmoil, which is still continuing in Saigon, President Thieu's Royal Palace was bombedj J [by one of his own pilots.
American efforts to help the threatened South Vietnamese rom advancing Communists insurgents have centered on vacua tion of war orphans to America.
President Ford and retary of State Henry Kissinger, instead of providing the nited States able leadership, used the debacle to shove the lame of defeat on Congress for refusing unrealistic appropriations to Vietnam.
This request seemed ridiculous when t was later announced that South Vietnamese troops had j Abandoned over one billion dollars in new American military equipment in their retreat from the battle fronts.
The Pittsburg Press summed up the situation in the following xcerpt from a recent editorial.
Henry Kissinger's step by step Middle East egotiations between Egypt and Israel completely collapsed, Kissinger flew back to the United States and declared that further legotiations without meaningful compromise from both sides would be impossible.
UNEMPLOYMENT RATE REACHES HIGHEST SINCE 1940 The United States unemployment rate rose to 8.7% in March,] ] the highest rate since 1940.
The total amount of Americansl I [unemployed now stands at eight million with an additional 1. illion no longer looking for jobs.
BBDD I Senate Trying To Limit Presidential Veto GUBERNATORIAL CANDIDATE Theodore Smith, speaking in the Union yesterday, outlined issues in the upcoming '75 campaign and criticized Mississippi's ""horse and buggy era"" government.
The State Senator and progressive Populist is one of six candidates who will probably compete in the Democratic primaries.
Spann Visits Millsaps as Wilson Fellow An Atlanta, Ga., attorney will be at Millsaps College the week of April 20 as a visiting Woodrow Wilson Senior Fellow.
He is William B Spann Jr., who served as chairman of the 294member American Bar Association's House of Delegates from 1970-72.
The distinguished attorney has been a leader in bar association activities for nearly 40 years, serving on several ABA standing and special committees and on ministration, ABA medal and budget.
He is currently serving as chairman of the special committee to study federal law enforcement agencies.
He is a member of several ABA professional sections and was a charter member of the antitrust and family law sections.
He is also a member of the judicial administration and labor relations law sections and holds membership on the Council of the Section of Individual Rights and Responsibilities.
From 1947 until 1961, he was a faculty member at the Woodrow Wilson College of Law in Atlanta while continuing his law practice.
A past president of the Lawyers Club of Atlanta, Spann directed the American Judicature Society from 1960-64 and chaired the Fulton County Juvenile Court Advisory Board for nine years.
He is a Fellow of the American Bar Foundation, the American College of Trial Lawyers and a member of the International Bar Association, the Inter-American Bar Association, the Federal Bar Association, the National Association of Railroad Counsel, the American Law Institute and Phi Beta Kappa Associates. by ROB McDUFF Editor In a move to diminish the veto power of the President of the college, the Student Senate is calling for a constitutional amendment which will allow it to override the President's veto by a two-thirds vote.
As it currently stands, the President may veto any action of the Student Senate.
In the March 18 meeting of that body, Senator Chris Wilkerson introduced a While at Millsaps, Spann will lecture, participate in seminars and hold informal conferences with faculty and students.
He is the second Woodrow Wilson Senior Fellow to come to the college during the current academic session.
His Mississippi visit is sponsored by the Woodrow Wilson National constitutional change which would abolish the veto altogether.
It passed, but one week later, second Vice-President Jigs Dantin moved that the veto be kept and that it be subject to the currently proposed two-thirds override.
Successful in the senate, it is this new measure which will go before the student body next week.
In the four years that he has been here, President Collins has yet to use the veto on Student Senate action.
He maintains, therefore, that there is really no need for the issue to come up and adds further that, if the students pass the amendment, it will make no difference since he must have final authority over all college actions as chief executive officer of the Trustees.
Student Senate President Jim McCafferty has said that Collins should not oppose the new measure if he has not used the veto power in the past and isn't going to use it in the future.
It may surprise many and please quite a few that there is a growing movement of Fundamentalists on campus.
Like the subterranean Christians of Rome, they are basically unseen and their presence is felt only in subtle ways.
Those early Christians were shrouded in mystery and misconceptions (many Romans thought they were cannibals) in the same way the word ""Fundamentalist"" conjures up visions of sweaty palms and fire-breathing preachers.
It is impossible to be raised in the South and not feel the effects of fundamentalism, for it is a long-standing tradition here and permeates all facets of life, from government to education.
It is also responsible, at least in part, for the conservative nature of the South.
But it is now a national movement, and its main followers are the young.
Royce Garvin, a Millsaps student who calls himself a fundamentalist describes it this way; ""We are getting back to the fundamentals of Christianity.
While he said thatitwas a campus movement, he explained that, ""it is not a cliqueish thing.
It's not a social group like many of the Youth for Christ organizations at the larger universities.
The reasons why the young would turn to a religion like this on a national scale are only speculative, but Garvin attributed it to the fact that ""People are distressed by the times.
Man can lean back on so many temporal pleasures that he can go through life rarely thinking about the Spirit.
As far as activities, discussions and seminars go, they really don't do anything for us.
Instead, we will run the Associated Press account of the trial's opening, written, by the way, by Pulitzer Prize winning journalist Carl Bernstein of the WASHINGTON POST, by CARL BERNSTEIN BAYONNE, ALA. — The trial of the notorious ""Hoofer Seven"" began today amidst cries of protest as defense counsel Oscar T Fornbush turned routine legal proceedings into total chaos.
With antics such as mixing drinks during the District Attorney's opening remarks and passing out during his own, Fornbush had the crowd in hysterics and the prosecution up . in arms.
All cries for a retrial, however, were ignored by presiding Judge ""Gulch"" Moonan.
The defendants, all students at tiny Hoofer College here in Bayonne, are charged with criminal conspiracy to subvert small college morals.
The case gained a national spoUight when school officials insisted it be tried in criminal court, starting a legal controversy that is still raging.
The rationale for wanting the case tried in criminal court was highlighted by Dean J Harvey Sandbrain in a press conference yesterday.
Further suspicions of extralegal manuvering were raised when the Hoofer Board of Trustees was selected as the jury.
These seeming inconsistencies in normal judicial procedure were put in perspective by Judge Moonan.
To accommodate the expected crowds, the trial is being held in the Religious Rotunda, a central building on the Hoofer campus.
Today saw a noisy and sometimes violent crowd pack itself into the aging structure to view the trial's opening.
Equally vociferous were members of the One Way Street gang, the militant Christian organization.
Chanting ""One way for Jesus, string up the Commies,"" they made the banter of the attorneys virtually unintelligible.
Possibly the most annoying distractions, however, were the actions of members of Mu Quacka, a Hoofer fraternity; Drinking beer throughout the opening session, they became noisily and visibly intoxicated, at one point actually attacking members of the SDA, screaming ""Hippie fags die"" amidst choruses of a fraternity song.
The behavior on the trial floor was little better, as attorney Fornbush repeatedly insulted witnesses and jury alike between slugs of Jack Daniels.
Pleading impassionately for the restoration of individual dignity to his clients, he paradoxically called nervous admissions counselor Rudy Pottie a ""carrotheaded twerp"" and Coach Tommy ""The Lone"" Ranger a ""mental bean bag,"" further arousing the ire of the astounded prosecutors.
All motions for mistrial, however, fell on the deaf ears of Judge Moonan, local barroom wit and drinking companion of Fornbush.
Fornbush was unavailable for comment at the session's conclusion but defense Press Secretary Miller Quake announced the startling news that Fornbush intended calling ""Slick Eddie"" Coolins, President of Hoofer College, as a witness.
This is a surprising development, for it is rumored that Coolins was instrumental in prosecuting the defendants to the fullest extent.
Admitting that this was akin to ""calling Golda Meir as a defense witness in the trial of Adolf Eichmann,"" Quake noted that Fornbush knew what he was doing.
DEAN JACK WOODWARD decided to aid comeventually turned into a pie throwing contest as a few carried away. petitor Bob Nevins in the Circle K sponsored pie of the distinguished professors got carried eating contest two weeks ago.
The pie-*ating contest PAGE 4 P&W APRIL 11, 1 &W/ Opinion rom the Editor Legalize Marijuana and Leave People Alone The issue of marijuana legalization has been argued around young people so much that you almost get tired of it.
Arguments are repeated time and again so that you stop listening — if you smoke, you just keep smoking when you please and if you don't, you don't.
This was amplified when three more students were arrested this week on charges of marijuana sale in a different matter.
Once again, the marijuana laws of Mississippi are used to harass and jeopardize the lives of young people — young people whose conduct is not criminal or immoral, but who happen to be involved with marijuana as are countless other students on this campus and campuses throughout the state and nation.
It is the threat that a young persons' college career, indeed his whole life, might be ruined because he is involved with a normally harmless and common drug.
So it is time that our lawmakers stopped feeding us the same old bull about drug laws protecting our youth from the ""evil menace"" of marijuana.
Its time they started talking about protecting our youth from the menace of narcotics agents and arrests and trips to jail and heavy fines and prison sentences.
Incidentally this was the first drug arrest to occur on campus in two and a half years.
There is no substantial indication, other than occassional rumors^ that the narcs are planning any organized campaign on Millsaps.
However, events of the past two weeks might serve as a warning to watch who you are associated with when drugs are around.
Also, to put idle rumors to rest, the administration had nothing at all to do with the bust in Bacot — in fact, they didn't know anything about it until it had happened.
The arresting agents had a search warrant, so they did not have to get permission from the college to come on the campus.
They did tell the security guard that they were here and got the campus guards to accompany them to the room in Bacot.
Dean Woodward has tried to get the police department to cooperate and let college officials know when they are coming onto campus to make an arrest.
But they are under no requirement to do so if they have a warrant, as was the case here.
From the Middle East to Southeast Asia, U S. foreign policy seems to be collapsing.
Secretary of State Henry Kissinger's peace efforts in the Middle East have broken down.
South Vietnam and Cambodia, two of our most favorite allies, are losing to the Communists.
Thailand and the Philippines are threatening to kick us out of our bases.
In Europe, the Communists are tightening their grip on Portugal, formerly a staunch ally.
In South America, the governments are scrambling to get on better terms with Fidel Castro.
Only the hated military dictatorships continue to embrace the United States.
These events have already led President Ford to order a quiet reappraisal of American foreign policy.
He has asked Kissinger to reevaluate America's international role, to consider whether U S. power is stretched too thin and to determine how the United States can better exert influences on world events in the 1970s.
Meanwhile, the President and Secretary of State are making a mighty effort to blame Congress for America's foreign policy failures.
The White House is casting about for a scapegoat, and the lumbering, contentious assembly on Capitol Hil) makes a convenient one.
Because for seven years, the Executive Branch cuddled up to the colonels in Athens and became identified with them.
Washington remained mute while the military dictatorship inspired a coup on Cyprus, and stood by again when the Turks invaded the island. — In Portugal, a military coup by conservative officers threw Kissinger into a panic.
Our ambassador in Lisbon reported back that Portugal was far from lost.
But some prominent, retired Americans living in Portugal told Kissinger privately that Lisbon was surely going Communist.
While America dawdles, Portugal is tilting more and more leftward. — The Latin American nations are rapidly tiring of Washington's ""Big Daddy"" approach to their affairs.
But the United States continues to prop up the bad guys — Nicaragua's Somoza and Chile's Pinochet, for example.
The political pros are wondering whether President Ford is serious about seeking re-election.
So far, he hasn't lifted a finger to form a campaign organization or to raise campaign funds.
This is strange behavior for a President who hopes to stay in the White House.
His predecessors were scarcely settled in the White House before they began making preparations for the re-election campaign.
It would weaken Ford's authority, of course, if the word got out that he intended to be no more than a caretaker President.
With this in mind, we checked our White House sources to find out whether he was bluffing when he announced his intentions to run in 1976.
These sources report that the President, in fact, has started laying plans for his 1976 campaign.
He is putting together a braintrust, which will plan campaign strategy.
As fast as the strategy is worked out, the President will select people to implement it.
He is also looking for a campaign manager who will take full charge of the re-election campaign.
Morton, recently named Secretary of Commerce, for the job if his health will permit it.
Congratulations on Community Week Although the unpredictable weather has dampened things a bit, the activities for Community Week constitute the best attempt made in a long time at giving Millsaps students something to do on campus.
Senate vice-president Mark Jones and his social affairs committee deserve thanks for the imagination and work they have put into making a good time happen during this week.
Jones deserves further commendation for his singlehanded efforts in bringing some really fine speakers to campus during this semester.
State Government Student Government National Sports Photographer Staff: Beth Edwards, Ralph Wells, Susa Steve Terrell, Kevfn Sessums, Mike Jeanette Deoever, Lee Howell, Laur Letters College Suj P&W Needs March 19, 1975 Dear Mr Editor: You can call this a ""letter to the editor"" if you like.
I am always impressed with the quality of your publication, and I am particularly impressed with the way you exercise freedom of speech and freedom of press.
