Approved for public release: distribution unlimited APPROVAL The undersigned certify that this thesis meets master’s-level standards of research, argumentation, and expression.
RICHARD MULLER ____________________________________ LT COL KRISTI LOWENTHAL ii DISCLAIMER The conclusions and opinions expressed in this document are those of the author.
His 14-year career on active duty with the Air Force has taken him to a variety of assignments and places, including Colorado, Arizona, Texas, Arkansas, North Carolina, New Jersey, Alabama, Africa, Europe, and Asia. iv ACKNOWLEDGMENTS I would like to acknowledge several people without whose support and help I would never have gotten off the ground with this study.
Their hospitality during my visit and assistance from afar has been extraordinary.
I would like to thank Lt Col Kristi Lowenthal and Sheila McKitt for their support in reviewing and strengthening my draft.
Most importantly, I want to express my sincere appreciation to my family for their love, patience, and understanding during the busy process of writing this paper.
To my children, you are always there to make me smile after a long day, thank you.
I also want to thank my parents for the lifetime of encouragement and cheerleading.
Finally, to my sister and her husband, thanks for actually wanting to read this and showing so much interest.
I am very fortunate for all the support and love I have received during this process.
However, behind the scenes other members of Kennedy’s staff, most importantly his brother Robert, facilitated backchannel negotiations with the Soviet Union through Ambassador Dobrynin and provided input and recommendations through the Executive Committee staff to the President.
Robert Kennedy, as the United States Attorney General, filled a role far outside this position’s typical responsibilities.
The uniqueness of being the trusted brother to the President combined with his strengths at communicating with a diverse group of people allowed a freedom of thought amongst the President’s advisors and communication between the White House and Kremlin.
Furthermore, Robert Kennedy’s ability to effectively communicate the stance of the United States and negotiate a settlement with the Kremlin through Dobrynin proved essential to avoiding nuclear conflict.
This thesis employs a historical narrative format utilizing archive documents, interviews with key figures, and scholarly analysis.
These resources provide new information from primary sources previously unavailable to the public.
The decision-making process during the crisis remains instructive, as the participants managed to stand on the precipice of Armageddon without falling over.
Key individuals contributed to decisions that ultimately offered an alternative, peaceful solution to total war.
Robert Kennedy, as the President’s brother, confidante, and Cabinet member was in a unique position to play an important role in this process.
His personality and drive allowed him to spearhead numerous efforts to guide the eventual resolution of the crisis.
Because of the trust that John Kennedy placed in him, Bobby Kennedy possessed the latitude and authority to act on behalf of the President.
The 1950-60s marked a period of change in the history of the United States.
This generation of politicians coming to power were shaped by their experiences in the preceding World War.
They now dealt with an uncertain post-war world in which one of the principal allies in defeating the Nazis, the Soviet Union, had emerged as the United States’ chief rival for international influence.
Many Americans now viewed the emergence of the Soviet Union, and its Communist ideology, as a threat on par with that of the recently defeated Nazis.
The blockade of Berlin, the Korean War, and advancements from both sides in the making of nuclear weapons increased the tensions of this Cold War.
Castro’s revolution in Cuba and displacement of the Batista regime was not initially seen as a threat to the United States.
In 1960, Castro openly acknowledged an alliance with the Soviet Union, and the United States now viewed Cuba “as a base for Communist subversion in the hemisphere,”1 and a significant threat to United States interests.
When China fell to the Communists in 1949, the Republican party gained power, partly due to accusations that the Democratic leaders were responsible for the loss of China.
The Republican Eisenhower administration now faced the same questions from Democrats on Cuba.
During the campaign for president, Senator Kennedy, in a speech in Johnstown, Pennsylvania, charged that, “Mr Nixon hasn't mentioned Cuba very prominently in this campaign.
This inflexible position would contribute to the failures experienced at the Bay of Pigs early in the Kennedy Presidency.
Nonetheless, the experience of the Kennedy administration during the Bay of Pigs invasion helped to shape the group of advisors, notably Bobby, and fostered relationships and ideas among the team that would confront the missile crisis in 1962.
The variety of primary sources currently available relating to the crisis provide an unparalleled amount of information about the famous thirteen days and beyond.
And most importantly, the preponderance of this documentation was preserved and made available to the public.
President Kennedy’s decision to record many key meetings, his desire to establish a Presidential Library to provide access to his papers, the willingness of many of the participants to conduct oral history interviews, and finally the various conferences held with these same participants contribute unique insights into the crisis.
Six presidents are known to have used some form of secret recording devices or systems in the White House.
Franklin Roosevelt, Harry Truman, and Dwight Eisenhower were limited in their use, while John Kennedy, Lyndon Johnson, and Richard Nixon used different systems extensively at various points in their administration.
Prior to and during his presidency, Kennedy used a device called a Dictaphone, primarily for dictating letters and personal notes.
Norton & Company, 2001), xiii. 4 addition to this device, in mid-1962, the President asked Secret Service Agent Robert Bouck to install recording devices in three locations, the Cabinet Room, the Oval Office, and a study in the Executive Mansion.
Bouck obtained state-of-the-art Tandberg reel-to-reel tape recorders on loan from the United States Army Signal Corps.
Two of these recorders were placed in the West Wing basement room for storing private presidential files.
Each of the West Wing recorders was attached to two different microphones in each location.
In the Cabinet Room the microphones were installed in place of wall fixtures hidden behind drapes.
The system was activated by a switch placed at the President’s seat at the large Cabinet table.
In the Oval Office, the two microphones were hidden in the kneehole of the President’s desk and the other was under a coffee table across the room.
This system was activated by a push button similar to the one in the Cabinet Room.
Information on the system installed in the Mansion is lacking, likely because Bouck says Kennedy rarely used that system.
According to Bouck, he, his assistant Agent Chester Miller, and the president’s secretary Evelyn Lincoln were the only individuals aware of the recording system’s existence.
Bouck said, “It was my understanding that from her appointment book she could pretty well tell what was on the tapes.
Following Robert Kennedy’s assassination in 1968, Senator Edward Kennedy took over custody.
Volume One, xviii-xix. 6 brought to light during the Watergate scandal in 1973, the Kennedy family confirmed the existence of the tapes and committed to turning them over to the National Archives.
Eventually a deed of gift was negotiated to deposit all the tapes, aside from those dealing with private family matters, to the John F Kennedy Presidential Library in Boston, Massachusetts.
Kennedy, containing both the transcripts and important contextual information spanning Kennedy’s presidency.
The intent of President Kennedy’s decision to install the taping system remains unknown.
The most accepted reason is his desire for a record of his presidency to be later used in writing his memoirs.
Volume One, xxii. 7 evidence that he taped only self-flattering moments.
Furthermore, the President publicly announced his intent to give his papers and memorabilia to the National Archives for this future library.
Soon after the President’s death, members of his family and close friends met to discuss a fitting memorial to the slain leader.
The John Fitzgerald Kennedy Library, Inc. was chartered December 5th, 1963, to plan and construct the library.
President Kennedy’s estate trustees, Jacqueline Kennedy, Robert Kennedy, and Edward Kennedy formally deeded his papers and historical items on February 25, 1965.
On October 1st, 1969, while the papers were housed in a temporary location, the first portions of Presidential papers were released for research use.
The corporation selected the eventual Columbia Point waterfront location in 1975 and completed construction in October of 1979.16 The library houses the original papers from the President and his staff and provides access to some of the most important primary-source materials from the Kennedy Administration.
This includes insights into the thought processes of the individuals involved and details of those conversations and meetings that occurred away from the recording systems.
Oral history interviews provide a great deal of insight, but in some cases memories fade and details are lost.
An alternative to the oral history approach are conferences in which a group is brought together.
At such gatherings, “the memories of the participants can help supply the missing context of the documents, and the documents can supply many of the facts which human memories distort or forget.
The conference brought together a group of academics including Graham Allison and Thomas Schelling, considered experts on the crisis, and veterans of the Kennedy administration who lived the crisis from the inside, including Robert McNamara, McGeorge Bundy, Douglas Dillon, Arthur Schlesinger, and Theodore Sorensen.
The conference strived to fill the gap in understanding of the Soviet motives and actions identified at Hawk’s Cay.
Due to the immense western literature and study on the crisis and the closely guarded Soviet history there exists a largely one-sided perception of the crisis.
The intent of the Cambridge Conference was to assist in breaking down that imbalance.
Joining this group were many of the participants from the Hawk’s Cay conference including, McGeorge Bundy, Robert McNamara, and Theodore Sorensen along with a number of American scholars.
The group represented key actors from the Soviet Union, Cuba, and the United States.
The American contingent contained many veterans from the first two gatherings.
Anatoly Dobrynin, Soviet Ambassador to the United States, Andrei Gromyko, Foreign Minister of the Soviet Union, Sergei Khrushchev, son of Nikita Khrushchev and editor of his father’s memoirs, and Georgy Bolshakov, who acted as a secret courier for messages between Chairman Khrushchev and President Kennedy.
These competing perspectives led to a distinct debate and discussion from which a number of revelations emerged.
The fourth and fifth conferences were held in Antigua and Havana respectively.
The is little written about or documentation from the 1991 conference in Antigua.
Nonetheless, the fifth conference took place in Havana, Cuba January 9-12, 1992.
The conference was attended by many of the key living United States, Soviet Union, and Cuba crisis veterans.
When these documents are viewed together with the oral history interviews, and the information from the three conferences, the insight gained is extraordinary.
This abundance of available information allows for an extraordinary level of understanding of a crisis which defined the international environment for decades after.
This analysis provides a unique view of a tumultuous time in United States history by combining many recently released tapes, transcripts, and accounts to provide a focused view of the Attorney General’s influence on the crisis.
Bobby was not a popular choice for Attorney General, but the President desired to have someone he knew he could trust explicitly close by in his administration.
Robert Kennedy’s post-Bay of Pigs expanded foreign policy role provided him a position from which to positively impact the EXCOMM and the advice given to the President.
Concurrent with his EXCOMM responsibility, the Attorney General was secretly meeting with Soviet contacts facilitating direct communication between his brother and Chairman Khrushchev.
The combination of purposes that Robert Kennedy provided to his brother places him as the key to resolving the crisis.
The extensive sources now available provide great insight and perspective on this role and allow a full analysis of Bobby’s historical role.
The first was the nomination and later confirmation of Robert Kennedy as United States Attorney General.
In nominating his brother, the President defied popular opinion and made a decision that would prove integral to his presidency.
Although failure is never a desired outcome, the lessons learned from the Bay of Pigs ensured that necessary changes in personnel and procedures were accomplished and in place prior to the discovery of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Attorney General After engineering his brother’s victory in the 1960 Presidential election as campaign manager, Robert Kennedy was uncertain of his next career move.
Houghton Mifflin Company, 1978), 229. 17 began an advice-seeking tour on the attorney general decision.
According to the book Johnny We Hardly Knew Ye, written by O’Donnell and other Kennedy intimates David Powers and Joe McCarthy, they all worried about losing their “reliable intermediary in our dealings with his brother.
This bond was vital to the President's success and those most intimate friends and colleagues, including John Kennedy himself, understood this.
After intense internal debate, Bobby decided against accepting the attorney general position and called his brother to inform him of the decision.
And so I need him…We’re going to have to change the climate in this country.
And if my administration does the things I want it to do, I’m going to have to be able to have someone as Attorney General to carry these things out on whom I can rely completely.
He ended by saying to Bobby, “I need you in this government,” John Kennedy then rose from his chair and walked to the kitchen.
Smiling, the President-elect returned and said, “So that’s it, general.
The article goes on to laud his ability as campaign manager but questioned his legal experience.
Certainly, the motives for Johnson's action proved to be entirely self-serving.
According to Bobby Baker, the Senate’s Secretary to the Majority Leader, in an interview he conducted for the Senate Historical Office, conservative Senator Richard Russell from Georgia had enough votes to kill the nomination.
In response, Baker says he, took Senator Russell over to the Secretary of the Senate’s office and I really poured heavy drinks in him.
The Case Against Him for Attorney General,” The New Republic, January 9, 1961, 15, 19.
The Republicans and Southern Democrats had enough votes to defeat Bobby Kennedy to be Attorney General.
After the hearings concluded a week later, only a single senator, Gordon Allott, spoke in opposition, and the Senate confirmed Bobby.
Robert Kennedy was sworn in as the Attorney General of the United States on January 20th, 1961, becoming the third youngest individual to hold that office.
The attacks Robert Kennedy experienced in the press and from the legislature were not unexpected, and it is likely the many doubters motivated the Attorney General even more to succeed.
Bobby understood that his cabinet position provided him the opportunity to protect and assist his brother.
He would become the President’s most trusted advisor and confidant, especially during the administration's most contentious moments.
Early in 1960 the Eisenhower administration approved a CIA plan for the training and arming of a Cuban exile army of liberation.
During the last weeks of the Eisenhower presidency, apparently unknown to Eisenhower, the CIA decided to increase the size of this guerilla force to a 1,500 man conventional army in Guatemala.
President Kennedy acknowledged the threat posed by the Castro regime so close to the United States.
After he learned of the CIA-planned invasion scheme the President, with what seemed to be a complete consensus among those advising him, gave approval for the operation.
On April 17th, 1961, a group of CIA-trained Cuban exiles landed at the Bay of Pigs.
Multiple issues occurred from the start and within two days the brigade was defeated.
This failure gave additional strength to the Castro regime and embarrassed the United States.
The Bay of Pigs fiasco was a low point for the Kennedy administration and in particular the President.
Although President Kennedy personally authorized the mission, very few in his administration were aware of the operation.
When word spread among the press, Ambassador Stevenson, and Kennedy's press secretary Pierre Salinger, who were uninformed, became blindsided by questions from the 26 Sorensen, Kennedy, 295.
The level of deception in the operation undermined the public’s trust in the government at every level.
President Kennedy summed up his feelings afterwards saying to himself, “All my life I’ve known better than to depend on the experts.
Robert Kennedy attempted to protect his brother in every situation and this role had the same intent, unfortunately the effect in this case was a negative one.
After asking why and listening to Schlesinger’s response, Bobby responded, “You may be right or you may be wrong, but the President has made his mind up.
The study group members included Taylor, Bobby, Admiral Arleigh Burke, and Allen Dulles.
Not only would Robert Kennedy make this suggestion, but he would expertly play this role in many of the Missile Crisis meetings.
With hindsight it is clear that what in fact he had approved was diplomatically unwise and militarily doomed from the outset.
What he thought he was approving appeared at the time to have diplomatic acceptability and little chance of outright failure.
That so great a gap between concept and actuality should exist at so high a level on so dangerous a matter reflected a shocking number of errors in the whole decision-making process—errors which permitted bureaucratic momentum to govern instead of policy leadership.
The committee’s findings triggered many changes in personnel and the way in which the administration made decisions.
According to Robert Kennedy, “the Bay of Pigs and our investigation led to a reorganization.
The most valuable result of the Bay of Pigs was the increased role of Robert Kennedy in all important decisions.
President Kennedy meeting with his Attorney General outside the White House in October 1962.
These precursors set the necessary conditions for the peaceful resolution of the 1962 crisis.
The personalities involved in advising the President were in place, and had formed relationships with each other because of the lessons learned from the Bay of Pigs disaster.
Among those individuals, the key personality of Robert Kennedy would prove the most valuable.
Douglas Dillon Following the failure of the Bay of Pigs, the Kennedy Administration increased efforts to determine future solutions to the Castro problem in Cuba.
Efforts of the intelligence community to gather information expanded and these efforts are likely the only reason the Soviet’s transport of missiles to Cuba were discovered.
The development of the U-2 Dragon Lady took place under Kennedy's predecessor, President Dwight Eisenhower.
The aircraft represented the culmination of a twenty-month process by Lockheed’s classified production arm Skunk Works, to build and deploy aircraft capable of photographing areas of interest from 70,000 feet and distinguishing objects only a few feet in length.
This technology provided a dramatic leap forward in reconnaissance and the ability to obtain concrete evidence of adversary actions.
Arthur Lundahl, director of the NPIC, held a meeting with his division chiefs to discuss routine matters when the film arrived at the NPIC for photo-interpretation.
As the analysis teams scanned the film they noticed what at first appeared to be preparatory work for the building of SA-2 missile sites, but were unable to locate the guidance radar and missile launchers associated with this type of weapon system.
Upon further investigation, the team discovered six canvas-covered objects measuring over sixty feet long.
After identifying himself, Lundahl said, “Ray, our worst fears are coming to pass in Cuba, because it looks like something more than defensive missilery is being deployed.
That evening McGeorge Bundy, the special assistant to the President for national security affairs, and his wife were hosting an intimate dinner for friends Chip and Avis Bohlen before Chip left to become the United States ambassador to France.
At 8:30 P.M Bundy received a call from Cline informing him of the U-2 photographs showing evidence of nuclear weapons in Cuba.
He rationalized this decision for two primary reasons; one was a desire to avoid a late-night meeting which might highlight to the press or Soviet agents that something out of the ordinary was occurring.
The President then ordered Bundy to assemble his foreign policy advisors from the State Department, the Pentagon, and the Central Intelligence Agency in the Cabinet Room at the next opening on his calendar, 11:45 A.M.13 After setting up the meeting, the President met with Bobby for a private discussion before continuing his regularly scheduled events for the day.
Following his final morning meeting, the President and his advisors gathered in the Cabinet Room.
Much of the discussion centered on determining the course of action but initially most of the advisors present appeared to assume that military operations were a foregone conclusion.
The President voiced the available options saying, “we’re certainly going to number one.
Robert is the first person to acknowledge the likely reprisals from the Soviet Union if air strikes against Cuba took place, saying “You’re going to kill an awful lot of people, and we’re going to take an awful lot of heat on it…Well, I would think it’s almost incumbent upon the Russians then, to say, Well, we’re going to send them in again.
When the group reconvened that evening, the discussion focused initially on tactical details regarding missile range, identification, vulnerability, and launch timing windows.
As the meeting continued, Robert Kennedy again interjected thoughts on the long-term, second, and third-order effects of the contemplated actions.
He understood these missiles in the hands of Castro created a shift in the balance of power in South America that affected the future ability of the United States to intervene according to interests in that area.
These considerations were integral to the decision-making process, and Robert Kennedy expertly injected these variables into the calculations of the group advising the President.
Later in the conversation, Bobby referenced the future of Cuba after such a strike is carried out.
Finally, McNamara comments, “Because the consequences of these actions have not been thought through clearly.
Concerns over drawing attention to the proceedings and the President’s travel schedule caused the group to delay further large meetings until the 18th.
Meanwhile, multiple small groups met throughout the night at the State Department and Pentagon.
These sides would change and shift as the crisis continued over the coming days.
CIA Director McCone returned to Washington after arranging the funeral for his step-son who perished in an automobile accident.
McCone arrived for his first meeting on the crisis at 9:30 A.M. and expressed disagreement with the President’s current preference for an airstrike.
McCone, in his memorandum documenting the meeting, states the “President seemed inclined to act promptly if at all, without warning, targetting on MRBM’s and possibly airfields.
After meeting with the West German Foreign Minister Gerhard Schroeder, the President continued his regularly scheduled events, a National Day of Prayer at St.
Matthews Cathedral, lunch at the Libyan embassy, and finally a political trip to Connecticut, returning to Washington later that night.
Volume Two, 498499. 42 and included a list of the required number of sorties for each option.
Meanwhile, many of the EXCOMM members met throughout the day to consider and discuss the merits of the considered options.
When the group adjourned for dinner, Robert Kennedy and Theodore Sorensen departed to meet the President at the airport upon his return.
They briefed him on the day's developments and highlighted the still unresolved questions.
Following the update, likely deciding that his presence might impede an honest and open dialogue amongst the group, JFK decided not to attend the meetings that night.
Instead, knowing that his closest advisor Bobby would be present, he was content to allow the group to continue without him that evening.
Robert Kennedy described the reason, in 1964 to Schlesinger, for his brother’s absence during those first meetings as, “freer conversation, and secondly, he was campaigning, see, don’t forget that.
As the meeting ended, the group remained split among the primary options.
Bohlen endorsed a strike but only if preceded by an ultimatum to Khrushchev.
Thompson, Martin, and Gilpatric agreed that a declaration of war followed by a complete blockade of the island was the best alternative.
The consensus amongst the President’s advisors shifted substantially from that morning to the end of the meeting towards the option that would ultimately be used.
Earlier that morning, intelligence analysts detected new evidence of intermediate-range ballistic missiles with twice the range of the previously identified MRBMs.
The proof of IRBMs caused some members to change their recommendation away from blockade towards massive strikes against targets in Cuba.
The most obvious impact that an ultimatum or other communications with Khrushchev would be the loss of surprise and increased danger to United States troops involved in conducting the air strikes.
This was an important exchange, now that the group had talked through the possible reaction by the Soviets to United States strikes against Cuba and the likely Soviet casualties, they have arrived at the likelihood of nuclear war between superpowers.
This frightening reality brings the President back to the subject of the blockade and the legality of enforcement without declaring war.
As General Taylor related years later, “it was argued very eloquently by Bobby Kennedy that that would be our doing the act of the Japanese in attacking Pearl Harbor.
In a 1987 interview, Douglas Dillon related a similar response, “I finally agreed with Bobby Kennedy that a surprise attack on Cuba at that time was unacceptable because it was too much like the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor.
There are multiple references to “Pearl Harbor” written alone in his notes from these meetings during the crisis illustrating this important theme in his mind.
Attorney 47 and especially Bobby’s statements, created a noticeable shift among the group towards supporting the blockade option.
At this stage in the crisis, Robert Kennedy appears to have made up his mind that a surprise attack against Cuba was the wrong decision.
He makes multiple statements throughout the remainder of the meeting designed to combat some of the pressure on his brother to quickly commit to an invasion or air strike.
The official meeting adjourns with the President asking Secretary Rusk to meet him at 4:30 to prepare for their 5:00 meeting with Gromyko.
After the President departs, the tape recording system captures the genesis of the eventual option the administration would use to resolve the crisis safely.
To which Thompson, McNamara, and Robert Kennedy answer in the affirmative.
The discussion on the blockade continues amongst the group before many have to depart for previously scheduled engagements.
This change was most apparent in McNamara, who after learning of the MRBM advocated a full invasion of Cuba but was now supporting further consideration of an independent blockade.
The Attorney General never overtly expressed this option during the meeting but instead used questions and insinuations that led some of the individuals to independently come to the conclusion that the blockade might represent the best alternative.
After the Kennedy brothers had dinner together, the EXCOMM met again at 9:15 P.M. in the Oval Room of the Executive Mansion to avoid being noticed by reporters.
The consensus was now in favor of the blockade and the President directed a detailed planning effort for its execution.
The President acknowledged the shift in opinion during his midnight recorded summary of the day.
Before meeting with the President, the Chiefs agreed on a united recommendation of a surprise airstrike against the military targets in Cuba.
However, on the question of invasion, there was disagreement, with Taylor opposing this step.
LeMay: I think that a blockade and political talk would be considered by a lot of our friends and neutrals as being a pretty weak response to this.
By the end of this meeting, the President was less sure that the blockade option was the best course of action.
Sorensen says, “he was counting on the Attorney General and me to pull the group together quickly—otherwise more delays and dissension would plague whatever decision he took.
Furthermore, the President placed the decision of recalling him entirely in his brother’s hands.
That afternoon in his Justice Department office, the Attorney General gave his theory on why the Soviets had installed the missiles to his press secretary, Edwin Guthman.
If we bombed, we would be the aggressors and they could do anything they wished.
Harper & Row, Publishers, 1971), 120. 51 understand not only their adversary’s actions but also provide context for the United States’ response.
Following the departure of the President, 18 members of the EXCOMM met throughout the day and night of the 19th.
Initially, the group was divided into two camps, those in favor of the air strike option and those preferring a blockade.
For those, especially Robert Kennedy, that supported the blockade, the necessity in gaining a positive vote by the OAS was vital to provide the legal authority for a blockade.
According to the minutes of the meeting, Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs Edwin Martin gave his opinion that he could immediately secure 14 votes and could likely increase these totals to 17, 18, or 19 within 24 hours.
In response, Robert Kennedy, with a grin, said that “he too had had a talk with the President, indeed very recently this morning.
At 4:00 P.M. the group continued their discussion with each side making its case.
The identification and correction of flaws in each plan provided the majority of the effort for the committee.
Overall, two hours were spent on the blockade plan with only 30 minutes on the airstrike option.
October 20, 1962 The next morning, Pierre Salinger announced to the press that the President had a cold and would be returning to the White House to recover.
Marine One landed on the South Lawn of the White House at 1:30 P.M. and the President met with Sorensen to review the draft speech he had written.
While this location did not have a taping system, the accounts and minutes of the meeting provide extensive details of the proceedings.
At the beginning of October 20th, there were four distinct recommended courses of action advocated by EXCOMM members.
The first was the traditional air strike , second was a blockade combined with an ultimatum that could be followed by an air strike if necessary , third was a blockade intent on halting Soviet action to gain time for negotiation , and fourth, blockade with the intent of initiating diplomatic negotiations, ultimately offering a trade of United States missiles in 46 Brugioni, Eyeball to Eyeball, 304.
The President was likely well aware of the current status following the previous night’s discussion with his brother.
Following a discussion of the moral necessity of providing a warning before striking to avoid a Pearl Harbor scenario, Robert Kennedy expresses his recommendation for action.
The Attorney General said that in his opinion a combination of the blockade route and the air strike route was very attractive to him.
In the event that the Soviets continued to build up the missile capability in Cuba, then we should inform the Russians that we would destroy the missiles, the launchers, and the missile sites.
He said he favored a short wait during which time the Russians could react to the blockade.
If the Russians did not halt the development of the missile capability, then we would proceed to make an air strike.
The advantage of progressing in this way, he added, was that we would get away from the Pearl Harbor surprise attack aspect of the air strike route.
Furthermore, this option addressed the moral arguments against a surprise attack.
The Attorney General synthesized the merits of the options presented into a logical plan that addressed the concerns of the one person who had the authority to make the decision, the President.
Robert Kennedy later articulated that with this option, the decision to strike would not need to be made immediately, suggesting that the President would gain time in which to make a decision.
This option provided the President with the ability to make a decision on immediate action with a blockade but still avoid a choice on airstrikes that may cause a quick escalation and confrontation between the two global powers.
Bobby bought his brother time with this option, and the President would not be forced to make an irrevocable decision on airstrikes that could have far-reaching and unknown consequences; instead, the blockade would provide a less aggressive starting point.
After deciding to use the term “quarantine” instead of blockade at the suggestion of Secretary Rusk, the meeting adjourned.
Following the meeting, John McCone spoke privately with Robert Kennedy and expressed concerns over aspects of the President’s drafted speech by Sorensen.
The Attorney General listened to the concerns and agreed to address them with the President at their subsequent meeting.
Additionally, McCone says the President stated that “he had made up his mind to pursue the course which I had recommended and he agreed with the views I expressed in the afternoon meeting.
President Kennedy, Attorney General Kennedy, General Taylor, General Sweeney, Director McCone, and Secretary McNamara met for approximately an hour in the Oval Room of the White House to discuss the viability of an aerial strike against the missile sites.
Secretary McNamara and General Taylor briefed the President on the airstrike option planned by the Joint Chiefs.
Once again the military advisors stressed that there was no guarantee of the destruction of all the missiles but nonetheless, indicated a 90 percent probability of success.
Bobby and McCone both ""advised against a surprise attack for the reasons discussed at previous meetings.
Bobby’s notes show his favor for the blockade option but also acknowledge the perils of this path.
In continuing with attempts to hide the crisis from the press, the afternoon meeting of the EXCOMM took place in the mansion rather than the Cabinet Room.
The central topic of the discussion among the group related to the third draft of the President's speech to the nation which he planned to give the next evening.
Much of the debate centered around where to place blame for the introduction of the missiles, the Soviets or Castro.
Bobby, who had been exhaustively working the Cuban problem since becoming Attorney General, suggested that the President’s appeal to the Cuban people was not sufficiently personal.
The President agreed with his brother and asked Sorensen to rewrite those passages.
Admiral Anderson provided the President his first detailed description on the execution of the quarantine.
Rules of engagement were detailed, debated, discussed, and finally, agreed upon.
The President arrived at the Oval Office around 9:15 A.M. and began making calls.
His second call that morning was to President Eisenhower to keep him abreast of the latest developments along with soliciting his thoughts on the situation.
Both men, although of very different political backgrounds, trusted each other implicitly.
After the President explained the plan for the blockade and possible Soviet responses, Eisenhower offered his support of Kennedy’s decision.
The conversation focused on a draft address to be read at the United Nations Early in the meeting the attention centered on the wording of Schlesinger's draft.
Republican Senator Ken Keating charged, back in August, that the Soviet Union was constructing offensive nuclear bases in Cuba.
Nonetheless, at the time the President asked the CIA for more information on the status of weapons in Cuba but was told that only defensive surface-to-air missiles were revealed by the U-2 imagery.
Although Bobby advocated for the blockade he still considered all options as the crisis unfolded.
This flexibility of thought made the Attorney General an excellent asset to the President.
After another meeting with advisors to discuss the impact of the crisis on Berlin the President scheduled a television address to announce the crisis for 7:00 P.M. that night.
The memorandum states that the group ""will meet, until further notice, daily at 10:00m. in the Cabinet Room,"" with the President as the Chairman and regular members, the Vice President, the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of the Treasury, the Attorney General, the Director of Central Intelligence, the Under Secretary of State, the Deputy Secretary of Defense, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Ambassador-at-Large, the Special Counsel, and the Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs.
According to the memorandum, the first regular meeting of the EXCOMM would occur the following day, Tuesday, October 23rd.
This meeting served as a test run for the upcoming meeting with Congressional leadership for the President in front of a generally friendly audience.
The President's final meeting before addressing the American public was with twenty Congressman recalled from around the country for this rapidly arranged discussion.
At 7:00 P.M. that evening, President Kennedy addressed the nation, laying out the case against the Soviet Union and describing their deception in Cuba.
That night about 1:00 A.M. the United States Ambassador to the Soviet Union, Foy Kohler, provided the Presidium with a transcript of Kennedy’s speech along with a personal letter from the President to Khrushchev.
While the Soviet Premier was relieved that there was no imminent invasion of Cuba, he spent that night in his office.
Although both sides were relieved that the night ended without military action by either country, tensions in the crisis were still peaking.
October 23, 1962 At 10:00 A.M. the EXCOMM met officially for the first time.
To the Kennedy brothers, the Republican McCone, who said he had previously suspected the Soviets of placing offensive weapons in Cuba before the discovery on the 16th, might pose a threat to the administration’s unified narrative.
The President once again relied on his most trusted ally to test the allegiance of the CIA Director without asking the question himself.
Volume Three, 104. 70 positive evidence,”87 the President decided to send him to meet with additional Congressman to explain the rationale for the blockade.
Robert Kennedy continues to address the tough questions that in his mind the group will undoubtedly receive.
We’ve taken this action after they’ve got their missiles already there, unopposed.
As the meeting ends, the President tentatively sets 6:00 P.M. for the committee to reconvene after the OAS makes their decision on support of the blockade.
That afternoon news arrived that the OAS had passed the U.S. resolution with only yes votes and two abstentions.
These two abstentions eventually changed to affirmative votes thus giving the United States unanimous support for the quarantine.
Later that evening President Kennedy signed the quarantine proclamation in the Oval Office in front of photographers.
In the company of only his brother the President was finally able to voice his frustration with the situation and doubts in the decision he made.
When they’ve been kicking us in the ass for two years, and they vote unanimously for this.
And then to get the reaction from the rest of the allies, you know like David Ormsby-Gore and everybody else.
The President could only allow himself to appear vulnerable and honest in front of his younger brother.
Bobby understood that his brother needed a confidence boost and he provides that by pointing to the victory in the OAS, even though Bobby himself provided the emphasis to gain their support and the support of their allies.
The special relationship between the brothers gave the President exactly what he needed during one of the most stressful days of the crisis.
October 24, 1962 The next day the EXCOMM met again at the regularly scheduled time of 10:00 A.M. just as the quarantine went into effect.
Naval intelligence also reported the belief that a submarine was trailing each of these two ships.
As the group waits for this information, McNamara continues to detail the procedure to drop depth charges and use sonar signals to warn the submarines to surface.
This was the moment we had prepared for, which we hoped would never come.
His hand went up to his face & covered his mouth and he closed his fist.
I felt we were on the edge of a precipice and it was as if there were no way off.
As the details on forcing the submarines to surface continue, the President emphasized that “we don’t want to have the first thing we attack as a Soviet submarine.
The Attorney General follows with a question, that although it would seem to be common sense, was critical.
This development was far from a resolution to the crisis but a sense of positive progress came across the room.
According to Bobby, “everyone looked like a different 98 Kennedy, Thirteen Days, 54.
Khrushchev goes on to say that the quarantine “is an act of aggression, pushing mankind towards the abyss of a world missile nuclear war.
John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum. 76 the previous evening.
The letter laid out the sequence of events that led to the United States’ decision to enact the quarantine.
That morning at approximately 6:00 A.M. in Washington D.C., U.S. naval ships intercepted the Soviet tanker Bucharest.
McNamara explained that the ship was queried and responded that it was carrying petroleum products and was bound for Havana.
Based on the President’s instructions the tanker was permitted to pass without inspection with the United States destroyer maintaining surveillance.
A discussion followed focused on whether the Bucharest should be searched and if not, would this display weakness to the Soviets and International community.
Volume Three, 237. 77 strategy to demonstrate that the quarantine was successful while also creating more time for the President to analyze the situation before committing to other actions.
Robert Kennedy pointed out that things relating to the quarantine haven’t “come to a head”107 until they actually board one of the ships.
Bobby sums up the discussion saying, “the point is that we may eventually have to intercept a ship.
The meeting concluded with the President’s frustrated statement “we don’t want to precipitate an incident…we still have then another six of seven hours.
The debate continues between the airstrike option and adding POL to the list of restricted cargos.
While the Attorney General was an advocate for the blockade, he never eliminated follow-on airstrikes if the blockade alone did not gain the desired results.
As the quarantine appeared to be working to stop the flow into Cuba, the attention of the Kennedys had now shifted to the problem of the missiles that were still in Cuba.
Friday morning the United States finally had an option to demonstrate a willingness to board and inspect ships crossing into the quarantine zone.
The Marucla, a Lebanese cargo ship, was Panamanian owned, and operating under a Soviet charter provided an answer to the dilemma of selecting the first ship to inspect.
Robert Kennedy wrote, “He was demonstrating to Khrushchev that we were going to enforce the quarantine and yet, because it was not a Soviet-owned vessel, it did not represent a direct affront to the Soviets, requiring a response from them.
The EXCOMM met again at their regular 10:00 A.M. time and began with a review of the intelligence gathered the previous day.
According to a CIA report prepared at 2:00 A.M., “photography of four MRBM sites shows continued rapid construction activity at each site.
President Kennedy’s judgment on the limitations of the quarantine was voiced, “Well, now the quarantine itself won’t remove the weapons.
According to Stevenson, the three primary parts of this standstill included the suspension of the quarantine, no further construction on the bases, and no more arm shipments.
But this proposal as explained by Stevenson was met by incredulity by many of the EXCOMM members in a very tense exchange among the members.
Bundy summed up the problem with the proposal stating, “the proposal which is before us from the U.N., it does involve a dropping of the quarantine, without what I would call adequate momentum.
Following this morning meeting, the group broke up with many focusing on plans for an air strike against the Cuban missile sites.
Director McCone and his top photo analyst Arthur Lundahl met briefly around noon with the President and Attorney General to detail the findings on the increased pace of construction observed in Cuba.
When the President asked McCone for his conclusion from the evidence he replied, “It appears to me that there’s a very great deal of concern about this thing.
The other way is, I would think, a combination of an air strike and probably invasion, which means that we would have to carry out both of those with the prospect that they [the missiles] might be fired.5 Preparation continued with a general feeling among most of the EXCOMM that the crisis was approaching an inevitable military confrontation.
The situation, however, were about to take a dramatic change once again.
The contents of the letter were full of rhetoric, at times emotional, but still generally coherent.
In the final section of the letter, Khrushchev proposes, We, for our part, will declare that our ships, bound for Cuba, will not carry any kind of armaments.
Then the necessity for the presence of our military specialists in Cuba would disappear.6 Based on Robert Kennedy’s account, it appears he was with the President when the translated letter from the State Department was received.
However, developments the next day would once again bring more uncertainty.
October 27, 1962 The EXCOMM met at their normal 10:00 A.M. and began the meeting with the customary intelligence update from McCone.
According to the CIA report, the mobilization of the Cuban military forces continued to increase, but the Cuban soldiers were under orders not to take any independent hostile action without permission from the Soviet Union.
Volume Three, 359. 86 missiles in Turkey wasn’t in the letter from the previous night.
Realizing he only had a small amount of information the President remarked, “well, let’s just sit tight on it.
Bobby, who aside from attending the EXCOMM meetings, was working a private channel with the Soviet ambassador, voiced his opinion on the issue of the Turkish missiles.
The first point being that this is a question of Cuba and the bases and must be resolved within the next few days.
The negotiations and discussions must get on, and the work that is continuing despite our protests has been going on.
This action that has been taken is not an action just by the United States but it is an action by all of the Latin American countries plus the United States.
This has nothing to do with the security of the countries of Europe, which do have their own problems.
We would obviously consider negotiating the giving up of bases in Turkey if we can assure the Turks and the other European countries for whom these bases were emplaced, if there can be some assurances given to them for their own security.
This will entail inspection, as we anticipate that there will be some inspection in Cuba and in the United States at the time that these bases are withdrawn from Cuba, and we give assurances that we are not going to invade Cuba.
We agree to remove from Cuba those means which you regard as offensive means; we agree to carry this out and make a pledge in the United Nations Your representatives will make a declaration to the effect that the U.S.A., on its part, considering the uneasiness and anxiety of the Soviet State, will remove its similar means from Turkey.2 With frustration mounting in the room, Robert Kennedy began to assert himself more than at any other point during the EXCOMM meetings.
The conversation consequently shifted to drafting a response to Khrushchev with Bobby leading much of the effort and discussion.
Even the other EXCOMM members begin to defer to Bobby in a way they had not previously.
Many of the themes and even wording suggested by the Attorney General are apparent in the final version of the letter.
Throughout the discussion, Bobby continued to push for them to frame their letter as a response to the original letter rather than the second one which referenced a trade of the Turkish missiles.
He’s made an offer and you’re in fact accepting it…He made an offer last night.
Volume Three, 436. 89 together in the Cabinet Room, a sense of humor was greatly needed to cut through the tension and stress.
Bobby was the only EXCOMM member that seriously considered public opinion and the political ramifications of the administration’s decisions, in this case, the reaction to a public trade of missiles.
However, Robert Kennedy was well aware of the adverse effects associated with any such deal and worked to ensure the President attempted to avoid it.
During the meetings, with and without the President, the group considered a tremendous number of scenarios along with the advantages and disadvantages of each.
The President was provided with executable options along with many of the implications involved with each.
Years later, Edwin Guthman describes Robert Kennedy’s opinion on the strength of EXCOMM as “how well it had functioned, how close the members had become, how open and unpretentious their discussions had been,”138 and ultimately how successful they were.
John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum, Boston Eventually, Bobby and Sorensen left the room to complete the draft response to Khrushchev.
The letter was transmitted to the Soviet Union at 8:00 P.M. coinciding with the time that Robert Kennedy was meeting with Ambassador Dobrynin, at the President’s request, to provide a copy of the letter.
This meeting and the numerous others between the two key figures would prove to be the most important events to resolving the crisis peacefully.
Robert Kennedy’s role in shaping the dialogue and narrative in the EXCOMM meetings brilliantly worked in concert with his efforts communicating with the Soviet Union through a secret back-channel with Ambassador Dobrynin.
Anatoly Dobrynin Robert Kennedy was an integral part of the EXCOMM and the role the group played in advising the President.
However, while many of his fellow advisors knew of his meetings with the Soviet Ambassador, few if any understood the importance of what they were discussing and the important role this communication channel would have on the peaceful resolution to the crisis.
Secrecy was crucial during the crisis, but never more so than the negotiations that occurred through the Robert Kennedy-Anatoly Dobrynin channel.
At stake was the NATO alliance, international prestige, and domestic political reputation.
The direct communication provided by these two men delivered one the greatest contributions to the crisis resolution.
For decades, both sides vehemently denied the existence of any such agreement, and information contradicting that stance was protected or eliminated.
However, as more information has emerged, the negotiations conducted by Robert Kennedy are shown to have often centered on a diplomatic solution involving a quid pro quo agreement on missile removal.
The skillful maneuvering 93 and negotiation conducted by the Attorney General allowed both nations to reach an acceptable solution to the escalating crisis.
Without Bobby’s developed relationships and communication channels with the Soviets, this private agreement would have been impossible.
President Kennedy's predecessor, President Dwight Eisenhower publicly pledged to extend the nuclear deterrent to the United States’ NATO allies including the installation of missiles in Turkey.
In late 1957, Eisenhower, in an effort to create an American-controlled stockpile of nuclear weapons in Europe while simultaneously removing the incentive for other countries to feel a need to develop their own nuclear capability, made an offer to all NATO allies.
For those agreeing to provide launch sites on their territory, the United States would base Thor and Jupiter missiles with the additional promise that the United States would provide the necessary information for the allies to build a nuclear submarine propulsion system.
Only the Italians and Turks agreed to accept the missiles; the other allies feared being targeted by the Soviets because of the presence of the weapons and declined the offer.
The utility of the missiles was questioned even at the time of installation.
The Kennedy Administration’s back-channel communications through Robert Kennedy originated in spring 1961.
Holeman had formed a friendship with Soviet agent Georgi Bolshakov after meeting at a luncheon hosted by the Soviet embassy in the early 1950s.
In this role, he was expected to create and foster intelligence sources and report the information back to Moscow.
When Kennedy was elected, Holeman, through his friendship with Robert Kennedy’s press secretary Edwin Guthman, felt that Kennedy might be receptive to a meeting with Bolshakov.
However, the temptation of meeting with the president’s closest confidant proved too appealing for Bolshakov, and he decided to meet with Kennedy on May 9th regardless of his instructions to the contrary.
At 8:30 P.M. that night, Holeman escorted Bolshakov to a rendezvous with Kennedy outside the Justice Department gate.
Soon after the two of them began to walk through the National Mall for their first of many meetings.
The relationship between the two men was viewed suspiciously by most of the intelligence community from both countries.
Nevertheless, to the Kennedys, it seemed the perfect channel through which to communicate more directly with the Soviet leadership.
Their hope in pursuing these private channels was to avoid the common leaks and misinterpretations often found in the traditional diplomatic methods.
There was also a lingering mistrust of many of the conventional diplomatic arrangements following the disaster of the Bay of Pigs.
The was necessary because, according to Kennedy, the Soviet leadership began to feel that the Soviet ambassador at the time, Mikhail Menshikov, was “not delivering the true messages reflecting the true point of view,”11 which in the end gave Khrushchev an 8 Tye, Bobby Kennedy Liberal Icon, 247.
When Anatoly Dobrynin arrived on March 15, 1962, to take over the ambassadorship from Menshikov, he was instructed by Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko to gradually take over Bolshakov’s connections.
Dobrynin later wrote he felt part of the desire for this change was Gromyko’s dislike of any communication channels that did not run through him.
This communication and sense of understanding between himself and President Kennedy gave Khrushchev the ability to exploit the relationship to sneak the missiles into Cuba.
This duplicity also contributed to the Kennedy brothers’ emotional outrage at the secret movement of weapons by the Soviet Union.
To avoid any suspicion by the United States, Khrushchev manipulated this back-channel by using Bolshakov to pass a message to the president through Robert Kennedy stressing a Soviet desire to work towards the Kennedy desired nuclear test ban.
This was an attempt to distract the administration from the missile transport.
Khrushchev hoped this superficial gesture of goodwill would reassure the Kennedys into a sense of complacency.
There is no evidence showing that Bolshakov was informed about the exact nature of the weapons in Cuba and likely was unaware until informed by his United States contacts.
During the President’s meeting with his advisors on October 22nd, a discussion occurred on the Jupiter missiles in Turkey.
The taperecorded conversation reveals President Kennedy’s desire to remove the 14 Fursenko and Naftali, One Hell of a Gamble, 197.
October 23, 1962 In Thirteen Days, Bobby describes a meeting he attended with his brother, Ted Sorensen, and Kenny O’Donnell in the oval office.
President Kennedy related the current escalating situation in Cuba to a book written by Barbara Tuchman, The Guns of August, which described the miscalculations made by the European powers that led to total world war.
The President went on to query his brother for information coming through the Bolshakov backchannel.
Robert informs him about his request for Charlie Bartlett to meet with Bolshakov.
In fact, Robert Kennedy had asked both Frank Holeman and Barlett to meet with Bolshakov earlier that day.
However, after President Kennedy remarks that Holeman is “not with us in this,”21 his brother seems to sidestep acknowledging his use of Holeman and shifts the discussion to Bartlett.
Holeman, at the request of the attorney general’s office, called Bolshakov to arrange a meeting to feel out the Kremlin on possible diplomatic options to resolving the conflict.
Later, based on an interview with Bartlett, he met twice that afternoon with Bolshakov also at Bobby’s request.
Kennedy said, “I sent Charlie Bartlett, who was friendly with him , to see him,”23 and the two met in Bartlett’s National Press Club office.
Bartlett expressed to Bolshakov that the administration did not desire to invade Cuba and was only concerned with eliminating the offensive missiles.
The result of this meeting seems to be insignificant, and Kennedy responded by asking Bartlett to meet a 19 Kennedy, Thirteen Days, 49.
This time he provided Bartlett with photographs of the missile sites taken from U-2 reconnaissance missions to shock Bolshakov into a more useful response.
Still dissatisfied with the lack of response elicited from the Bolshakov channel, Kennedy decided to try another approach.
According to Kennedy's account, he related to Dobrynin the fact that the statements stating there were no offensive weapons in Cuba by Dobrynin, Gromyko, and TASS had misled the president.
Dobrynin: sometimes when an ambassador is abroad, he is not told everything.
This omission seems inconsistent, especially based on the three meetings earlier in the day with Bolshakov that discussed the possibility of a trade.
Strangely, the GRU station that received the reports from Bolshakov chose not to transmit the information regarding the Jupiter missiles to Moscow immediately.
This failure to act broke from the standard protocol up to that point of passing all information on meetings with Robert Kennedy to Moscow.
This change likely stemmed from Bolshakov’s declining position in the eyes of Moscow.
Dobrynin said, “he question about the bases, until the 27th [Dobrynin likely means the 26th when he discusses the missiles with Robert Kennedy referenced later], did not arise.
Aleksandr Alekseev, the Soviet ambassador to Cuba during the crisis, gave his opinion “that Khrushchev did not have thoughts of an exchange for Turkish missiles.
Lippmann argues that the link many in the press were making between Cuba and Berlin was misleading.
These were very different cases since the American base in Berlin did not contain missiles or offensive capabilities.
He went on to say that “he two bases could be dismantled 33 Allyn, Blight, and Welch, Back to the Brink, 80.
The majority of the discussion centered around an agreement that the United States would not invade Cuba and that the Soviet Union would withdraw missiles placed there.
Dobrynin relayed the information on this meeting to Moscow and the next day Khrushchev released the infamous public letter referencing a trade of missiles in Turkey.
October 27, 1962 Late on the night of the 27th Dobrynin says he was invited by Bobby to meet at the Justice Department.
According to Thirteen Days, Bobby telephoned Dobrynin about 7:15 requesting to meet and did so 39 Allyn, Blight, and Welch, Back to the Brink, 143.
The Attorney General expressed his feeling that the crisis was rapidly worsening, especially with the recent news of the shoot down of the United States U-2 reconnaissance aircraft.
This action created increasing pressure on the president to strike Cuba.
Bobby explained that the president believed that Khrushchev’s first letter, lacking any mention of a missile trade, provided a reasonable basis upon which the resolve the crisis.
The most important thing to the United States was that all construction was stopped on the missile sites.
In response, the United States would end the quarantine and guarantee they would not invade Cuba.
Following this explanation, Dobrynin, in his book, says he questioned the lack of inclusion of the Turkish missile agreement.
In his description, he again uses “quid pro quo”45 underlined for emphasis to explain his response to Dobrynin’s query on the removal of missiles in Turkey.
According to the Soviet Ambassador’s account of the meeting, Kennedy replied that the president was willing to remove the missiles but because of the delicate nature of the NATO alliance could not agree to a public deal.
Conversely, Dobrynin describes a much more specific agreement between the two regarding the Turkish missiles.
According to the ambassador, Kennedy said, “I believe, that it will probably take four to five months for the United States to withdraw its missiles from Turkey.
The discussion of the whole Turkish aspect of the problem can be continued through you and myself.
During the discussion between many of the key figures of the crisis, Ted Sorensen made a previously unknown revelation.
The recorded descriptions of the tone and behavior of Kennedy during this crucial meeting vary.
In Chairman Khrushchev's first memoir Khrushchev Remembers he describes the Attorney General as “look exhausted.
True, about twice he tried to return to the topic of ‘deception,' but he did so in passing and without any edge to it.
Many of the books and analyses of the crisis assume that this meeting resulted in Robert issuing Dobrynin an ultimatum.
However, Dobrynin's account of the meeting says ""Robert Kennedy said his brother hoped that the head of the Soviet government would not misunderstand him and think the United States was issuing an ultimatum.
He states, “he request for a reply tomorrow, stressed R Kennedy, is just 52 Lebow and Stein, We All Lost the Cold War, 526.
October 28, 1962 Different accounts dispute the timing of this message.
According to Kennedy's account, he met at 11:00 A.M. on Sunday with Dobrynin where he learned that Khrushchev would agree to dismantle and remove the missiles from Cuba, essentially agreeing to all aspects of the United States' proposal.
It read, ""et in touch with Robert Kennedy at once 55 Lebow and Stein, We All Lost the Cold War, 526.
October 29, 1962 In a memorandum written by the Attorney General to Rusk, he described his meeting with Dobrynin on October 29th.
Kennedy stated that he received a phone call at 11:00 A.M. from Dobrynin requesting to meet which, according to the Attorney General's desk diaries, they did at 7:45 P.M. in the Attorney General’s office.
The description in the memorandum of the meeting that night is brief and only mentions that Dobrynin gave him an unsigned letter from Khrushchev to the President.
This letter, Kennedy felt, ""did not properly set forth my conversation of the previous Saturday night with Ambassador Dobrynin.
However, the message acknowledged the Turkish missiles although it also agreed to avoid public discussion of the matter and promised only to discuss the subject through the confidential back-channel between the Attorney General and Soviet ambassador.
The exact contents of the letter have never been revealed and do not seem to exist in the records of the United States or the Soviet Union.
Following this meeting, Kennedy met with Secretary Rusk and Ambassador Thompson to discuss the contents of the message.
Robert Kennedy's handwritten notes written immediately after meeting with the ambassador provide the best insight into the substance of the letter from the United States' perspective.
These notes and his memorandum to Rusk show this was likely a Soviet attempt to gain a written record of the agreed upon deal regarding the Jupiter missiles.
If letters of this type are needed—go to State Dept You have my word on this & that is sufficient Take back your letter—Reconsider it & if you feel it is necessary to write letters then we will also write one which you cannot enjoy Also if you should publish any document indicating a deal then it is off & also if done afterwards will further affect the unclear relationship64 Dobrynin provided additional information about the contents of the confidential memorandum during the Moscow Conference in 1989.
In discussing the topics laid out in the letter, he says that not only were the Jupiter missiles included but also that, “e raised the question of Guantanamo…this question did not meet with understanding from the American side.
Kennedy’s memorandum to Rusk and his desk diary set the time for the October 30th meeting as 2:15 P.M. in his Department of Justice office.
Kennedy says he communicated his impression that the Khrushchev letter was misleading and would necessitate a response from President Kennedy clarifying the terms of agreement.
In the memorandum, he describes his emphasis to Dobrynin that if the missiles were not removed from Cuba, “drastic action was going to be necessary by the United States.
The dealings with Dobrynin and especially the Turkish missile trade show Robert Kennedy acting with the President’s blessing but also making independent decisions with an understanding of what his brother ultimately wanted.
The exact manner in which he conducted parts of these negotiations and the channels he used were likely not approved or endorsed, but because of the intense trust between the two Kennedys he was provided the latitude to negotiate as he saw fit.
By rejecting any written agreement on the Turkish missiles, Robert Kennedy was controlling the narrative for his brother.
By keeping the deal a secret Bobby protected his brother from political attacks or negative impacts on the NATO alliance.
At the end of Bobby’s handwritten notes from the meeting with Dobrynin the night before, there are two lines that illustrate the manner in which Kennedy protected his brother while understanding what was needed on his part.
Pres rejected Turkish base deal—Pres accept later Know what Pres means72 71 Dobrynin, In Confidence, 90.
However, unofficially the President was willing to accept a trade that would be executed sometime in the future.
Robert understood what his brother wanted, and he knew how to execute those wishes.
Furthermore, he held the confidence to understand he was acting with his brother’s tacit sanction.
Dobrynin captured the significance of his back-channel communication with Kennedy during the Moscow Conference saying, “ith regard to the question connected to Robert Kennedy.
I should say that in my view the existence of the confidential channel did play a positive role in the course of the crisis.
After all, who if not the brother of the president would know what the president was thinking.
Information and agreements from Robert Kennedy were perceived to be sanctioned by the President, and the Soviet leadership treated them as such.
Promise Kept On April 25, 1963 Robert McNamara sent the President a handwritten note that said, “The last Jupiter missiles in Turkey came down yesterday.
If the agreement had become known at the time, the ramifications would have been extremely consequential to both the Kennedy administration and the United States.
Furthermore, the reaction in Congress, the Joint Chiefs, and voters, would have cancelled 74 Handwritten note from Robert McNamara to President Kennedy.
As it happened, the end of the crisis was viewed by most observers as a victory for the Kennedy administration and one of the greatest accomplishments of his presidency.
By allowing the crisis to resolve without a public declaration acknowledging the missile trade from President Kennedy, Khrushchev was seen as the loser in the conflict.
The United States succeeded in reestablishing the status quo in Cuba while removing missiles from Turkey that were already outdated and eventually slated for replacement by the more capable Polaris submarine missiles.
During testimony to the House of Representatives Committee on Appropriations on February 7, 1963 McNamara addressed questions regarding a missile trade with the Soviet Union.
One of the speculations applies to the alleged withdrawal of our missile bases from Turkey.
Since that time I believe it has been the intent or the declared intent of the United States to withdraw our missiles from Turkey.
Hearings before a Subcommittee of the Committee on Appropriations, 88th Cong., 1st sess., 1963, 57.
I can say without any qualifications whatsoever there was absolutely no deal, as it might be called, between the Soviet Union and the United States regarding the removal of the JUPITER weapons from either Italy or Turkey.
The question was raised by Mr Khrushchev during the negotiations relating to the withdrawal of the offensive weapons from Cuba.
The President absolutely refused to discuss it at that time, and no discussion took place, and certainly there was no agreement to withdraw weapons from any allied nation in association with a response to the agreement of the Soviets to withdraw offensive weapons in Cuba.
The use of Robert Kennedy, the most trusted person in the mind of President Kennedy, and the strict avoidance of documenting the agreement between the two nations allowed McNamara to continue the traditional narrative that no deal was in place, even during sworn Congressional testimony.
This consistent messaging was reinforced by all members of Kennedy’s staff, both those that were aware of the deal and those that were not.
Some, as demonstrated by the previously mentioned Sorensen confession, went so far as to remove references to the deal from Robert Kennedy’s manuscript.
These impediments would take until late November to overcome and require many sleepless and stressful nights for those working to bring about a peaceful end to the crisis.
Even Bobby Kennedy’s memoir and a large-budget Hollywood movie were titled Thirteen Days.
In fact, it would take over three weeks after the famous thirteen days to truly resolve the crisis.
Until the 28th of October, the thirteenth day of the crisis, the negotiations had largely been only between the Soviet Union and the United States.
However, the following three weeks were largely driven by Fidel Castro and his anger over Khrushchev’s handling of the negotiations with the United States.
The Final Obstacles Although a tentative agreement was brokered through the Robert Kennedy-Anatoly Dobrynin channel, the crisis was far from over.
The focus for the United States and EXCOMM now shifted to the verification process for the removal of the missiles and IL-28 bombers from Cuba.
These remaining hurdles created three tense weeks during which the final outcome remained uncertain.
Castro, as the leader of Cuba, was not consulted or informed about Khrushchev’s decision to remove the missiles from Cuba.
In fact, Castro learned the news on the 28th of October from a phone call from Carlos Franqui, the editor of the Cuban newspaper Revolución.
Without a United States presence on the ground to observe the dismantling of the offensive weapons, another method was necessary.
The best alternative appeared to be continued U-2 reconnaissance flights.
A sophisticated SA-2 system now blanketed the whole of Cuba and created a threat to any attempts to fly over the island.
This capability and risk were demonstrated dramatically when Rudolf Anderson’s U-2 was shot down on a surveillance mission on October 27th.
As U Thant began negotiations with Castro in Cuba, EXCOMM continued to meet, but due to a largely stagnant situation, little was accomplished.
Alekseev, with directions to agree to U Thant’s request to personally observe and verify the dismantlement of the missile sites.
The Soviet leadership was well aware of the international spotlight on the tense situation in Cuba and were now making every effort to bolster their image.
Although Thant publicly characterized his negotiations with Castro as ""fruitful"", the reality was much different.
Thant met later that night with an American delegation including Stevenson, McCloy, and Charles Yost.
Two methods of aerial surveillance were available, high-level U-2 flights or low-level Air Force RF-101 and Navy F-8U flights.
The risks were higher for the low-level operations but the greater fidelity and detail captured were substantial.
Further complicating the decision was the news provided by McNamara during the evening EXCOMM meeting on the 29th.
According to McNamara one of the RF-101s sent to capture photographs of the IL-28 airfield, “appears to have been fired on.
The pilot reported about 20 bursts of antiaircraft fire on the side and behind the aircraft.
During the November 1st EXCOMM meeting, after Thant’s return, the President authorized the resumption of reconnaissance flights.
President Kennedy approved low-level sorties conducted by six aircraft to photograph the IL-28 airfield and several of the MRBM sites.
Furthermore, it was decided that “if a United States plane is shot down, no military reprisal will be taken today…The President directed that if one of our planes was hit, we would not announce this fact.
We would not announce our intention to make low-level flights, but 14 Coleman, The Fourteenth Day, 51.
In sharp contrast to Castro's rhetoric, the United Nations group observed that the Soviet officials in Cuba were extremely forthcoming and went to great lengths to act on Khrushchev's promise to dismantle and remove the missiles.
Alekseev and the military commander of Soviet missile forces in Cuba, Major General Igor Statsenko, both stated that efforts to dismantle the bases commenced within a few hours of receiving the order on October 28th.
The Soviets set the expectation that by November 2nd they would remove the missiles and major equipment and have the sites bulldozed.
Thant also related his impression, although never explicitly addressed, that the Soviets intended to remove their IL-28 bombers as well.
On November 1st, Gromyko sent a telegram to the Soviet Ambassador in Havana with a more detailed timeline for the missile removal.
The date for the removal of the dismantled special materials from Cuba has been set for 7 or 8 November, but not later than 10 November.
For the removal of these materials it is now possible and advisable to use our usual ships located in Cuban ports or arriving there in the coming days, and there is no need to hide such materials in the ship holds.
Encouraging evidence from surveillance flights on November 1st analyzed by the NPIC showed the Soviets were in fact dismantling and bulldozing the missile sites.
Less reassuring was evidence that the assembly of IL28 bombers appeared to continue and accelerate at the airfields.
At the November 3rd EXCOMM meeting, John McCone presented an analysis showing continued progress with the assembly of IL-28s at the San Julian airfield.
By November 2nd, there were two fully operational bombers, five nearly complete, and two fuselages ready for assembly.
Aside from the IL-28 bombers, the intelligence received indicated the Soviets were fulfilling their side of the agreement.
As of October 22nd, 24 missile sites were complete, with 16 still under construction and a total of 42 missiles present.
Furthermore, Kuznetsov said they were willing to offer the United States photographs of the decommissioned sites and provide a detailed schedule of the transportation of equipment and missiles to the ports and a subsequent shipping schedule.
Additionally, he welcomed the United States to “bring our own vessels along side the Soviet ships which were taking the missiles out in such a way as to enable us to see and count the missiles.
Finally, Kuznetsov previewed the information that would be contained in a forthcoming letter from Khrushchev to Kennedy.
The Soviet leader objected to the inclusion of the IL-28s on the list of equipment to be removed from Cuba.
In his letter to Kennedy, Khrushchev writes, “I have studied the list and, I must confess, the approach of the American side to this matter has seriously worried me.
Although the IL-28 issue had recently emerged as the hot-button item, it was unlikely President Kennedy would have sacrificed the resolution of the crisis over the bombers.
While the President viewed the outdated bombers as offensive weapons, and desired their removal, he was likely willing to take this argument only so far and never at the expense of achieving a peaceful resolution to the crisis.
The Crisis Ends On Robert Kennedy’s 37th birthday he rightfully again played a central role in the finale of the crisis.
The Attorney General had a scheduled meeting with Dobrynin at 11:00 A.M. on November 20th where the Kennedys hoped to receive an agreement from Khrushchev regarding the IL-28s.
Upon arriving at the Attorney General’s Justice Department office, Dobrynin smiled and said to Bobby, “I have a birthday present for you,”31 as he handed him a letter.
The letter, in Khrushchev’s signature rambling and disorganized style, contained his concession to remove the IL-28s, and with them the final major obstacle to ending the crisis.
John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum, Boston At 6:00 P.M. on November 20th the President of the United States addressed the nation for thirty minutes.
In return, upon verification, the United States agreed to remove the naval quarantine and provide assurances against an invasion of Cuba.
In short, the record of recent weeks shows real progress and we are hopeful that further progress can be made.
The completion of the commitment on both sides and the achievement of a peaceful solution to the Cuban crisis might well open the door to the solution of other outstanding problems.
These qualities may be tested many more times in this decade, but we have increased reason to be confident that those qualities will continue to serve the cause of freedom with distinction in the years to come.
This crisis remains the closest the world has come to total nuclear conflict.
The United States and the Soviet Union nearly allowed missiles in Cuba to ignite a rapidly escalating war between the two superpowers.
President Kennedy faced one of the most difficult decisions that any president in history had to make.
Without his brother playing such a valuable role during the crisis, the President would have likely followed his initial instinct for airstrikes, reinforced by the advice of many of his advisors pressing for military action against the missile sites.
Without him, John Kennedy would have found it far more difficult to overcome the demand for military action…It was Robert Kennedy who oversaw the Executive Committee, stopped the air-strike madness in its tracks, wrote the reply to the Khrushchev letter, conducted the secret negotiations with Dobrynin.
Had Bobby Kennedy decided to ultimately refuse the Attorney General position, or if the Bay of Pigs hadn’t inspired the President to rely more heavily on his brother for working foreign policy issues, the outcome would have been quite possibly disastrous.
Many decades have passed since the last Soviet missile left Cuban soil, yet the impact of the crisis endures.
The public expression of restraint regarding nuclear weapons set a precedent that continued throughout the Cold War and beyond.
Afterward, both countries understood how close they truly were to nuclear war.
Not merely peace for Americans but peace for all men and women--not merely peace in our time but peace for all time.
Total war makes no sense in an age when great powers can maintain large and relatively invulnerable nuclear forces and refuse to surrender without resort to those forces.
It makes no sense in an age when a single nuclear weapon contains almost ten times the explosive force delivered by all the allied air forces in the Second World War.
It makes no sense in an age when the deadly poisons produced by a nuclear exchange would be carried by wind and water and soil and seed to the far corners of the globe and to generations yet unborn.
The Cold War was evolving and shifting away from the specter of inevitable nuclear confrontations over Berlin or Cuba, and instead the focus shifted to confronting and containing the spread of the rival ideologies.
This change did not result in peace, but it did significantly reduce the chance of thermonuclear Armageddon.
Whatever thaw had occurred in the Cold War due to the efforts of Kennedy and Khrushchev were brought to a halt when an assassin's bullet struck President Kennedy in Dallas, Texas on November 22nd, 1963.
According to Ambassador Dobrynin, if President Kennedy had lived, the relations between the two countries would have continued to improve.
The assassination came as a shock to Khrushchev and the next day he was reported to have been weeping over Kennedy’s death.
Soon after Lyndon Johnson was sworn in as president, William Walton, a journalist and artist who was a close friend of President Kennedy, was sent to the Soviet Union by Robert Kennedy under the guise of visiting with Soviet artists for a future artistic community in the Soviet Union.
According to Walton, Bobby intended to remain Attorney General until the end of 1964, run for governor of Massachusetts to build political capital, and finally to run for president.
About a week after Walton’s visit, on December 18th, 1963, McGeorge Bundy, at the direction of President Johnson, met with Dobrynin over lunch to discuss the new administration.
He became vulnerable following the Cuban crisis, seen by his rivals as an example of “harebrained scheming,”14 and they began plotting his removal soon afterward.
With Kennedy gone and a changing relationship with the United States, Khrushchev was easily removed from power and forced to retire far removed from the centers of power in Moscow.
Omni-Photo Communications, Inc., Universal Images Group The world was a different place after the two leaders who had worked so hard to bring their countries to a peaceful understanding were 14 Taubman, Khrushchev, 620.
The conflict in Vietnam escalated, and tensions once again grew between the United States and the Soviet Union.
Many believed the last hope for continuing the progress of the Kennedy administration lay with Robert Kennedy.
After a decisive primary win in California on June 5, Bobby took the stage in front of supporters at the Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles.
As he departed from his speech through the hotel kitchen, a man stepped out and fired multiple shots from a .22 caliber revolver.
The wounds were mortal and at 1:44 A.M., June 6th, 1968, Robert Kennedy was pronounced dead.
Bobby devoted his personal life to his family and much of his professional life to supporting his brother, later attempting to see his brother’s legacy fulfilled.
How the world would look today if either or both brothers had survived is impossible to know.
The idea that JFK, with RFK at his side, would have avoided the quagmire in Vietnam-however appealing--must remain speculative.
The fact that nuclear weapons have not been used since is a testament to the far-reaching impact of this accomplishment.
Without Robert Kennedy in EXCOMM and working a communication channel with Dobrynin, the outcome of the crisis would assuredly have been quite different.
But I have promises to keep, And miles to go before I sleep, And miles to go before I sleep.
Electronic Publications John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum.
