From his perspective, the Kennedy White House adroitness kept the world from being incinerated.
Practically gloating, Frankel reveals that the missiles in Turkey were considered nearly obsolete in 1962.
Once he acquired dictatorial power in the mid-1950s, Nikita Sergeyevich Khrushchev proved to be an adventurous leader trying to rush his people out of a Stalinist hell toward a brighter future.
As he remembered years later, dictating his memoir, the idea of sending his missiles to Cuba just popped into his head one day in April 1962, while he strolled on the banks of the Black Sea with his minister of defense, Marshal Rodion Malinovsky, a comrade since the great World War II battle of Stalingrad.
The bulldog-faced marshal was growling again about the American Jupiter missiles aimed at Soviet bases from neighboring Turkey, just across the water.
After sitting so long, so smugly behind their ocean moats, Americans should finally share the anxiety of living in the thermonuclear shadows that hung over all Europeans.
For this portrait of Khrushchev as risk-taking global conspirator to work, Fidel Castro and the Cuban revolution must become incidental to the showdown.
Cuba becomes an outpost of Soviet expansionism rather than a country with legitimate fears over another Bay of Pigs.
The best records deal with ""Operation Mongoose,"" a plan hatched by a guerrilla fighter of mixed reputation, Brigadier General Edward Lansdale, a Kennedy favorite for a time.
His plan envisioned widespread sabotage and the infiltration of agents and guerrilla fighters to inspire a rebellion that could become the pretext for American military intervention by October 1962.
But the CIA and Pentagon dragged their feet; the plan produced a few pinpricks that only stiffened Castro's defenses and buttressed his requests for more Soviet arms.
In his biography of Fidel Castro titled Fidel, Szulc states that ""things could have not been worse"" for Castro in the spring of 1962.
Armed rightist bands were active in the Oriente and Escambray mountains.
Cuban casualties in the Escambray alone were nearly three times as great as at the Bay of Pigs.
Economic losses were calculated around $1 billion in ruined crops, burned houses, and blown up rail lines, roads and bridges.
While Frankel tries to give the impression that direct United States involvement with the counter-revolution had come to an end after the Bay of Pigs fiasco, ex-classified documents contradict this.
CIA reports that 11 teams will have been infiltrated by the end of July and that 19 maritime operations have aborted.
Of the teams in, the most successful is the one in Pinar del Rio in western Cuba; its success was helped greatly by a maritime re-supply of arms and equipment; the fact that it is a ""going concern"" and receives help from outside has attracted recruits.
Its potential has been estimated at about 250, which is a sizeable guerrilla force.
With equally large guerrilla forces in other Cuban provinces, guerrilla warfare could be activated with a good chance of success, if assisted properly.
Ultimately, Frankel's version of the 1962 happenings depends heavily on foreshortened events.
Instead of seeing the missile crisis as the culmination of a year of superpower bullying and threats, it turns into a cold war duel with Cuba, Berlin and Turkey as pawns.
The president sheepishly conceded that invading Cuba had been a mistake.
He was made to feel young and inexperienced, a weakling who had lacked the courage even to finish off Castro.
Another ex-NY Times reporter, Seymour Hersh, sees Kennedy's post-Bay of Pigs stance differently.
In April 1962 the president lent the prestige of his office to the anti-Cuba effort by flying to Norfolk, Virginia, to watch a huge military exercise; some 40,000 men conducted amphibious landings at beaches in North Carolina and off Vieques Island, Puerto Rico, less than fifty miles from Cuba.
Once Kennedy had decided to blockade Cuba, he needed to make sure that the Soviets were kept in the dark about his plans.
Since the Times participated freely in a cover-up, he might argue that this was still a ""free"" press.
Although John F Kerry sees himself an enlightened foreign policy expert in the mold of the first JFK, there is every indication that the events of 1962 have much more in common with the invasion and occupation of Iraq that liberals would admit.
Just as Bush administration officials have been implicated in lies and cover-ups, so were prominent Kennedy White House figures, especially liberal icon Adlai Stevenson, who was the representative to the United Nations.
Immediately after the Bay of Pigs operation began, Stevenson held up photographs to the UN Political Committee that proved Cuban air force defectors bombed Castro's soldiers.
Even after he discovered that they were CIA forgeries, Stevenson continued to deny American involvement.
After these claims were revealed to be false, Stevenson described the entire episode to Pierre Salinger as ""the most humiliating experience"" of his career.
One assumes that if Castro had been defeated at the Bay of Pigs, Stevenson would have felt much differently.
Time after time, in places like Cuba, Vietnam, and Iraq, where United States foreign policy is frustrated in its aims, there is much soul-searching.
Such efforts seem in vain, for the proper time for soul-searching is in advance of such adventures rather than when they turn sour.
Legalese Please, feel free to insert a link to this work on your Web site or to disseminate its URL on your favorite lists, quoting the first paragraph or providing a summary.
However, please DO NOT steal, scavenge, or repost this work on the Web or any electronic media.
When/if we publish your opinion we will only include your name, city, state, and country.
