Join googletag.cmd.push { googletag.display; }); SUPPORT THE POST Many Americans were caught by surprise when they heard President Kennedy order a military quarantine around Cuba.
They were just as surprised to learn that Russia was building missile sites in Cuba, within range of the United States, and how Russia and America were challenging the other to back down or face war.
The showdown had been coming ever since Fidel Castro and his communist rebels overthrew the government of Cuba.
The United States had strongly opposed the new regime and, in 1961, had backed an invasion of Cuba by anticommunist exiles.
Khrushchev saw this defeat as proof of America’s inherent weakness and was emboldened to build missile bases on the island to keep the United States permanently on the defensive.
The Soviets parade one of their long-range missiles during the annual May Day parade in Red SquareIn August 1962, a team of Soviet engineers arrived in Cuba and began hurriedly constructing launchpads that would enable the Soviets to drop a thermonuclear warhead almost anywhere in the United States If Khrushchev could get the missile sites working quickly, the United States would not be able to remove them without risking nuclear attack.
Khrushchev planned to repeat the operation in Europe to force Americans from their outpost in West Berlin.
A Russian ship carrying missile-launching systems on its way to Cuba.Round 1 On October 20, President Kennedy took action, announcing the United States would block any Soviet ships from reaching Cuba, beginning at 10:00m., Wednesday, October 24.
On that morning, the Executive Committee of the National Security Council began its long watch for the USSR’s response.
As Alsop and Bartlett address, “Reports came in which indicated that some of the Soviet ships appeared to have changed course, and that others had gone dead in the ocean.
A Navy reconnaissance plane shadows a Russian freighter approaching the quarantine line set by the U.S.Round 2 Khrushchev might have hesitated, but he was still determined.
On Friday night, he sent a letter to Kennedy that contained threats but also an appeal to be reasonable.
The following day, spy planes over Cuba showed launchpad construction proceeding at full speed.
In a Moscow broadcast, Khrushchev demanded that the United States dismantle its missiles in Turkey, which were pointed at the Soviet Union.
Later that day, a United States spy plane was shot down with a Soviet surface-to-air missile—the first one fired from Cuba.
Khrushchev appeared to be stalling until the missiles were operational.
President Kennedy consults with Defense Secretary Robert McNamara.It was Robert Kennedy who came up with a way to move beyond the standoff.
He suggested that the president publicly interpret Khrushchev’s Friday letter as a proposal to negotiate.
President Kennedy agreed and immediately replied, explaining that the United States would take no action against Cuba and would end the blockade if the USSR removed its missiles.
What Alsop doesn’t report, and perhaps didn’t know at the time, was Kennedy’s secret offer to remove United States missile bases across the border in Turkey.
With the message sent, ExComm’s meeting broke up and everyone went home that Saturday night not knowing whether the following morning would bring peace or—as millions of Americans feared—nuclear attack.
On Sunday, to everyone’s immense relief, Khrushchev agreed to the terms of Kennedy’s offer.
In a Post article, written the following month, Stewart Alsop said, “This was, of course, the final, unmistakable blink.
The entire crisis was covered in depth in the 1962 Post article “In Time of Crisis” by Stewart Alsop and Charles Bartlett.
The History of Bias and Power in the Supreme Court Jeff Nilsson ReplyYour email address will not be published.
Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * Email * Website Δdocument.getElementById.setAttribute ).getTime ); Become a member The Saturday Evening Post is a nonprofit organization funded primarily by our members.
