NATIONAL SENIOR CERTIFICATE GRADE 12 SEPTEMBER 2017 HISTORY P1 ADDENDUM *HISTE3* This addendum consists of 13 pages.
HISTORY P1 3 SOURCE 1B This source is part of a speech that JF Kennedy, president of the United States of America, delivered on 16 October 1962.
In this address he talks about the Soviet Union's deployment of missiles to Cuba and how the United States government intended to deal with the crisis.
The same thing applies in regard to the essences of the missile bases in Cuba.
However, president Kennedy is ready to come to agreement on that question with NS Khrushchev, too.
HISTORY P1 5 SOURCE 1D This cartoon by E Valtman appeared in The Hartford Times, on 30 October 1962.
SOURCE 2A This source shows the involvement of foreign countries in the Angola after 1975.
The crisis in Angola developed into a Cold War battleground as the superpowers and their allies delivered military assistance to their preferred clients.
The United States supplied aid and training for both the FNLA and UNITA while troops from Zaire assisted Holden Roberto and his fighters.
Before November 11, the MPLA had negotiated with Castro for Cuban assistance.
At the same time, UNITA, which enjoyed United States support, approached the Apartheid government in South Africa for military reinforcement.
Pretoria, with the aim to end the use of Angola as a base for rebels fighting for the independence of South Africaoccupied Namibia, contributed forces that entered southern Angola in October and made rapid progress toward the capital.
Savimbi developed close relations with influential American conservatives, who saw Savimbi as a key ally in the United States effort to oppose and rollback Soviet-backed, non-democratic governments around the world.
The conflict quickly escalated , with Washington and Moscow seeing it as a critical strategic conflict in the Cold War.
The Soviet Union gave an additional $1 billion in aid to the MPLA government and Cuba sent an additional 2,000 troops to the 35,000-strong force in Angola to protect Chevron oil platforms in 1986 … … In addition to escalating its military support for UNITA, the Ronald Reagan (then President of the USA) administration and its conservative allies also worked to expand recognition of Savimbi as a key United States ally in an important Cold War struggle.
In January 1986, Reagan invited Savimbi to meet with him at the White House.
Following the meeting, Reagan spoke of UNITA winning a victory that ""electrifies the world"" at the White House in January 1986.
Two months later, Reagan announced the delivery of Stinger surface-to-air missiles as part of the $25 million in aid UNITA received from the United States government.
Jeremias Chitunda, UNITA's representative to the U.S., became the Vice President of UNITA in August 1986 at the sixth party congress.
HISTORY P1 9 SOURCE 2D This source describes the impact that the Battle of Cuito Cuanavale had on the Southern African region.
The Battle of Cuito Cuanavale and the Cuban intervention in Angola is one of the turning points in Southern African history.
It led to the movement of powerful Cuban armed force, into the west, towards the Namibian border.
The fighting in the south western part of Angola led to the withdrawal of the South African, ANC and Cuban presence in Angola, and to the independence of Namibia.
The Battle of Cuito Cuanavale is, however, a contentious issue, widely discussed and debated by ordinary people, participants and historians.
Depending on where you stand, Cuito Cuanavale is described as a defeat of the South African Defence Force , a tactical withdrawal by the SADF, or, a stalemate.
The battle, or more correctly termed the siege, of Cuito Cuanavale was fought on the banks of the Lomba River in the vicinity of Cuito Cuanavale, in south-eastern Angola, between UNITA and the Angolan army aided by Cuba, the Soviet Union and to a lesser extent East Germany.
SOURCE 3A This source is an extract from Stokely Carmichael and George Hamilton’s book, Black Power.
Any programme to end racism must address itself to that double reality … The need for psychological equality is the reason why SNCC (Student Non-violent Co-ordinating Committee) today believes that blacks must organise in the black community.
Only black people can convey the revolutionary idea that black people are able to do things themselves.
Only they can help create in the community an aroused and continuing black consciousness that will provide the basis for political strength.
In the past, white allies have furthered white supremacy without the whites involved realising it or wanting it, I think.
Black people are fed up with the dillydallying … compromising approach that we’ve been using toward getting our freedom.
Our people have to be made to see that any time you take your dollar out of your community and spend it in a community where you don’t live, the community where you live will get poorer and poorer, and the community where you spend your money will get richer and richer.
HISTORY P1 11 SOURCE 3C This source explains the philosophy, goals and achievements of the Black Power Movement.
The Black Power movement instilled a sense of racial pride and self-esteem in blacks.
Black Power advocates encouraged blacks to form or join all-black political parties that could provide a formidable power base and offer a foundation for real socio-economic progress.
For years, the movement's leaders said, blacks had been trying to aspire to white ideals of what they should be.
Now it was time for blacks to set their own agenda, putting their needs and aspirations first.
Many whites, and a number of blacks, saw the movement as a black separatist organisation bent on segregating blacks and whites and undoing the important work of the civil rights movement.
There is no question that Black Power advocates had valid and pressing concerns.
Blacks were still victims of racism, whether they were being charged a higher rate for a mortgage, getting paid less than a white co-worker doing the same work, or facing violence at the hands of white racists.
Bobby Searle is on the left-hand side if the photograph and Huey Newton is on the right-hand side of the photograph.
