Friday, April 01, 2016 Maybe Cuba Should Have Kept Those Soviet Nukes The Nuclear Security Summit in Washington is reminds us that President Obama won his Nobel Peace Prize in large part because of his stated intentions concerning nuclear non-proliferation.
The two most recent achievements in United States counterproliferation and non-proliferation have been tarnished by the destruction of Libya as a counter-proliferation example for North Korea by the deposition and murder of a WMD-bereft Muammar Qaddafi; the United States inability to follow through on President Obama’s ambitions to bring Israel into the NPT fold as a self-acknowledged nuclear weapons power; and by United States acquiescence to brutal Saudi Arabia-led rollback operations against Shia forces in Syria, Yemen, and Bahrain as compensation for US-Iran rapprochement.
In contrast to most sane Americans, I am not an enthusiast for the NPT-enforced oligopoly of a few nuclear states.
I think it distorts foreign policy, particularly American foreign policy, which is keyed to the idea of leveraging the United States “nuclear umbrella” to establish the United States as the indispensable security power everywhere and anywhere.
The United States commentariat is publicly appalled at Trump’s casual comments about South Korea and Japan going nuclear.
And the United States would not have so big an incentive to militarize and escalate local frictions to create a plausible role for Uncle Sam and his magic nuclear umbrella.
In other words, in a world in which the United States continually maintains and improves its nuclear arsenal while inhibiting the emergence of counterbalancing deterrence—and at the same time refusing to renounce nuclear first strike—maybe the big nuclear danger is trying to keep the nukes out instead of letting the nukes in.
Being with a woman all night never hurt no professional baseball player.
The one nuclear proliferation crisis everybody likes to cite to illustrate the benefits of anti-proliferation is Cuba 1962, when America’s Best and Brightest under Jack Kennedy stared down Nikita Khrushchev and his attempt to position strategic nuclear weapons in Cuba.
Soviet strategists were appalled by the introduction of United States Jupiter nuclear-tipped missiles into Turkey and Italy and justifiably anxious about the prospect of a pre-emptive United States strike.Kennedy understood that standing up to the Soviets over Cuba--antiproliferating--was more a matter of United States (and his) credibility and a reflection of United States determination over Berlin than an issue of United States national security.
The most interesting element of denuclearizing Cuba is that the United States didn’t think that the Soviet Union had any operational nuclear weapons capability in Cuba when it decided to go public and issue the ultimatum to Khrushchev.
And as for Khrushchev “not having the troops”, there were allegedly forty thousand Soviet troops in Cuba, not the few thousand estimated by Marchetti and the CIA, infiltrated together with shiploads of military equipment under the noses of the CIA and including infantry, anti-aircraft, and other defensive units to protect the core strategic nuclear force.
However, Marchetti is correct in terms of describing United States perceptions at the time of the crisis, and as for the readiness of the strategic nuclear forcee. the ability to launch a nuclear attack on the United States mainland from Cuba, apparently spot on.
The part about the strategic missiles not being operational was something of a lucky guess.
It turns out the CIA was if not completely right, it was not completely wrong; the warheads for the strategic missiles, it transpires, were in Cuba but had not been deployed to the launch sites yet.
Therefore, President Kennedy had the certain luxury of gaming his Cuba scenarios on the assumption that Cuba didn't have any usable nukes yet, the nuclear confrontation would play out only within the parameters of a potential direct nuclear exchange between the US and Russian homelands, and Khrushchev probably wouldn't escalate to global nuclear war if the United States dropped the hammer on Cuba.
Tactical Air Command, who cautioned that maybe a nuclear-armed missile might survive the massive United States strike to hit the United States.
While the Soviet Union was out of the proliferation game, the United States went all in on nukes as a geostrategic asset, not only maintaining its nuclear edge through technological improvements and integrating nuclear weapons into its security architecture in Asia as well as Europe, but also by antiproliferating, by seeking to deny new aspirants, allies as well as adversaries, entry to the club through suasion, sanctions, and even war.
In an interesting way, the United States is now somewhat recapitulating the Soviet endgame in Cuba, with elements in Japan and the Republic of Korea becoming more vocal about their desire to control their own nuclear destinies rather than rely on the United States, thereby challenging the United States nuclear weapons monopoly and the Asian security architecture which it underpins.
The forces advocating for nuclear proliferation are many; the US, while not standing alone as an anti-proliferater, is perhaps alone in its depth of conviction, interest, and determination.
This creates challenges for President Obama as he tries to universalize the internationalized NPT legal regime and wean the United States from unilateral anti-proliferation and its occasional resort to violations of sovereignty to achieve its objectives.
BlueHost is one of the best hosting company with plans for all of your hosting requirements.
