Item 1 Maxwell Taylor, Dean Rusk, Sidney Graybeal, Marshall Carter, McGeorge Bundy, Douglas Dillon, LBJ, others.
Item 2 Rusk, Robert McNamara, Edwin Martin, Maxwell and Taylor, Douglas Dillon, RFK, George Ball, #28A Roswell Gilpatric, U Alexis Johnson, LBJ, Item 1 Evelyn Lincoln, others.
All written transcripts are imperfect abstracts of spoken conversation.
Variations in sound quality and in the aural acuity of listeners can and do produce wide variations in what is heard.
Statements uttered by officials of the United States government in the course of their duties are considered to be in the public domain.
Users of this material are cautioned, however, that not all persons recorded were members of the Kennedy family or government officials.
A number of the people recorded were, at the time of recording, private citizens.
Therefore, those intending to quote from this material beyond the accepted limits of fair use are cautioned to determine the copyright implications of any intended publication.
The first time a name is mentioned, the full name is provided whenever it is known.
Well, on site on one of the encampments contains a total of at least fourteen canvascovered missile trailers measuring 67 feet in length, 9 feet in vidth.
The overall length of the trailers plus the tovbars is approximately 80 feet.
The other encampment contains vehicles and tents but vith no missile trailers.
In this instance, the missile trailer is. backing up to the launch point.
The site that you have there contains at least 8 canvascovered missile trailers.Four deployed probable missile erector launches.
In Area II, there are at least 6 missile covered, missile, uh, canvascovered missile trailers, about 75 vehicles, about 18 tents.
And in Area number III, ve have 35 vehicles, 15 large tents, 8 small tents, 7 buildings, and one building under construction.
If the nose cone is not *on that missile and it measures 67 feet— the nose cone would be U to 5 feet longer, sir; and with this extra length we could have a missile that'd have a range of 1,10D miles, sir.
The surface has to be hard, then you put a flame deflect-, a deflector plate on there to direct the missile.
We can find nothing that would spell ""* nuclear warhead in term of any isolated area or unique security in this particular area.
The mating of the nuclear warhead to the missile from some of the other short range missiles there would take about, uh, a couple of hours to do this.
The unknown factor here, sir, is the degree to which the equipment has been checked out after it's been shipped from the Soviet Union here.
There is only one missile there, sir, ar;i it's, uh, at the actual, apparently, launching area.
If everything were checked out, it would still take them in the order of two to three hours before they could get that one missile up and ready to go, sir.
One of them is in what appears to be the position from which they're"" launched—in the horizontal.
We haven't any specifics yet on this but here is the way we believe that it could actually be lifted.
This is one of the most important thoughts ve face in properly interpreting the readiness of, of these missiles.
It's inconceivable to me that the Soviets ■would deploy nuclear warheads on an tuifenced piece of ground.
It should be one of our important objectives to find that storage site.
They're currently being chemically processed at the Ilaval Center at Suitland, and they're due to reach us at the National PI** Center around 8 o'clock tonight.
Both of these missions go from one end of Cuba to the other — one along the north coast and one along the south — so additional data on activities or these storage sites which we 4 consider critical may be in our grasp if we can find them.
There would appear to be little need for putting this type of missile in there, however, unless it were associated with jiucltar warheads.
The question is one of readiness of the, to fire and — and this is highly critical in forming our plans — that the time between today arid the time when the readiness -to fire capabilitydevelops -is-a, very important thing.
Certainly /words unintelligible/ surely do not have up-to-date photographic coverage on the whole island.
Or /words unintelligible/, ... consider whether we should not authorize more flights on the basis of COMOB* priorities.
There's a specific question of whether we want a closer and sharper look at this, this area.
That, however, I think should be looked at in the context of the question whether we wish to give tactical warning, any other possible activities.
Carter? : Rusk?: McKamara: Carter: Mclfemara: Speaker ?: Mclfamara: Speaker ?: J McNaraara: Lundahl: JFK: Speaker ?: JFK: * Lundahl or Carter?: JFK or Taylor?: Carter?: Lundahl: Speaker ?: Speaker ?: I vould recommend, Mr President, that you authorize such flights as are considered necessary to obtain complete coverage of the island.
Now, this seems to be ill-defined, but I purposely define it that vay because we 1 re running into cloud cover oa some of these flights, and I vould suggest that we simply repeat the flight if ve have cloud cover and repeat it sufficiently often to, to obtain the coverage ve require.
U-2, sir! . . -. specif ically excludes the question that Mac -raised of low-level flying which.
We estimate that four missiles make up a battalion, uh, so that in this one that you're looking at^ Mr President, has eight missiles.
This one in front of the table is a second separate installation from vhich we can see six missiles.
The third installation has the tents, but there are no missiles identified anywhere in that area.
Uh, or we're going to decide that this is the time to e l iminate the Cuban problem by actual eliminate the island.
The QAS could constitute itself an organ of consultation promptly, although maybe, it may take two"" or three days to get, uh, instructions from governments and things of that sort.
That will undoubtedly be turned down, but it will be another step in building tip the, uh, building a position.
It ought to be said to Castro that, uh, uh, this kind of a base is intolerable and not acceptable r The time has now come when he must take the interests of the Cuban people, must now break clearly with the Soviet Union, prevent this missile base from becoming operational.
If we announce, at the time that we announce this development — and I think we do have to announce this -development some time this veeV. — ^Organization of American States.
We reject the mission of secrecy in this hemisphere in any matters of this sort.
We reinforce our forces in the southeastern part of the United States— vhatever is necessary from the military point of viev to be able to give, to deliver an overwhelming strike at any of these installations, including the SAM sites.
I'll assume that ve can move on this line at the same time to interrupt all air traffic from free world countries going into Cuba, insist to the Mexicans, the Dutch, that they stop their planes from coming in.
I think we 1 11 be facing a situation that could well lead to general war; that we have an obligation to do what has to be done but do it in a vay.that gives, uh, everybody a chance to, uh, put the /word unintelligible/ down before it gets too hard.
Mr President, there are a number of unknowns in this situation I vant to comment upon, and 9 in relation to them, I would like to outline very briefly some possible military alternatives and ask General Taylor to expand upon them.
But before commenting on either the unknowns or outlining some military alternatives, there are two propositions I would suggest that we ought to accept as, uh, foundations for our further thinking.
Ky first is that if we are to conduct an air strike against these installations, or against any part of Cuba, we must agree now that we will schedule that prior to the"" time these missile sites become operational.
Uh, secondly, I, I would submit the proposition that any air strike must be directed not solely against the missile sites, but against, the missile sites plus the airfields plus the aircraft which may not be on the airfields but hidden by that time plus ell potential nuclear storage sites.
Oh, we could carry out an air strike within a matter of days. -We would be ready for the start of such an air strike within, within a matter of days.
In any event, we would be prepared, followin g the air strike, for an^a ir, invasion, bothy* by air and by sea.
Si— ' ; ■ •""^""-""•'^ '""""""■■* '■, ""R after the start of V^.^ the air strike, that would '""be"" possible if the political environment made it desirable or necessary at that time.
There might have to be a second phase, and then it would require a declaration of a national emergency.
TJh, practically, I think the, our knowledge of the timing of the readiness is going to be so, so, uh, difficult that we'll never have the, the exact permanent, uh, the perfect timing.
One, a, an initial pause of some sort while we get co:qpletely ready and get, get the right posture on the part of the target, so We can do the best job.
I'd then start this continuous reconnaissance, the list that you had, continue over Cuba. 13 Then, then the decision can be made as we, as we're mobilizing, uh, vith the air strike as to whether we .invade or not.
I think that's the hardest question militarily in the whole business— one which we should look at very closely before we get our feet in that deep mud in Cuba.
I might say incidently, sir, that you delay -anything else you have to do at this point.
Secondly, I don't believe, myself, that the critical question is whether you get a particular missile before it goes off because if they shoot those missiles we are in general nuclear var.
In other vords, the Soviet Union has got quite a different decision to make.
This is why I suggest that if we're talking about an air attack, I believe we should consider it only on the assumption that we can carry if off before these become operational.
What it'd give 'em is primary, it makes the launching base, uh, for short range missiles against the United States to _ _ .supplement their rather f&ecej>t±vei7 ICBM_system, for example.
If there are nuclear warheads associated with the Punchers, you must assume there will be nuclear warheads associated wxth aircraft.
Even if there are not nuclear warheads associated with aircraft, voa must assume that those aircraft have hig h explosive^ potential.
TJhm, for"" the first time, I'm beginning really to wonder whether maybe Mr Khrushchev is entirely rational about Berlin.
Gromyko stated that in his press conference the other day, too, 16 Yeah.
You get all these"" noises again. ... without, uh, the slightest consultation or, or warning or preparation.
They may announce* within three days they're going to have warheads on 'em; if we came and attack, they're going to fire them.
Obviously they can get 'em in by submarine and so on,.l don't know whether you, you just can't keep high strikes on.
I suspect, Mr President, we'd have to take out the surface-to-air missiles in order to get in, to get in, take some of them out.
In terms of the tightness of our intelligence control, Mr President, I think we are in unusually and fortunately good position.
We set up a, uh, new security classification governing precisely the fieia of offensive capability in Cuba just five days ago, four days ago, under General Carter.
We'd have to ask for relaxation of the ground rules, uh, that, that Mac has just enunciated, so that I can, uh, give it to the senior commanders who are involved in the plans.
Well, Mr President, I, I think, to be realistic, we should assume that this will become fairly widely known, if hot in the newspapers, at least by political representatives of both parties within — I would, I'm just picking a figure — I'd say a week.
And I say that because we have, we have taken action already that is raising questions in people's minds.
And normally, uh, the photo interpreters and the, and the operational officers in these commands are looking forward to these.
We have stopped all that, and this, this Lj^c of information is going on throughout the department.
And I, I doubt very much that we can keep this out of the bands of , uh, of members of Congress, for example, for more than a-veek.
Busk; Well, Senator Keating*-* has already, in effect, announced it on the floor of the Senate.
I think ve can count on announcing it not later than Thursday or Friday of this veek.
My question, Mr President, is whether as a matter of, uh, tactics ve ought not* to interview Senator Keating and check out his data.
Seem to me that that ought to be done in a routine sort of way by an open officer of the intelligence agency.
I think that, uh, we're committed at any timethat ve feel that there's a build up that in any way endangers to take whatever action we roust take to assure our security.
I would think the secretary's evaluation of this thing being around all over the lot is a pretty accurate one, I would think it'd take a week to do it.
I would, uh, like 'to hear what the responsible commanders have to say this afternoon.
I think the question with the base is whether we take it out or whether we talk about it, and, uh, both, either alternative is a very distressing one, but of the two, 'I would take it out.
I spent the weekend with the ambassedors of the Organization of American States.
I think this organization is fine, but I don't think, I don't rely on 'em much for any strength in anything like this.
And, I, the fact that we're talking about our other allies, uh, I take the position that Mr Bundy says, ""We ought to be living all these years with /words unintelligible/ get your blood pressure up.
I take this little State Department Bulletin that you sent out to all the congressmen.
One, one of the points you make --that any time the build up endangers or threatens our security in any way, we're going to do whatever inust be done immediately to protect our own security.
Uh, I think we have to be prudent and cautious, talk to the commanders and see what they say, what they're. ... /l'n7 not mic ^ for circularizing it over the Hill or our allies, even though I realize it's a breach of faith.
There are perhaps two or three of our principal allies or heads of government we could communicate, at least on a 2l*-hour notice basis.
One, the second is the broader one that Secretary McKaTnara was talking about, which is on the airfields and on the SAM sites and on anything else connected 21 •with, uh, missiles.
Third is doing both of those things and also at the same time launching a blockade, vhich requires really the, uh, the, uh, third and vhicb is a larger step.
And then, as I Just have to Jy or As unintelligible/ and do it. tell them, though, the night before.
Probably ought to We have the fifth one, really, vhich is the invasion.
I vould say that, uh, you're dropping bombs all over Cuba if you do the second, uh, air, the airports, knocking out their planes, dropping it on all their missiles.
Veil, I would think ft's almost incumbent upon the Russians, then, to say, ""Well, we're going to send them in again, and if you do it again, we're going to do, we're going to do the same thing to Turkey, or ""We're going to do the same thing to Iran.
It ought to be enough. larticularly if it isn't directed initially on Havana, the Havana area.
If you carriea out an air strike, this . might leaa to an -uprising such that in oraer to prevent the 'Slaughter of, of, uh, of the free Cubans, we wouia have to invaae to, to, uh, reintroduce oraer into the country.
I would rather think if there were a, a coniplete air strike against all air forces, you might as well do it, do the whole job.
Yeah. -' 23 If you give less, you, you run the risk of, of giving up surprise.
One is how much time we've got on these particular missiles before they're ready to go.
Taylor: Bundy: Taylor: Bundy: McKamara: Bundy: Carter: questions because, uh, this type of missile, uh, can be launched very quickly with a concealed expedience.
So that ... ... intelligence, uh . . . ... even today,this, this one, uh, area, might be operational.
I can see that it's, it's highly /words unintelligible/ . . . toe very important question is whether there are other areas which conceivably might be even more operational that we have not identified.
So that kind of movement has already been taking place and it's been possible to do it quietly.
I think our point of view may change somewhat because of an adjustment here.
There is a great danger of, of equipment dispersal of all the, the interesting aircraft.
The advantage of taking out these airplanes would be to protect us against a reprisal ... ... by them.
Taylor? : Bundy: Taylor? : Carter?: JFK: Bandy: JFK: Bundy: JFK: Bundy: JFK: BFK: Speaker JFK: Billon: General.
We've authorized, Mr President, ve have a decision for additional intelligence reconnaissance, a minor decision that ve'll talk to Keating.
I should think"" we need to know the, the earliest readiness for the various sizes of air strike and how long they would take to execute.
You've got to tell, it seems to me you're going to have to tell SACEUB*** -. . . . . . and, uh, and the commandant.
Maybe just have *° ust ta ^ e them out, and continue our other preparations if we decide to do that.
I, myself, think we ought . . . &*:jWK*&&mi ' & 'yg--V.-\""M ***Supre:iie Allied Commander, Europe. 28 Well, we'll have . . . ... to work out a contingency on that.
There's going to be a difference between those who know that—this wiU leak out in the next few days— there are these, uh, uh, bases, until we say or the Pentagon or State won't be harsh.
I discussed the matter with, uh, Bohlen* of the Soviet bloc and told him he could talk to Thompson.
It seems to me that' there's no one else in the State Department that ought to be talked to about it -. . . ^ords unintelligible/ in the department. ... in any level at. all, and, uh, until we know a little more.
Maybe a lot of people know about what's there, but what we're going to do about it really ought to be, you know, the tightest of all because otherwise we bitch it up.
McNaraara: JFK: McNamara: JFK?: McNamara: Carter? : McNamara: JFK: McNamara: JFK: McNamara: JFK: McNamara: JFK: 29 Mr President, may I suggest that ve come back this afternoon prepared to, to answer three questions.
I mean should we state publicly ... • that, that you have stated we will, we'll act to take out any offensive weapons.
And I wouldn't, I would think particularly of ""the contacts with Khrushchev.
And I would think that if these are to be done, they must be scheduled in terms of time very, very carefully in relation to a potential military action.
There must be a very, very precise series of, of contacts with him, and indications of what we'll do at certain times following that.
And, thirdly, we should"" be prepared to # answer your questions regarding the, the effect of these strikes and the time required to carry them off.
How long before ve get the information about the rest of the island, do you figure, General? 30 Could take weeks, Mr President.
The, the one thing to worry about on low level is that that will create a sense of I tactical alert in the island, and I'm not sure we want to do that.
All right, well, now, I think we've got to, uh, /word unintelligible/ for this for us to be doing anything quickly and quietly and completely that's what we've got to be doing the next two or three days.
Yeah. ^everal speakers speak at once and none of the words are intelligible.
That vould be still better because you're supposed to be out there at eight.
JFK: RFK: JFK: Speaker ?: JFK: Speaker ?: Speaker. .? : * ""Rusk: Speaker ?: Busk: Ball: 33/Words unintelligible/ Well, then you bring who you think ought to be brought.
All right, now the other question is on, uh, the /words unintelligible/ Eisenhower.
All right, but I've got, I'm working on /words unintelligible/, no, but I've got a, want to see about a speech, that's all.
What about /words unintelligible/* 1'H call hi^ about this thing tomorrow.
Everybody else will sit down at the table /words unintelligible/ and consider what gaps there are.
If you had, uh, /iimnediate27/words unintelligible/ that's something else.
Have /words unintelligible/ just sit down and you're right, they're great at that.
