With the blockbuster film ""Thirteen Days"" the story now ignores the Soviet Union as well.
The film turns history on its head and drums into our heads exactly the wrong lessons of the crisis.
Yes, the United States as victim, an old theme that justifies massive military build-ups.
She could not learn from ""Thirteen Days"" that in October 1962 the United States was waging a war against Cuba that involved several assassination attempts against the Cuban leader, terrorist acts against Cuban civilians, and sabotage of Cuban factories.
The endgame of this low intensity conflict envisioned a United States invasion.
Nor would she have know from the film that the Kennedy Administration had convinced the Soviet military that the United States was planning a first strike against its superpower adversary by rapidly building up United States strategic forces.
In 1962, the Soviet had fewer than fifty bombers and missiles that could hit the United States.
The missile gap Kennedy exploited in his 1960 campaign was real, except that it was in the United States favor, not the Soviets.
Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev sought to placate his generals by placing intermediate range ballistic missiles in Cuba.
It was a cheaper way to provide some deterrent against a feared United States attack than to build many new intercontinental ballistic missiles that could be launched from the Soviet Union.
But we not only lose the broader context for the drama when the time frame is narrowed.
We learn the wrong lessons from the history of this moment when the world came closer to nuclear destruction than at any other time.
On the basis of documents I obtained through the National Security Archive's Freedom of Information Act requests, it is clear why the Soviet and Cuban leaders were expecting a United States invasion of the island.
Notably, former Secretary of Defense Robert S McNamara acknowledged at an historic 1989 meeting with former Soviet and Cuban officials that ""if I had been a Cuban leader, I think I might have expected a United States invasion.
At the same time, President Kennedy had ordered the largest expansion of peacetime United States military power despite the acknowledgment by Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric that United States strategic forces far surpassed Soviet capabilities.
We now know that one of the five approved strategic plans at the time, which were based on the United States build-up, called for a nuclear first-strike against the Soviet Union.
Like our own military analysts, Soviet national security advisers tend to worry about worst-case scenarios, and United States actions made them very nervous.
While the Soviet placement nuclear missiles ninety miles from the United States may have been an absurdly risky and dangerous way to discourage both United States aggression against Cuba and a United States first-strike against the Soviet Union, it is an understandable reaction to the circumstances.
Therefore, the United States should be more prudent in trying to overthrow or threaten other governments.
Instead the lesson we learn from the film, by taking the crisis out of its broader context, is that crazy foreigners will always threaten the United States and so we must always be vigilant.
The second traditional lesson that the film reinforces is that the crisis was resolved because the United States forced the Soviet Union to back down.
We came ""eyeball to eyeball"" with the Soviets, Dean Rusk said, and they blinked.
Khrushchev, like Kennedy, perceived the crisis was spiraling out of control.
You would not know from ""Thirteen Days"" that the Soviet leader had given orders not to shoot down any U-2 surveillance planes.
Soviet officials seem to have understood this could have brought retaliatory strikes and perhaps even a United States invasion.
Khrushchev knew, and contrary to the film's depiction, Kennedy did not know that the Soviets had deployed tactical nuclear missiles to Cuba.
These battlefield weapons, intended for use against an invading army, had warheads nearly size the size of the Hiroshima bomb.
Had a local Soviet commander fired one of these, it would have been the start of a general nuclear war.
It is not the kind of fear one experiences in a game of chicken, where the fear is for your own personal safety.
Toughness and rigidity in such a situation makes it more likely that the other side will feel compelled to act equally macho.
It was Kennedy's flexibility--finding a way to trade the missiles in Turkey for the missiles in Cuba--and Khrushchev's willingness to risk humiliation (he was deposed as General Secretary in 1964 in part because of the missile crisis) that brought the confrontation to a peaceful conclusion.
The filmmakers do achieve a laudable sense of the tension some of the key United States players felt at the time.
Most important, they depict the lack of precision with which President Kennedy reached a peaceful resolution of the crisis.
Hopefully, the scenes depicting human frailty will destroy one of the oft-invoked lessons of the confrontation, that crises can be managed if the Kennedy technique of assembling the best and brightest is repeated.
In fact, we were lucky to have survived, because such situations cannot be micro-managed with precision.
Donaldson and Self also get it right in understanding that the Kennedy brothers manipulated the consensus of the ExComm toward a decision they wanted rather than waiting passively for agreement to emerge from a group that tended to favor an aggressive act.
President George Bush should learn from this what Governor Bush did not understand, that a leader cannot simply turn to advisers for solutions.
The big one most reviewers have noted is the role of political aide Kenny O'Donnell, who did not have a serious role during the crisis.
O'Donnell's character provides a useful dramatic vantage point from which to watch the crisis.
The filmmakers also make a big error in portraying United States officials as having knowledge that there were armed tactical nuclear missiles on the island.
In fact they did not know, and their ignorance is what almost brought us to the brink.
Cuban anti-aircraft gunners did not fire on low-level United States reconnaissance planes until October 27, when they almost brought one down.
Only two or three people--not the bulk of the ExComm--knew about Robert Kennedy's secret October 27 meeting with Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin and his offer to remove the Turkish missiles.
But these artistic discretions do not depart substantially enough from what really happened to discredit the film.
Far more significant is the film's one-sided presentation of the events in 1962.
Most of the film's reviewers also are to blame in not alerting us to the serious distortion.
Sure, except it missed inconvenient facts about United States attacks on Cuba and the United States missile build-up.
Without Soviet restraint during the crisis it could have been far different.
Variety's anonymous reviewer tried to offer readers some of the relevant background, but unfortunately repeated myths about Khrushchev's low regard for Kennedy that were debunked more than a decade ago.
And teachers will use it unless warned, because the missile crisis did bring us closer to nuclear holocaust than any other confrontation.
Other producers will shy away from the subject for a while now that it has been done to such acclaim.
In contrast to USA Today, which advised parents and teachers that ""younger audiences ought to see this movie,"" reviewers should have raised a ruckus.
This movie feeds the worst American jingoism, they should have warned us.
The confrontation between the superpowers took place on the high seas and for the Soviets that is where the crisis occurred.
In Cuba, it is called the Crisis of October, to distinguish it from the many other confrontations Cuba has experienced with the United States.
To do that we need to see it from the viewpoint of all the countries involved.
