Ever since Graham Allison’s Essence of Decision, scholars have concentrated on the pitfalls of individual perception and cognition while paying little attention to organizational weaknesses in intelligence.
And they have overlooked the silent but deadly organizational weaknesses that led analysts to make the wrong call.
In part one, I make the empirical case for calling the crisis an intelligence failure by examining all of the pre-crisis national intelligence estimates of 1962.
In part two, I discuss why the success narrative has stuck and why it matters.
To date, answers have focused on mirror imaging and other aspects of misjudgment.
Yet I find that organizational deficiencies also played a pivotal and unexplored role-causing signals to be found and then lost in the bureaucracy; driving the interagency estimates process toward a false consistency over time; and channeling dissenting hypotheses out of the Cuba estimates process entirely.
This paper argues that we have learned the wrong intelligence lessons from the most studied event of the nuclear age.
Lebow finds that the Cuban missile crisis is filled with “dogmas” that have only tenuous connections to reality.
Organizations frequently forget what they should remember and remember what they should forget.
These realities mean that improving any organization’s performance over time requires unlearning erroneous lessons as much as retaining the indispensable ones.
DO NOT CITE WITHOUT PERMISSION missiles constituted a stunning American intelligence success.
The paper seeks to fill the gap, shining a light on the organizational deficiencies that lurked in the background and led analysts to make the wrong call.
The September 11 terrorist attacks and faulty estimates of Iraq’s weapons of mass destruction suggest that organizational impediments to analysis are still very much alive today.
I begin my making the empirical case for treating the crisis as in intelligence warning failure, focusing in particular on the four national intelligence estimates produced before American U2 pilots snapped those infamous photographs of Soviet nuclear missile sites near San Cristobal on October 14, 1962.
As we shall see, every estimate, including one issued just 25 2 DRAFT 9/21/10.
DO NOT CITE WITHOUT PERMISSION days before the missiles were discovered, concluded that Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev would not place nuclear weapons or any other offensive capabilities in Cuba.
Sherman Kent, who chaired the Central Intelligence Agency estimates office, later reflected, “There is no blinking the fact that we came down on the wrong side.
And yet, scholars and practitioners have either excused the warning failure as an occupational hazard –arguing that intelligence is not omniscience -or glossed over it, focusing instead on the CIA’s eventual discovery of the missiles and the successful conclusion of the crisis.
Next, I turn to this historical narrative, exploring how the intelligence success story has gained so much traction over time while the intelligence warning failure has not.
For each question, I show how conventional explanations, which attribute failure to analytic constraints, fall short, and how organizational forces played a powerful and unseen role.
The Four Pre-Crisis Intelligence Estimates of 1962 The empirical record of United States intelligence assessments leading up to the crisis is rich.
We now know that between January and October 1962, when Soviet nuclear missile sites were ultimately discovered, the CIA’s estimates office produced four National Intelligence Estimates and Special National Intelligence Estimates about Castro’s communist regime, its relationship with the Soviet Bloc, its activities in spreading Communism throughout Latin America, and potential threats to the United States.
National Intelligence Estimates and Special National Intelligence Estimates were –and still are -the gold standard of intelligence products, the most authoritative, pooled judgments of intelligence professionals from agencies across the United States government.
DO NOT CITE WITHOUT PERMISSION The four pre-crisis estimates of 1962 reveal that United States intelligence officials were gravely worried about the political fallout of a hostile communist regime so close to American shores and the possibility of communist dominoes in Latin America.
The first estimate, released January 17, 1962, was a big think piece that assessed threats to the United States from the broader Caribbean region over the next twenty years.
Again, the estimate discounts heavily the possibility that the Soviet 5 DRAFT 9/21/10.
DO NOT CITE WITHOUT PERMISSION Union would defend Cuba or establish offensive military capabilities there.
The third estimate was disseminated on August 1, 1962 just a couple of weeks after intelligence began indicating a major Soviet arms buildup in Cuba.
The fourth and crucial estimate before the crisis was released September 19, 1962.
It turns out, however, that conspicuously larger numbers of Soviet military forces actually were in Cuba at the time; we just did not know it.
CIA estimators assumed this key indicator of a Soviet strategic missile base would be easy to see.
The Intelligence Success Narrative For decades, scholars and practitioners have been reluctant to call the precrisis intelligence estimates of 1962 a strategic warning failure.
One argues that intelligence warning succeeded, the other admits that no accurate warning was possible; United States intelligence estimators did the best that anyone could.
DO NOT CITE WITHOUT PERMISSION The first success narrative conflates causes and outcomes.
Because the crisis ended without nuclear confrontation and gave Khrushchev a major political defeat, there is a natural tendency to conclude that United States intelligence warning worked well.
To be sure, for most of 1962, there were no nuclear missiles in Cuba to be found.
Still, none of the intelligence estimates sounded the alarm to be on the lookout for such a possibility; indicated specifically what factors, other than large numbers of troops, might conceivably change the assessment of Khrushchev’s intentions; or urged policymakers to take seriously the idea that 1 Nor did Khrushchev give any indications that something was afoot.
DO NOT CITE WITHOUT PERMISSION the Soviets could be up to something more.
Both President Bush and his National Security Advisor, Condoleezza Rice, told the 9/11 Commission that the large number of FBI field investigations gave them the distinct impression that the FBI had the threat covered.
As many have noted, false alarms look like warning failures when they are really warning successes, compelling policymakers to take steps that prevent the anticipated bad outcome from occurring in the first place.
DO NOT CITE WITHOUT PERMISSION Cuban missile crisis, each passing decade brings new and frightening evidence of how Kennedy’s “seizing the initiative” after seeing those U2 photographs nearly led to nuclear disaster, not American victory.
In 2002, scholars unearthed terrifying new evidence that one Soviet submarine captain actually did order preparations to launch of a nuclear-tipped torpedo off the American coast.
On October 27th, bombarded by United States Navy depth charges and running out of air, the Soviet Captain gave the order to prepare a nuclear weapon for firing.
In short, the mounting evidence of narrow misses during the crisis suggests that 12 DRAFT 9/21/10.
DO NOT CITE WITHOUT PERMISSION luck played a pivotal role, and that the outcome could easily have taken a tragic turn.
One wonders whether observers would feel quite the same about the performance of United States intelligence agencies had Soviet SS-4 nuclear missiles landed in south Florida.
The second variant of the success narrative maintains that United States intelligence estimators may have been wrong, but they did the best that any human could; as Betts and Jervis note, intelligence failures are inevitable.
With a few exceptions, examinations of the Cuban missile have picked up this theme.
Although comparatively little work has examined intelligence in the crisis, nearly all of it starts from the premise that intelligence agencies did the best possible job against a highly irrational enemy.
Raymond Garthoff’s 5 For a different view questioning Khrushchev’s rationality, see Lebow 1983.
Khrushchev was the one who erred by acting in such an aberrant, risky fashion.
More recently, Renshon examines the role of “mirroring risk” in United States intelligence estimating errors of the crisis.
Blaming the adversary for his unpredicted behavior is an odd argument, to say the least.
By this measure, the Cuban missile crisis seems a textbook case of anomaly 14 DRAFT 9/21/10.
The Benefits of Calling a Failure a Failure Calling something a success or failure is not simply an exercise in semantics.
Seeking to explain “why warning was so hard,” intelligence research on the crisis has focused primarily on cognitive psychology and the pitfalls inherent in human cognition.
But more recent analyses of the September 11 terrorist attacks and the faulty estimates of Iraq’s 8 Sagan’s excellent work examines organizational weaknesses that nearly led to accidents, not organizational factors that impeded intelligence analysis.
DO NOT CITE WITHOUT PERMISSION weapons of mass destruction suggest that organizational weaknesses in intelligence can have devastating effects.
Below, I revisit the intelligence warning failure of the Cuban missile crisis, raising three lingering questions from the historical record and offering some initial organizational explanations.
My purpose here is to show that intelligence failure is a good starting point; that despite the rich literature on the Cuban missile crisis, much more conceptual work remains to be done; and that organization theory provides analytic traction for a deeper understanding of the challenges that have hindered intelligence warning for the past fifty years—and still do.
Signals and noise have been a major part of every intelligence postmortem since Pearl Harbor.
Roberta Wohlstetter, who coined the terms, observed that intelligence warning requires analysts to separate “signals,” or clues that point to an adversary’s future action, from a background that is filled with “noise,” or intelligence indicators that turn out to be irrelevant, confusing, or just plain wrong.
Detecting the right signals before disaster strikes, however, is another matter entirely.
DO NOT CITE WITHOUT PERMISSION Wohlstetter’s important insight warns against the perils of hindsight bias.
Fixating on numbers and individual cognition, we have missed the crucial role of organizations.
Immediately after the Cuban missile crisis, the steady refrain was that intelligence noise was tremendous while signals were scarce.
Intelligence officials working in the weeks and months before the September 11 terrorist attacks would gladly have traded signals-to-noise ratios with their Cuban missile crisis counterparts.
Although processing technology had improved dramatically, it was nowhere near enough.
DO NOT CITE WITHOUT PERMISSION As the comparison suggests, quantifying signals and noise tells part of the warning story, but not the most important part.
His memo generated no interest at FBI headquarters, was sent to just one FBI field office, and was never forwarded to the CIA or any other intelligence agency.
DO NOT CITE WITHOUT PERMISSION searching for Khalid al-Mihdhar and Nawaf al-Hazmi, two suspected al Qaeda operatives who ultimately hijacked and crashed American Airlines flight #77 into the Pentagon.
And because a gaping divide separated domestic and foreign intelligence agencies, the CIA and the rest of the United States Intelligence Community never seized these or other FBI leads in time, either.
And smart intelligence officials struggled alone, piecing together what they knew based on what they could get.
Moussaoui’s belongings sat unopened for weeks as agents desperately tried to obtain a search warrant -unaware of the Phoenix memo or the existence of another terrorist in FBI custody who could have identified Moussaoui from al Qaeda’s training camps.
The Moussaoui investigation was known by a handful of headquarters officials and some agents in the bureau’s Oklahoma City field office who had been dispatched to Airman Flight School, which Moussaoui had previously attended.
In these cases, and twenty others, someone somewhere in the intelligence bureaucracy noticed something important.
A string of Jihadist flight school students in Arizona, a suspicious extremist at a Minnesota flight school, two suspected al Qaeda operatives with United States visas in their passports -these and other signals were not drowned out by the noise.
FBI signals were never put together before 9/11 because the Bureau’s field office structure was designed to keep them apart.
FBI field offices were supposed to work independently, carefully and slowly investigating past crimes, case by case, in discrete jurisdictions.
They were never designed to track broad terrorist plots that spanned the country and required fast action to forestall catastrophe.
In addition, although CIA Director George Tenet believed the system was “blinking red,” his Central intelligence Agency was not, in fact, centralizing intelligence across agency lines.
By law, the United States intelligence system was splintered into a dozen different agencies, and the CIA Director had little more than “whining rights” over their budgets, personnel, and activities.
Even a cursory look at the Cuban missile crisis suggests that structural fragmentation appears to have played a similar role then, isolating and 22 DRAFT 9/21/10.
DO NOT CITE WITHOUT PERMISSION weakening signals rather than concentrating and amplifying them.
Created just fifteen years earlier, the CIA had been hobbled from birth by existing intelligence agencies in the State, Justice, War and Navy departments, all of whom vigorously protected their own missions, budgets, and power.
The CIA, in fact, did not control the intelligence budgets or activities of the Defense Intelligence Agency, the National Security Agency, or any of the military intelligence services, all of whom reported to the secretary of defense.
This structure meant that intelligence reporting and analysis of the Cuban situation was handled by half a dozen different agencies with different missions, different specialties, different incentives, different levels of security clearances, different access to information, different interpretations of the findings, and no common boss to knock bureaucratic heads together short of the president.
DO NOT CITE WITHOUT PERMISSION Department handled diplomatic dispatches.
At first the CIA, and then the Strategic Air Command, manned U2 reconnaissance flights over Cuba.
In short, in 1962, as in 2001, there were many bureaucratic players and no one firmly in charge of them all.
Although a more thorough organizational analysis of how every signal was processed through the bureaucracy lies beyond the scope of this paper, initial evidence does suggest that organizational fragmentation existed, and that it had the effect of delaying action and hindering signal consolidation.
DO NOT CITE WITHOUT PERMISSION daily intelligence checklist, the most important current intelligence product.
At the time, however, it was given only “routine” precedence because the CIA analyst who saw it was 25 DRAFT 9/21/10.
DO NOT CITE WITHOUT PERMISSION charged with identifying information relevant for aerial surveillance, and thought the information was “too general” to be of targeting use (Central Intelligence Agency 1962, item #118).11 In short, preliminary evidence suggests that the same organizational barriers operating on 9/11 were also at work during the missile crisis.
Indeed, given the long and sordid history of intelligence coordination problems, it seems unlikely that Cuban intelligence reporting constituted a shining exception where intelligence warning signals were collected, assessed, and disseminated by a well-oiled coordination machine.
Instead, in both cases, bureaucratic jurisdictions and standard operating procedures ended up creating invisible fault lines within and across intelligence agencies that kept signals from converging.
Structural fragmentation made it likely that signals would get lost, even after they had been found.
Or more precisely, why did that final September 19th special estimate 11For original document with “routine” precedence marking, see McAuliffe 1992, 105.
Recall that the estimate clearly indicated conditions on the ground had changed since the previous estimate, which was published on August 1, 1962.
But mirror imaging was not the only problem hindering the estimates process; organizational pressures were also driving strongly toward conformity and consistency across the four Cuba estimates.
These reports were not the product of a single mind, a single view, or even a single agency.
That, in turn, meant overcoming immense bureaucratic inertia -convincing every intelligence agency involved in the estimating process that what it said or assessed or wrote or agreed to the last time should be discarded or modified this time.
DO NOT CITE WITHOUT PERMISSION not just take more work inside each agency.
In short, organizational dynamics naturally gave consistency the upper hand.
Instead, my point is that estimating has always involved a political “catch 22:” any new estimate that revises earlier judgments can be seized – however unjustifiably -as proof that earlier estimates were wrong.
We saw these politics play out in living color in 2007, when the National Intelligence Council dramatically changed its estimate of Iran’s nuclear weapons program.
While earlier estimates judged Tehran to be developing a vigorous nuclear weaponization program, the 2007 estimate considered new evidence and concluded that Tehran had probably frozen its nuclear weapons program back in 2003.
Nevertheless, the new and improved Iran estimate was seized by Republicans and Democrats alike as evidence of an earlier estimating failure.
DO NOT CITE WITHOUT PERMISSION The political atmosphere surrounding the Cuba estimates was no less intense.
The Cold War stakes had never been higher and the CIA had already caused Kennedy a devastating defeat in the Bay of Pigs invasion just eighteen months earlier.
At that precise moment, on that particular topic, consistency was a safe and prudent course while inconsistency carried substantial risks, both for the Intelligence Community and the president.
DO NOT CITE WITHOUT PERMISSION The usual explanation is that no strong dissenting opinions existed.
CIA Director John McCone, who suspected Soviet missiles from the start.
In fact, the historical record shows that he forcefully advocated his hypothesis about Soviet missiles with senior Kennedy advisors on several occasions, starting in August 1962.
DO NOT CITE WITHOUT PERMISSION Both Garthoff and Wirtz argue that McCone refrained from foisting his opinions or judgments on the estimates process, and conclude that this was a good thing.
On the one hand, dividing labor into subunits enables experts to tackle specialized tasks in specialized ways.
DO NOT CITE WITHOUT PERMISSION Organizations are filled with these kinds of standard formats and operating procedures.
The trouble is that the more that things get done the same way each time, the harder it is to do things differently.
The entire system becomes a welloiled machine that, by its very existence, keeps alternative ideas or ways of operating from getting through.
The estimates process in the Cuban missile crisis seemed ripe for structural secrecy problems.
It was highly specialized, with multiple units, offices, and agencies collecting and analyzing different pieces of the Cuba intelligence puzzle.
Instead, worked within the estimating machine, requesting additional photographic reconnaissance to get the proof he needed.
Conclusion Nearly fifty years after the Cuban missile crisis, intelligence warning is still plagued by many of the same challenges.
DO NOT CITE WITHOUT PERMISSION And yet, some of the most powerful barriers to effective intelligence warning remain relatively unexplored.
Final Report of the national Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States, authorized edition.
Item #112 in President’s Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board, Chronology of Specific Events Relating to the Military Buildup in Cuba.
In President’s Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board, Chronology of Specific Events Relating to the Military Buildup in Cuba.
Joint Inquiry into Intelligence Community Activities Before and After the Terrorist Attacks of September 11, 2001.
Report of the United States Senate Select Committee on Intelligence and the United States House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence . 107th Cong., 2nd sess., December.
House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence and Senate Select Committee on Intelligence Joint Inquiry Staff Statement.7th Cong., 2d sess., September 24, 2004, as supplemented October 17, 2002.
In appendix 2, “Phoenix EC,” United States Department of Justice, Office of Inspector General.
A Review of the FBI’s Handling of Intelligence Information Related to the September 11 Attacks.
Commission on the Intelligence Capabilities of the United States Regarding Weapons of Mass Destruction.
