Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty and nuclear testing Grade Level: Grades 9-12 Subject Areas: United States and World History after World War II Time Required: 2 class periods Goals/ Rationale The Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty was signed in Moscow on August 5, 1963 after eight years of negotiations between the United States, Great Britain, and the Soviet Union.
Although this treaty was limited in scope, it paved the way for later arms agreements.
In this lesson plan, high school students consider the threat of nuclear weapons in the early 1960s and the opportunities and challenges in negotiating an arms control agreement.
Objectives Students will • analyze a political cartoon. • interpret the language of an international treaty. • assess the opportunities and difficulties for the United States in negotiating and signing a nuclear test ban treaty in the early 1960s. • consider the challenges all nations face in developing international arms treaties.
Historical Background and Context The destruction of Hiroshima and Nagasaki by atomic bombs marked the end of World War II and the beginning of the nuclear age.
As tensions between East and West settled into a Cold War, scientists in the United States, Great Britain, and the Soviet Union conducted tests and developed more powerful and efficient nuclear weapons.
But, as scientists and the public gradually became aware of the dangers of radioactive fallout, they began to raise their voices against nuclear testing.
In 1959, radioactive deposits were found in wheat and milk in the northern United States.
Backed by growing public sentiment against nuclear testing, leaders and diplomats of several countries sought to address the issue.
In May of 1955, under the auspices of the United Nations Disarmament Commission, the United States, the United Kingdom, Canada, France, and the Soviet Union began negotiations to end nuclear weapons testing.
Diplomats disagreed about whether to link a ban on testing to general arms control.
Conflict over inspections to verify underground testing impeded later talks because the Soviet Union feared that on-site inspections could lead to spying that might expose the fact that Khrushchev had vastly exaggerated the number of deliverable Soviet nuclear weapons.
As negotiators struggled over differences, the Soviet Union and the United States suspended nuclear tests -a moratorium that lasted from November 1958 to September 1961.
John F Kennedy had supported a ban on nuclear weapons testing since 1956.
Believing a ban would prevent other countries from obtaining nuclear weapons, he took a strong stand on the issue in the 1960 presidential campaign.
Once elected, President Kennedy pledged not to resume testing in the air and promised to pursue all diplomatic efforts for a test ban treaty before resuming underground testing.
President Kennedy met with Soviet Premier Khrushchev in Vienna in June 1961, just five weeks after the humiliating defeat of the United States Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba.
He announced his intention of cutting off Western access to Berlin; and threatened war if the United States or its allies tried to stop him.
Many United States diplomats felt that Kennedy had not stood up to the Soviet Premier at the summit, therefore, giving Khrushchev the impression that he was a weak leader.
Fearing secret underground testing by the Soviet Union and gains in Soviet nuclear technology, political and military advisors pressured Kennedy to resume testing.
And, according to a July 1961 Gallup poll, the public approved testing by a margin of two-to-one.
In August 1961, the Soviet Union announced its intention to resume atmospheric testing, and over the next 3 months it conducted 31 nuclear tests.
It exploded the largest nuclear bomb in history—58 megatons—4,000 times more powerful than the bomb dropped on Hiroshima.
Discouraged and dismayed by the Soviet tests, President Kennedy pursued diplomatic efforts before allowing renewed testing by the United States.
Unsuccessful in his efforts to reach a diplomatic agreement, President Kennedy reluctantly announced the resumption of atmospheric testing.
In a series of private letters, Khrushchev and Kennedy reopened a dialogue on banning nuclear testing.
The Soviet government broadcast a translation of the entire speech, and allowed it to be reprinted in the controlled Soviet press.
Kennedy selected Averell Harriman, an experienced diplomat known and respected by Khrushchev, to resume negotiations in Moscow.
An agreement to limit the scope of the test ban paved the way for a treaty.
By excluding underground tests from the pact, negotiators eliminated the need for the on-site inspections that worried the Kremlin.
On July 25, 1963, after only 12 days of negotiations, the two nations agreed to ban testing in the atmosphere, in space, and underwater.
The Treaty was signed in Moscow on August 5, 1963, by United States Secretary Dean Rusk, Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko, and British Foreign Secretary Lord Home—one day short of the 18th anniversary of the dropping of an atomic bomb on Hiroshima.
Over the next two months, President Kennedy convinced a fearful public and a divided Senate to support the Treaty.
In September 1996, the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty was adopted by the United Nations General Assembly.
Signed by 71 nations, including those possessing nuclear weapons, Prepared by the Department of Education and Public Programs, John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum the Treaty prohibits all nuclear test explosions including those conducted underground.
Though it was signed by President Clinton, the Senate rejected the treaty by a vote of 51 to 48.
Prepared by the Department of Education and Public Programs, John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum 3.
Note for students that the United States, Soviet Union, Great Britain, and France were the only countries that had previously tested nuclear weapons.
Note that the United States, Great Britain and the Soviet Union complied with the LNTB agreement and did not test nuclear weapons in the atmosphere, space, or underwater, although they each continued a significant number of underground tests until the early 1990s.
Also, discuss how this agreement paved the way for future non-proliferation agreements.
Extension Have students look at the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty Signed by President Clinton in 1996, and have them write about or discuss as a group why the Senate did not ratify it.
Prepared by the Department of Education and Public Programs, John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum Additional Resources Treaty of the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the IAEA A Chronology From the International Atomic Energy Agency, this web page provides a chronology of key events in Nuclear Non-Proliferation from 1957 to 2014.
The Making of the Limited Test Ban Treaty, 1958-1963 This web page not only provides an excellent essay from the National Security Archive, but also includes links to a large number of primary sources.
Around the same time, however, both the Soviet Union and the United States were escalating their aggressive rhetoric towards each other regarding Germany and West Berlin and, after a moratorium that had begun in November 1958, resumed testing of their nuclear weapons.
Negotiations took place over the next two years, even as testing continued.
One of the stumbling blocks of the treaty involved the issue of how to verify compliance with the test ban.
Also, both the Soviets and the US wanted to make sure they could still develop forceful nuclear weaponry to maintain their status as superpowers.
Mr Harold Brown [Director of Defense Research Engineering in the Department of Defense from 1961-1965] has said before a Senate committee that we could accept as few as six on-site inspections.
Well, that is the position we have taken more publicly…Mr Brown, whose judgment I value highly, has not set the official Government position.
We have suggested to the Soviet Union that we would consider the make-up of the inspection team, the rules under which the inspection team would operate, the area where there could be drilling, all of these questions, and then if we can get those settled, we could then come finally to the question of the number of tests.
The Soviet Union has refused, however, to consider these other matters until we agree with their position of three.
We feel that we ought to try to wind up all the other questions which divide us, and then we could finally come and decide what would be, given the arrangements we have made for these other matters, what would be a responsible number of tests.
But we are back and forth to the Soviet Union and we are still hoping that we can find a perhaps easing of their position.
But I would say that we will know by the end of the summer whether it is finally out.
I said from the beginning that it seemed to me that the pace of events was such in the world that unless we would get an agreement now, I would think the chance of getting it would be comparatively slight.
We are, therefore, going to continue to push very hard in May and June and July in every forum to see if we can get an agreement which I regard, but I will say as of now, since December that has been no change in the Soviet position on the number of tests nor Prepared by the Department of Education and Public Programs, John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum willingness to discuss in any way any of these other questions until we accept their position of December, which is not a satisfactory position for us.
As I indicated, what we are proposing, we settle the other matters and then come to the number of tests.
So in answer to your question, we are not moving at this time on the number of tests.
