The undeniable thing about the Kennedys of Boston is that with the great wealth of the family giving all the children three options—living a life of pleasure and leisure, increasing their wealth in the private sector, or performing public service—every one of the clan admirably chose the latter.
That commitment, almost unique among large prominent families in American history, continues to this very day.
JFK would tell Time magazine in 1957, “Dad persuaded us to work hard at whatever we did.
We soon learned that competition in the family was a kind of dry run for the world outside.
Kennedy’s first assignment was to a desk in naval intelligence in Washington, preparing a news digest for the navy chief of staff.
But this was not what he wanted, and once again he called on his father’s influence to get him transferred to the patrol torpedo boat training station in Melville, Rhode Island, to prepare him for combat duty in the South Pacific.
In his oral history at the Kennedy library in Boston, John Harllee, the executive director of the PT boat school, said, “Kennedy was such an outstanding student that I selected him for the training squadron at Melville.
This was in the days before there were enough combat veterans to fill the ranks of the instructors... a few of the best students were made instructors.
As a matter of fact, he and I had some pretty hard words about this assignment, and I thought I had made another enemy for life, but I insisted that he remain with us.
When Kennedy eventually learned that the squadron to which he was assigned, Squadron Fourteen, was going to be assigned to Panama, far away from the combat zone, he got busy, authors Joan and Clay Blair Jr. write, “trying to find the right string to pull to get out of Squadron Fourteen and into combat.
I was somewhat surprised by the orders and suspected that some strings had been pulled.
The suspicion was later confirmed when I had occasion to review his record in the Bureau of Naval Personnel in 1947.
The Presidency of John F Kennedy,44). xiii “Ask not what your country”: Many other people have previously uttered articulations very similar to these words by Kennedy, and the general sense of historians is that the idea was not Kennedy’s and he had heard or read some variation of it elsewhere.
Knowing that Kennedy was a voracious reader, my guess is that he picked it up from a 1925 article by the Lebanese philosopher Kahlil Gibran.
The second reason is that the title of Gibran’s article was “The New Frontier,” and we all know this appellation was associated with Kennedy’s years in office.
He first used “The New Frontier” in his acceptance speech for the Democratic nomination in Los Angeles in July of 1960.
When I asked Even Kennedy’s speechwriters never came up with the injunction, only a more concise and dramatic way of saying it.
Introduction him about the frequently quoted figure of “over two thousand” books, he said, “Too high.
However, the compilation includes non-assassination books also—indeed, books that only have a chapter or two on the assassination.
I asked Sawa if he would be kind enough to go through his massive compilation and cull out only JFK assassination books, which he said he’d be happy to do.
I told him that I would be calling him close to the time the book was going to press for a number up to that point, which turned out to be in late November 2006.
He told me that more than 2,000 books had chapters on the assassination.
I have been asked over and over again how Gerry Spence and I ended up trying the case.
If any reader of this book has the same question, I can only quote the producer of the docu-trial, Mark Redhead, for the answer.
Redhead told me that he first started talking to lawyers at the American Bar Association convention in London in 1985, and followed this up with speaking to trial lawyers at bar conventions in the United States.
The first contact I had had with Spence prior to the London trial was when, I believe for the first and only time in his career, he prosecuted a case in the late 1970s, serving as a special prosecutor in a murder case in which he had been a close friend of the victim, whose wife and child were also murdered.
Spence called me to find out how, as a prosecutor, you get around this argument.
I wasn’t in, and when I called him back he wasn’t in, but I left a message with his secretary that most biblical scholars interpret the original language of the fifth commandment to mean, “Thou shalt not commit murder’’’ (murder being an unlawful killing, not a sanctioned one), which is exactly how it appears in the New English Bible.
In other words, you can’t kill in the first instance, which would be murder, but if you do, it’s not against the Bible that you yourself be killed.
I am not a biblical scholar, but I knew from my prosecutorial background that not only doesn’t the Bible prohibit killing, it commands it when someone has committed murder.
By the way, Spence got a conviction of first-degree murder and the death penalty in that case.
I’ll never forget the first time I met Spence, a joint appearance with him a few years later in Wyoming.
During the question-and-answer period that followed our addresses, a fellow got up and said to me, “Mr Bugliosi, we have a problem around these parts.
Little could I have known that just a few years later Spence and I would be squaring off in London, with me “prosecuting” someone whom I believed to be guilty of murder and Spence defending him.
Past courtroom opponents and co-counsels of Spence’s spoke of his stopping at nothing to win, including “trying to physically hurt” his opposition.
Of course, Spence’s extremely competitive nature is just one of the reasons why he is the great trial lawyer he is, separating him from his peers.
I thought I was a courtroom battler, but Spence exposed me to a level of legal confrontation that I had never dreamed about.
In several instances I was clearly able to turn his conduct around, right in front of the jury, to my distinct advantage, but I don’t intend to go into them here, except to say that Spence is such a colorful rogue that when you catch him with his hand in the cookie jar, instead of getting angry, except for one instance, I just handled the matter and smiled.
I do, however, want to mention two out-of-court instances, one of which ended in a stalemate, the other which Spence won.
The reason why I want to mention the stalemate one is that it ostensibly tended to confirm what the media, on both sides of the Atlantic, were saying about Spence and me, which didn’t begin to tell the whole story.
Going into the trial I didn’t know Spence well, but I was aware of his superlative record, respected him, and certainly had no dislike for him.
I don’t recall, now, Judge Bunton saying this to Spence and me directly, but he may have.
He certainly told the reporter this, but in a later note to me he said his remark “had nothing to do with the courtroom performance of you and Gerry.
What happened at the pretrial conference was, looking back, humorous, at least to me.
Looking back, obviously Spence couldn’t have been serious, and perhaps was just trying to intimidate me, but at the moment I was stunned and responded, “You gotta be kidding.
I don’t know what you’ve been getting by with around the country, but you’re in the majors now, and you’re not going to get by with it here.
Judge Bunton and the typically proper Brit, Mark Redhead, sat there openmouthed and ENDNOTES speechless.
Spence said, “I don’t see any reason why I have to sit here and take this kind of abuse,” and proceeded to leave the room with his law partner, Ed Moriarty.
I forget what happened next, but Gerry returned to the room in a few minutes.
Later that afternoon I was working in my room at our hotel, the Savoy, when Moriarty called to say, “Gerry is downstairs in the dining room.
Now, Vince, we’re in this f-trial together, and it ain’t to any of our benefit to fight like this.
To this day, I call Gerry “cowboy,” not in denigration, because Spence is a great trial lawyer, but Gerry “thinks” he’s a cowboy, coming into court with his Stetson hat, suede jacket, and cowboy boots.
And he does own a thirtyfive-thousand acre ranch eighty miles from his home in Jackson Hole, Wyoming.
Though the trial that followed contained many tense, confrontational moments between Spence and me, from that moment on we got along fine and have become good friends.
Spence is someone I have a lot of respect for, not only because he’s the best criminal defense attorney and plaintiffs lawyer in the country, but because he’s a man of compassion for the little guy, as I am.
He also happens to be one of the finest writers of nonfiction books in America, bringing a wonderful literary quality to his writing that is largely absent in the nonfiction genre.
He’s a golden nugget waiting to be discovered by mainstream book reviewers.
About the incident that Spence won, the night before the trial we all appeared in court to familiarize ourselves with the courtroom and everyone’s position in it, right down to the court reporter.
Spence proceeded to sit in a seat at the counsel table that was closest to the jury and always occupied by the prosecutor, the defense attorney invariably sitting at the other end of the table.
The Brits were absolutely terrified, having invested well over a million dollars and a year and a half of very diligent effort to track down witnesses and put the trial together.
Mark Redhead was as pale as a ghost and was once again shocked by the conduct of Spence and me.
In Britain, lawyers are very dignified and reserved, and now twice, within two days, Redhead was being exposed to conduct that was both foreign to him and an assault on his British sensibilities.
But Mark took my side in the dispute, whereupon Spence said to him, “I told you that I would insist on sitting next to the jury and you gave me your word I could.
I finally broke the impasse, once again finding the situation humorous, by telling Redhead with a smile and to his great relief, “Mark, the problem we’re having here is that American lawyers are different from British lawyers, but even among American lawyers, Gerry and I are on the fringes.
You people here in England are civilized, I’m half-civilized, and the cowboy is completely uncivilized.
And Spence, who refers to himself as a gunslinger, won the fight and sat next to the jury throughout the whole trial.
And then there was the occasion when Spence, at the lectern, started reading from an HSCA volume in his cross-examination of Dr.
Charles Petty, the Dallas medical examiner who was my expert forensic pathologist.
I asked Spence from my position at the counsel table to Spence’s right.
Spence, showing a little irritation, finally told me volume 7 of the HSCA, and then resumed his reading.
I again popped up, not to interrupt Spence, but to make sure he wasn’t missing a word, or reading selectively.
Clearly irritated now, he answered sharply, “Page 129,” and said to the witness, “I’ll read it again now, without counsel’s interruptions , if I might’’ and continued to read on when, to his exasperation, he heard a persistent voice once again coming from his right.
Gerry, now more than irritated, and feeling I had gone too far, did not reply, telling Dr.
ENDNOTES The jam-packed courtroom was already smiling and enjoying the interplay when Spence, a thespian at heart, seized the moment and said to Bunton, “I’ll even give it to counsel so he can see it.
Here you go, counsel,” he said as he left the lectern and approached me at the counsel table.
The situation was getting more and more humorous, and the courtroom burst into laughter when Judge Bunton said from the bench, “It’s nice to see both of you sitting side by side.
When the laughter subsided, Spence and I returned to serious lawyering, with Spence finally reading to Dr.
Petty the language he had set out to read a while back, in which the HSCA said that the autopsy photos of the president’s brain did not indicate the degree of laceration that would be expected if the bullet had entered the president’s skull at the point the autopsy report said it did, the back of his head.
It was perfectly proper crossexamination by Spence, but because the language was taken out of context it could easily lead the jury to believe that maybe the shot never came from Kennedy’s rear, where I was maintaining Oswald was.
Because we were operating under very tight time constraints and I wasn’t sure at this point if Judge Bunton would allow me to conduct redirect examination, where I could clarify the matter, when Spence got up from his seat beside me to return to the lectern after he finished reading what he wanted to Dr.
In any event, the trial received rave and widespread reviews from virtually every major news outlet in the country, many doing feature stories.
Bugliosi questions cops, people who were there that day, people who knew Oswald, and experts on forensic firearms, photography and chemistry.
Judge Bunton said, “Bugliosi and Spence were extraordinarily well-prepared.
The trial was of the highest caliber, one that measures up to any legal standards.
Since 1994, Gerry Spence has been conducting a three-week seminar for trial lawyers throughout the country at his ranch in Dubois, Wyoming.
Called “Trial Lawyers College,” it has become very popular, almost to the point of becoming a mecca for trial lawyers, and is attended not just by new trial lawyers but also by successful, experienced ones who want to rise to a higher level.
I’m told that the key thing he teaches among many points is that a trial lawyer has to “bond” or connect emotionally with the jury, get them to like him.
And one technique he urges lawyers to employ in this regard is to talk to the jurors at a gut level and also to expose the lawyer’s own human weaknesses and vulnerabilities to the jury.
And I have to swear to you something that I think some of you will find hard to believe.
And that is that I never start a final argument in a case like this without my belly just going lickety-split split, and I feel shivers going down my arms, and I’m uptight, and I wonder if I can do my job right.
Because of his course’s popularity, in the past several years Spence has also been conducting four or five regional three-day seminars around the country.
The many, positive testimonials I’ve seen from lawyers who attended speak to the fact that not only have they started becoming more successful in their trials, but also what they learned gave them a better sense of who they are as human beings, thereby enriching their lives.
ENDNOTES That might be hard for you to believe from somebody as experienced as I that has been in these courtrooms all these years.
But if you stop to think how you feel right now, as a part of a very important historical trial, as a part of a jury trial that has historical significance that will go on for generations, then maybe you know how I feel.
Because you folks are the first American citizens who have ever had a chance to pass judgment on the government’s case.
And together, I think we’ll find some answers here this evening that are going to be important for history.
And the one thing that always makes me proud of being an American is the fact that I get to join with other good Americans who sit here in a jury trial and give of their time, give of their lives, go through hardship, go through physical discomfort, and serve their country in a search for truth.
Excepting, you know, in every jury trial that I have been in before, I’ve had a client.
Somebody that looked at me with his eyes, and—and needed somebody to care.
And as I began to think about what I was going to say to you folks this evening, I began to wonder what it would be if Lee were here.
And I think he would look to me for some answers and for some reassurance.
And maybe I would say to him, Lee, when they charge you, that doesn’t mean you’re guilty in this country.
You know, there has got to be 12 good and true men who find you are guilty beyond a reasonable doubt.
And Lee, I want to tell you something, in my experience you can trust the jury.
Because, you know, lawyers may think they are pretty smart, Lee, and doctors, scientists may think they are smart.
The people with the great educations and the wonderful qualifications, Lee, they think they are great.
But a jury, Lee, is a composite of ladies and gentlemen like this one, maybe with an average age of 40 years old.
This jury has more judgment and more intelligence and is brighter than the brightest scientists and the greatest orators and the smartest lawyers that have ever walked into a courtroom, because a jury is a composite mind.
You know, when you have a man who has labored and a man who has suffered and a woman who has given birth to children and raised babies; when you have people from all walks of life, from every kind of background and experience, and you bring them together, it isn’t the flat information that you get from a single witness on the stand, it becomes whole and round and complete.
I want to tell you something else I might say to Lee under those circumstances.
Introduction I might say, Lee, you know, in this country we have great rights.
And when a member of this jury demands those rights be given to you, they are protecting those rights for themselves.
When this jury says this case has to be proven to us, not just me, but to every one of my colleagues, beyond a reasonable doubt, they protect you, but they also protect themselves, and they protect this system and this country that is different from every other country in the world.
And you may have discovered by now, Lee, that there aren’t any juries in Cuba, and there weren’t any juries in Nazi Germany, and there aren’t any juries in China.
And we’ll be free as long as we have a jury like the one that is going to judge you, and see you, and test this case the state brings against you.
Now, folks, the judge is going to instruct you after this case is in and my argument is over, and one of the things that you will see in the charge is this language.
All of the proof has to come from Mr Bugliosi, this government’s representative.
We don’t have to prove anything, because we are, you and I are, American citizens.
They have to prove every element of this case beyond a reasonable doubt, and when there are reasonable doubts that are raised by this evidence, which was my obligation to do, fairly, if I could, they must dispel those doubts.
But the raft of doubts that you have heard in this case have to somehow disappear unanimously.
Each one of you have the power to stop this thing, and so none of you can say, you know, I just went along with the majority.
You have heard the testimony of doctors who testified the majority said this, and the minority said that.
In this case, if you decide no, I have a reasonable doubt, you can stop this conviction all by yourself.
You have the power, you have the right, you have the responsibility to do it if in good conscience you can’t go along with a conviction in this case.
If one single doubt remains in your mind, you have the right and the responsibility and the duty to have the courage to say no.
And I turn to Lee Oswald, and I say, Lee Oswald, this jury—this jury is composed of people that have the courage to say no.
There is one truth in this case, ENDNOTES and that is that the closet involved here is locked, still locked.
This man suggests to you that I have some obligation to prove something that is in his locked closet.
Every one of us have had prejudices from the standpoint of history that have been brought to us.
How does it feel to have someone come up to you with a nice man, like the FBI’s Shaneyfelt, and use him to prejudice you, reading a diary that was probably written in two or three days.
How does it feel to have your prejudices turned on and messed with so that suddenly you find yourself hating a human being, hating him because somebody from the stand read something from a letter and from a diary.
And if I have been too friendly during the course of this trial, if you have seen that as an attempt to influence you, then you must see me as some person who has no respect for you.
You must see me as some person who believes that you would sell your vote, sell your conscience, sell your honesty, sell your true beliefs for a smile.
And I hope it’s been all right that I have smiled at you from time to time.
If he can do this, it can only help him in his quest for the verdict he is seeking.
But there is another, perhaps superceding dynamic and reality at play here.
If he’s not, the jury will pick up on the phoniness just like that, and this can only hurt him in the jury’s eyes.
Although it is natural for Spence to play to the jury and try to get them to like him, it would not be natural for me to do so.
Although I obviously want them to also like me, I make no effort in that regard.
Not only would I feel very uncomfortable making such an effort, since it’s not my personality, but I’m too absorbed in the trial anyway to be thinking about such things.
And by the What I introduced into the record may possibly have had that effect, but that was not my intent in introducing it.
I presented evidence of Oswald hating America and capitalism to fortify my argument on motive that to Oswald, Kennedy probably was the quintessential representative of a society for which he had a grinding contempt.
Introduction way, I would imagine there’s a little intrinsic danger in playing to the jury.
For example, with respect to the technique of smiling to the jurors (which Spence did and I didn’t in London), if you happen to smile at some jurors more than others, this may possibly cause the latter to feel slighted, especially if, accidentally, no smiles come the way of a particular juror who sees you smiling at his fellow jurors.
There is also the problem that Spence himself seemed to be concerned about—that the jury might think a smiling, friendly counsel believes he can get a juror to sell his vote or conscience, which would be very insulting to a juror.
What I try to convey to the jury is sincerity, honesty, substance, and stature.
They all add up to credibility, which I want to have with the jury above all else.
An example of my seeking to have stature and credibility with a jury happened in 1966, only two years after I had become a prosecutor at the Los Angeles district attorney’s office.
The situation had gotten so bad that many of the drivers refused to drive without a police officer present on the bus.
Finally, a seventy-one-year-old driver who was due to retire within one month was shot and killed when he resisted two robbers, surprisingly the first homicide that the Rapid Transit District bus line in Los Angeles had ever had.
It was an important case in the office, and we were seeking the death penalty against the two defendants.
The judge obviously felt that since I hadn’t been in the DA’s office that long, I was a relative rookie and could be pushed around.
If you tell me to stand up and sit down like a yo-yo in this courtroom, I’m not going to have that.
You can believe it or not, but from that point on in the trial, I made all my objections sitting down, not standing up, and the judge never said a word.
Of course, a trial lawyer talking to a judge like that risks being held in contempt of court.
LWT’s chief outside consultant was Paul Hoch of Berkeley, California, whom neither I nor Spence worked with in the preparation of our cases.
Not impressed at all with the enormous improbability that two groups of conspirators could keep a secret for decades, prominent conspiracy theorist Peter Dale Scott has added a third group from which not one word has ever escaped.
If we wait long enough, Scott, whose passion for speculation and hypotheticals is matched only by his aversion for hard facts, will surely come up with some fourth group whose members have all remained silent for over forty years—for instance, those who were offered a choice role in the killing of Kennedy, but for whatever reason declined.
This book will make it very obvious how unreliable and independent Oswald was, yet many conspiracy theorists contend he wasn’t only a secret agent for the political left or right, but a double agent.
But at times I found the sheer weight of the case almost too much, saying to myself that I might not have enough time to get a handle on one of this magnitude.
These low moments, however, were always immediately quelled by my awareness (an awareness that gave me renewed impetus and vigor to break the back of the case from a prosecutorial perspective) that if I were unable to satisfactorily explain away to the jury the multiplicity of problems with the case and prove Oswald’s guilt beyond all reasonable doubt, the Warren Commission critics would seize on this fact as virtual confirmation that when a jury of twelve objective and impartial American citizens had heard and considered the evidence against Oswald, they concluded he was not guilty.
And the theorists would unquestionably cite this fact in the future in their books.
In preparing for the trial, nearly all of my time was spent on getting a solid grasp of the case and all its major issues.
I never had the time to really familiarize myself with the many pages of direct examination, crossexamination, and final summation I had prepared to the point where the whole page was in my mind.
I therefore had to make reference to my yellow-pad notes more than I would have in a normal trial.
One of the biggest problems I had preparing for the trial was how to compress the prosecution of a murder case of this magnitude (and in addition thereto, two other murders inextricably related to the Kennedy assassination I had to deal with—Oswald’s killing of Officer Tippit and Ruby’s killing of Oswald) into only ten and a half hours, my half of the time allotted for the trial.
And to do so in a structured, understandable, and persuasive way for the jury.
Because of the time limitations, I was also forced to proceed at a markedly faster tempo than normal with my questioning of witnesses.
Though considerations of style would have dictated otherwise, I invariably opted for the historical record, determined to shoehorn as much substance into the record as possible.
Because of these same time constraints, although it is good trial technique anyway not to object to your opponent’s questions too often in a jury trial (the jurors may conclude you’re trying to suppress relevant evidence they want to hear), I rarely objected to Spence’s questions, even those that were clearly objectionable, not wanting to consume valuable time.
Producer Mark Redhead told me years ago that on the first ballot back in the jury room, the vote was slightly in favor of an acquittal, like 7 to 5 or so.
Though the trial was twenty-one hours long, Showtime showed only four and a half hours.
London Weekend Television and Showtime, which helped fund the project, wanted to have a poll from the national audience (in which people calling in would have fifty cents added to their phone bill) on whether Oswald was guilty or not guilty, and whether or not they believed there was a conspiracy.
If a real juror had to miss even 1 percent of a trial, they would automatically be replaced by an alternate juror.
Secondly, as stated in the main text, it was not alleged in the indictment that Oswald was part of a conspiracy, and it was not an issue for the London jury to decide.
I agreed to go along with the poll if it was limited to a call-in for guilty or not guilty, with no vote on the conspiracy issue.
That was my mistake, thinking the television audience would be responsible enough to vote on the only issue before it.
When the result of the national poll came on the screen and was announced by the host, network commentator Edwin Newman, it showed that 85 percent voted not guilty, only 15 percent voted guilty.
National polls at the time showed that approximately 85 percent of the American people believed that Oswald was part of a conspiracy in the assassination.
The television audience, unable to vote for its belief in a conspiracy, expressed its belief in the only way available to it, by voting not guilty.
This conclusion of mine was virtually confirmed when the four and a half hours of trial was again shown on national television in 1988 in a Tribune Entertainment Geraldo Rivera special from Dallas on the twenty-fifth anniversary of the assassination.
I had learned my lesson, and even though I knew the audience shouldn’t be voting on anything , and certainly not on the issue of conspiracy, I now insisted that they vote separately on the issue of conspiracy.
The Showtime special had not put on the screen the number of voters who called in.
But the number for the 1988 Tribune Entertainment special was a phenomenal 221,516.
Eighty percent voted guilty, 20 percent not guilty, and 71 percent of the television audience said that Oswald was part of a conspiracy In an interview following the vote, I commented that national polls at the time showed that 85 percent of the American people believed there was a conspiracy in the assassination, and that after the audience (certainly a representative sample of the ENDNOTES national population) watched only four and a half hours of the twenty-one-hour trial, the number had dropped to 71 percent.
I added my belief that if the audience had seen the entire twenty-one hours, the percentage would have been considerably lower.
By way of footnote, although the only verdict for the London jury to return was guilty or not guilty, they were also asked, based on what they had seen at the trial, to give their informal opinion as to whether Oswald acted alone or as part of a conspiracy.
Actually, in the law, not guilty and innocent are not synonymous terms.
Whoever wrote these words either knew nothing at all about the FBI’s investigation, or should have his or her mouth washed with soap.
Since the FBI and Warren Commission knew beyond all doubt that Oswald killed Kennedy, by definition any conspiracy had to have involved Oswald.
So only in that sense is the Church Committee statement that the FBI investigation “focused narrowly” on Oswald correct.
Since it knew Oswald killed Kennedy, the narrow focus on Oswald’s (as opposed to some innocent person’s) association with others was mandatory.
Moreover, the Church Committee statement suggests much more than this—that virtually no investigation of conspiracy was conducted.
When leading Warren Commission critic and proconspiracy author Harold Weisberg pointed out that the FBI and Warren Commission “checked into almost every breath drew” (Weisberg, Oswald in New Orleans ,214), this fact is an investigation of a possible conspiracy.
There can be no question that the FBI spent thousands of man-hours investigating matters that had nothing to do with Oswald killing Kennedy and everything to do with whether he was involved with anyone else in the assassination.
With a large staff and eleven senators on the Church Committee, it’s remarkable that a historical falsehood and blasphemy like the aforementioned statement would not have been caught by someone and corrected before publication.
Apparently the Church Committee was unaware of the FBI’s very extensive investigation of the Sylvia Odio incident, the considerable number of FBI interviews of anti-Castro Cuban exiles, and the fact that the Warren Commission took sworn Introduction testimony from several members of that community concerning the Carlos Bringuier incident.
On the other hand, Gary Cornwell, chief deputy counsel for the HSCA, makes the point that with the exception of the Warren Commission and FBI investigating all aspects of Ruby’s involvement in the assassination weekend, and their looking into, though much more modestly, Oswald’s possible association with the CIA, FBI, and KGB, they should have been more proactive in investigating the conspiracy issue, as opposed to too often only responding to tips and leads furnished them.
For instance, he said, since motive is circumstantial evidence, and since organized crime had a motive to kill Kennedy, the Commission should have sought the FBI electronic surveillance tapes of the mob, which it didn’t do, but which his HSCA did.
Since it was well known that many of them hated Kennedy over the president’s failure to provide air support during the Bay of Pigs invasion, the Commission should have asked the FBI to investigate this group in depth , beyond the Sylvia Odio affair and Oswald’s brief foray into infiltrating anti-Castro elements in New Orleans.
Although in a criminal investigation you follow leads for the most part (you don’t blindly spin your wheels pursuing that which doesn’t exist), the presence of motive is itself a lead to pursue.
The only observation I would add to Cornwell’s critique of the Warren Commission is that since the Commission knew beyond all doubt that Oswald killed Kennedy, by definition, if there was any conspiracy, the conspiratorial group (mob, anti-Castro Cuban exiles, CIA) had to have been involved in some way with Oswald.
Inasmuch as the Warren Commission, FBI, and Secret Service probably conducted the most comprehensive and meticulous investigation of Oswald that has ever been conducted on any individual in history, even though the Commission and FBI did not go out and do what Cornwell said they should have done , they virtually reached the same degree of knowledge by examining almost every day of his life.
But there are, in the eleven volumes of exhibits comprising 9,833 pages, a number of dubious evidentiary value.
In this limited category, he cites two newspaper photos of Mark Lane , an FBI interview on the treatment of Jack Ruby’s baldness, lyrics of a Russian song, and Marina’s dental records, among a few others.
Because for whatever reason, witnesses testifying before the Commission either specifically referred to the exhibits in their testimony, or gave testimony that prompted the FBI to go out and try to confirm something they said.
The Warren Report, of course, is only a summary of the twenty-six volumes.
And it’s these volumes that contain the testimony, statements, exhibits, and affidavits of the witnesses.
On page 71 of the report, the Commission writes, “When the shots were fired, many people near the Depository believed that the shots came from the railroad bridge over the Triple Underpass or from the area to the west of the Depository ,” and page 73 of the report specifically sets forth the conclusion of several of these witnesses.
Although Posner’s conclusion is correct, Milteer was considered sufficiently important and troubling by the HSCA to appear on forty-six pages of its volumes.
Virtually all of the media reviewers of Posner’s Case Closed (the San Francisco Chronicle and Washington Post may have been the only exceptions) just assumed that Posner was somehow responsible for the computerized analysis in his book.
Yes, the American Bar Association’s mock trial is a matter of public record, but it was a very obscure event that at least ninety-eight out of a hundred people had to be completely unaware of.
And Posner, in his book, clearly wasn’t eager to increase the number of people who did know about it.
The only references to the mock trial are buried in the back of the book in citations to the text, and nowhere in his book does Posner tell his readers that the American Bar Association commissioned FAA’s work for the trial.
Much more important and relevant is the fact that while Posner’s citations, as he indicates, do refer to the mock trial and Dr.
Piziali’s testimony at the trial, they in no way refute (or even address themselves to) the reality pointed out by Frank that Posner had led his readers to believe that he had commissioned FAA’s work.
Not only the print media but also the electronic media thought Posner had commissioned the FAA work.
It almost had to be Thursday morning because Ruby didn’t get to bed Thursday night until after four in the morning , so he wasn’t likely to have been up a few hours later on Friday morning and in front of the police department where Hansen said he saw him, especially given the time he always took for a shower, breakfast, dressing meticulously, and getting ready to leave his apartment.
Not in the news but in the newsstands in Paris is a booklet of astrological predictions by Andre Barbault and published by Albin Michel.
But Conlon had left early for lunch to be able to get back for the presidential motorcade, so she wasn’t in the building when Ruby arrived, and Craddock said that she had no conversation with Ruby that day other than his shouting out from a distance across the lobby that “the president is going to be here today” (CE 2321, 25 H 282, FBI interview with Mrs.
Well, let me tell you, would walk into my office and invariably he was looking for a plug in column for an act, and we’d talk in generalities.
And then, he’d start to talk, and as he talked, he got louder and louder.
I was Italian, and that’s the kind of neighborhood I was brought up in.
The probable reason he didn’t is that in the writing of the book Case Closed , author Gerald Posner confronted Zoppi with the fact that Ruby said Zoppi was not at the Dallas Morning News on the morning of the assassination when he came by.
Zoppi proceeded to tell Posner that Ruby was right, and that he, Zoppi, had not told the truth to the HSCA investigators.
Posner, on a Washington, D.C., radio station said, “He admitted to me that he just tried to make the story sound more interesting by putting himself there.
Conspiracy theorists have wondered why, if Ruby cared for the president so much, and was such a familiar figure attending so many events in Dallas, he wouldn’t have been somewhere along the motorcade route.
Watching a motorcade pass by for fifteen or twenty seconds would probably not have been a part of the action to Ruby.
Ruby’s testimony before the Warren Commission, in attempting to explain why he didn’t go out in the street and watch the presidential motorcade, that “I don’t want to go where there big crowds.
I can’t explain it to you” , makes no sense at all, and hence, cannot be reasonably explained.
His limited intellect ENDNOTES tried to come up with a reason that made sense as to why someone who loved the president as much as he said he did wouldn’t be out on the street greeting him, and he uttered a completely irrational statement.
Additionally, there was a 12:00 noon deadline for the ads, so Ruby had a good reason to be where he was as opposed to watching the motorcade.
In 1963, there was only one plane that served as Air Force One, SAM26000.
The vice president would always fly on one of the Air Force Two planes.
The oft-stated belief is that since the bubble top was plastic and not bulletproof, it wouldn’t have made any difference if it had been used in Dealey Plaza.
But that presupposes that Oswald would have shot Kennedy if the bubble top was on the car, and we don’t know that.
The limousine being a presidential one, he may have assumed the top was bulletproof and therefore concluded that he could not shoot and kill Kennedy.
After the assassination, the limousine was sent back to Hess & Eisenhardt for modification, which included a reinforced steel roof and bulletproof glass.
The rebuild was completed in less than six months and the limousine returned to the White House, though the new president, Lyndon Johnson, rarely used it.
It remained a part of the White House fleet until it was retired in 1977.
However, during a 1967 CBS News broadcast, Charlie Givens provided another explanation as to why he didn’t fulfill Oswald’s request: “Well, I, you know, kind of excited, wanted to see the parade, so when I got downstairs I really forgot it.
Bonnie Williams testified that “at the time I couldn’t see too much of the sixth floor because the books at the time were Four Days in November stacked so high.
Pepper for lunch at that exact place, that should have been the end of it.
When Day later found out the food and drink had belonged to Williams, he decided the lunch bag and Dr.
Pepper bottle had no value to the case and threw the sack and bottle away.
Other than her and her colleagues’ insatiable passion for pointing out normal inconsistencies in the recollections of witnesses, nowhere does Meagher tell her readers what the relevance of these inconsistencies was.
Bonnie Ray Williams told the Warren Commission on March 24, 1964, that he could not remember the exact time he descended to the fifth floor.
He first suggested it was “ten to fifteen minutes after twelve” when he said he finished his lunch.
It is unlikely that Williams, who left the sixth floor around 11:55 to get his lunch, and probably arrived back on the sixth floor at around noon or shortly thereafter, would have taken close to twenty minutes to eat his lunch.
FBI agents Tom Carter and Will Griffin reported that earlier, in a January 14,1964, interview, Williams told them he went back down to the fifth floor around 12:05m.
In any event, the man was twenty-three-year-old Jerry Boyd Belknap, who was working part-time in the mail room of the Dallas Morning News at the time of the assassination.
Belknap said he was struck by a car several years earlier, suffering a head injury that required him to take medication three times a day to avoid fainting spells, saying he did not believe the spells were any type of epilepsy.
He neglected to take his medication on November 22, and when he felt a fainting spell coming on while waiting for the motorcade, he attempted to move back from the crowd, and while doing so, fainted and fell backward on the sidewalk.
Belknap said that shortly after the ambulance attendants carried him on a stretcher into Parkland Hospital, President Kennedy was brought into the hospital and, he said, there was “much confusion” and “little attention” was paid to him.
But he did get a glass of water from a nurse, took his medication, and when he felt much better, walked out of the hospital without ever registering as a patient, and returned to work.
Belknap said he didn’t know Oswald, but had seen Jack Ruby on one or two occasions though he never met or spoke to him.
Amateur films taken by Elsie Dorman and Tina Towner, however, prove the limousine made a smooth, uninterrupted turn from Houston onto Elm Street using the center lane.
The exact time of the assassination being at 12:30m. was established by several witnesses.
Royce Skelton, a mail clerk at the Texas Louisiana Freight Bureau, who was standing on top of the Triple Underpass, also testified that he saw a bullet strike the pavement.
According to Skelton, the bullet struck concrete to the left front of the president’s car, scattering pavement dust away from the Depository, although Skelton’s testimony indicates this occurred around the time of the head shot.
In this instance, however, the governor’s recollection is at odds with that of two other witnesses and a film of the event.
The Zapruder film supports the recollection of both women, showing Mrs.
If true, this, of course, would be just another piece of circumstantial evidence that the shots came from right below the pigeons—Oswald’s sniper nest.
The problem is that when you look at the official record, and in view of the fact that we know people don’t always speak with precision, it cannot be categorically stated that the pigeons flew from the roof of the Depository.
But earlier in his testimony he said (perhaps loosely) that he saw the “pigeons began to fly up to the top of the building” , suggesting the pigeons were not originally on the roof.
At the London trial, when I asked Baker if he saw “any activity of pigeons” at the time he heard the shots, he clarified one point, saying, “Yes, sir, I did.
Dallas Police officer Earle Y Brown adds to the confusion with his Warren Commission testimony that from his position on top of the railroad overpass above the Stemmons Freeway he saw pigeons “all take off” around the time of the shots.
Though the question dealt with sound, counsel obviously was interested in where the shots came from, and, though not necessarily, one would have expected Harkness to have mentioned the pigeons coming from the Dal-Tex Building leading him to believe the shots came from there.
The stronger inference is they were on the northwest corner of the building, not the southeast corner where Oswald was.
Whether Brown was referring to the same pigeons referred to by Baker and Rackley, or other pigeons, is not known.
On the matter of the presidential limousine dramatically slowing down, but not stopping, the conclusive evidence that it did not stop is the Zapruderfilm itself.
But as far as eyewitnesses are concerned, predictably, they were very divided on whether the car stopped or merely slowed down.
But just as many or more erroneously thought the limousine had come to a complete stop.
It has to be noted that from the rear, which is where most of the witnesses were, it would be much more difficult to discern whether the car (slowing down many yards away) had slowed down or stopped than it would be for someone very close to the car or to the side of it.
Jean Hill told the Warren Commission that “I jumped to the edge of the street and In fact, if one is, for instance, traveling in his car on a straight road, it literally cannot be determined if a car traveling in the same direction ahead some distance away is actually traveling or stationary at any given moment in time.
The same would be true if one were the same distance away but in front of the vehicle.
Though we aren’t dealing with these distances here, the above phenomenon is something that has to be factored in.
But nowhere at the time of the shooting in Dealey Plaza is Kennedy seen looking to his left in the direction of Mrs.
Jean Hill took a lot of ribbing for telling reporters in a national TV interview shortly after the shooting that President and Mrs.
Kennedy were looking at a little white dog on the seat between them as the car came abreast of Hill’s position.
In later years, conspiracy theorists tried to restore her credibility by claiming that photographs taken at Love Field show that Mrs.
Kennedy had been given a white, stuffed-toy version of the famous Sheri Lewis TV puppet, Lamb Chop.
The claim, however, was based on poor-quality images posted on the Internet.
When asked whether he could see what Oswald was firing at, Brennan replied, “Subconsciously I knew what he was firing at.
But immediately I looked towards where President Kennedy’s car should be, and there was something obstructing my view.
Kennedy’s description of the president’s head wounds, as she saw them, were deleted from her published Warren Commission testimony.
On June 5,1964, just six and half months after her husband was murdered at her side, the Warren Commission had the delicate task of having to ask her to provide testimony about the day’s events.
The Untold Story of the Warren Commission,”40), and her testimony was subsequently published.
Kennedy reached the time of the shooting in her testimony, she said, “And just as I turned and looked at him, I could see a piece of his skull and I remember it was flesh colored.
Early critics of the Warren Commission were outraged at the deletion, suspicious that something Four Days in November important had been withheld, and launched a legal battle to get the omitted testimony released.
Conspiracy theorist David Mantik claimed that “these details could have been valuable to the House Select Committee on Assassinations,” although exactly how he never explained.
Kennedy wasn’t asked for even “more detail” since she had an opportunity to view the wounds as they originally existed longer and closer than any other person.
Another critic added, “Why would withhold an accurate description is open to debate, but the fact that they put out an altered transcript is telling.
Court Reporter’s Tape Shows Additional Description Withheld,” JFK Lancer Productions and Publications, August 5, 2001) Frankly, the only thing the critics have proved from the episode is that the hearts of the Warren Commission members were not made of stone.
It is improbable that Greer would have sped up while his head was turned away from the road and he was preoccupied with looking at the president, particularly when he could see Special Agent Clint Hill running to catch up to the limousine to board it.
According to some witnesses, Greer himself felt he did not react instantaneously, and hence blamed himself for the president’s death.
Although he told the Warren Commission that “just as soon as I turned my head back from the second shot, right away I accelerated right then” (actually, as indicated, it appears it was after the third shot that Greer accelerated), which he said was “about simultaneously” with Kellerman’s instruction to him to speed up , author William Manchester writes, without citation , that at Parkland Hospital, “Those who had been in the motorcade were racking their brains with if only this, if only that.
Bill Greer, his face streaked with tears, took her head between his 30 ENDNOTES Although it is the consensus that Greer only speeded up after the head shot, there is disagreement as to when he slowed down.
When I asked him if additional evidence of the limousine slowing down was the statement of Dr.
David Mantik that from his review of the Muchmore film he noticed that the right taillight of the limousine was on at least by Z frame 311, he said, “No, it is not that clear from the Muchmore film that the taillight is on.
How the Film of the Century was Edited,” in Fetzer, Assassination Science ,301) The Warren Report, however, said that “motion pictures of the scene show that the car slowed down momentarily after the shot that struck the President in the head and then speeded up rapidly” , but the citation it gives for this is not a good one.
I heard somebody say ‘Get going’... and that is when the Presidential limousine shot off” . hands and squeezed until she thought he was going to squeeze her skull flat.
Of course, overcome by the tragedy, he couldn’t be expected to be precise in his words.
But if he, in fact, did emote to Jackie at the hospital, and if the words attributed to him are close to what he said, it would clearly appear he felt he had failed the president, and that failure had caused the president’s death.
And in a CBS interview by Charles Kuralt on November 22, 1988, former Kennedy aide David Powers spoke of the considerable remorse Greer felt over not speeding up quickly enough to save Kennedy’s life.
Back in 1977, Warren Commission critic Patricia Lambert, looking at contradictions in several statements made by Harold Norman, wrote an article concluding that Norman had “fabricated” his testimony.
Of course, he could have told them this and they neglected to include it in their very brief summary report or he could simply have not mentioned it, even though it happened.
But she doesn’t say why he would do this other than to say it’s “suspicious” and most likely Norman fabricated the story.
In other words, I guess we should just forget about the sworn testimony of four other witnesses (Howard Brennan, Amos Euins, James Worrell, and Robert Jackson) who saw a rifle in the sniper’s nest window, three of whom saw the rifle being fired.
The FBI report is most likely in error since it is unlikely Williams and Norman would have only said the shots came from inside the building when they both told the authorities from the very beginning that the shots came from directly above them.
Lambert doesn’t stop at accusing Norman of fabricating evidence against Oswald.
Finding inconsistencies in statements by Williams and Jarman between their first statements to the FBI and their subsequent statements to the Secret Service (all set forth in a Secret Service Report, CD 87, Control Number 491, on December 7, 1963), when, she said, they changed their stories and mentioned things for the first time (e.g., Norman mentioning the sound of the bolt and hearing shells fall), she says this “casts doubt on the integrity of the investigation conducted by Dallas field office.
For if these stories are fabrications, the witnesses who supplied them had guidance from someone.
That the Secret Service set out to frame Lee Harvey Oswald for Kennedy’s murder.
But of course if the agency did that, it’s virtually no step at all to conclude that it was behind Kennedy’s murder, and this is why it tried to frame someone else for it.
Lambert doesn’t ask herself why in the world would the president’s own security force kill him, or, at a minimum, frame someone for his murder.
And if the Secret Service was getting the three book employees to tell lies and was “coordinating” their stories, Ms.
Lambert also doesn’t explain how come the Secret Service said in its report that Norman heard the bolt action and three shells falling above, but said Williams and Jarman did not.
But if Williams and Jarman were going to tell other lies for the Secret Service, as Ms.
Lambert is a very intelligent and decent woman who went on in later years to write the best book on the Garrison case, False Witness.
Charles Hester, in suit and tie, and his wife, Beatrice, had been sitting on the grassy slope north of Elm Street watching the motorcade.
Wiseman asks a woman employee how many exits there were to the building.
When told four, he exits the building, rounds up some Dallas police, and reenters the building with them.
Wiseman runs up the stairs all the way to the attic and gives each floor a quick search on the way down, finding nothing.
However, Captain Will Fritz testified the building wasn’t sealed off until twenty-two minutes later . 53 limousine pulls up abruptly: The exact time of arrival at Parkland varies depending on the source.
Critics claim that the backseat was washed out with a bucket of water, citing photographs that allegedly show a bucket near the limousine.
Nurse’s aide Shirley Randall was reportedly asked to perform such a task, but in the excitement, never got around to it.
It is unclear when and how Kennedy started having back problems, different biographies of him giving different accounts.
For instance, biographer Michael O’Brien writes that “one account said suffered a ‘spinal injury’ in a junior varsity scrimmage” at Harvard, which JFK entered in 1936 after attending part of the previous year at Princeton.
Dallek writes that although Kennedy “had suffered football injuries and other mishaps that could help account for his emerging back pain, the onset of his back problem could have been related to his reliance on adrenal extracts and/or parathyroid hormone to control his colitis; they may have caused osteoporosis and deterioration in his lumbar spine.
Despite his back injury, Kennedy helped save at least two burned and injured crewmates who were thrown into the water, which was covered with gasoline flames.
In the process, Kennedy swallowed much gasoline, which later gave him serious stomach problems.
A member of the varsity swimming team as a Harvard undergraduate, he then managed to swim for four hours to a small island, Plum Pudding Island, pulling one of his badly burned crewmates by clasping the man’s life preserver straps in his teeth.
It was from another small island nearby that Kennedy sent out to Rendova, the main base for the PT boats, with natives, a coconut shell with the following rescue message, Nauro Isl Native knows posit He can pilot 11 alive need Small boat Kennedy On the seventh day of being stranded, the natives brought back a PT boat from Rendova to rescue JFK and his crew, and they were transported back to Rendova.
I venture to say there are very few men would swim out in that ocean alone without knowing what was underneath you.
A Houston Post article raised another “if” question, this time as to Governor Connally, theorizing that if Connally hadn’t looked over his right shoulder after the first shot to see if the president had been hit, the shot that entered under his right armpit would have hit more to his left, entering his heart and killing him.
Critics have questioned whether Howard Brennan was really the source of Sawyer’s detailed description and the dispatcher’s subsequent broadcast.
Although Meagher is correct in reporting that any description given by Brennan to Sorrels could only have occurred after Sawyer’s 12:44m. broadcast (since Sorrels didn’t arrive at the Depository until about 12:50m.), Brennan wrote in his 1987 book that he it was JFK’s boat.
Robinson said that JFK had an executive officer on board with him, another officer he had asked to come along whom he was friendly with, and ten crew men.
He took a strap from the life jacket of a crew member named McMahon, who had been very badly burned in the explosion of three thousand gallons of high-octane gas our boats carried, and attached it to his teeth, and towed McMahon, for lack of a better word, to the nearest island.
All his crew are now dead, but when they were alive, not one of them ever said a negative word about him.
Robinson recalls that Kennedy had “a great sense of humor” and was “one of the guys.
Robinson said that when he tented with Kennedy, JFK was “in bad shape, but he never talked about it.
He was extremely thin, and from his demeanor you could tell he was not in good health.
He had orders to go home but he insisted on going back up the line where he went on several other PT missions before they sent him home.
His knowledge was very versatile—everything from poker to philosophy”; “He was a fine man.
Meagher’s claim that Sawyer did not remember speaking to Brennan or anyone who resembled him is only a quartertruth.
Asked to provide details about the witness, Sawyer remembered that he was a “white man” who was “a few years either way” of thirty-five.
Only two witnesses who claimed to have seen the gunman firing the rifle were known to police at that time—the fifteenyear-old black youth, Amos Euins, and the forty-five-year-old white construction worker, Howard Brennan.
And like Sawyer’s recollection, Brennan was escorted to the sheriff’s office by Secret Service agent Forrest Sorrels.
Sawyer responded, “Well, it was thought that the shot might have come from this building.
Although Meagher sees this as an indication that Sawyer’s witness was someone who hadn’t actually seen the gunman in the window, it’s more likely loose language on Sawyer’s part, or the statement only reflected Sawyer’s own initial uncertainty about the accuracy of any of the early reports he and other police officers were receiving.
Subsequent investigation, of course, did later confirm Brennan’s report.
Patrolman William Duane Mentzell, a friend of Tippit’s, was assigned on the 7:00 m. to 3:00m. shift to Districts 91 and 92, right in the heart of Oak Cliff, 91 being the same district Tippit was killed in, and he did not go, nor was he assigned to go, downtown to help in the assassination.
After responding to a “Signal 7” , he heard an officer had been shot on his beat.
He couldn’t figure out who it could be and learned it was his friend Tippit, whom he had worked with in the past, when he arrived at the murder scene.
Each of the officers assigned to the three shifts for the district would have the same call number.
There is considerable doubt about the details Amos Euins provided investigators.
The construction worker could not have been Howard Brennan, known to have been in close proximity to Euins at the time, since Brennan had seen no one run out the back of the Depository, nor had he described the gunman as having a bald spot.
This statement, of course, contradicts his remarks to newsman James Underwood immediately after the shooting in which he was convinced that the gunman was a ENDNOTES black man.
In the end, it is difficult to understand how Euins could possibly have seen a bald spot on the top of the gunman’s head (even if, as Euins said, the man was facing the street, looking down the rifle barrel) from Euins’s position sixtyone feet below the sniper’s nest window.
Before departing for the sheriff’s office, Forrest Sorrels and Howard Brennan stood on the top step, just outside the entrance to the Depository, for a few minutes.
During this period, Brennan spotted Depository employees Harold Norman and James “Junior” Jarman leaving the building, and identified them to Sorrels as two of the three black men he saw in the fifth-floor window just below the sniper’s nest window.
William Whaley’s original testimony to the Warren Commission was that he had dropped Oswald off at the corner of Neches and North Beckley, one-half block north of Oswald’s rooming house.
Recalled to testify again several weeks later, he specified the intersection of Neely and North Beckley, close to four blocks from Oswald’s rooming house at 1026 North Beckley.
Conspiracy critics have made a big deal out of this rather benign conversation.
Theorists see Murray Jackson’s “be at large” comment as some sort of code message that ultimately led to Tippit’s fatal encounter with Oswald.
Obviously, Tippit would have automatically responded to any emergency that came up and didn’t need to be told to do so.
The fact that Jackson pointed out this obvious fact to his former partner is strongly supportive of Jackson’s later explanation that the remark was nothing more than his way of needling Tippit about the previous incident.
Roberts’s claims as supportive of the charge that Oswald met up with police conspirators after leaving his rooming house, the housekeeper’s account of seeing a Dallas police car is rife with discrepancies and devoid of logic.
Roberts, who admitted she was “completely blind” in her right eye, and couldn’t “see too good” with her left, told the FBI the license plate number of the police car was 207.
There was only one Alexander on the force, a Lieutenant Floyd T Alexander, but he was a firearms expert who worked in the crime lab, and he didn’t drive a squad car.
There had been another Alexander on the force, Sergeant Floyd J Alexander , but he left the force in 1957.
Of course, this sequence of events hardly seems conspiratorial, since this version has Oswald remaining at the curb without getting in the “police car” and the car presumably drives off.
On the issue of Roberts giving the numbers for two police cars that were proved to have been elsewhere at the time in question, it is a non sequitur to conclude, as some anti-conspiracy theorists have, that this means no police car was there.
That would be the equivalent of saying that if you give the incorrect address of your new apartment on a job application, your apartment doesn’t really exist.
However, Roberts giving two police car numbers that didn’t check out is relevant to the issue of whether or not she made the story up.
Just have a creative mind, there’s nothing to it, and just make up and keep talking until she just makes a lie out of it.
Hugh Aynesworth, the Dallas Morning News reporter who, along with Jim Ewell, the newspaper’s police beat reporter, covered the assassination story from ground zero, said that he went out to the rooming house right after the police had searched Oswald’s room on the afternoon of the assassination and interviewed Roberts in depth.
In fact, Aynesworth said he interviewed Roberts at least two more times thereafter and she never said a word about the alleged incident.
Ewell, he said, had also interviewed Roberts separately and she never mentioned the incident to him either.
When I went back to her and brought it up, she became very flustered and never had a satisfactory answer why she hadn’t mentioned the incident to us.
The Earlene Roberts story has no evidence or logic to support it and therefore cannot be given any weight.
Another perception of Roberts that appears to have been wrong is the color of Four Days in November the zippered jacket Oswald was wearing when he left the rooming house.
All of the direct and circumstantial evidence is that the jacket was light-colored (see main text), but when Mrs.
Roberts was shown the jacket by Warren Commission counsel, she said the jacket Oswald had put on “was darker than that.
Although the time of death was estimated at 1:00m., and this is the time that has been accepted through the years, Dr.
At 1:32m., the Associated Press reported that “two priests who were with Kennedy say he is dead of bullet wounds,” even though Father Thompson had said nothing, and bullet wounds had not been mentioned.
Author William Manchester wrote that Hoover called Robert Kennedy and when Kennedy came to the phone, Hoover said, snappily, “The president’s dead,” and hung up , which on its face is almost impossible to believe.
According to the FBI memo of the incident, after learning of the president’s death from Robert Kennedy, Hoover advised Kennedy of the condition of Governor Connally and that Mrs.
Hoover also gave Kennedy up-to-the-minute details on the search for the assassin and inquired whether Kennedy intended to go to Dallas.
Manchester later asked him if Hoover seemed to be upset, and Kennedy said no.
But it’s reasonable to believe that RFK was referring to Hoover’s first call to him when Hoover told him, “I have news for you.
The Dallas police tapes now being played by many throughout the country are notoriously poor in fidelity.
Two, he said, were for the FBI, one for Chief Curry, and one copy for himself, which he transcribed from.
The Henslee transcriptions were only made for the Dallas Police Department, and it is not known whether they ever left the department.
Although Henslee supervised the transcription of the channel 1 and 2 police radio logs, it appears he, himself, only transcribed the channel 2 log.
I say that because his signature only appears at the end of the channel 2 transcription , not at the end of the channel 1 transcription.
On March 25,2004, Bowles, who had a copy of the channel 1 recording (not his magnetic copy of the original) in his office that was clearer than the copy I had, played it over the phone for me and we could hear the second “seventyeight” call at 1:08m., though not completely clearly, but could not make out the first one.
As with all Dallas police squad cars, there was a clipboard installed on the dashboard of Officer Tippit’s car number 10 for him to take notes and keep his wanted persons’ names on.
In 1983, Detective James R Leavelle, who headed up the Tippet murder investigation, told author Dale Myers, “I looked at some of the stuff that Tippit had in car, but, to my knowledge, there was nothing found—that was written—in regards to the man he stopped.
Leavelle said the absence of a note in such a situation was very common.
Although an FBI report says that Helen Markham’s bus, per the Dallas Transit System, came by each day “at about 1:12m.,” not 1:15m., I tend to doubt the 1:12 time for two reasons.
Number one, the FBI never nailed down which of two separate buses Markham could have taken at Jefferson and Patton, not asking her what corner at the intersection she got on her bus.
We know that Markham was not a bright woman, but she was smart enough to hold down a job as a waitress, where one has to deal with numbers on a customer’s bill, and smart enough to get to work every day.
It requires no intelligence to read a watch or clock, and though the Dallas Transit System advised the FBI that the bus was scheduled to come at 1:12,1 find it very hard to believe it routinely came by at that time.
Tippit murder authority Dale Myers, while not definitely rejecting the conventional wisdom, feels he has come up with an even better reason why Tippit may have stopped Oswald.
Myers cites three sources for the proposition that Oswald had been walking west on Tenth Street before his confrontation with Officer Tippit.
He resolves the seeming conflict between the sources he relies on and the statements of those who said Oswald was walking east on Tenth by saying they both were correct in that they were talking about different times.
Though he didn’t see the shooting, and said he could not identify the man, he did say that after he heard the shots he saw this same man running away from the squad car south on Patton.
He told the FBI that at the time of Tippit’s murder, he and his friend, William A Smith, were seated inside his brother Billy Burt’s house located at the corner of Ninth and Denver streets, about a block and a half from the murder scene, when he heard a total of what he believed to be six shots.
He and Smith immediately left the house, got in his car, and drove to the murder scene.
But even assuming that the story Burt told Chapman was true insofar as his location at the time of the shooting, his twenty-year-old friend, Smith, while not refuting Burt’s story, does not corroborate it on a key point.
But, unlike Burt, he said he did not see the assassin walking west in front of Burt and him before the shooting.
In any event, since there was no evidence to support this statement, it has to be written off as a foundationless assumption.
Although Scoggins was never asked if he saw a man walk in front of him just prior to the shooting, it’s the type of thing he would be expected to volunteer if the man killed Tippit shortly thereafter.
But it should be noted that Scoggins had just returned to his cab parked on Patton at Tenth (after leaving it to get a Coke and watch TV at a nearby place) when the shooting occurred, saying he had only “taken one or two bites of my sandwich and drank a couple of swallows out of my Coke” , and it’s possible that Oswald had crossed Patton on Tenth going east before Scoggins returned to his cab.
Of course, King was not a Dallas police detective and may have gotten this “information” for his speech, which was about his department’s relationship with the media, from his department’s “Homicide Report” onTippit’s murder prepared on the day of the assassination.
One alleged witness Myers doesn’t rely on for his “change of direction” theory, not even mentioning him in his book probably because of the person’s almost assuredly phony story, is Elcan Elliot, who waited thirty-one years to tell his story for the first time to author Gus Russo.
Elliot claimed that after the president was shot, “there was no one on the streets” because everyone was home watching the assassination news on TV or radio, or simply out of fear.
In the Tippit incident alone, we know Helen Markham, William Scoggins, and William Lawrence Smith (see main text) were walking on the street, and people were in their cars (e.g., Jack Tatum and Domingo Benavides) going places other than home to watch the TV news.
But undoubtedly most people were at home or in their offices with their TV or radio turned to the assassination news, a fact that could have contributed to Tippit’s having stopped Oswald.
In any event, Elliot, who claimed he lived near Oswald, said he was driving his car on the streets of Oak Cliff searching for his fourteen-year-old daughter because he feared for her safety.
There is no indication in Russo’s book that Elliot gave any reason for his thirty-one-year silence on this matter, which alone would almost seem to disqualify Elliot as a credible source.
After being shown photos of Oswald, he felt sure Oswald was the man he had seen walking by him while he, Smith, was going to lunch.
Also, at the time Smith saw the man walking west on Tenth, he wouldn’t have had any reason at all to remember what he looked like, Smith not indicating the man did anything at all to draw anyone’s attention to him.
So Smith’s identification, though not to be dismissed out of hand, has to be considered suspect.
On the other side of the issue as to the direction in which Oswald was walking, we have, as set forth in the main text, Jack Tatum, with every reason to remember Oswald , telling the HSCA in 1978 that he saw Oswald walking east on Tenth as Tippit’s car pulled over to the curb to talk to Oswald, and repeating this observation to me at the London trial.
And we know Helen Markham testified that she saw Oswald “walking away from me” (i.e., walking east) before his confrontation with Tippit.
Of course, neither Markham’s nor Tatum’s observations, even if true, negate Myers’s position that Oswald was originally walking west.
However, Scoggins’s and Markham’s testimony that they saw Tippit proceeding very slowly eastbound on Tenth is much more consistent with his having been following Oswald for some time from behind as Oswald was walking east, than Oswald walking toward him going west on Tenth.
Also, it would seem that Oswald’s seeing Tippit and suddenly turning around and walking in the opposite direction would be inconsistent with Oswald’s conduct that day.
And even a child would know that turning around and walking in a different direction when seeing a police officer makes one look guilty of something.
Though the possibility cannot be dismissed, it seems unlikely to me that Oswald would have changed directions right in Tippit’s view, that is, if Oswald could see Tippit, Tippit could see him.
In fact, as indicated, Tippit’s allegedly seeing Oswald turn around is the basis for Myers’s conclusion as to why Tippit pulled over.
But perhaps the biggest problem I have with the argument that Oswald was originally walking west on Tenth is that if you look at the map of the area in the photo section in this book, although there were several routes Oswald could have taken to reach Tenth and Patton from his rooming house, any route that would have him walking westbound on Tenth at the time Tippit pulled over would be, as Sheriff Bowles told me, “way out of his way.
Drenas, a letter carrier from Lowell, Massachusetts, told me that taking this route and walking at a “fast pace” took him sixteen minutes and thirty-five seconds, which, if Oswald left the rooming house around 1:00m., as is believed, would not have permitted him to be where we know he was at the time of the murder.
The only other way he could have gotten there on time, Drenas said, would have been “if he had hitchhiked part of the way,” but no evidence has ever surfaced to indicate Oswald did this.
Moreover, even to get dropped off at the main point of Marsalis and Tenth, two changes of street direction (at Colorado and later at Marsaslis) from the intersection of Beckley and Zangs Boulevard would have to be made, requiring that Oswald have been picked up by someone willing to chauffeur him rather than merely driving him only in the direction the driver was proceeding in on Zangs, the normal situation.
Murray Jackson, who worked with Tippit in the past, and knew him well, said that “when Tippit approached a person he would never look directly at them but would look either sideways or down at the ground.
This lack of eye contact plus the fact that he usually walked with his hand on his gun butt could have alarmed Oswald.
Billy Fowler, another Dallas police officer who partnered with Tippit for awhile, said the same thing, telling author Bill Sloan, “He always kept his eyes averted when he was talking to you.
Personally, I figure that’s how Oswald—or whoever it was that shot him—got the drop on him in the first place.
Fowler said that he was Tippit’s partner, and if he hadn’t had the day off, he would have been withTippit.
It seems he “just wouldn’t look anyone in the eye for more than a second or two,” and Henslee and others even criticized Tippit for this habit, but he never changed.
CE 2985,26 H 488). 78 the young man pulls a gun out: For years, Warren Commission critics have alleged that Oswald’s known movements that day precluded him from being at Tenth and Patton in time to kill Tippit.
In a reconstruction by the FBI, at an average pace (which we have no reason to believe Oswald would have been walking at) it would have taken Oswald six and a half minutes to walk the seven blocks to board the bus at Elm near Griffin.
In heavy traffic , the bus was timed as taking four minutes to travel the two blocks on Elm to the point near Poydras where Oswald got off.
The approximately three blocks from there to the cabstand at Lamar and Jackson took three minutes to walk at an average pace, putting Oswald there around 12:48m.
Warren Commission assistant counsel, with a stopwatch, reconstructed with Whaley the route he took with Oswald, leaving the cabstand at the Greyhound bus depot around 12:48m., most likely several minutes later than Oswald actually left there.
I say that not only because Oswald would have probably been walking at a fast pace from the time he left the Depository, but most importantly because the most reasonable assumption is that Whaley put 12:30-12:45m. on his trip ticket because he left at some time prior to 12:45m., making the Warren Commission estimate of a 12:48m. departure from the bus depot at least three minutes too late.
It makes little sense that if Whaley left the depot at 12:48, he would record his departure time as being between 12:30 and 12:45m.
With a probable minimum three-minute error by the Warren Commission, the real arrival time was most likely around 12:56m. or earlier.
But there is no reason to assume that Earlene Roberts’s guestimate of 1:00m. should be given precedence over the reconstructed time minus the three minutes.
And if we use, based on common sense, the amended reconstructed time, Oswald would have left his home around 12:59, or earlier.
Generously assuming a departure time as late as 12:59m., since my best estimate of the time of Tippit’s murder was around 1:12m. or earlier, with Oswald arriving there around 1:11m., this gave Oswald twelve minutes to reach Tenth and Patton, eight-tenths of a mile away.
As the reader can see from the sketch in the photo section of this book, there are several routes Oswald could have taken to get there.
Warren Commission assistant counsel David Belin points out in a statement he made for the record in the Warren Commission volumes that there are two “direct” routes from Oswald’s rooming house to the Tippit murder scene.
The first one is from Beckley south to Davis, then left or east on Davis a very short block to Crawford, and then continuing south or right on Crawford to Tenth, and then going left again or east past Patton to the murder scene.
The second direct route is to take Beckley to Davis and stay on Davis all the way to Patton and then take Patton south to Tenth, then going east to the murder scene.
In Belin’s book on the case he tells the reader that at a normal pace, the first route took him fourteen minutes and the second route twelve minutes.
Since Kennedy was shot at 12:30, Roberts’s remark is a non sequitur. tHSCA investigators, during their reconstruction of the event, strangely concluded, in contravention of Roberts’s observation that Oswald was “in a hurry... all but running,” and with nothing to support their conclusion, that Oswald was at Beckley for five minutes, an inordinate length of time.
And since their walking to Tenth and Patton from Beckley took fourteen and a half minutes by what they said was the shortest route, they have him arriving there at around 1:15m.
And at some point he would have had to pass Markham on the sidewalk and be walking in front of her, since for her to see him walking east on Tenth, as she said she did, he would have to reach Tenth and Patton before she did.
When I walked the same route Belin did (and the one the Warren Commission assumed Oswald did) on September 22, 2004, with assassination researcher Bill Drenas timing me with a stopwatch, and his colleague, Ken Holmes, following us in his cab truck, it took me eleven minutes and twenty-three seconds going at a quite brisk pace, the pace I assumed Oswald would be walking.
So Oswald would have had sufficient time to get where, from all the evidence, we know he was at the time Tippit was shot.
A point that should be noted is that of the various reasons people have speculated why Tippit pulled Oswald over, I don’t believe I’ve ever read of one of the most obvious ones, that Oswald was most likely walking at a fast pace, and this immediately stood out to Tippit.
Unfortunately, the documents on the matter don’t indicate that any of the witnesses who purportedly saw Oswald before the shooting were asked at what speed or gait he was walking, and Helen Markham was not asked this in her Warren Commission testimony.
When Jack Tatum first noticed Oswald walking eastbound on Tenth, it was right before Tippit pulled him over, so at that point, even if Oswald had been walking fast earlier, he would have been slowing down.
So the murder happened at 1:10, or even earlier they say, making it even more difficult for Oswald to have been the killer.
Of course, even if Bowiey is correct, and Tippit was killed at 1:10 or earlier, it would be irrelevant, since we know Oswald killed him.
How he managed to get there on time to do it would only have academic value.
If we didn’t know that Oswald killed Tippit, then Bowley’s affidavit would be more relevant.
In an affidavit she gave to the Secret Service on December 2, 1963, it’s not completely clear.
ENDNOTES ity that with an officer lying apparently mortally wounded on the ground, Bowley would want to look at his watch, we don’t know that Bowley’s watch was not off by several minutes, as so many watches are.
We know the assassination took place at 12:30m., yet a Dealey Plaza witness, Mrs.
Indeed, if we’re going to resort to citing Bowley for when the murder happened, we can’t pick and choose, and Bowley, in the same affidavit, says that the first thing he did at the scene was to try to help Tippit, and he suggests that while he was doing this, Benavides was trying to operate the police radio but couldn’t, so he did.
But we know from Dallas police radio dispatch records that Benavides didn’t start trying to operate the police radio until 1:16m. (which would prove that Bowley’s watch was five to six minutes off), and Bowley established contact with the police close to 1:18m.
But we know Markham is wrong since we knowTippit called in on his police radio at 1:08m., two minutes after Markham says he was dead.
Conspiracy theorist Mark Lane alleges in his book Rush to Judgment that although the Warren Commission suggested that Helen Markham was the only female witness to the murder of Tippit, in fact there was another one, Mrs.
Acquilla Clemons, and he strongly implies that the Commission knew of her existence and didn’t want to know the truth she had to tell.
But Lane presents no evidence that the FBI or Warren Commission knew of Mrs.
In his book, Lane says that Clemons “told several independent investigators that she saw two men standing near the police car just moments before one of them shot Tippit.
He cites an article in the New Leader of October 12,1964, by George and Patricia Nash based on a tape-recorded interview of Clemons in 1964 as support for this.
But the New Leader article doesn’t make any reference to Clemons saying she saw one of two men shoot Tippit, nor to his thereafter waving to the other man and each of them running off in opposite directions.
Another of the endless and countless kooks in the Kennedy assassination.
Conspiracy theorists have raised the issue of Jack Tatum’s legitimacy as a witness because he never came forward to the authorities at the time with his observations.
Moriarty found Tatum to be originally reticent about getting involved, particularly since he felt the case was closed, but he said Tatum ended up cooperating when he found out more from Moriarty about the HSCA investigation, although Moriarty said he remained apprehensive.
Moriarty was impressed with Tatum, as I was when I interviewed him in 1986 for the London trial.
Tatum’s story is completely compatible with everything else we know about Tippit’s killing, and he certainly wasn’t someone looking for his fifteen minutes of fame or trying to cash in on his story.
And Tatum told a London Weekend Television interviewer, and later told me, that he was driving a red Ford Galaxie XL500 car that day.
Additionally, with respect to the last coup de grace shot that only Tatum reported seeing Oswald fire at Tippit, the HSCA noted, “The committee did verify from the Tippit autopsy report that there was one wound to the body that slanted upward from front to back.
One excellent indication of just how solid a witness Tatum is took place at the London trial.
After Tatum told the jury that he got a “very good look” at Tippit’s killer, and said there was no question “whatsoever” in his mind it was Oswald, Gerry Spence did not even cross-examine Tatum on the issue of whether he was at Tenth and Patton, in effect thereby conceding that he was there.
Moreover, Spence conducted an extremely and uncommonly brief crossexamination of Tatum on the issue of his identification of Oswald as Tippit’s killer.
Spence, a highly experienced trial lawyer, obviously made an assessment that Tatum could only hurt him.
Although Domingo Benavides testified in 1964 that he ultimately contacted the dispatcher after one failed attempt , Dale Myers pointed out in his 1998 study of the Tippit murder, With Malice , that starting around 1:16m. on Dallas police radio tapes, one can hear the sound of someone making noise with the microphone button of the police radio.
Bowley, used it to successfully contact the police dispatcher at about 1:18m.
When they heard the shots, she looked out the window and saw a man lying on the street in the next block.
Wright’s address and called it in to the police, resulting in the incorrect address for the shooting.
If anyone was more confused about what happened after the shooting than Mary’s husband, Frank, I don’t know who it was.
While his wife was dialing the operator, Frank walked outside to see what happened.
About the only thing he saw that we know was correct was a man lying on the ground near the left fender of his car and a man looking down at him.
From this point on, Frank Wright went psychedelic, claiming he saw the man who was standing run to a car, an old gray coupe, and race away.
But if that was so, unless the coupe was parked on the wrong side of the street, it couldn’t have driven off in a direction away from Wright, as he claimed it did, without making a U-turn.
Wright also said that before the ambulance arrived, other than he and a woman who had “come down from her porch, there wasn’t anyone else out there at all,” when we know that at least Benavides, Markham, and Bowley were at or near the police car.
Indeed, Clayton Butler, the ambulance driver, said that “there were at least 10 people standing around” Tippit when he arrived.
With everyone except Wright seeing the gunman run away, not drive, it’s underFour Days in November standable that when Wright (who says that “nothing in the world is going to change my opinion.
Conspiracy theorist Josiah Thompson figured that the bullet , later dubbed by critics as “the magic bullet,” was therefore probably found by Tomlinson at about 1:50m.
Warren Reynolds claimed to have crossed the street immediately after the gunman disappeared behind the buildings near Crawford and Jefferson, and checked the parking lot; however, considerable evidence exists that about five minutes elapsed before Reynolds checked the lot . 86 collect other evidence: The detectives also find a Dr.
Mr Pinkston of the FBI, a Secret Service man, and two men from the Alcohol and Tobacco Tax Unit of the Treasury Department (the predecessor to today’s Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, the name changing in 1968) were also present as Lieutenant Day and Captain Fritz photographed and examined the rifle.
Since one live round was found in the chamber, and Oswald fired three rounds, this means that for whatever reason Oswald took only four bullets with him when he left in the morning to kill the president.
Either he never had two more to put into his six-round clip, or he felt he was such a good shot that four rounds were more than he needed, or he knew he’d have to leave to escape long before he’d have an opportunity to fire six rounds (we knew he left after three rounds, not firing the fourth), or he had some other reason we’ll never know.
Although conspiracy theorists continue to yap that the rifle found on the sixth floor was not a 6.5-millimeter Mannlicher-Carcano, but some other weapon, such as a 7.65-millimeter Mauser (which one of the officers who discovered it thought it was), there can be no question the rifle was a 6.5-millimeter Mannlicher-Carcano.
All of the evidence, including photographic and eyewitness, proves this.
Indeed, photographer Tom Alyea of WFAA-TV in Dallas was on the sixth floor at the time 56 ENDNOTES and filmed the recovery of the rifle.
The rifle was originally designed in 1891 as a 6.5-millimeter weapon and produced in new models—which varied only in superficial details such as barrel length and caliber—in 1891, 1938, and 1941.
After the outbreak of World War II, the Italian government continued to produce many 6.5-millimeter versions in order to use up large stocks of ammunition on hand.
These 6.5-millimeter Carcanos are designated as model 91/38, to distinguish them from model 38, the designation for a 7.35 millimeter rifle.
One of the most unusual occurrences in the whole assassination story is set forth in a Secret Service report about an incident that took place outside Trauma Room One.
I was outside of the President’s room with SA Berger when Chief Nurse Nelson entered the President’s room.
When SA Berger and I stopped him he said, ‘F.B.I.,’ and made a determined effort to enter the President’s room.
He again tried to forcibly enter the President’s room and had to be restrained.
But that’s not the way the FBI agent involved in the incident, Doyle Williams, said it happened, although his version doesn’t make too much sense.
On the afternoon of the incident he wrote a memo stating that around 12:35m., he was instructed by the special agent-in-charge in Dallas to go to Parkland and establish contact with the Secret Service and offer the bureau’s assistance, which he said he did with Special Agent Roy Kellerman.
So he said the chief nurse on duty in the emergency ward then took him to another part of the hospital where he was able to use a telephone and contact the special agent-in-charge.
He said he immediately identified himself, whereupon Kellerman appeared on the scene and asked him to leave the area, which he did.
When got the report that the president had died, he grabbed a nurse and told her he was an FBI agent and that he needed a phone immediately.
The nurse told Williams to follow her and the two of them moved hastily down the emergency unit’s hallway.
The nurse came to a curtained-off corner and, pulling the curtain slightly aside, told Williams there was a phone in there.
The instant he walked inside the curtained area, a burly man coldcocked him square in the nose.
Hosty was under the impression the incident took place outside the new president’s door, but Williams, in a December 1,1963, memo to his personal file, said it took place in the area “where the President and Mrs.
Hosty said that Williams ended up filing a Workman’s Compensation claim over the beating he took, but nothing came of it.
Billy Lovelady told the media back in 1964 that “a roll call was taken of the dozen or so men in my work gang.
At least there is no record of an established institution in America exulting over his assassination.
The Church Committee Report said this Teletype from FBI Director Hoover was sent out by FBI headquarters in WashingENDNOTES ton, D.C., at 9:40m.
But to believe these times, one would have to believe that even though the FBI started working on the case almost immediately, it waited at least seven long hours after the shooting in Dealey Plaza before sending out any instructions to its field offices around the country, which makes little sense.
In fact, this Teletype was the reason that Ken Howe [Hosty’s immediate supervisor] told me on my car radio to ‘get back to the office fast’ from where I was at Parkland Hospital.
In the original copy of the FBI Teletype there are many times stamped on it, but the earliest time is 2:39m.
This article insures the continuity of the executive branch of government, giving the vice president the same powers that the president had.
The line of succession is somewhat murky since Article II, Section 1 does not provide that the vice president becomes president on the death of the president.
If there was any ambiguity in this language, it was not clarified by the Twentieth Amendment in 1933, which provided that “If, at the time fixed for the beginning of the term of the president, the president elect shall have died [Kennedy was not a president elect], the Vice-President elect shall become President.
This is why it is so remarkable that with LBJ, as with the prior seven vice presidents who had been elevated by the death of a sitting president, this nation has blatantly ignored the Constitution and elevated vice Four Days in November presidents to the office of the presidency on the death of a president.
This practice, which has no constitutional basis, all started in 1841 when President William Henry Harrison, the nation’s ninth president, died in office of pneumonia exactly one month after being sworn in, and John Tyler, his vice president, arrogated to himself the title as well as the powers and duties of the president.
In any event, all illegitimacy and ambiguity was removed by the ratification of the Twenty-fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution on February 10,1967.
There are those who believed that between the time of Kennedy’s death and the oath-taking of Lyndon Johnson as president two hours later, the nation had a president, but one who, under Article II, Section 1 , could not act as president.
If there had been an election following the deaths in office of the seven presidents before Kennedy, it’s fair to assume that one or more of the vice presidents who succeeded these presidents would not have been elected, and hence, with a different presidential administration, history almost assuredly would have been different.
And after Kennedy’s death, if there had been an election, there is a good chance the president’s brother Robert would have actively sought, or been pressured into running for, the office of the presidency.
And with the mood of the country being so sympathetic to the president’s surviving loved ones, and RFK certainly more likely to represent in the voters’ minds a continuation of the JFK presidency than Johnson, he might have been elected.
And with his election, it is not unreasonable to conclude that there may not have been aVietnam War, with its cataclysmic repercussions, which resonate powerfully to this day. tThe conflict is between Article II, Section 1 , which immediately gives the vice president the powers and duties of the president, and Section 1 , which seems to contradict 1 (unless 1 only applies to elected presidents) by saying he can’t carry out these powers and duties until he is sworn in, in effect rendering Section 1 a nullity.
Assistant Special Agent-in-Charge Lem Johns was aboard Air Force One at the time and was of the belief that the Constitution itself technically prohibited Johnson from ordering a nuclear response prior to his being sworn in.
Ed. ), there is something that trumps and is above the Constitution where necessity and national security are involved, and that is common sense.
One is reminded of Lincoln’s temporary suspension of the constitutional right of habeas corpus during the Civil War.
It was rabidly anti-Kennedy for what it felt was his appeasement of Khrushchev and Castro in the cold war.
The argument goes that the ACCC was a part of the conspiracy to murder Kennedy and the Abundant Life Temple was to be a convenient refuge for Kennedy’s and Tippit’s killer.
In 1987, nearly a quarter of a century later, Warren “Butch” Burroughs, his memory understandably much better now than in 1963, told conspiracy theorist Jim Marrs that the person who had sneaked into the theater could not have been Oswald because he saw Oswald enter the theater a minute or so after 1:00m.
And later, around 1:15m., Oswald came up to his concession stand and bought some popcorn.
You see, when Burroughs testified before the Warren Commission on April 8,1964, not only did he say he never saw Oswald enter the theater, but he didn’t say anything about Oswald being inside the theater at any time prior to when the police arrived, or selling Oswald popcorn.
Conspiracy theorist Robert Sam Anson quotes this article by McDonald, then suggests that this man who fingered Oswald was part of the United States intelligence plot to frame Oswald.
Anson gives no source for this “then disappeared” assertion of his, which bolsters his story of a frame-up, almost undoubtedly because none exists.
McDonald’s article, beyond what I’ve already quoted, makes no further mention of the man who fingered Oswald, not saying anything about him, much less that he disappeared.
And in the finest traditions of the conspiracy theorists, Anson doesn’t bother to tell his readers that McDonald later found out who the man was who pointed Oswald out to him.
Moreover, the nick or indentation was in the “wrong” location, not being in the center of the primer.
So the Commission concluded it was the trigger snapping back that made the snapping sound, not the snap of the hammer, which bears the firing pin.
If the city of Dallas itself could not make up its mind on what to call the five-story gray stone structure at 2000 Main Street in downtown Dallas, outsiders can’t be expected to.
The three names strewn throughout the Warren Commission and HSCA volumes are City Hall, the Municipal Building, and the Police and Municipal Courts Building, all at the same location , between Main and Commerce on the north and south and Harwood Street on the west.
Complicating the matter further is that although there is only one solid structure at this location, it actually consists of two buildings.
From Warren Commission testimony and talking to Dallas old-timers like Jim Bowles, a thirtyyear member of the police force, this is the best I could do to decipher the matter.
The first structure on this block was built in the early 1900s at the corner of Commerce and Harwood and was named the Municipal Building, but people called it “City Hall” because the mayor, the city council, and the city departments had ENDNOTES their offices there.
In 1958 this building was renamed the Police and Municipal Courts Building, with the Dallas Police Department taking over the second through the fifth floors and the Municipal Court occupying the first floor.
A new Municipal Building (City Hall) was built as an addition to the old Municipal Building, and faced Main Street.
At the time of the assassination, the formal name for the two collective buildings was the Municipal Building, but again, most Dallasites called it “City Hall,” and that title included, as indicated, the Police and Municipal Courts Building.
The traffic lane leading down into and up out of the basement of the single structure was below and right in the middle of the Police and Municipal Courts Building on one side and City Hall on the other.
The parking area or garage in the basement was under the City Hall part of the structure, not under the Police and Municipal Courts Building, but was only for the use of the police department.
The department operated, of course, around the clock seven days a week, had many more people working in its headquarters than there were people working in City Hall, and needed a basement area for security purposes when transporting prisoners to the jail.
City Hall occupants parked in a lot on the east side of the building facing the Pearl Expressway.
Although it was said that Captain Fritz had been offered the position of chief of police a number of times but always turned it down, preferring to work in the Homicide and Robbery Bureau, Dallas police detective Elmo Cunningham, who knew Fritz well, said that Fritz “told me he didn’t particularly want to be chief, but he said ‘Now these people that’s passed the word around that I turned it down are wrong.
Among other things, Cunningham said, Fritz “didn’t believe in writing, and his reports on the investigations were usually very brief.
However, many years later, someone discovered a little over two and a half pages of Fritz’s contemporaneous handwritten notes at the National Archives.
They are obviously scribbled and extremely sparse for twelve hours of interrogation, but they do set forth when each of the four interrogations of Oswald began, and with two of them, the second and fourth, when they ended.
Therefore, Fritz’s recollection had to be compared with those recollections of others present to determine during what session, and in what sequence, the questions and answers took *However, I could not take even this at face value.
But we know from the testimony of several witnesses that the first interrogation session started at the very latest around 3:00m.
Wherever possible, the timing of other events helped determine when a series of questions took place.
For instance, Oswald could not have been asked about the backyard photos during the first interrogation session because they hadn’t been found at that point.
Oswald was interrogated by Dallas police captain Will Fritz and others for a total of approximately twelve hours between 2:30m. on Friday, November 22, 1963, until just after 11:00m. on Sunday, November 24.
It would have been good for the historical record if the sessions had been tape-recorded.
It wasn’t because, as some conspiracy theorists have darkly suggested, that Dallas law enforcement didn’t want anyone to know what Oswald really said.
Alexander has suggested in the past that even if Fritz had had a recorder, it is likely he wouldn’t have used it because “if had said, ‘Yeah, I killed the no-goodo.b. president,’ it would have been inadmissible in any court.
Even if we gave him the proper warning, and then reduced his statement to writing, if he then refused to sign it in the presence of a witness, it useless.
But under that reasoning, which would apply, by the way, in any state, law enforcement would never want to tape-record any interrogation.
Yet they have routinely done so around the country, including in Texas, for years.
When I interviewed Alexander, he conceded this point, acknowledging that if Oswald had voluntarily confessed, there would at least be a good chance that he would also sign such a confession.
Such a signed confession would obviously be something that law enforcement would very much want.
And if the suspect refused to sign it, the police wouldn’t be any worse off than if they hadn’t even attempted to get his confession.
It is a legal oddity and curiosity that in a state noted for its conservatism and, In the majority of states, oral confessions or admissions of a defendant made to police while in custody are admissible against him at his trial—assuming there is no other reason for their exclusion, such as coercion, not being advised of rights, and so on.
Four Days in November even today, for the lack of proper safeguarding of the constitutional rights of indigent defendants, in the one area of oral admissions and confessions by defendants, Texas for years was way ahead of virtually every other state.
Just one of a considerable number of conflicting stories about the same event: Lawrence F O’Brien, Kennedy’s special assistant for congressional relations, told the Warren Commission it was he who went to get Jackie for the swearing-in ceremony.
Samuel Byck, a professed Nixon hater, got on a Delta airline flight at Baltimore-Washington International Airport on February 22, 1974.
He ordered the pilot to take off, and when the pilot refused, Byck started shooting.
Before it was over, Byck had shot and killed the copilot and an airport policeman and seriously wounded the pilot.
A second airport policeman shot through a plane window and struck Byck with two bullets, in the abdomen and chest, before Byck killed himself by shooting himself in the temple with his .22 caliber gun.
Author James W Clarke researched the Byck case and heard a tape recording, which the FBI had, that Byck had made the day before his attempted hijacking in which he said he wanted to make his death and President Nixon’s a “smashing success” by crashing the plane “into the target, which is the White House,” hopefully killing Nixon inside.
The slight piece of evidence that goes in the opposite direction was that in Byck’s attache case, the 250pound former Philadelphia salesman had an incendiary device consisting of two gallons of gasoline in plastic containers wired to a destructing mechanism, an explosive that clearly wouldn’t be necessary if the plane crashed into the White House.
On the other hand, if he merely intended to blow up the plane with his incendiary device, he wouldn’t have had any need to hijack the plane.
In 1972, the Secret Service had investigated Byck as a result of an alleged threat he made against Nixon.
He was picked up and committed to a Philadelphia hosENDNOTES 66 pital for mental observation.
LBJ may have been insecure because of the way he became president, but few have ever been more knowledgeable about, or expert at, the manipulation of the levers of power in accomplishing their presidential agenda than Johnson, as he soon proved with his civil rights legislation and war against poverty.
Apart from his unease over how he ascended to the Oval Office, the “Master of the Senate” (the title of one of Robert A Caro’s three biographical volumes on Johnson) felt otherwise comfortable, indeed, in the presidential chair.
Lyndon Johnson was Kennedy’s strongest opponent for the Democratic presidential nomination at the Democratic national convention in Los Angeles in July of 1960.
It was not Johnson’s intent to be Kennedy’s vice presidential running mate, but after a half-hour meeting with Kennedy the following day, he was talked into it.
Kennedy, needing to shore up his support in the South, chose Johnson over people like Senator Stuart Symington of Missouri, Senator Henry M Jackson of Washington, and Governor Orville L Freeman of Minnesota.
His supporters had committed themselves to Johnson’s campaign for the presidency.
Johnson was moved to tears at one point, knowing the sense of dismay their friends and supporters would feel.
The surveillance, beginning at about 5:00m. on November 22 and ending at midnight November 24, proved negative.
There is a considerable difference of opinion about the exact circumstances surrounding this incident.
Although both Hosty and Revill agree that the conversation took place, there is also a dispute over the precise words that were used.
Revill testified that he may, in fact, have “misunderstood” what Hosty said about Oswald being “capable” of the assassination and that he would give Hosty “the benefit of the doubt” about this portion of the conversation.
After the purchase he took them to the Depository Building that same day and showed them to Roy Truly, telling Truly he intended to hide the rifles in his office because he was going to give the .22 rifle to his son as a Christmas present.
But on second thought he feared the rifles might be stolen so he took them home that day, November 20.
William Manchester’s book The Death of a President , which is quoted from heavily in this section, is by all accounts a very important literary contribution to an understanding of the human drama surrounding the assassination, and probably will remain the definitive account of this aspect of the tragedy.
In fact, the Kennedys had sent copies of the book to their nieces and nephews as Christmas presents.
But perhaps no book in publishing history generated more controversy than Death of a President did, even before it was published.
The problem is that both the Kennedy and Johnson camps were convinced the book was going to hurt their side politically and stain their legacy.
The Johnson camp was convinced that “from leaks” the Kennedys were dictating the thrust of the book, and the book would depict Johnson in such a boorish, unflattering way that it would cause serious harm to Johnson politically, thereby enabling RFK to defeat him for the presidency in 1968.
Washington correspondent William White, in a syndicated December 17,1966, column, spoke of the “unremitting hostility” of the Kennedy people toward LBJ, whom they viewed as a “crude usurper” to the throne.
Indeed, Manchester, who ended up being hospitalized for twelve days from exhaustion in the writing of the book, himself would say that Mrs.
Kennedy reminded him of “Marie Antoinette, completely isolated from the world by her courtier-advisers.
And RFK, he said, was “surrounded by people who have hitched their wagon to his star.
But it wasn’t just the LBJ side that was having kittens worrying about the book.
Jackie Kennedy, whom Manchester interviewed on tape for ten hours, also was dissatisfied with the manuscript of the book Manchester furnished her—so dissatisfied, in fact, that she sent an urgent, handwritten plea to Manchester to revise his manuscript in designated areas, which he refused to do.
There are many other matters, I know, but these are all of that sort, and they are absolutely necessary to me and my children.
But it was believed by many that Jackie was mostly concerned about what the manuscript said about her innermost private self.
Manchester, “William Manchester’s Own Story,”65; “The changes”: Adler, Eloquent Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, 158) The public squabble became so involved and bitter that an entire book, The Manchester Affair, was written on it.
However, President Johnson reportedly declined Manchester’s request to be interviewed for the book.
This simply can’t be squared with the testimony of the three members of Dallas law enforcement who came to her door.
Critics often use this reference to portray Oswald as a bewildered victim, caught up in a plot not of his own making.
In fact, Hosty testified that the word “frantically” should have been “emphatically” , a small, but significant change in meaning.
Alexander said, “In those days, we didn’t have supporting, probable cause affidavits.
Critics have charged that the four Oswald lineups, including the one for Markham, were grossly unfair.
However, the lineup (and the others that followed) was almost unavoidably a defective one, one that pointed to Oswald as the most likely suspect among the four men.
For one thing, Oswald had a cut on his forehead above his right eye, and his left eyelid was puffed up, the only one of the four men in the lineup who was physically bruised.
Secondly, Oswald was verbally belligerent to the police detectives throughout the lineup, in contradistinction to the other three men.
But one disparity between Oswald and the other men that Warren Commission critics have pointed to, the attire of the men in the lineup, is not quite as great.
The Dallas Police Department had no policy with respect to taking photographs of lineups.
Detective James Leavelle, who conducted three of the Oswald lineups (standing with the witnesses and telling the men on stage to turn left, right, etc.), said that in close to one hundred lineups he conducted as a Dallas officer, he never once took a photo of the people in the lineup, and unfortunately, the Oswald lineups were no exception.
However, the Dallas Police Department did send the Warren Commission photos of Clark, Perry, and Abies standing next to each other in a pose taken months after the lineup.
Two of the photos appear in the Warren Commission volumes , and Clark and Perry are in suit and tie.
Abies is wearing a sports shirt, but couldn’t possibly have looked more neat.
This, of course, contrasts sharply with a bruised, unshaven Oswald in a plain Tshirt.
Understandably, the critics have railed against this obvious disparity.
But at the time of the lineup, none of the three were dressed as they were in the photo taken for the Warren Commission.
However, each testified to their attire before the Warren Commission, and they corroborate Leavelle’s recollection.
But even the clothing the three men were wearing at the time of the lineup presented a contrast to Oswald’s T-shirt.
Although the police had recovered Oswald’s gray jacket by this point, they obviously couldn’t have Oswald, for his own benefit, wear the very jacket that the witnesses had seen Tippit’s killer wear.
So the police would have had to put the gray Four Days in November jacket on all the men in the lineup (which they could not do simultaneously, of course), or on none of them, which they chose to do.
There is one area of unresolved ambiguity about the lineup which may have additionally pointed to Oswald as Tippit’s killer—his name.
Although the Warren Commission said it was “satisfied that the lineups were conducted fairly” , I am willing to concede that the Tippit lineups were not fair lineups, although Oswald himself was partially responsible for this.
To accept that proposition, one would have to presuppose that the witnesses picked out Oswald not because he looked like the man they saw at the Tippit murder scene, but simply because he stood out in many other ways from the other men in the lineup.
Indeed, even if Oswald was the only one in the lineup, and therefore there wasn’t even anyone else to choose from, their observation that he was the man they saw at the Tippit murder scene would have to be accorded great weight.
To conclude otherwise, and embrace the notion that the witnesses picked out Oswald as Tippit’s killer only because of his bruises, his disheveled appearance, and the way he acted it necessarily follows that the critics believe if Arnold Schwarzenegger or anyone else took Oswald’s place in the lineup, with the same bruises and disheveled appearance, and acted like Oswald did, all the witnesses would be positive that he was the one they saw kill Tippit or run from the murder scene.
Detectives Richard Sims and Elmer Boyd wrote that they returned Oswald to Captain Fritz’s office at 4:20m.
There is some discrepancy as to the exact time the search was conducted.
I asked Bill Alexander whether the detectives who were with him had the same fears as he.
Secret Service agent Lem Johns, while acknowledging that he didn’t know what was going on in people’s minds on the plane, did not personally notice the alleged tension between JFK and LBJ’s staffs.
He tried to telephone Commander James Humes earlier in the afternoon but was unable to reach him.
Upon their arrival at Bethesda, General McHugh spoke with Admiral Galloway about having Kennedy embalmed on the grounds of the hospital following the autopsy.
Galloway resisted, saying the hospital didn’t have the facilities to perform an embalming service.
The general persisted, telling Admiral Galloway that it was what the Kennedy family wanted.
Galloway eventually acquiesced, and arrangements to bring portable embalming equipment to Bethesda to perform the service were made with Gawler’s Funeral Home.
Confusion surrounding the manner in which the president’s body arrived at the rear of the hospital later resulted in charges by conspiracy author David S Lifton that a decoy ambulance was used to deceive those present and cover up the fact that the president’s body had already been surgically altered at another location and then snuck into the morgue.
They returned to the front entrance and subsequently escorted the first ambulance to the morgue entrance.
The honor guard, along with a Navy enlisted-man driver, the other duty officer, and me, rode to the morgue on the guard truck at high speed, believing that the ambulance was following.
Since the Secret Service driver was unfamiliar with the grounds, we decided he was lost.
Retracing our path, we found the ambulance still at the front of the hospital amid many onlookers.
In our haste we had left without confirming that the ambulance was behind us.
However, hall clocks visible in television footage and still photographs depicting Lieutenant Day carrying the rifle through the third-floor hallway show the time as 6:16m.
McWatters testified that he never told police of what he now believed to be his mistake that night (2 H 290), which explains why the police record was never corrected.
Critics have charged that McWatters’s testimony impeaches his alleged encounter with Oswald on November 22, and that Oswald must have used some other form of transportation to get to Oak Cliff.
However, in straightening out the Jones-Oswald mix-up, McWatters testified that a man did board his bus at about Elm and Griffin after having knocked on the door of the bus, and exited two blocks later, taking a transfer as he left.
The description, a close approximation of Oswald, is less important when one considers the physical evidence—the transfer itself.
Some critics have contended that the bullet wound in the back wasn’t discovered until the latter stages of the autopsy, a claim Dr.
Humes told the HSCA that the back wound was found during the initial examination of the body.
Upon arrival at police headquarters, Marguerite Oswald insisted on talking with FBI men “from Washington” about her suspicions that Lee was a secret agent.
She finally agreed to talk with Dallas FBI agents, telling them, “For the security of my country, I want this kept perfectly quiet until you investigate.
Other contents of Oswald’s wallet included a snapshot of Marina, one of him in a Marine uniform, and one of a small baby in a white cap, most likely his daughter Rachel.
Do Not Dup.,” number 1126; a silver-colored Marine Corps emblem ring; a chrome ID bracelet with expansion band with the inscription “Lee”; and, curiously, a paycheck stub for a James A Jackson from American Bakeries Company dated August 22, 1960, or August 27, 1960, reflecting the amount of pay as $66.17, less federal income tax of $7.40 and Social Security tax of $1.99 for a net amount of $56.78.
He said that he had never met Lee Harvey Oswald and had no idea how Oswald came into possession of the stub, only conjecturing that perhaps he had accidentally dropped the stub on the street and someone picked it up.
Why Oswald would have on his person a three-year-old paycheck stub of Jackson’s is unknown.
The document’s reverse side further identifies the card as a “Uniformed Services Identification and Privilege Card,” DD Form 1173.
Some conspiracy theorists have suggested this privilege card shows Oswald was somehow connected with United States military intelligence.
The buffs don’t bother to ask themselves why, if Oswald was a United States agent or operative, they discontinued his privilege on December 7, 1962, almost a year before the assassination.
Chester H Boyers, the navy corpsman who typed the receipt, gave HSCA investigators an affidavit under penalty of perjury that contained his handwritten notes at the time of the autopsy, in which he jotted down during the autopsy that “there were bullet missile fragments recovered.
Both Agents Sibert and O’Neill confirmed to the HSCA that they received two bullet fragments, not a missile.
As Sibert put it in an affidavit, “Regarding the receipt for the ‘missile,’ I do not recall exactly how the receipt described the fragments but it was certainly not for a whole missile, rather it was for some fragments.
A single missile to me means considerable substance, more of a whole bullet.
This receipt was prepared by someone else and typed up by a naval corpsman.
In 1975, Dennis David, a navy first-class petty officer at the time of the assassination who later became a key cog in conspiracy author David Lifton’s zany bodyalteration theory, claimed that he was the one who typed up the receipt for the bullet fragments.
During an interview for Lifton’s book, David claimed that a Secret Service agent reportedly dictated the receipt in the administrative offices, describing the physical characteristics of four bullet fragments.
And he made some comment about, ‘This is considered classified material.
His name doesn’t appear on any list of personnel involved in the autopsy , nor is his story about typing the receipt for four bullet fragments corroborated by anyone.
Although the “fourth bullet rather than two fragments” argument is deader than a doornail, David Lifton has persisted in trying to keep it alive, and his weapon is the faulty memory of others.
Of course, throughout the HSCA’s entire investigation no one else had told the committee about seeing a slug on the autopsy table or anywhere else at Bethesda.
The HSCA said it “recontacted Admiral Osborne and informed him that the body of the President had not arrived in any clothes , but was wrapped in sheets, and that no one else recalled anything about the discovery of a missile.
Lifton contacted Osborne the next year and Osborne proceeded to tell him his original story, claiming that Kennedy arrived in his casket in his clothing, and a “reasonably clean, unmarred” bullet fell from the clothing.
Stover had been the commanding officer of the United States Naval Medical School and, like Osborne, was in the autopsy room during the autopsy.
If I can conclude this silly story with one observation over and above the fact that it has been established beyond any reasonable doubt that two large bullet fragments, not a missile or bullet, were found during the autopsy, it would be this.
James Humes and his two fellow autopsy surgeons were completely perplexed over the fact that they could not find or figure out what happened to the bullet that entered the upper right part of the president’s back, Humes only determining what happened to it the following morning when he spoke on the phone to Dr.
Although the May 27,1992, issue of JAMA reported that Lieutenant Colonel Pierre Finck arrived at 9:15m.
EST (Breo, “JFK’s Death—The Plain Truth from the MDs Who Did the Autopsy,”2798), all other accounts show that Finck arrived at about 8:30m.
However, other testimony indicates that the heart and lungs were not removed until the latter stages of the autopsy.
The difficulty of finding the bullet that entered Kennedy’s upper back is reminiscent of the much longer search for a bullet to the back of President James A Garfield, shot by Charles Guiteau on July 2,1881.
While Garfield lingered near death for eighty days, his doctors, not having X-rays at the time, probed for the bullet that entered Garfield’s right back with unsterilized instruments or their bare hands, a common practice at the time.
Guiteau severely criticized Garfield’s doctors, claiming that it was they, not he, who killed Garfield.
The bullet was finally found during the autopsy following Garfield’s death on September 19, 1881.
During the eighty-day period, the location of the bullet in Garfield’s body became a national obsession, with many people offering advice on how to locate it.
One citizen wrote to the White House that the doctors should simply turn the president upside-down and see if the bullet would fall out.
On March 15,2006, the FBI notified all of its field offices that the bureau would no longer analyze gunshot residue in its investigations.
In his book Rearview Mirror, former FBI agent William Turner writes that in the mid-1960s Dr.
Vincent Guinn, who at the time was the head of the General Atomics project in San Diego that had developed the process of neutron activation analysis , and Raymond Pinker, the director of the Los Angeles Police Department crime lab at the time, “ordered an Italian Carcano rifle such as Oswald supposedly fired from the same mail-order house in Chicago.
There simply is no way to square this with the testimony and experience of the Dallas police and FBI in this case.
Barnes, who conducted the parafENDNOTES fin test on Oswald’s cheek, testified, as noted, that it was the only time in nine years of doing such tests that he had ever been requested to test one’s cheeks to determine if the person had fired a rifle.
No one could really believe this is perjured testimony, if for no other reason that no professional would lie under oath on a matter that he knows other experts could easily refute him on.
It should be noted that after the Dallas police conducted paraffin tests on Oswald, they washed both casts.
Though no nitrates were found, the washing hadn’t removed all the barium and antimony on the casts.
Five witnesses, four of whom knew Ruby, testified that they saw him on the third floor of police headquarters at City Hall sometime earlier, between 5:30 and 8:00 that Friday evening.
Most assuredly, all of these people did see Ruby Friday evening at police headquarters, but the likelihood is that looking back (for four out of the five, months later, including for two, eight months later, with only one closer to the event, and even that one was two weeks later), they are simply mistaken as to the time.
All of ENDNOTES the things they saw Ruby doing, such as hanging out outside Captain Fritz’s door and helping reporters, Ruby admits doing, but after he arrived on the third floor around 11:00m.
It makes no sense, and the Warren Commission tended to believe the witnesses had been mistaken in their time , something that would be easy to do when the intensity of the drama was all focused on Oswald and the president’s death and no one was concerned about Ruby.
Finally, Eva Grant, Ruby’s sister, was very candid in her testimony about her failure to even remember approximate times, but when asked how long her brother had stayed in her apartment the last time he visited her on the day of the assassination, she said, “I would say a good two hours.
Waggoner Carr testified that he couldn’t “for the life of me” remember who it was who called him.
Although Wade may have said this, he didn’t suggest anything like this in his Warren Commission testimony, and Alexander, in an interview with author Larry A Sneed, doesn’t say this.
But Wade, in his Commission testimony, never indicated he spoke to anyone in Washington about the matter.
Whenever Marina found the ring on the day of the assassination, she did not move it from its place in the cup.
A few days later, Marina, now being in protective custody of the Secret Service, told FBI agents she wanted them to go to the Paine residence to retrieve her husband’s ring for her.
Either she forgot to tell them where it was, or they forgot what she told them, because when FBI agent Bardwell D Odum and another agent showed up at Ruth Paine’s door, their only message was that Marina wanted her husband’s ring, and asked Ruth if she had any idea where to look for it.
Ruth, who hadn’t been told by Marina that Lee had left his ring behind, told the Warren Commission, “I said I’ll look first in the little tea cup that is from her grandmother, and on top of the chest of drawers in the bedroom where had stayed.
However, the consensus of opinion of those in attendance is that the autopsy ended at about midnight.
For more than a year, O’Neal’s Funeral Home in Dallas tried to collect the $3,995 bill for the Britannia casket and services rendered.
The government’s General Services Administration questioned the amount, though it finally paid on February 26, 1965, after O’Neal knocked $500 off the bill.
The funeral home’s business in Dallas fell off 50 percent in the wake of the adverse publicity.
Years later the lab was transferred to the FBI’s new headquarters in the J Edgar Hoover Building in Washington.
The lab is currently at the FBI’s longtime training facility in Quantico, Virginia, about forty-five miles south of the capital.
A conflicting internal FBI memorandum dated November 22, 1963, indicates that these arrangements were made by 8:18m.
Coupled with the fact that Ruby frequently carried his revolver with him, it doesn’t sound improbable at all.
But in his testimony before the Warren Commission, Ruby said, “I lied” about this.
The sophisticated argument (if this is what Ruby was referring to) that if he didn’t shoot Oswald on Friday this would indicate that what he did on Sunday was unpremeditated, and hence, he shouldn’t get the death penalty, is certainly not the type of thing he would have been thinking about (with his flat intellect, perhaps at any time—here’s someone who just testified his defense would be more accurate if he lied) just one day after he killed Oswald and after only a four-minute meeting with attorney Tom Howard, who wasn’t even Ruby’s attorney at that point.
However, his lawyers may have come up with this at a later date, and Ruby, who went with it, had to decide which story was a lie, and he chose to say his first story was.
This jail card entry of 12:23m. is an apparent error, or at best misleading.
He says nothing about Oswald making a phone call at or around that time.
And when we look at the aforementioned jail card, the times for the three phone calls at *Ruby was hopelessly inconsistent on this matter.
Prior to the trial as well as after the trial but before a motion for a new trial he made on April 29, 1964 (which in either event is substantially before his polygraph examination), Ruby handwrote, on three-by-five-inch cards, his version of the events surrounding the shooting of Oswald.
ENDNOTES the bottom of the card (the same card that indicated higher up on the card that Oswald made a telephone call at 12:23m.), are listed as 1:40m., 4:22m., and 8:00m.:23m. is not listed.
See also CE 2003,288, where there is no reference to a call being made by Oswald after he was brought up to the fifth floor.
There is no record of Oswald being checked out of jail for this arraignment.
Maybe, he speculates, Ruby thought he was the kind of hero Scudder was talking about.
We do know, of course, that Ruby thought he would be viewed as a hero for killing Oswald, and, indeed, many in America viewed him that way after his act.
The language from the Heroism flyer did seem to be tailor-made for inciting an already fervently patriotic person who also happened to love Kennedy.
The building of this nation . . . required the leadership and achievement of heroes.
Whether he answers the call depends on his character, his values, and the strength of his will.
Senator also says Crafard went to the post office with Jack and him, but Crafard doesn’t indicate he did, only that Jack said he wanted to go there and that after the three left Webb’s, Jack and Senator dropped him off at the Carousel, the two presumably on their way to the post office.
While Crafard’s memory is clear on the sequence of what took place that night, Senator admits his memory was not.
As with so much else in this case, there’s some confusion as to when Ruby and Senator got back home.
But Ruby told the FBI he and Senator dropped Crafard off at the Carousel Club at around 6:00m.
Assuming Webb is correct since he may have arrived at his shop around the same time every day, what time Ruby and Senator returned to their apartment in large part is dependent on whether they went to the post office after leaving the shop, or had already been to the post office.
One of the somewhat surprising consequences of the assassination aftermath is the permanent estrangement between Ruth Paine and Marina Oswald.
After the Secret Service took protective custody of Marina, Ruth lost track of her for several weeks, and mail coming to her house for Marina from around the country, including donations, was sent by Ruth to the Irving police for forwarding to Marina.
Since the assassination weekend, other than one phone call from Marina to Ruth expressing her gratitude to Ruth for everything, Marina was making herself very scarce.
Included in the mail that Ruth would forward to the Irving police were letters from Ruth herself to Marina, eventually taking on the tone of near beseechment to Marina to contact her.
But Marina did not respond except for a Christmas card that Ruth said had “zero content,” telling Marina in a follow-up letter that “you wrote me as if I were an old grandmother and not a friend.
Finally, Ruth tracked Marina down to the home of James Martin in Dallas, the manager of the inn that the Secret Service had taken Marina to on November 24 whose subsequent invitation to Marina to live in his home with his wife and children she had accepted.
On the morning of December 21, 1963, Ruth knocked on the door of the Martin residence, laden with mail and packages for Marina and, more importantly, wanting to see her.
But Marina went to the back of the house and remained out of sight, Martin telling Ruth that he had been asked by Marina not to reveal her whereabouts to anyone, the implication being that Marina was not in the house, which, as indicated, she was, and which Ruth suspected.
After months of separation, Ruth met briefly with Marina one evening at the home of Mrs.
Declan Ford, a mutual friend in the Russian emigrant community in Dallas.
Ruth had suspected that Marina was not being given Ruth’s letters to her, but Marina said she had, and said she hadn’t responded because Martin, who Four Days in November had become her personal manager, had urged her not to.
Though Marina was friendly, the two did not have a really substantive discussion, and Ruth wasn’t particularly encouraged.
The next and final time they saw each other was when Marina, Ruth felt, wanted to show off her new home just north of Dallas in Richardson.
Marina, justified or not in her sentiments, has been quite explicit as to why she rejected Ruth.
Marina said, “I think that she wants to see me in her own selfish interests.
She likes to be well known, popular, and I think that anything that I should write her, for example, would wind up in the press.
The reason that I think so is that the first time that we were in jail to see Lee, she was with me and with her children, and she was trying to get in front of the cameras, and . . . instructed her children to look this way and look that way.
Her biographer, Priscilla McMillan, raises this possibility, at least for consideration.
McMillan writes that after Oswald’s funeral, “Marina expected to go on living at Ruth Paine’s.
Additionally, the Secret Service agents who were protecting Marina seconded Robert’s advice to Marina not to live with Ruth.
Their thoughts weren’t as goofy as Robert’s, but they were uncomfortable with the fact that the Paines were active members of the ACLU, considered left wing by most Americans, and Michael Paine was under some undisclosed cloud with the police, perhaps because of the fact that his father had once been a follower of Leon Trotsky.
In any event, “Marina was allowed to understand that if she wished to remain in the United States, she had better put distance between herself and the Paines.
McMillan goes on to say that when Ruth sent Marina two books after the assassination, in one of which the Secret Service found the note of instructions Lee had 90 ENDNOTES left for her on the night he went out to murder General Walker, thereby implicating Oswald for the first time in the attempt on Walker’s life, Marina “blamed Ruth for the fact that she had been compelled against her wishes to go into the Walker affair, and she used this as a rationalization for having severed their communications.
The editor-in-chief of Time-Life , Henry R Luce, estimated a loss of close to a million dollars in discarding the previously completed November 29 edition, but would later say it was the best million dollars he had ever spent.
The previous edition (the cover story had featured United States Naval Academy All-American football quarterback Roger Staubach) now ripped apart, Life' s editorial team, in a round-the-clock effort in which “everyone in the Life family pitched in,” managed to put out its completely new assassination special edition on November 29.
The edition had a four-page spread of many Zapruder frames, but Z313, the gruesome frame showing the president’s head exploding in blood and brain tissue, was not shown to Life’s readers.
For the twelve years it owned the Zapruder film, Life was extraordinarily possessive of it, perhaps unusually so, not allowing—despite pressure and clamoring from many sources who felt an important piece of evidence dealing with the public interest should not be hoarded by a private corporation—the film to be shown on public television or anywhere else, and electing to show only selected frames to its readers.
Other than claiming to tell a local Dallas FBI agent where the FBI could find the original money order ,^ since the FBI already had all the informaMcMillan writes that in Marina’s mind, Walker was still alive and her husband’s attempt had come to nothing.
Coupled with the fact that she felt “Lee had too many murders on his soul already,” she had kept the fact of her husband’s attempt on Walker from the authorities.
Indeed, when it was published in 1977, Marina made a number of joint television appearances with McMillan to promote the book. tWe don’t even know that Holmes did this.
In an interview for Larry Sneed’s 1998 book (remarkably, Sneed gives no dates for his interviews throughout his important book of interviews, and it has been established from the sources that some of his interviews were conducted as much as ten years before the publication of his book), Holmes relates a verbatim conversation with an FBI agent who he says was waiting in his office when Four Days in November tion it needed about the entire transaction , it is difficult to see what else Holmes did.
He and his staff in Dallas were involved in a flurry of activity to locate the stub (retained after a money order is ripped off and given to the customer) of the money order used to buy the weapon, and in the original search looking for a March 20, 1963, stub for $21.95, they were understandably unable to locate it.
Whether the Dallas FBI gave Holmes this misinformation, or whether Holmes got it confused, is not known.
In any event, once the FBI learned that Washington, D.C., had the records, the original money order purchased by A Hidell in Dallas on March 12 was recovered.
Humes told the HSCA that he returned to Bethesda Saturday morning and met with Drs.
Boswell and Finck between 10:30 m. and 12:00m. and that it was during this time that the call was placed to Dr.
It is likely that the call was placed later in the morning considering that Humes first went to church and the fact that he couldn’t have been certain that Dr.
It is also unlikely that Humes met with Finck on Saturday morning (Finck, who worked at Walter Reed Army Hospital, didn’t mention a Saturday meeting in any of his reports or testimony), although it’s conceivable that he met with Boswell, since Boswell, like Humes, had his office at Bethesda.
The compound at Hyannis Port was the heart and soul of the hard-working, fun-loving Kennedy family, members always returning to it for emotional sustenance through the years.
It was at Hyannis Port that John Kennedy spent the night of the election in 1960 and received the news he had been elected president.
But many years earlier, when Holmes testified before the Warren Commission just over four months after the assassination, his story was that when he arrived for work that Saturday morning, the postal inspector on duty told him that an FBI agent had phoned and inquired how to get the original money order and the inspector told Holmes he had told the agent.
In Holmes’s version many years later, the inspector told Holmes the FBI agent was up in his office waiting to talk to him.
CE 1799; 23 H 419) 92 ENDNOTES iting the Kennedys” at Hyannis Port drafted by a close friend, Dave Hackett.
Anticipate that each Kennedy will ask you what you think of another Kennedy’s dress, hairdo, backhand, latest achievement.
The only way I know of to get out of playing is not to come at all, or to come with a broken leg.
If you don’t have a broken leg and if you come, you will play; that is, you will if you don’t want to take your supper in the kitchen, or if you don’t want to talk to anyone for the rest of the weekend.
Make a lot of noise and make out that you never had a better time in your life.
Look glum if your team doesn’t score a touchdown, and become gleeful when your team does.
Curry revealed that he had sent a letter to Earl Warren in 1964 detailing Shanklin’s request.
According to jail records, on November 23, 1963, Oswald was checked out of jail at 12:35m., back in at 1:10m.; checked out again at 10:25m., back in at 11:33 m.; checked out a third time at 6:00m., back in at 7:15m.
On November 24, Oswald was checked out of jail for the last time at 9:30m.
A brief listing of the property seized during this search (CE 2003, 24 H 348; Stovall Exhibit B, 21 H 598) does not list the backyard photographs specifically.
Stovall testified (7 H 194) that the line item “Miscellaneous photographs and maps” represented these items as well as others uncovered.
An itemized list of articles found in Oswald’s blue suitcase appear under inventory Nos.
As indicated in an earlier endnote, critics have questioned the value of the police lineups involving Oswald.
A letter from FBI Director J Edgar Hoover to the Warren Commission’s general counsel, J Lee Rankin, dated February 4, 1964, details an investigation into four telephone numbers found on a slip of paper found in Oswald’s trouser pocket after his murder.
Several friends had telephoned him, saying they had heard on the radio that Oswald was requesting his representation.
However, Abt said that at no time did Oswald, or anyone claiming to represent Oswald, actually talk to him that weekend.
When it was later learned that Hurt served in United States Military Intelligence during World War II, the theorists felt that finally they had solid evidence linking Oswald and the assassination to United States intelligence.
As late as April 11,1978, three investigators for the HSCA interviewed Hurt in Raleigh.
Hurt, who told the investigators that he had served in the Army Counterintelligence Corps in Europe and Japan from 1942 to 1946, and had no connection with the military since, said that people from the news media had called him about this, but that he had never received a telephone call from Oswald and had never even heard of Oswald prior to the assassination.
It was a “complete mystery” to him how his phone number had turned up on the slip of paper.
A few months after John Hurt died in 1981, his widow told author Henry Hurt that her husband had admitted the truth to her before he died—that on the day of the assassination he was so upset that he got extremely drunk, a habitual problem he had, and tried to get in touch with Oswald at the city jail.
When he couldn’t get connected to Oswald, he left his phone number, and had been too embarrassed about it ever since to tell anyone about it.
Detectives may have held him on the fifth floor until word was received that Dallas Bar Association president H Louis Nichols had concluded his television interview with reporters, which was being conducted just outside the jail elevator door on the third floor.
Videotapes show detectives bringing Oswald through this same door at 6:24m., shortly after the Nichols interview had concluded.
His interrogation started at 6:35m., per Captain Fritz’s handwritten notes.
After bringing Oswald down from the jail, Detectives Sims and Graves leave and are replaced by Dhority and Montgomery.
However, the search of the Four Days in November 95 Paine residence, during which the backyard photos were discovered, did not occur until after 1:00m.
Secret Service inspector Thomas Kelley correctly reported that these questions were asked during the 6:00-7:15 m. interrogation session, after Oswald had been confronted with the pictures.
Captain Fritz later testified, “I have always felt that was Ruby who made that call.
However, contemporary reports written within days of the event show this testimony to be in error.
The HSCA said that entrance through this door would have been along an easy and relatively direct path for Ruby.
He said he was told by an unidentified maintenance man at the time he was securing the basement that it was locked on both sides and could only be opened with a key.
When Dean answered unresponsively—“I had the maintenance man open this door for me”— counsel, like so many other times in Commission testimony, simply let the witness take him into a new direction without returning to try to get an answer to his original question.
Dean said the door was “used as a—oh, I think they sometimes throw materials—it’s not even an elevator.
Conspiracy theorists throughout the years have suggested that Larry Crafard’s sudden departure may have been connected, in some way, to the assassination.
But they haven’t been able to come up with the smallest speck of evidence that his departure had anything to do with the murders of Kennedy and Oswald.
The Warren Commission, taking cognizance of Crafard’s nomadic existence, including his hitchhiking one time with his wife and their two infant children from Dallas to Bakersfield, California, concluded that his departure “does not appear to have been uncommon for him” and saw no connection between it and the events in Dallas.
The Commission accepted Crafard’s reasons for leaving, including Ruby’s having berated him for waking him up early on Sunday morning (November 24), his never considering the job anything but temporary anyway, and his not being fond of his work.
In fact, he had given notice to Ruby on November 17 that he intended to quit working the next day, but Ruby talked him out of leaving.
Crafard also said he wanted to visit his sister in Michigan, whom he was worried about because she hadn’t, as was her custom, answered “right away” a letter he had written to her.
When he asked Crafard why he was leaving town, Crafard merely said he could not find work and was tired of carnival jobs.
What is noteworthy is that the driver did not notice any unusual or troubled behavior on Crafard’s part.
There is a possibility that while Ruby was downtown, he stopped in at police headquarters.
Indeed, someone heard Ruby talking to a newsman over the phone on Saturday afternoon saying he had been to City Hall and had information Oswald was going to be transferred that afternoon , but it cannot be certain that Ruby had picked up this information on a visit that day to Dallas police headquarters, or whether he had learned of it the previous night.
However, several witnesses claimed they saw Ruby that Saturday at the police department and their description of his conduct sounds just like Ruby.
For instance, Frederic Rheinstein, an NBC veteran from Los Angeles, said he was working in his mobile unit Four Days in November 97 parked between the front entrance to City Hall and the ramp leading down to the basement, while network newsman Tom Pettit handled the reporting from the third floor.
The first time Rheinstein said he saw the funny-looking guy in the fedora and horn-rimmed glasses was just before lunch, when the fellow pushed aside the window curtain keeping the inside of the van dark and stared in at the bank of monitors in front of the technicians.
Rheinstein shooed him away, but saw him a couple more times on the sidewalk outside.
Eventually they picked him up on the monitors of the cameras they had stationed up on the third floor, and one of the WBAP engineers thought he was the guy who swiped one of the chicken dinners brought in for the crew’s lunch.
Rheinstein knows the type, one of those who will do anything to get himself into what he considers high places.
They are nuisances, but so omnipresent and indefatigable that they come to be not only tolerated but often almost invisible.
Some time later Rheinstein was told by a WBAP engineer that he had seen this “creep” disappear into the office on the third floor where they knew Henry Wade was and to which they themselves couldn’t gain admission.
Also around noon, Philippe Labro, the correspondent of France-Soir, a Parisian newspaper, bumped into Ruby, who asked him who he was and what he did for a living.
Labro told him, and Ruby responded, “Oooh la la, Folks BergeresV ’ That, Labro saw, just about exhausted Ruby’s acquaintance with the French language.
Ruby gave him a card for the Carousel and invited him to come up for a drink, and Labro noticed, as Ruby went off, that he addressed several of the police officers by their first names.
Ruby eventually handed Waldo a card with the names of his clubs on it, telling him, “Everybody around here knows me.
UPI photographer Frank Johnson also said he saw Ruby at City Hall “during the day” on Saturday, and French journalist Francois Pelou recalled Ruby “passing out sandwiches to members of the press” at City Hall on Saturday afternoon.
It’s certainly possible that the above-described incidents did take place Saturday afternoon, when Ruby, already downtown, would have been likely to drop in where he knew the action was.
Of course, all of the witnesses, looking back several months later, could be wrong as to the day, and time of day, the incidents took place.
The problem so far is that under this version, Ruby would have been arriving in Dealey Plaza in the early afternoon, yet Chaney said he first saw Oswald around 3:30m. , and Wise said it was around 3:00m.
And there is support for Ruby showing up at Sol’s Turf Bar around 4:00m.
At this point, it certainly starts to look like the 4:00m. time at Sol’s was correct.
It’s impossible to know how the next point affects any of what’s set forth in the text or this endnote on the matter, but Garnett Hallmark, the manager of Nichols parking garage who was present when Ruby stopped by to make his call that Saturday afternoon, said that Ruby came by the garage around 2:50m. and he last saw Ruby shortly after 3:00m.
Yet Brown said the incident took place between 1:30 and 2:00m. , and Hallmark said the incident took place around 3:00m.
This almost undoubtedly was the telephone conversation Ruby had with Kenneth Dowe at KLIF (though Hallmark was under the impression that Ruby spoke to Ken on the same call to Wise, which would not have been possible since Wise and Dowe were at separate radio stations) where Ruby offered to be a de facto reporter for KLIF and Dowe agreed.
Oswald, as indicated, was scheduled to be transferred to the county jail that day at 4:00m., so obviously Ruby wouldn’t be talking to Dowe between 4:00 and 5:00 m., as Dowe says, about whether Dowe was agreeable to having Ruby cover the bered, in her statement to the FBI and her testimony before the Warren Commission, what her brother’s conversation with Kaufman was all about.
Just before 4:00m. that day, Ruby was, indeed, seen among a large crowd that had gathered in front of the county jail entrance on Houston Street between Elm and Main, but the transfer didn’t take place.
My view is that the existing evidence doesn’t even lend itself to any kind of informed opinion.
Fortunately, the resolution of this matter is not important to any issue in the assassination.
In what is almost certainly erroneous testimony, John Branch, the manager of the Empire Room (a Negro nightclub in Dallas, not the Empire Room in the Adolphus hotel) and a licensed agent for musicians, told the Warren Commission that on Saturday evening around 9:05m., Ruby showed up at his club, passed out a few five-dollar bills, as he frequently did, and told Branch he wanted him to get his sister a new piano player for the Vegas Club, which Branch agreed to do.
Branch said Ruby stayed about thirty to forty minutes, never spoke about the assassination, then left.
Not only would this behavior by Ruby be out of character for the mental grief he was going through, as witnessed by a considerable number of people, but Ruby’s schedule that night, as attested to by many people, would not allow the time it would take for his alleged visit to the Empire Room.
Branch’s testimony was on June 26, 1964, seven months after the assassination, and although he claims Ruby came to his club on the Saturday night after the assassination, he obviously was confusing the date of the visit.
In addition to the above reasons for not believing the accuracy of his testimony, one telltale sign that he was wrong was his telling the Commission that on the night of his visit, Ruby was “in a hurry” to leave around 10:00m. because he said Ruby told him he wanted to “go down to the Carousel Club” to catch a “new act” of his.
Before his Warren Commission testimony, Branch also told the FBI on December 9, 1963, that he saw Ruby on Saturday evening, November 23, but in this earlier statement he said he saw Ruby out on the street in front of the Hall Diner, spoke to him for about ten minutes concerning getting a piano player for the Vegas Club, and Ruby appeared perfectly normal.
This was Lawrence Meyers’s original testimony before the Warren Commission, telling the Commission that Ruby’s competitors remaining open was what he “assumed was talking about” when he said he was “going to do something about it,” because that was the context in which Ruby made his statement.
But later in his testimony, after repeating that “my assumption through my conversations with him and through knowing him is that he was talking about the Weinsteins,” he said, “I have since begun to believe that he was not talking about the Weinsteins” when he made his remark, but about “the Kennedy family,” that is, that he wanted to do something for them.
If sorting out the chronology of Ruby’s activities on Saturday afternoon, November 23, is a nightmare, things don’t improve too much for Saturday evening.
Although Eva was on pain medication from her abdominal surgery, her credibility on this issue is enhanced by the fact that time and time again she candidly acknowledged to the Warren Commission that she could not remember the exact sequence of events over that hectic weekend or their precise times.
So when she said she knows her brother was at her apartment from around 4:00 to 8:00m., it’s entitled to more weight than usual.
So when he later testified that Ruby came into the Carousel around 6:00 to 7:00m. on Saturday and told him “the club was going to be closed and immediately I got on the phone and started to making phone calls ... to all the people” , Armstrong was obviously confused, and the documentary evidence substantiates this.
The evidence is strong and clear that Ruby showed up at the Carousel sometime late Saturday evening.
There’s the two statements of the Nichols garage attendant, Huey Reeves (CE 2287,25 H 214; CE 2334, 25 H 297); Dallas police officer Harry Olsen and his girlfriend, Kay, saw Ruby standing outside of the Carousel around “ten or eleven at night” (14 H 635, WCT Harry N Olsen; Kay Olsen testified it was around 9m. ); and most importantly, the Carousel telephone records show Ruby made calls from the Carousel Club on Saturday evening and had short conversations with Ralph Paul at his residence in Arlington, Texas, at 11:18, 11:36, and 11:47m. (the last call for only one minute.
At 10:44m., Ruby called Paul at Paul’s restaurant for nine minutes from phone number LA 6-6258.
The problem is that number is his sister Eva’s phone number, which Ruby had registered under his name.
Paul believes this conversation was the last he had with Ruby that night, but he almost has to be wrong.
The last telephone call Ruby made to Paul, at 11:47 that Saturday night (as well as the previous two, at 11:36 and 11:18), was from the Carousel Club.
So the crying conversation had to have taken place during the nine-minute conversation at 10:44 m.
This makes sense since it is a little more likely that such a conversation took place during the nine-minute call at 10:44m. than during any of the three later calls, which lasted one, two, and three minutes.
Since it is clear that Ruby called Paul from Eva’s apartment at 10:44m., it is also clear that Eva either forgot her brother had returned to her apartment for the night or didn’t mention it because no one asked.
But Ruby’s calling Paul from Eva’s apartment at 10:45m. creates somewhat of a time problem for Ruby.
Even if he left her apartment immediately , that would have given him only twenty-five minutes to drive downtown to his club, park and pay the attendant the five dollars the latter had advanced Little Lynn, then walk next door and up a flight of steps to his office to make his first call to Paul from the Carousel Club at 11:18m.
But again, these problems and conflicts in the chronology have no relevance to the murder of President Kennedy.
Some of Ruby’s extreme agitation on Sunday morning is due to the Preludin he’s been taking, a diet pill he believed to be harmless, but, like most prescription appetite suppressants, is basically speed, a synthetic form of Dexedrine which makes some users not only alert, but confused, anxious, and even paranoid.
But I was so carried away emotionally that I said—I don’t know how I said it—I didn’t say it in any vulgar manner—I said, ‘If something happened to this person, that then Mrs.
There is a conflict as to when this last interrogation of Oswald began.
If this is accurate, surely it wouldn’t have taken them a half hour to do so.
And Inspector Holmes testified the interrogation began at 9:30m. , and he wrote a memorandum to the FBI on December 19, 1963, that it started at 9:25m.
Since Holmes’s estimate is tied into the time he normally went to church, it is likely to be correct.
The final changes in the report were finished and the report was about to be typed up when the pathologists heard that Oswald had been shot (2 H 374, WCT Dr.
Humes delivered the autopsy report to Admiral George G Burkley at 6:30m.
Perhaps this is not worthy of mention, but three Dallas WBAP-TV television technicians told the Warren Commission they believed they saw Ruby near City Hall from their TV truck parked on Commerce Street at various times between eight and eleven o’clock Sunday morning.
None of them knew Jack Ruby, none looked at him for any extended period of time, and “all were occupied with their duties and had no reason to remember the appearance of the man they saw” until they saw Ruby’s picture on television.
Also, two of the three gave descriptions that don’t match Ruby at all, one describing him as an “unkempt person that possibly slept with his clothes on,” whereas we know, as the Commission said, that Ruby was characteristically clean and well groomed.
But there’s a better reason for knowing the three technicians were mistaken.
However, during a 1993 conference in which reporters recalled their experiences, Pappas said, “I was going to be a sharp guy, get a big scoop and interview upstairs.
Detective James Leavelle has thrown into question one of the arguments made by those who do not believe in a conspiracy in the assassination that if Oswald had not gotten a change of clothing, Ruby would not have made it to the basement of City Hall in time to kill Oswald.
The reason for this inference is the belief that Oswald’s clothing must have been some distance away, most likely on the fifth floor, where his jail cell was.
But Leavelle said that in those days, inmates were not given jail garb to wear.
We had no place on the fifth floor or anywhere else to store inmates’ clothing.
Oswald’s extra clothing was in a small room within the homicide office no more than twenty to twenty-five steps from Fritz’s private office, where we temporarily kept odds and ends.
Of course we know it took a few additional seconds to discuss which item of clothing Oswald would wear.
There is some confusion over whether Lieutenant Woodrow Wiggins was called before or after Oswald left the third-floor homicide office.
Lieutenant Baker disputes that he made the call after Oswald left the homicide office, claiming he placed the call before Captain Fritz left with Oswald.
In an earlier report, however, Baker wrote that “prior to leaving the office, Capt.
From that they conclude, “If Ruby ... did not go down that ramp, then he had help getting in” (Brown, Treachery in Dallas , 171), ergo, a conspiracy in the assassination of Kennedy (whose killer Ruby supposedly “silenced”) involving the Dallas Police Department.
Of the four, only Vaughn seemed to be very confident that Ruby didn’t enter through the Main Street ramp.
I’m certainly not accusing Vaughn of lying (in fact, he passed a polygraph test that he was not lying ), but his extremely consequential blunder in not spotting and stopping Ruby from entering the basement (if Ruby did in fact do so) would give him far more reason than anyone else to state, as he did, that he was satisfied “beyond a reasonable doubt” that Ruby did not do so.
And we also know that Vaughn was very distracted at the time of the incident— walking out of the ramp, clearing away the small group of people who had congregated at the top of the ramp, and making sure eastbound traffic on Main was clear for Pierce’s car to enter Main Street.
And Pierce went further, testifying, “I’m saying the possibilities are very great that had he been there I might not have seen him.
Napoleon J Daniels, a former Dallas police officer who was positioned on the sidewalk on the Western Union side of the ramp has some credibility problems with the stories he has told.
Officer Vaughn had seen Daniels, whom he knew, standing on the sidewalk to his right, so he naturally called Daniels at his home the next day and asked him if he recalled seeing Rio Pierce’s car coming out of the basement.
Vaughn told Daniels, “That’s the way Ruby said The HSCA may have been partly influenced in its conclusion by the fact that Dallas police sergeant Patrick Dean, who was in charge of basement security at the time Ruby shot Oswald, told the HSCA that he requested of Dallas police chief Jesse Curry that he be given a polygraph, was given one, and “failed” the test.
The HSCA was unable to find the test or any report of it and concluded that the Dallas Police Department may have withheld this mrormation from the Warren Commission.
He gave an affidavit to the State of Texas, County of Dallas, on November 29,1963, that “I did not see Officer Vaughn challenge this person nor did he show any signs of recognizing him, nor even being aware that he was passing, but I know that he saw him.
Just short of a week later, on December 4, 1963, Daniels told the FBI that the man he saw looked vaguely familiar to him, as someone he had seen around the police station, and was partly bald.
When shown photographs of Ruby he said the man looked “similar” to Ruby, but could not say it was he.
He said the man had an intent look on his face and was walking fairly fast.
The problem is that his “impression” came over four and a half months after he had the opposite impression.
Daniels may have had a motive for trying to make the Dallas Police Department look bad.
When he was with the department, Daniels, who was black, was found to be working (trying to collect rent for someone whose real estate he was managing) while on duty, and he was fired from the force.
Westbrook told Larry Sneed that Daniels failed a polygraph, and the inference is that the polygraph pertained to the matter for which he was fired.
However, Westbrook indicates Daniels also took a polygraph on the Ruby matter, but unlike Vaughn and Flusche, he did not say what the result was.
Though Daniels’s stories can easily be dismissed, the statement of another witness, Dallas police officer Donald Flusche, cannot.
In 1978, Flusche told the HSCA as well as Dallas police captain Jack Revill that on the subject Sunday morning, he had parked his patrol car on Main Street across the street from the police and courts building.
While standing outside his car with the door open, he was monitoring his police radio, just watching what was happening, and hoping to see Lee Harvey Oswald being moved to the sheriff’s office.
Flusche said he knew Jack Ruby and he did not see Ruby walk down Main Street (which would have been right across the street from where Flusche was) and enter the ramp from Main Street leading down into the police basement.
Neither Revill nor the HSCA questioned Flusche’s credibility, which is not the same thing as saying they believed that Flusche’s word conclusively proves that Ruby did not enter the Main Street ramp.
Revill did say that Flusche’s statement “tends to dispute the findings of the investigative team [Dallas Police Department investigation of the issue of how Ruby got into the basement—see later discussion] I was assigned to.
The Dallas Police Department conducted a very thorough three-week investigation of how Ruby got into the police basement, interviewing many Dallas police officers.
If, for some reason, Flusche never knew about this investigation (one I would expect every member of the force to know about by word of mouth), it is inconceivable that Lieutenant Knox would not have known about it.
Yet we know that not only Flusche but also Knox never came forward with this important information, which they would have had to know the police department’s investigative team would have wanted.
No, there is evidence, common sense, and Ruby’s knowledge of events that prove he entered through the Main Street ramp.
The evidence is that Jimmy Turner, the TV director at WBAP-TV in Fort Worth who was on assignment for NBC on November 24, testified that he saw Ruby coming down the Main Street ramp no more than a half minute before Ruby shot Oswald.
He certainly could assume that an officer or officers would be at the entrance to the two ramps, most likely along with other people.
From his position across the street he said he could see the Main Street entrance to the ramp and anyone walking on Main Street, if such were the case, from the Western Union office toward the ramp.
But way back on December 6 and 9, 1963, which was shortly after the shooting, he told the FBI a different story, saying that for about five minutes before the shooting he had left his cab and was standing near the Main Street ramp with the people congregated there.
The focus of his statements at that time is that he saw no one enter the ramp, not that he saw no one walking on Main toward the ramp.
Indeed, although Ruby probably also told the authorities additional details in this very first interview (though Clardy, in his brief summary of the interview during his Warren Commission testimony, never mentioned it), the next day, November 25, Ruby added details that he could never have known if he hadn’t seen them with his own eyes.
And this is precisely what Vaughn did, as the statements and testimony of the four officers attest.
For example, Vaughn admits that as Pierce’s car started to come up the ramp, he was a few feet “inside the ramp” and was not on the sidewalk, necessitating, of course, his having to walk backward as the car approached the top of the ramp.
And he says he “stepped out on the sidewalk somewhere between the sidewalk and the curb,” and his back was facing “towards the east,” which, of course, is where Ruby, coming from the Western Union, was walking from.
And Pierce says Vaughn moved “toward the street... to let us out,” that is, he was moving backward.
Pierce adds that Vaughn “was facing me,” meaning Vaughn’s back had to be facing Ruby.
On November 29, 1963, Dallas police chief Jesse Curry appointed an investigative team to determine the “operational security involving the transfer of Lee Harvey Oswald on November 24, 1963,” that is, how Ruby got into the basement and was able to kill Oswald.
The report concluded, “This investigative team believes that Jack Ruby entered the Main Street ramp as the car driven by Lieutenant Rio Pierce was leaving the basement.
Note that if the Dallas Police Department investigative team had any reason to lie, it would not have been to place full blame for Oswald’s death on the negligence of its own department, as it did.
Chief Curry would later tell author Seth Kantor that he never criticized Vaughn, or called the patrolman into his office, or put any reprimand of Vaughn into the record.
I just didn’t want them to think I was trying to shift the blame onto him.
If they let him in to silence Oswald, this would necessarily mean that members of the Dallas Police Department were part of the conspiracy to murder Kennedy, which no rational person would want to conclude, at least in the absence of evidence, of which there is none.
If this is what happened, Oswald’s murder was due to Fritz’s considerable negligence.
If so, it would be a terrible cap to a sterling law enforcement career.
Although Leavelle’s version may, of course, be correct, I have rejected it for the narrative here because the weight of the evidence is that it is not.
For his own part, Fritz told the Warren Commission, “We thought we had clearance,” telling the Commission that when he emerged from the jail office, he asked if the way was clear and “two officers,” a detective whom he didn’t identify and Lieutenant Woodrow Wiggins, answered that everything was clear.
And Wiggins, understandably not wanting to admit his negligence, for all intents and purposes did.
When your boss, the head of detectives for thirty-one years at the time, asked you a simple, but extremely important question, you didn’t just stare at him.
A French newspaper journalist, Francois Pelou, reported that when Oswald turned to his left, Pelou followed his gaze and caught sight of Jack Ruby as he lunged from the crowd.
Pelou’s story eventually evolved into a rumor that Oswald recognized Ruby as he lunged from the crowd.
Detectives Don Ray Archer and Thomas McMillon thought Jack Ruby was the one who made some sort of statement as he fired the shot.
He then went limp, and both Detectives Leavelle and Graves believed Oswald died at that point.
Price told Crenshaw he was glad he had thought of it and agreed that Oswald shouldn’t be treated in the same room where the president died.
Crenshaw wrote that when he noticed two nurses preparing Trauma Room One, he told one of them, “In deference to President Kennedy, we will not treat this patient in Trauma Room One.
Rose said he and his searching party tried to put everything they looked at in Ruby’s apartment “back in exactly the same place” they found it.
Whether the department was fully responsible is a question that is more difficult to answer.
That the Dallas Police Department has been blamed completely for what happened is well known and is accepted by virtually everyone—everyone, that is, except many members of the Dallas police force who feel positive the force is not to blame.
We were trying in the police department to let the press have an opportunity to observe the proceedings as they were.
Where the question of culpability comes in is that under the Dallas city charter, the most powerful man in city government is the city manager, not the mayor, who is mostly a ceremonial figurehead.
In fact, the city manager at the time, Elgin Crull, had personally hired Chief Curry and had the power to fire him.
Crull added that not only did Cabell say he didn’t, but it was Crull who had responsibility over the police department, not the mayor.
Since Curry has died, no one will ever know the answer to that question.
The members of the Dallas Police Department who were there, and therefore in a much better position to hear and know what was going on, have no question in their minds that it was Crull who made the decision to transfer Oswald right out in the open.
Dallas police sergeant Gerald Hill said, “I want to defend Chief Curry because the idea of transferring Oswald the way he was, was not Curry’s idea.
Westbrook said, “I don’t know whether Curry had a sense of guilt that he just didn’t disregard the city manager’s orders, which is what I think he should have done.
I think he would have ridden the storm by doing it and moved that night about 10:30 or 11:00 by car to the county jail.
The city manager had control... over just about everything that happened in the city, including the police department.
Homicide detectives Charles Dhority and Charles Brown are two of the police officers who accompanied Oswald’s body from the second-floor operating room to the X-ray Department on the first floor.
They were present when Marina and Marguerite viewed the body, as was Sergeant Patrick T Dean.
After the women left, Brown and Dhority accompanied the body to the morgue at Parkland Hospital and witnessed the postmortem photos being taken by Dr.
This was one of the early rumors circulating among the press in the City Hall basement.
Another early rumor circulated that Ruby had helped two television men push a camera into the basement garage.
This rumor was based on the observations of Detective Wilbur J Cutchshaw, who saw three men pushing a WBAP-TV camera into the basement two to three minutes before the shooting.
Immediately after the shooting, Cutchshaw stopped and questioned the television crew when he noticed only two of the men pushing the camera out of the basement.
FBI agent C Ray Hall testified that Ruby’s refusal to say how he got in occurred before his meeting with attorney Tom Howard.
On his own, Captain Fritz may not have said that the case was “cleared” , and should not have said it even in response to a reporter’s leading question, and Fritz was criticized for saying what he did.
The Secret Service decision to temporarily house the Oswalds at the Inn of the Six Flags would prove to have considerable consequences for Marina and the motel manager, James Martin.
He had greeted and situated Marina and the other Oswalds in rooms when they arrived at the inn, and when he learned in a few days that the Secret Service was concerned about where Marina would stay after the brief period at the motel, Martin, who had had Marina, her children, and Robert over to his home for Thanksgiving dinner, volunteered to let Marina and her two children move into his home with his wife and three children.
When the suggestion met with everyone’s approval, including that of the Secret Service, Marina moved into the Martins’ Dallas home shortly after Thanksgiving and stayed for two and a half months.
There were two Secret Service agents and a Dallas police officer at the home twenty-four hours a day, so the house was crowded.
Martin quit his job at the inn and became Marina’s personal manager, signing a ten-year contract on December 6,1963, that guaranteed him 15 percent of her earnings.
This did not include any share of the thousands of dollars Marina was receiving in donations from the American public, the amount eventually reaching $65,795, which, together with $5,000 from the sale of one of the backyard photos to Life magazine, was enough to allow Marina to buy a modest home in Richardson, a town near Dallas.
As early as December 29,1963, while visiting Robert Oswald and his wife, Vada, Marina confided to Vada that Martin had professed his love for her.
Marina told Vada she liked Martin as a friend and as her business manager, but was not in love with him.
Vada cautioned Marina to make it very clear to Martin what their relationship was and was not, and did not tell Robert what she had learned from Marina.
Martin and Thorne thereafter accompanied Marina to Washington, D.C., for her testimony before the Warren Commission starting on February 3, 1964.
The following day at Robert and Yada’s home, Marina confided to Yada that she had consented to having sexual relations with Martin on one of the nights she was in Washington after Martin insisted that he loved her and assured her he would leave his wife.
Though Martin stayed in her room on two of the nights, this was the sole time she had been intimate with him.
The following day, February 11, when Marina returned to the Martin residence to pick up her clothes, Mrs.
Martin confronted her about “the talk” concerning Marina’s relationship with her husband, but Marina made no comment.
However, after returning to Robert and Yada’s home that day, she called Martin and when she found out Mrs.
Martin was listening on an extension phone, she proceeded to tell her of the relationship she had had with her husband.
She also thought that Marina enjoyed talking to her friend Katya in Russian.
On February 18, William McKenzie, a lawyer retained by Robert to represent Marina in the future, wrote Martin a letter notifying him that Marina no longer wanted him to represent her, and asking for an accounting of all monies earned by Marina up to that point.
CE 274, 16 H 766)+ But Martin and Thorne didn’t go away quietly into the night.
The reader will see in the Oswald biography section of this book that some of Marina’s relatives in Leningrad believed her to be a woman of loose morals, though there seemed to be no confirmation of this.
But during the year after the assassination, emotionally traumatized and very lonely, she drifted into this type of life.
FBI agents, wiretapping her phone conversations and monitoring her activities, gave her the nickname “hot pants” (Interview of FBI agent Thomas Trettis by Church ComApparently, even before this admission to Mrs.
In a March 3, 1964, FBI wiretap of a conversation between Marina and Katya Ford, a friend of hers in the Dallas Russian emigrant community whom she apparently had also told about the night in Washington, Mrs.
During this period, she believed that some of the men she had relationships with were FBI agents watching her closely, so that if she ever changed her testimony about her husband they would discredit her.
But Marina quickly settled down, and her marriage the following year to Kenneth Porter, a Dallas carpenter, brought stability into her life.
However, the evidence is very substantial that Gordon Shanklin lied under oath not only at the FBI oversight committee hearings, but before.
On July 29, 1975, J Edgar Hoover wrote a memorandum to the United States attorney general stating that on July 3, 1975, he and Deputy Associate Director James B Adams met in his office with a reliable informant who requested that his identity not be revealed to third parties.
Hoover purportedly learned for the first time from the informant that Oswald had left a threatening note at the Dallas FBI office prior to the assassination, and the visit and note were not properly reported to FBI headquarters following the assassination.
Hoover proceeded to tell the attorney general about the extensive investigation he personally oversaw into the charges.
Affidavits under penalty of perjury were taken from nine FBI employees of the Dallas office at the time of the assassination, including five agents and four clerical personnel.
Hosty’s affidavit that Shanklin knew One wonders how much a revelation about Lee contributed to her dissipation.
Marina had seen him make entries into it in Minsk, frequently as he was singing the theme song to High Noon , but she knew nothing of its contents, and although Lee had told her of proposing marriage to another woman in Minsk, Ella German, she was shocked to learn that Lee had married her to get even with Ella.
Another contributing factor to her loose conduct may have been the debased view she had of herself, denouncing herself for not going to the police after Lee’s attempt on General Walker’s life.
If he had been prosecuted and convicted of attempting to murder Walker, Kennedy would still be alive, and she could not forgive herself for this moral lapse on her part.
She put her failure to agree to go back to Lee on the night before the assassination, which she strongly believed would also have prevented the assassination, into a completely different category, since she had no idea that he intended to kill Kennedy the next day if she didn’t come back to him. tThe first article ever published on the note was Johnson’s “Oswald Threat Revealed” in the August 31, 1975, edition of the Dallas Times Herald.
Yet Shanklin, in his July 21,1975, affidavit, under penalty of perjury, said, “I can state categorically that I have no knowledge” of Howe bringing the note to him, and “have no independent knowledge of Hosty ever discussing Oswald being at the office, leaving a note for him, or certainly I was never shown any note by Hosty or Howe or anyone else.
Sullivan recalled that Shanklin seemed unwilling to discuss the matter other than to say he was handling it as a personal problem with assistant to the director, John P Mohr, a close friend and mentor.
In October of 1975, and pursuant to Hoover’s inquiry, the United States attorney general’s office noted from a review of all the affidavits that “former SAC Shanklin was vulnerable to prosecution for perjury and obstruction of justice based on his sworn statement that he had no knowledge prior to July, 1975, of the Oswald visit to his office or the note left there for Special Agent Hosty.
One piece of almost certain misinformation furnished to the reporters by District Attorney Wade, not at the Sunday-night news conference but the next morning, is his saying that a Dallas city map with “X” marks and a line similar to the trajectory of the bullets that killed Kennedy was found in Oswald’s apartment.
And the Dallas Morning News of November 25, 1963, quoted a “reliable source” as saying that “Oswald had placed marks at all major intersections along the motorcade route—three or four as I recall.
More specifically, the Enco map of the Dallas-Fort Worth area had eight markings on it in Dallas.
They do not set forth the parade route and there is no trajectory of fire on it.
Despite this, on December 8,1993, former Dallas police lieutenant Elmo Cunningham, who participated in the search of Oswald’s room and saw the map, told author Gus Russo in an interview, “The map definitely had the president’s route on it.
Russo writes that “the original Oswald map, stored in the National Archives, is too faded to be of any use.
In addition, the map, after the fact, was laminated, which obliterated the faint pencil markings on it.
Prior to the lamination, Dallas-based Kennedy archivist Mary Ferrell made a photocopy which retains some of the markings.
One also wonders why Oswald would even need to trace the route of the motorcade when it was already in the Dallas Morning News.
Whatever is on any alleged copy of the map today would have had to have been superimposed after Fritz looked at the map and the FBI photographed it.
As indicated earlier, starting on Friday afternoon and for the three days following the assassination, all three networks devoted every minute of their airtime to coverage of the assassination and its related events.
Before the assassination, television was mostly an entertainment medium.
For the first time in its young history, television not only received the respect of the print media as partners in conveying the news, but also, partly because events in Dallas were unfolding too fast to print, became an integral part of a historical event, and we know this precedent would continue and be expanded upon in the ensuing years.
The FBI divided its investigation of the assassination between two main divisions, the General Investigative Division, which traditionally handled FBI murder investigations, and the Domestic Intelligence Division, which was responsible for the bureau’s investigation of Oswald’s activities, associations, and motivations, including the question of conspiracy, domestic as well as foreign, in the assassination.
Because Oswald was a Marxist who had defected to Russia, agents from the division’s Soviet section were assigned to work on the case.
One dramatic departure from all of this was a highly significant action by J Edgar Hoover that would seem to indicate strongly that although he would do almost anything to avoid being criticized and blamed for the assassination, to his credit that “almost” did not apparently include violating what he felt was the proper administration of his office.
Hoover ordered, the day after the assassination, an internal probe by the bureau’s Inspection Division to determine if his office was negligent in its pre-assassination investigation of Oswald.
Gale recommended that disciplinary action be taken against seventeen members of the bureau.
Although, in an addendum to the report, Assistant Director Alan Belmont wrote that “all of the supervisors and officials who came into contact with this case ... as well as agents in the field are unanimous in the opinion that Oswald did not meet the criteria for the Security Index,” Gale’s recommendation for censure, probation, and so on, was approved by Hoover.
In another annotation to Gale’s memorandum, Hoover wrote, “Such gross incompetency cannot be overlooked nor administrative action (discipline) postponed,” and most of the agents received their discipline within days thereafter.
The HSCA said that “a former assistant director stated Gale, whose Inspection Division found all the “delinquencies,” testified before the HSCA in 1978 that “even if the investigative shortcomings . . . which I had found had been carried out, it would not have made any difference in Dallas.
Although, as it turned out, no discipline of the agents leaked out until an article in the October 13, 1964, Dallas Herald (three weeks after the Warren Commission issued its report) stated that two agents had been disciplined, Hoover certainly would have had no reason to be sanguine about the disciplinary actions not being leaked shortly after they were imposed.
Although Hoover, to save himself from public embarrassment, was willing to lie to the Warren Commission and the outside world about what he thought was the incompetence of some of his agents, as we have seen, he apparently was unwilling to compromise the effective management of his office by not disciplining the agents.
In any event, the Warren Commission concluded that the FBI had more than enough information in its possession about Oswald (e.g., his defection, his hostility to the United States, his pro-Castro activities, his contact with the Soviet embassy in Mexico) “to list Oswald as a potential threat to the safety of the president” and refer the Oswald case to the Secret Service.
Though the Commission did not go on to say that if the FBI had done this, the assassination would not have occurred, it clearly was a serious indictment by the Commission of the FBI’s pre-assassination investigation of Oswald.
Four days later , eight of the bureau agents against whom disciplinary action had already been taken in December of 1963 were again disciplined for reasons identical to those that led to action being taken against them previously, and three agents who had not been previously disciplined were disciplined by formal censure.
The actions of the agents involved were appropriate under the circumstances as they knew them.
That Oswald turned out to be an assassin should not have been used to fault the agents, since they had no reason to that would be the case when they were dealing with him.
William Sullivan’s findings certainly weren’t hurting Hoover in the latter’s supposed effort to limit the investigation.
Given the fact that Dulles, being the former head of the CIA and the Commission’s unofficial liaison to the agency, was knowledgeable about many CIA secrets, the charge has been made by many that if the CIA were involved in the assassination, Dulles had a conflict of interest in being a member of the Commission.
But of course Dulles left the CIA almost two years before the assassination, and even if the CIA was behind the assassination, it would be unlikely that those who hatched the idea would apprise him of it once he left the agency.
By letter of March 18, we asked that the Bureau make certain inquiries for the Commission as to the hour of the day when Lee Harvey Oswald’s check from the Texas Unemployment Commission might have been delivered by the postal authorities in New Orleans, Louisiana, on or about September 24, or 25, 1963.
Since that letter was forwarded to you some new evidence has come to light which relates to the same problem, and we believe that the invesigation in connection with this new evidence might conveniently be carried on as part of the previously requested investigation.
D-22 includes, among other things, a notice of change of mailing address signed by Lee Harvey Oswald.
The notice bears a stamped mark of 11:00m., September 25, 1963, on the reverse side, and on the front side there is a stamped mark of September 26, 1963.
This card bears two postal marks, one dated June 11, 1963, and the other apparently dated October 3, 1963, although it is scarcely legible.
The Commission would like to know the significance of the latter postmark, especially its significance as to when Lee Harvey Oswald could have deposited the card in the mail or handed it in personally at the post office, and where this probably occurred.
This portion of the report states that Lee Harvey Oswald appeared at the Louisiana Employment Commission regularly, at weekly intervals, throughout August and September 1963, and that the last such appearance was on September 24,1963.
The Commission would appreciate the Bureau’s looking further into the whole matter of what Oswald did on his weekly appearances at the Louisiana Employment Commission, and if discrepancies appear between this evidence and the evidence in connection with the timing of the mailing of Oswald’s check from Texas, we would like the Bureau to attempt to resolve such discrepancies.
The purpose of the questions posed in this letter and in the aforementioned letter of March 18, 1964, is to determine the earliest and latest times at which Lee Harvey Oswald could have left New Orleans for Mexico.
We would therefore like the Bureau to carry on any investigation that it may deem useful for this purpose, based upon any additional facts that might come to light in connection with the investigation requested in this letter.
It set forth such matters as personnel available to assist the staff, terms of employment, and the outline and organization of their work , and asked each team of lawyers to “prepare as soon as possible a comprehensive memorandum,” which was to include a “summary of the facts already developed by the agencies in the area” the team was assigned to, together with “recommendations as to further investigation to be conducted by the agencies” as well as “recommendations as to the taking of testimony by the Commission” in their subject area.
Apart from the fact that no commission lawyer is named as having said this, and there is no quote to this effect, whoever told the magazine this was not a believable witness for the simple reason that the published transcript of Marina’s testimony itself proves the fact that Marina did not give incomplete answers—at least no more than normal for someone asked hundreds upon hundreds of questions.
The story also says that Commissioner John McCloy complained openly about Warren’s “kid gloves” treatment of Marina.
The Untold Story of the Warren Report,”41) Though Rankin, indeed, was very civil with Marina, the vast majority of Commission witnesses were treated in the same way.
It’s hard to cite Meagher’s other examples because either they are not contradictions, clearly appearing to be simple errors of memory, or they don’t even pertain to Marina’s statements about the case (e.g., Marina supposedly denying to the American embassy in Moscow that she had ever been a member of a Communist youth organization, which might have disqualified her for a visa), or Meagher herself was so confused about where Oswald might have kept the rifle in his home on Neely Street in Dallas that she didn’t know if Marina, or George de Mohrenschildt and his wife, was telling a lie.
At one of these meetings, a dispute arose over whether or not witnesses should be “prepared,” a usual practice in which trial lawyers interview witnesses prior to their testifying to find out what they’re capable of testifying to, as well as question inconsistencies and reduce irrelevancies.
Originally, a compromise was reached in which lawyers were to submit a memorandum of their off-the-record interviews with witnesses, but eventually Rankin simply told the attorneys to use their own discretion in preparing witnesses.
It wasn’t until March 16, 1964, when the Commission had already heard from witnesses whose testimony comprised about one and a half out of the fifteen volumes of testimony and affidavits the Commission would ultimately take, that the Commission formally prescribed, by a resolution, some of the basic procedures for One staff lawyer, Burt Griffin, was reprimanded for using too much discretion while questioning Dallas police sergeant Patrick Dean about Ruby’s entry into the police basement.
Finding Dean’s statements contradictory, Griffin went off the record, cleared the room, bluntly told Dean he was lying, and offered to help him keep his job if he told the truth.
Chief Justice Warren stated that “no member of our staff has a right to tell any witness that he is lying or that he is testifying falsely.
At a Warren Commission executive session on June 23, 1964, the Commission attempted to determine how to handle a KGB defector, Yuriy Nosenko , who was claiming to United States intelligence that he had information about Oswald’s presence in Russia, and that Oswald was not connected to the KGB in any way.
The commissioners had been receiving drafts from their staff on many sections to be included in the Commission’s final report, and one titled “Lee Harvey Oswald’s Life in Russia” had ten references to Nosenko in it.
I just think we shouldn’t put our trust in any defector unless it is known absolutely and positively that he is telling the truth—unless he can be corroborated in every respect.
John Dulles added that he had spoken to his former colleagues in the CIA about Nosenko over the weekend, “and they are not yet in a position to determine his bona fides.
Rankin added to Warren’s earlier remark that Warren and he had discussed a few months earlier whether to take Nosenko’s testimony before the Commission, and said they had agreed it was contingent on his bona fides being established, which had not occurred.
Ford’s and Rankin’s observations seemed to carry the day, and when Warren recessed the session, the sense from the transcript was that Nosenko, and his allegations, would be mentioned in the report.
Assistant Counsel David Slawson was the author of the draft (Assistant Counsel William Coleman reviewed it) on Oswald in Russia that was the subject of the executive session.
He said that in late February or early March he had met alone with a CIA representative at Warren Commission headquarters and was told about Nosenko and about the effort the CIA was making to establish his bona fides.
Slawson said he hadn’t even heard of Nosenko at the time and although he would later learn that Nosenko’s defection had been reported in the media, there seemed to be little, if any, follow-up on it, and he was of the opinion that the public did not know that the CIA had taken physical custody of Nosenko to determine if he was bona fide.
The CIA representative told Slawson that his agency wanted him to keep the entire Nosenko matter quiet and under wraps, even at the Commission, until after the CIA was through with Nosenko.
Slawson only shared the information about Nosenko that was furnished to him by the CIA, which included an FBI interview, with Coleman, who worked on foreign conspiracies with him, and General Counsel Rankin.
Since at the time the Warren Report was published in September the CIA hadn’t even come close to resolving the question of Nosenko’s bona fides, Slawson believes, without knowing, that the Commission yielded to CIA pressure not to even mention Nosenko in its report.
I am assuming that the various drafts leading up to the Commission’s final report, which was released to the public, were not to be seen by anyone outside the Warren Commission and its staff.
But we know that someone on the Commission or its staff (it would be far less likely to have been the typist) was furnishing the FBI with a copy of the drafts.
In an internal FBI report to Assistant Director A1 Belmont on July 3, 1964, Assistant Director Alex Rosen summarizes the contents of “the third draft of the President’s Commission In fact, on February 10,1964, a State Department press officer announced at a press conference in Washington, D.C., that Nosenko had defected from the Soviet Union and had requested political asylum in this country.
In a more scholarly, less strident, and not as blatantly wrong way, and without accusing the Commission of being dishonest, Warren Commission historian Max Holland, surprisingly, agrees with the essence of Epstein’s position.
But then Holland proceeds to tell his readers that actually, the Warren Commission had concealed “some of the truth” from the American people because its inquiry had taken place at “the height of the Cold War,” and, hence, the concealment “must be judged in that context”—that is, certain revelations might be inimical to the national interest.
Moreover, he says, the concealed truths would not have changed the ultimate conclusions.
Holland only mentions one, but the support for his position crumbles when he admits that really, the Warren Commission never concealed it, the CIA concealed it from the Warren Commission—namely, the CIA’s Operation Mongoose, the enormous United States government-sponsored plan to overthrow Castro following the Bay of Pigs invasion and the CIA’s plots to kill Castro.
But the Warren Commission, of course, cannot be vilified for the CIA’s concealment.
Though as noted, Holland clearly says that the CIA kept certain things from the Warren Commission, in loose writing for such a fine writer, he seems to impute the CIA’s guilt to the Warren Commission.
He doesn’t expressly do this but it’s implicit in his writing when he uses the words CIA and Warren Commission interchangeably in a discussion of the cover-up issue.
When Holland, in the last three paragraphs of his article, finally gets around to providing evidence of what he believes the Warren Commission covered up, he fails to meet his burden.
He said it many months earlier— in fact, following the testimony of Marina Oswald on the very first day of the Warren Commission hearings on February 3,1964.
He told newsmen that as Marina Oswald continued with her testiParenthetically, the agency may not have mentioned Mongoose to the Commission, but everyone already knew about it, so there was nothing to conceal.
With literally thousands of United States government and anti-Castro Cuban exiles working on the project, Mongoose was a very well-known secret.
What wasn’t well known at the time and the main thing the CIA kept from the Warren Commission was the CIA plots to assassinate Castro.
I am not referring to anything especially—but there may be some things that would involve security.
He writes, “As former President Ford now acknowledges, ‘Judgments were made back then that seemed rational and reasonable.
Indeed, Ford’s using the words “today with the totally different atmosphere those judgments might seem improper” would strongly suggest that he was not referring to national security matters, since even today nothing has changed, certainly with the government, or even the American people, about the accepted wisdom of keeping matters dealing with national security secret.
What Ford most likely was referring to were things like the Commission’s acceding to the wishes of the Kennedy family that autopsy photos of the president not be furnished to the Commission for fear they might get into the hands of the public and be exploited commercially.
Holland concludes his article by saying, “The Warren Commission’s investigation cut across the entire national-security apparatus during the height of the Cold War, when even a national trauma could not be allowed to disturb the inner workings and unalterable logic of that struggle.
Enduring, perhaps ineradicable controversy over the assassination has helped foster deep alienation and cynicism and a loss of respect among the American people for their government and the citizens who serve in it.
Griffin, now a judge, confirmed to me the essence of what he told Posner in a telephone conversation I had with him on December 6, 2004.
Boswell, in a February 26, 1996, deposition before the ARRB, acknowledged that Carl Eardley, a deputy attorney general in Ramsay Clark’s office at the time, asked him to write the aforementioned letter.
This, naturally, has caused some members of the conspiracy community to suggest that the fix was in with the presumably independent Clark Panel, particularly since it was Eardley who sent Boswell to New Orleans in February of 1969 presumably to clarify or to rebut the testimony of fellow autopsy surgeon Pierre Finck during the Clay Shaw trial that some construed as meaning that army generals, not the autopsy surgeons, were in control of the autopsy.
Unlike the Clark Panel, the Rockefeller Commission (named after its chairman, Vice President Nelson A Rockefeller, and formally called the Commission on CIA Activities within the United States) was established on January 4, 1975, not to review President Kennedy’s autopsy, but to determine whether the CIA had conducted illegal activities in the United States that violated the rights of private American citizens.
However, during the commission’s work, and only as an incidental part of it, the commission found itself examining certain aspects of the autopsy findings.
Richard E Sprague (not related to Richard A Sprague, though he served as a photographic consultant to the latter during the latter’s brief tenure as HSCA chief counsel) was convinced the CIA murdered Kennedy and had “controlled” the Warren Commission to keep this fact from the public.
He maintained that Chief Counsel Sprague, his chief assistant, Robert Tanenbaum, and Chief Investigator Cliff Fenton, suspected the CIA killed Kennedy and were out to prove it, so the CIA decided it had to get rid of Sprague.
The committee realized that some information in the hands of the security agencies was kept from the Warren Commission on the grounds that it was classified, so it took the precaution of arranging top-secret security clearance for every member of its staff.
After consultation with the two agencies, the committee made its own determination on each clearance.
At the same time, the committee made sure that its own procedures for handling classified documents respected the integrity of the security system, and committee members signed memoranda of understanding with each of the agencies to establish procedures on how sensitive documents were to be handled.
The committee wanted to ensure that its members and staff would have access to all classified information completely unsanitized, with no “sources or methods” information removed from the material.
In handwritten annotations to my letters to him of February 2 and 3, 2005, Robert Blakey affirmed my speculation that as far as the individual volumes were concerned, the experts in the various fields wrote the original drafts, with staff help, and he and Billings put the finishing touches on them for publication.
With respect to the pathology report, he indicated that the statement in 7 HSCA 75 that Dr.
Loquvam prepared the initial draft and it was redrafted and edited by Dr.
Very few things have convinced the American public that there was a conspiracy in the Kennedy assassination more than the federal government allegedly “sealing” literally several-million pages of assassinationrelated documents until the year 2039, that is, for seventy-five years after the Warren Commission completed its investigation.
Remarkably, the Oliver Stone movie JFK was perhaps more responsible than any other single event for the enactment of the JFK Act.
The ARRB used the conjunctive “and” perhaps to avoid the embarrassment of acknowledging that a Hollywood movie alone had been responsible for the Act.
Absent these two great misconceptions, virtually the entire, immense issue of secrecy would never have arisen.
One misconception can be refuted by the facts, the other by the dictates of common sense.
With respect to the first misconception, the entire genesis of the American public’s conclusion that the federal government has been withholding many of the facts about the assassination is their belief that “the Warren Commission sealed the records” for seventy-five years—and for those with a little more knowledge , that it was Chief Justice Earl Warren who was specifically responsible for this.
No one is more of a conscientious and fair critic of the Warren Commission than attorney and assassinologist Mark Zaid.
But in 1992, after Stone’s movie, Stokes was a key sponsor of the JFK Act, whose mandate included all of the HSCA records on the case.
Conspiracy author Anthony Summers took this myth to an even higher level when he actually retitled the new edition of his 1980 book, Conspiracy, now calling it Not in Your Lifetime.
Of course, even if he put the date of Warren’s remark in the opening paragraph of his book, it would still have required the reader to put two and two together, something most people don’t always do.
A major premise of Summers’s book is that Warren and his Commission decided not to tell the American people, for seventy-five years, what he and his Commission had learned.
The reality is that Warren has been quoted completely out of context, and because of it, millions of Americans and people the world over have been misled for over four decades.
There is no evidence whatsoever that the Warren Commission sealed any part of its records, documents, or findings.
To the contrary, the exact opposite is true, and the origin of this myth and misconception is one single remark Warren made that, as indicated, has been taken completely out of context.
As alluded to in a previous endnote, after Marina Oswald testified on February 3, 1964, which was the very first day of the Warren Commission hearings,^ Warren told newsmen outside the hearing chambers in Washington, D.C., that as Mrs.
Warren went on to say that in view of this, “Yes, there will come a time—but it might not be in your lifetime.
And he spoke only hypothetically of the possibility of the records being sealed; he did not state that they actually would be sealed.
This one remark, always Ironically, one of the very few people who did not think that the Warren Commission sealed the records was New Orleans district attorney Jim Garrison.
Like virtually everything else Warren Commission critics have alleged about this case, this contention has no basis in fact.
Actually, if Warren had clearly said, on February 3, that he did intend to seal the records, even that would have been irrelevant if he ended up not doing so.
Not only didn’t he do so, but instead he and his Commission encouraged the release of all the records to the American people.
Whenever I would read the assertion in the many conspiracy books that Warren and his Commission had sealed the records for seventy-five years, I would look for the source or citation, but it was never there.
The critics of the Warren Commission have simply continued to repeat the canard, yet have never offered any evidence to support it for the simple reason that no such evidence exists.
Fortunately, while talking to Lesar on another issue, I raised the matter with him.
Though a conspiracy theorist who believes “there’s physical, medical and ballistics evidence that leads you to conclude that one person could not have fired all of the shots,” Lesar told me there was no question the Warren Commission did not seal its records.
Lesar said he had researched the matter years ago and could not, at the moment, locate the documentary evidence, but he told me that the National Archives had a rule, which applied across the board to all historical records that federal agencies and commissions turned over to them, that the records would not be released to the public for seventy-five years.
This belief somehow got started in the [conspiracy] research community, and it took on a life of its own” (Telephone interThe NARA began its existence as an independent federal agency called the National Archives Establishment in 1934 under President Franklin D Roosevelt.
It was incorporated into the General Services Administration , answerable to the administrator of the GSA, in 1949.
In 1984, it was separated from the GSA and currently is once again an independent federal agency operating in the executive branch of the United States government.
Tilley did not have immediate access to the documentary evidence detailing how the records ended up being sealed, but he was extraordinarily cooperative in sending to me every document on the matter he could find.
In abbreviated form, the following is the chronology of events leading up to the sealing of the records.
The Warren Commission, of course, resulted from President Lyndon Johnson signing Executive Order 11130 on November 29, 1963.
The records were sealed under a general policy that applied to all federal investigations by the executive branch of government.
Johnson told the president that if there was any “justification for withholding from the public” the records, it was “incumbent” upon the president “to make it clear why.
The Cedar Rapids mayor sent copies of his letter to Vice President-elect Hubert Humphrey, Chief Justice Warren, two senators, a congressman, and, perhaps more importantly, many members of the media, including the Associated Press and American Society of News Editors.
President Johnson, moved by the letter, immediately referred the matter to McGeorge Bundy, his special assistant, who in turn asked the National Archives for a background memo on the subject.
The study should include, he wrote, asking Chief Justice Warren what his position was on the matter.
In a letter to Attorney General Katzenbach on April 5,1965, Chief Justice Warren left no ambiguity as to his state of mind.
It wished them to be held there for the benefit of the American people.
At that time, it decided that it was in the best interests of all concerned that the policy relating to the Commission’s records provide for the fullest possible disclosure.
The Commission, after full consideration, concluded that it did not have either the authority or the necessary information to determine the technical questions as to when the classified materials should be released without injury to the security of the country.
It decided that the responsibility for that decision must of necessity be left with the originating agencies and the Attorney General, as the chief legal officer, in accordance with established law and policies of the government.
In arriving at the foregoing conclusions, however, the Commission assumed that all of the determinations by the agencies and the Attorney General would be made in recognition of the overriding consideration of the fullest possible disclosure.
We hope that this report of the attitude and conclusions of the Commission concerning the full disclosure of its records will be helpful to you in the formulation of your proposal for making the materials of the Commission now in the National Archives available to the public.
Ironically, Warren, in all likelihood, had never even heard of the seventy-five-year rule at the archives.
When it was in existence, as previously indicated, the seventy-five-year rule only applied to records of the executive branch of government, and hence, the Warren Commission records, but not to the records of the HSCA investigation of the assassination.
And as we shall see, the Freedom of Information Act never covered congressional records.
But Tilley told me in his November 14, 2001, letter that House rules state that a simple resolution not enacted into permanent law expires at the end of the Congress that passed it.
Finally, in 1989, the fifty-year rule became official when Rule XXXVI of the House, passed in 1979 , was amended by the House to provide that investigative records of the House transferred to the archives shall be sealed for fifty years and all other House records for thirty years.
The second great misconception responsible for the desire of conspiracy theorists and the public to have all Warren Commission records disclosed is the notion that we can learn the truth about the assassination only if the records are unsealed.
In other words, we’ll know the truth about the assassination only in 2039.
Such a silly notion can be easily demolished since its premise is illogical and contravenes human experience.
In the first place, the belief that any alleged conspirators who plotted Kennedy’s assassination would commit to paper anything that expressly, obliquely, or in any other way referred to the murderous plot is ridiculous on its face.
But you see, if that were the case, these people would simply destroy these documents, not leave them in any file.
If they were immoral enough to murder Kennedy, or do whatever they could to cover up for those who did, surely they would eliminate an incriminating document.
Yes, but that’s what the whole notion fueling the disclosure movement has been.
But one or the other of these two states of mind, or some close variation thereof, would necessarily have to have governed the actions of any alleged criminals for there to be any viability to the disclosure movement.
To summarize, if there were any documents that pointed to a different gunman or the existence of a conspiracy, these documents would have been destroyed years ago.
Therefore, if the purpose of the JFK Act and ARRB were to find out if such documentary evidence existed among the previously unreleased Warren Commission and HSCA records, the JFK Act and ARRB were almost, by definition, an exercise in futility.
However, despite this inherent futility, inasmuch as the JFK Act and ARRB have become an important part of the historical record of the assassination, a brief discussion of them is called for.
The whole debate the last several decades over the wisdom, or lack thereof, in releasing to the public the unpublished Warren Commission and HSCA records However, the situation perhaps isn’t quite as black and white as I have painted it here.
Though a smokinggun incriminating document would never be found in the archives, it is undeniably true that whenever anyone attempts to destroy much incriminating material, here and there hints of conspiracy and complicity somehow continue to survive, if in no other way than that gaps in documentary evidence may be discovered, in which case the effort to cover up leaves its own trail, and therefore inferences—perhaps tentative—can be drawn.
And there is the situation where a surviving document, by itself, would appear to be benign, and hence wasn’t destroyed, but in the hands of a good researcher this document may contain information that, in conjunction with other information or documents, becomes a part of the mosaic pointing toward wrongdoing.
So if there was a conspiracy to murder Kennedy, the diligent search for an examination of documents that are part of the assassination record is not, per se, an automatically fruitless undertaking.
This fight over secrecy reached its zenith in America during the paranoia of the cold war (which encompassed the Kennedy assassination) and continued, almost unabated, until the collapse of the Soviet Union helped to shift, at least somewhat, the free world’s emphasis from secrecy to openness.
Prior to 1946 in America, short of a subpoena in an ongoing lawsuit, there was no federal statute entitling any citizen to secure the records of any federal agency.
In that year, Congress passed a law providing that unless “secrecy in the public interest” was involved, every federal agency had to publish or “make available to public inspection all final opinions or orders ” resulting from administrative proceedings of the agency.
Apart from the Department of Justice guidelines for access to Warren Commission records heretofore referred to, which were never codified into statutory law, the first major breakthrough and crack in the federal secrecy armor came in the landmark Freedom of Information Act of 1966 , which went into effect on July 4, 1967.
Moreover, if any federal agency resists an applicant’s request for any document or record on the ground that a particular exemption applies, and the applicant sues, there is a presumption against disclosure, and the plaintive applicant has the burden of proving that the It should be noted that most FOIA requests do not deal with the Kennedy assassination, indicating Americans’ appetite for government information of all kinds.
For instance, in 1990, federal agencies received 491,000 FOIA requests and spent $83 million responding to them.
The Defense Department received 118,000 requests; the Justice Department, 62,000; the Immigration and Naturalization Service, 45,000; the Environmental Protection Agency, 39,000; the FBI, 11,000; and the CIA, 4,000.
Jim Lesar is considered by many to be the leading FOIA private lawyer in the country.
And Lesar has no hesitancy in declaring that “FOIA has done an enormous amount of good.
Therefore, under FOIA, the vast records of all congressional investigations that dealt either exclusively or partially with the Kennedy assassination, such as the HSCA, the Church Committee, and the Rockefeller Commission, are off-limits.
President Bush left the appointment of the board members to his successor, President Bill Clinton, and they were sworn in on April 11, 1994.
It wasn’t until October 1, 1994, however, that Congress appropriated funds for the Review Board’s operation, and because of the belated start, Congress twice extended its life, the ARRB finally turning off the lights to its operation on September 30, 1998.
They throw up many threshold defenses,” he says, some of the defenses bringing an infrequent laugh to Lesar.
When he stopped chuckling at that argument, he addressed himself to the issue of why the FBI, CIA, and other federal agencies try to prevent the release of documents whose contents won’t even hurt them.
There are several reasons for this, he said, proceeding to mention a few.
In many cases, they don’t know for certain whether information in a document is harmful, but they consider there’s always a possibility it might be in some way they don’t even know about.
They view requesters as subversives, a class of people who are looking for information to hurt them.
There’s also the notion that government officials somehow come to believe that they are the owners of the information that they obtain.
But in getting this information they were working on the taxpayer payroll, using taxpayer-owned equipment, even paper, so the taxpayers own the product.
The board members met two full days every three weeks, although its paid staff of twenty-six (including two investigators with law enforcement backgrounds) worked full-time.
Previous assassination-related commissions and committees were established for the purpose of drawing conclusions about the assassination.
For instance, under the JFK Act, all congressional records on the assassination, including, most importantly, the records of the HSCA that had not been published in its twelve volumes were now subject to release to the American public.
In other words, under FOIA, nondisclosure could be permanent under many situations, but under Section 6 of the JFK Act, only a “postponement” was possible.
However, even the “postponements” have a virtual limit under the JFK Act.
And since the Act allowed only the ARRB, not private citizens, to procure assassination records under it, the courts have held that throughout the period of the JFK Act, private citizens and the general public still had to continue to seek assassination records under FOIA with its limitations.
For instance, in 1993, the Assassination Archives and Research Center sought some FBI records under FOIA relating to assassination figure Marita Lorenz, which the FBI denied.
Moreover, although most of the same litany of grounds (in addition to national security) for nondisclosure exists under the JFK Act as under FOIA (e.g., under Section 6 of the JFK Act, where disclosure would reveal the identity of an intelligence agent, or intelligence source or method of operation, etc.), the courts, in interpreting FOIA, held that even if the source or method of operation were not currently being utilized—indeed, even if the agent or source were dead—an exemption could still be sustained.
The “current” requirement was an obvious compromise between the public’s right to know and the traditional and understandable concern of law enforcement and intelligence agencies like the FBI and the CIA to protect, above all else, their sources and methods of operation, which was particularly acute during the period of the cold war.
The problem with that definition, the Review Board concluded, was that it was too restrictive and wouldn’t satisfy the conspiracy community, which had already established a reputation for seizing on a far-out tidbit of information that no one but them would conclude was relevant to the assassination inquiry.
With this in mind, the Review Board, after conducting two public hearings on the mattert and much deliberation, expanded the definition of an assassination record to include “ all records, Under Section 3 , the JFK Act also compelled the release of assassination records of “any State or local law enforcement office that provided support or assistance” in the investigation of the assassination.
But on January 27, 1992, months before the JFK Act was even enacted , the Dallas Police Department, after a unanimous vote by the Dallas City Council, released all of its documents on the case for inspection by the public.
The ARRB, with broad powers, including the power to subpoena witnesses and documents and grant witnesses immunity from prosecution (JFK Act, § 7 (j and k)), began to implement the JFK Act on April 11,1994.
However, inasmuch as the date the JFK Act went into effect was October 26, 1992, and it set forth its objective of releasing JFK assassination-related documents to the public, by April of 1994, federal agencies, on their own, had voluntarily declassified thousands upon thousands of documents.
In fact, once the Review Board started its work, it was only dealing with about sixty-two-thousand assassination-related documents whose release was being opposed by one of the twenty-three agencies or entities (e.g., FBI, CIA, National Security Council, Department of State, Lyndon Baines Johnson Library, Church Committee, etc.) that possessed them.
Of these, 33,176 were eventually released by the agencies without a ruling by the Review Board.
This was so because once the ARRB started to establish its voting patterns, the agencies or entities began to recognize that the Review Board would not grant postponements for certain types of information, so they voluntarily withdrew their request for postponement before the ARRB ruled on them.
This left only 29,420 documents that the Review Board had to review and vote on, 49 percent of which were CIA documents and 34 percent FBI documents.
Judge Tunheim told me that these approximately twenty-nine thousand documents contained redacted material, and most of them had not been released by the agencies involved.
The materials were legally transferred by the Kennedy family to the archives on October 29, 1966.
Stored in special vaults at the archives, the JFK collection of all assassination documents prior to the ARRB was “more than four and a half million pages.
Most important to the suspicious and cynical, however, Judge Tunheim said that either he or another member of the Review Board has personally examined all of the redacted material, and there was “nothing in any of the documents that was central to the assassination.
Hundreds upon hundreds of conspiracy theorists, as well as others, have spent considerable money and time throughout the years to get one or more assassination documents released from the archives, and without exception, when successful, they found there was nothing of any value in them.
They found that their assumption that the government’s fighting so tenaciously with them to withhold the document meant it was hiding something of relevance to the assassination was, in the case of assassination documents, a non sequitur.
Over and over they found, to their consternation, that a federal agency was only withholding the identity of an intelligence source or methods of operation.
In those cases where it wasn’t, it was just plain bureaucratic obstinacy.
Later, when the ARRB released the same document unredacted, they learned the redacted material was of no evidentiary value to them.
Although the conspiracy community had been salivating over what the release of the assassination-related records would reveal, they naturally were bitterly disappointed when nothing was found to contravene the findings of the Warren Commission and support their various theories of conspiracy.
Either the title or description of a document was provocative and the document itself was banal, or upon close inspection, a seemingly significant line of inquiry turned out to mean something completely different than initially thought.
But eventually the ARRB got everything from the Secret Service it asked for, with the exception of a document containing the names of all known people who had threatened Kennedy within six months of the assassination.
The Secret Service said that since many of these people had been institutionalized, to release their names, even though many are now dead, would compromise the Secret Service’s relationship in the future with mental health providers for the mentally ill.
The Secret Service appealed the Review Board’s demand for the document to the president (under the JFK Act, the only person or entity an agency can appeal to, not the courts), but President Clinton denied the Secret Service’s appeal before his term expired in January of 2001.
The other agency that wasn’t completely cooperative was President Clinton’s Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board, a White House agency.
It appealed to the president the ARRB’s demand for minutes of the board during meetings in 1962-1963 regarding Cuba and Russia.
Again, just before his second term expired in January of2001, President Clinton also rejected the appeal of the Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board.
Therefore, when the ARRB discontinued its operations on September 30,1998, no future requests could be made under the Act.
When I mentioned that the documents he was seeking would be disclosed at least in 2017 because of the JFK mandate, he said not necessarily so.
When I asked for an example, he said that in 1962 the CIA’s Office of Biographic Registry compiled a five-volume set of profiles on Cuban leaders.
First, after an unprecedented and historic four-year scavenger hunt by the ARRB for all documents “reasonably related” to the assassination, no smoking gun or even a smoldering ember of conspiracy was found.
But there are two other official repositories of assassination documents that are not nearly as well known, those of the Dallas Police Department housed at the Dallas Municipal Archives, and those of the Dallas Sheriff Department pertaining to Parkland Hospital and the department’s custody of Jack Ruby following his shooting of Oswald.
In early 2006,1 asked John Slate, the city archivist at the Dallas Municipal Archives, to furnish me with the history of the JFK assassination records of the Dallas Police Department at the archives.
I am grateful to Slate for writing me back on July 10, 2006, with the history I requested.
The John F Kennedy/Dallas Police Department Collection contains 11,406 documents and photographs, including homicide reports, affidavits, witness statements, newspaper clippings and correspondence.
The Dallas Municipal Archives, a division of the City Secretary’s Office, possesses all of these original files except those that have been transferred permanently to the federal investigation collection held at the National Archives.
A first set of documents related to the Kennedy assassination were discovered by the city’s records management officer during a records inventory of the Dallas Police Department in 1989.
The documents, housed between 1963 and 1989 in a filing cabinet with other historical materials, were appraised as no longer administratively needed by the police department.
Little fanfare accompanied the transfer, but much more notice was taken after the addition of several more feet of documents in 1992, largely in response to the late 1991 release of Oliver Stone’s film JFK , parts of which were shot in Dallas.
In the absence of meaningful local of federal open records laws until the 1970s, the Kennedy records were more forgotten than actually restricted and were open to public inspection, through few made specific written requests to the department or the police chief.
Most citizens’ requests to the DPD for information were of a general nature and they were directed to the Warren Commission volumes or to the National Archives.
While it appeared the records were closed, in truth they were never meant to be restricted.
Unless we are specifically instructed otherwise from Washington, we believe it can and should become public information.
Nearly thirty years later the chief’s forgotten utterance finally became reality.
The six series in the collection are organized according to the organizational functions of the police department and kept in the same order as they were physically stored at the department.
During the processing of the collection a subject and name index was generated to create further access points.
In 1967 through 1969, photocopied newspaper and magazine articles relating to New Orleans district attorney Jim Garrison’s investigation were added to document that case.
In 2005, several original but duplicate photographic prints and documents (concerning Oswald’s murder and the sending of his clothing to the National Archives) stolen from DPD at an undetermined time were discovered and seized during a 2004 drug raid.
Several items of correspondence in the collection are requests for access written during the 1960s connected with the official federal investigation of the incident.
An early transfer of material to the FBI is documented in a December 3,1963, letter from Chief Curry to FBI field agent J Gordon Shanklin.
Curry confirmed that files on Lee Harvey Oswald’s murder were microfilmed by the FBI upon receipt and the bureau returned a roll to DPD while the originals were sent to Washington.
Subsequent piecemeal requests for information on various aspects of the larger investigation were made by the FBI or other federal agencies over a number of months, and there is a reasonably consistent paper trail of what was sent to Washington.
Perhaps the most significant letter came in 1964 from J Lee Rankin, general counsel for the Warren Commission, through Texas attorney general Waggoner Carr, requesting the police department to provide everything they had relating to Lee Harvey Oswald to the Commission.
Many original items were never returned and retained permanently by the Warren Commission or the FBI, explaining why approximately 30% of the DPD Kennedy records in the Dallas Municipal Archives are second-generation carbon copies or photocopies from originals.
Author William Manchester contacted Chief Curry in June 1964 as he was conducting research for Death of a President.
Presumably his letter was not only a request to visit Curry, but also to review police records.
Byrd to request a thorough review of all DPD Kennedy records, in conjunction with a subpoena from HSCA vice chair Henry B Gonzalez for Byrd to appear before the committee.
There is no further correspondence with Byrd, nor did Byrd appear at the hearings, as far as is known.
Also in 1976, David Martin, legal counsel to the United States Secret Service, received approval to release DPD documents in possession of the federal agency to early Warren Commission critic and activist Mark Lane, including a police radio transcript, DPD’s investigation of the attempted murder of Major General Edwin Walker, and Lee Harvey Oswald’s fingerprints.
Because of the fragile nature of the majority of original materials the complete collection was microfilmed and photocopied for public access, and a pioneering digitalization project funded by Wang Laboratories in 1992 created a virtual collection for use at a public computer terminal.
While the original project was a significant achievement, improvements in digital scanning technology will necessitate the re-scanning of portions of the collection.
Researchers may continue to use the photocopy and microfilm sets by appointment.
The Sixth Floor Museum at Dealey Plaza received the Dallas County Sheriff’s Department known files and records pertaining to the Kennedy assassination on February 3,2005.
Ownership of the records was officially transferred to the Museum by Sheriff Lupe Valdez on April 4, 2005.
First, on June 21, 1994, the Dallas County Commissioners Court ordered all county records pertaining to the Kennedy assassination be located and transferred to the Dallas County Historical Foundation, which operates the Museum.
At that time, the Museum received numerous original and photocopied Parkland Hospital records related to the assassination.
The order also encouraged county elected officials, which includes the sheriff, to also round up Kennedy files and transfer them to the Dallas County Historical Foundation.
These files were brought to the attention of the Museum at that time and arrangements were made to receive them early the following year.
During my tenure as the Museum’s archivist and curator, I continued a personal friendship with former Dallas County sheriff Jim Bowles.
My phone calls to that department, however, led to a finding that the county had no assassination files in storage from either the sheriff or anyone else.
The HSCA’s eleventh-hour finding left the committee scrambling to rewrite its already written draft of its final report, which had concluded, like the Warren Commission before it, that Oswald was the lone gunman.
Four of the twelve committee members—House Representatives Harold S Sawyer , Robert W Edgar , Samuel L Devine , and Charles Thone —vigorously disagreed with the HSCA’s conclusions, contending that the panel rushed to judgment in concluding that a conspiracy existed.
Representative Edgar said, “We found no evidence to suggest a conspiracy.
We found no entry wounds from the front into any person, including President John Kennedy and Gov.
We found no bullets or fragments of bullets that did not belong to the Oswald weapon.
And we found little, if any, evidence of partnership with Lee Harvey Oswald.
In the following pages, let’s take a look at the facts and controversy surrounding this acoustic “proof” of conspiracy and show how it has been thoroughly discredited.
In December 1976, Gary Mack, then program director for KFJZ-FM in Fort Worth, Texas, who had developed an interest in the assassination after seeing the Zapruder film on Geraldo Rivera’s ABC national television show the year before, met with conspiracy theorist Penn Jones Jr., former editor of the Midlothian Mirror , a small Texas newspaper.
Jones felt that the communications were jammed on purpose, and even though the open microphone was on channel 1, which was not being used for motorcade communications, Jones believed the open microphone was on a motorcycle that was part of the motorcade.
Intrigued by Jones’s speculation, Mack alertly suggested that perhaps the open microphone, if it were truly part of the motorcade, picked up the sound of the shots fired at the president and transmitted them back to Dallas police headquarters, where they were recorded on the very tapes Jones now had.
The Dallas Police Department had two radio channels to commumcare with policemen , each on a different frequency.
The cyclist, by clicking a switch, could go from one channel to another but could never be on two channels at the same time, although the dispatcher, at police headquarters, had the ability to transmit simultaneously on both channels.
To transmit, the cyclist had to pick up the microphone, depress the transmitter button (“pushto-talk button”) on the microphone, and keep it depressed while talking.
McLain if it would be possible for the microphone button “to have been stuck in the open position,” and McLain said yes.
When the microphone button is not depressed , then the police radio is in the “receiving” or “monitoring” position or mode in which the cyclist can hear transmissions from the police dispatcher.
Occasionally, the microphone button will stick when pressed down, leaving the radio in transmission mode even after the officer has finished speaking and released the button.
Once the motorcyclist depresses the microphone button to transmit , this does not preclude all other cyclists from talking to the police dispatcher at that time.
They can still transmit on that channel, but if two or more cyclists are talking at the same time, you’d normally have almost incomprehensible voice-overs.
Second, the term cross talk refers to a conversation being broadcast on one radio channel that is picked up by a nearby police microphone that is on a different radio channel and becomes a part of the record of this other channel when the conversation is retransmitted, by this other microphone, back to the dispatcher’s Dictabelt at police headquarters.
Made by Dallas radio reporter Sam Pate, it later appeared on the Colpix Inc. record album Four Days That Shocked the World.
Pate admitted, during an FBI interview, that most of the tape had not even been recorded in Dealey Plaza, but in a studio after the assassination.
The Commission nonetheless arranged for a scientific analysis of the tape by Dr.
Lawrence Kersta of Bell Telephone Acoustics & Speech Research Laboratory.
Kersta found some “spikes” of noise on a key eight-second part of the tape, but did not say anything about them being gunshots.
James E Barger of Bolt, Beranek and Newman Inc., who found that parts of the tape had been recorded near Dealey Plaza on November 22, 1963, but not during the shooting.
Mack feels his background in broadcasting helped predispose him to his thought.
But certainly, someone in law enforcement should have thought of this before Mack did so many years after the assassination.
Jones subsequently gave Mack a multigeneration copy of the tapes of the two channels, which Mack took back to the radio station.
After filtering them through a graphic equalizer, Mack thought he could hear gunshots on the channel 1 tape, but the “muddy” quality of the recording prevented further study.
In January 1977, Mack obtained clearer copies of the two Dallas police tapes from researcher Mary Ferrell (“Special Gallery Report on the JFK Assassination,” Gallery, July 1979) and took them to two recording studios (TM Productions and January Sound in Dallas), where he talked some sympathetic sound engineers into working with the tapes.
Mack took the tape home and synchronized it to the Zapruder film at various points to see if he could match it to the movements seen in the film.
Posner said that he had heard a rumor in Dallas that a former reporter for Dallas radio WFAA, Travis Linn, had an audio recording of the shooting in Dealey Plaza.
He said that since he was covering the Trade Mart that day, he asked an associate of his to take a small portable tape recorder to Dealey Plaza and set it down on top of a column near the reflective pool close to the corner of Houston and Elm to pick up the sound of the motorcade going by.
Since the associate was going to be there anyway, why Linn wouldn’t just have him hold it in his hand, and closer to the street, is not known.
In any event, after the shooting, Linn went to Dealey Plaza and found that his associate had left, but the recorder was still there.
He played the tape back at the station and heard three shots on it, but while he was starting to duplicate it, his news director sent him out to Oswald’s apartment.
I later found out that Sixth Floor Museum curator Gary Mack, who has no visceral opposition to far-out stories as long as they’re not fraudulent, had proved the story was false.
When Linn told Mack the story around 1989, Mack told me he interviewed Walter Evans, Linn’s news director at the time of the assassination and Evans just laughed, saying it never happened and he hadn’t even heard about it before.
Mack also spoke to Pierce Allman, the station’s program director at the time, who told Mack he had never heard it either.
L’Hoste, the WFAA-TV photographer Linn supposedly asked to record the motorcade.
He told Mack his late father filmed the motorcade on Main Street, not Dealey Plaza, and had never heard of Linn’s story.
Indeed, L’Hoste’s film, shot about nine blocks east of Dealey Plaza, appears without sound in the WFAA-TV videotapes recorded on November 22, 1963.
Finally, Mack looked at the Elsie Dorman film, which picks up the area where the tape recorder was supposedly left, and saw no such recorder.
A stylus makes an impression on a thin celluloid belt, just like the stylus cutting a groove on the channel 2 Gray Audograph disk.
Tapes were made of the belt and disk, some relatively clear, some multigenerational and of very poor quality.
The terms Dictabelt and channel 1 tape are used interchangeably in this section.
To preserve the Dictabelt, the HSCA worked, for the most part, from a magnetictape copy of the Dictabelt, and the HSCA itself tended to use the two terms interchangeably.
HSCA chief counsel G Robert Blakey had substantial misgivings about the benefits of such a conference.
Hence, not just radio transmissions by the police, but any noise close enough to the motorcycle microphone to be picked up, would activate the recording machine back at police headquarters.
The machine belt and disk would also continue rotating if the transmitter button were stuck in the “on” position.
After a noise or transmission ended, the Dictabelt or Audograph would continue to rotate and operate in the recording mode for an additional four seconds, then stop.
However, Mack says that after the HSCA’s finding of a fourth shot on the tape at around the time of the shooting, he went back to his copy of the channel 1 tape and “heard what the HSCA people decided were gunshots,” Mack firmly believing in the HSCA’s conclusion.
She told Blakey about Mack’s study and how he had found evidence of seven gunshots.
At the top of a list of five firms was Bolt, Beranek and Newman Inc. of Cambridge, Massachusetts, one of whose founders, Dr.
Richard Bolt, had been the chairman of a panel appointed by Judge John J Sirica to investigate the mysterious eighteenminute gap in the Watergate tapes.
During the subsequent criminal trial of members of the National Guard, prosecutors from the Justice Department used BBN’s analysis of the tape, combined with photographs taken at the time of the shootings, to establish which guardsmen were the first to fire shots.
In early October, HSCA senior staff attorney John Hornbeck met with BBN scientists who told him that if the Dallas police tapes actually did contain gunshots, and they had “a good enough” copy to work from, they could probably resolve a number of questions about the assassination, including how many gunshots there were, the intervals between them, and the direction of fire.
First, it was decided that a copy of the police tapes would be electronically “cleaned up” and converted into a graph showing duration and volume.
Second, test shots fired in Dealey Plaza would be recorded and compared to the sounds on the police transmissions in an effort to see if any of the “shapes of sound” on the channel 1 tape matched the test shots—a process similar to matching fingerprints.
Due to the poor quality, BBN was unable to determine whether a portion of the channel 1 recording did or did not contain the sounds of gunfire.
This fact alone, as you’ll see, is strongly suggestive, though not conclusive, that the motorcycle with the open microphone was not in Dealey Plaza.
The Dallas police communications system was routinely recorded onto thin, plastic belts and disks by two separate duplex recording units.
Channel 1 was recorded on a Dictaphone A2TC, Model 5, belt recorder purchased by the department in 1957.
Channel 2 (the one for special-event radio traffic) was recorded on a Gray Corporation “Audograph” flat disk recorder that was bought in the early 1950s.
Both duplex devices consisted of one unit set to record and a second unit set to standby mode, ready to take over as soon as the first unit contained a full recording.
McCaghren moved the files to his office in the Intelligence Division, where they were stored until late 1971.
It then says it also received “a tape recording of transmissions over channel 2,” the implication, by omission, being that unlike the original Dictabelt, the committee did not get the original Audograph channel 2 recording.
When I called Robert Blakey about this, he said, “This was just sloppy drafting.
If that turned out to be the case, he reasoned, there would be no need to go to Dallas to do additional acoustic tests.
The HSCA agreed, committing $40,000 to the project, with $20,000 held in reserve just in case Barger turned something up.
If the sounds failed to pass any one of the test questions, he could safely assume that they were not caused by gunfire and the study could end.
If they passed the test questions, expensive acoustic tests would have to be conducted at the scene of the assassination.
A match of any of these “acoustical fingerprints” would be further evidence that the impulse sounds were gunfire, and the BBN team would then be able to determine the timing of the shots on the Dictabelt as well as the location of the weapon and the target for each shot discovered.
House Select Committee chairman Louis Stokes, sensitive to the feelings of the Kennedy family, asked that Senator Edward M Kennedy, the late president’s brother, be briefed immediately about the proposed Dallas test firings.
On August 2, 1978, several committee members met with Senator Kennedy in his Capitol office.
Also at 12:31 (about 5 seconds after the decrease in the sound), he said he heard on the channel 1 tape “four groups” or “patterns” of “impulse sounds” that his BBN team thought might be gunshots.
But even with a gunshot, he explained, there was a problem because the Dallas police radio system had a “limiter” built into it that takes an extra loud sound and reduces it down to an acceptable level for transmission through the radio, and the limiter has made these sounds, if indeed they were gunshot sounds, “quiet.
So it is so distorted that you don’t have the impression of hearing gunshot.
The ability of an officer to transmit a message from his cycle when a microphone from another cycle is stuck in the open position was based largely on its proximity to a number of relay towers located throughout the city, which routed radio signals back to the central dispatch room via voice-grade telephone lines.
An officer whose radio was close enough to a relay tower might be able to override the signal from the stuck mike and transmit a message, though distorted, whereas others, in more distant locations, might only be able to produce brief heterodyne tones.
Still others might not be able to transmit or produce any sounds at all.
The closest relay tower to Dealey Plaza, less than a mile away, was atop the Adolphus hotel, Jim Bowles, a Dallas Police Department radio dispatcher supervisor at the time, recalls.
Bowles had worked in the dispatcher’s office for ten years and is probably the leading authority on the channel 1 tape.
But when Bowles prepared a rebuttal to the HSCA’s fourth-shot conclusion in 1979, he listened to the same magnetic copy of the original Dictabelt he had used in 1964 and put on earphones.
Three seconds later, “a series of randomly spaced, loud clicks and pops” can be heard, lasting around ten seconds. tHorsefeathers, says Bowles.
Bowles told me in November of 2004 that several times before and after the assassination he personally has heard the sound of gunshots on channel 1 tapes.
For instance, they could be the result of the motorcycle engine misfiring, or noises generated by the motorcycle’s ignition system, or the microphone itself becoming unstuck, turning off, then back on again.
The impulse sounds could also be due to scratches on the surface of the Dictabelt.
On August 8 and 9, Blakey briefed the House Administration Committee on the acoustic evidence during its supplemental budget hearing, telling the committee that BBN had discovered four sounds that could be gunshots and that the timing of the sounds suggested a second gunman may have been firing at the president at the same time as Oswald.
The committee postponed its decision on whether to provide additional funds for the proposed acoustic tests in Dallas, but Blakey committed his cash reserve of $20,888.
To Blakey’s horror, someone had leaked a story to Dallas Morning News correspondent Earl Golz, a frequent writer of assassinationrelated stories, that the BBN’s preliminary acoustic analysis had found that not only had the “impulse sounds” on the Dallas police Dictabelt already been determined to be gunshots, but there had been more than Oswald’s three shots, hence, a conspiracy.
Early on Sunday, August 20, 1978, a crowd began to gather in Dealey Plaza to witness the historic test firings, which began just after dawn.
Although the two hundred or so people who showed up were mostly members of the media, part of tem had a limiter, but he said it only “cut off the extreme highs and lows” of a loud sound.
The investigative team that had been assembled consisted of four HSCA staff members, seven acoustic experts, a photographic consultant, and thirty-three Dallas police officers.
Acoustic experts from BBN decided that none of the changes would significantly alter the acoustic fingerprints of the test shots they planned to fire.
To ensure that the speed and loudness of the test shots would cause shock and muzzle blast waves comparable to what would have occurred on the day of the assassination, Dallas police sharpshooter Jerry Compton was instructed to fire, from the sniper’s nest, a Mannlicher-Carcano rifle similar to the one found on the sixth floor in 1963, and Clint L Metcalf, the Dallas police marksman stationed behind the stockade fence atop the grassy knoll, was handed both a Mannlicher-Carcano rifle and a .38 caliber pistol to fire.
Since the type of weapon allegedly fired from the grassy knoll was unknown, acoustic scientists wanted to make sure they had examples of test shots fired from both supersonic and subsonic weapons.
Neither marksman used the telescopic sights of their weapons, preferring the safety of the iron sights, which allowed them to see the immediate area around the targets.
Three were based on the preliminary examination of the Dallas police tape, which showed “pops and clicks” at intervals that matched the position of the limousine at Zapruder frames 160, 200, and 313.
A fourth target was placed at the south curb of Main Street, near the Triple Underpass, where the 1963 investigation showed that a bullet had ricocheted.
The biggest problem for the acoustic team was finding a method of determinThe HSCA ultimately concluded that the Z200 shot was fired a few frames earlier than believed at the time of the test firing.
The BBN experts decided that the motorcycle had to have been somewhere within Dealey Plaza to pick up the sound of the gunfire.
Realizing that the motorcycle was likely to be no more than about 18 feet from the center of the 40-foot-wide street, BBN hit upon the idea of arranging three groups of twelve microphones each (for a total of thirty-six possible positions), spaced at 18-foot intervals along the motorcade route through Dealey Plaza beginning at the turn onto Houston from Main and continuing to the site of the head shot on Elm.
Test shots would be fired and recorded for each of the three separate groups of microphone positions.
In this way, scientists reasoned that in a worst-case scenario, the actual motorcycle position would be no more than 18 feet from any test microphone location.
The theory behind this rather complicated acoustic test was that a gunshot produces an initial impulse sound , followed by a series of echoes.
Each microphone position would record a sequence of uniquely spaced impulse sounds depending on the location of the shooter, the target, and echo-producing structures surrounding that microphone.
So by the reconstruction, the committee could obtain unique “acoustical fingerprints” of various combinations of shooter, target, and microphone locations.
If “any of the acoustical fingerprints produced in the 1978 reconstruction matched those on the 1963 Dallas police dispatch tape,” it would be “a strong indication” that the impulse sounds on the police tape were in fact gunshots recorded by an open microphone in the motorcade.
Over the next seventeen days, the BBN experts made 2,592 comparisons between the recorded test shots and the impulse sounds on the Dallas police tape.
What they were looking for was a close match between the police tape impulses and the arrival of echoes at each microphone position as recorded during the test firings.
Since the location of the motorcycle’s open microphone was unknown, the .006-second “window” (called a “coincidence window” in the acoustic reports) allowed for the possibility that the stuck-open microphone was It was sixty-eight degrees in Dallas on the day of the assassination, while the temperature on the day of the test firing hit nearly ninety degrees.
The difference in temperature was figured into the final calculations by the acoustic experts.
Each potential match also had to have a sufficiently high “correlation coefficient,” a number that describes the quality of the match between a test echo pattern and an impulse sound sequence on the police tape.
A correlation coefficient of 0. or higher (with 1. being perfect) was considered sufficient to catch all impulse sound sequences that might actually represent true gunfire.
On the other hand, setting the correlation coefficient that high allowed the possibility that “random noise or other factors” would also read as a match.
After comparing all 2,592 combinations of echo patterns recorded during the test firing with the “pops and clicks” on the eight-second sequence of the 1963 Dallas police tape, the BBN acoustic team discovered fifteen test echo patterns that were within the .006-second window and had a correlation coefficient of 0. or higher.
These fifteen patterns were found to be grouped around four different periods of time on the Dallas police tape, an indication that four shots had been fired.
To determine which of the fifteen “matches” were valid gunshot sounds, if any, and which were false, the BBN team plotted the location of the microphone of each “match” against the time shown on the Dallas police tape.
BBN calculated the probability that this could have occurred at random as less than 1 percent.
According to BBN, this fact, in and of itself, tended to confirm that there was a motorcycle with an open microphone moving through Dealey Plaza and that it did record gunfire.
Though nine correlations remained, with “no other acoustical evidence that would help to determine which of the remaining nine correlations are false alarms, if any,” BBN scientists said that the expected number of false alarms in an analysis this size was thirteen, but, as indicated, only six had been found.
To put it another way, there was only a fifty-fifty chance that any of the nine remaining correlations were actual gunshots, although two, BBN believed, almost certainly were.
From the channel 1 tape, the time span between the onset of the first impulse pattern and the onset of the fourth impulse pattern was 7. seconds.
When corrected for the fact that the tape recorder was running about 5 percent too slowly, the real time span, BBN said, was 8. seconds.
Barger called to give the committee the news—he had completed his preliminary analysis of the Dallas tests (the final calculations were completed on September 6, 1978) and had found evidence of four shots, one of which, the third shot, came from the grassy knoll.
Blakey suggested he come to Washington the day before he was scheduled to testify to discuss his work.
Barger met with Blakey, Congressman Floyd J Fithian of Indiana, and Deputy Chief Counsel Gary Cornwell, and explained his methodology.
According to Blakey, the men examined photographs taken at the time of the assassination to see if they could identify the motorcycle with the stuck microphone button, but none of the photographs they studied covered the time and place where they expected the motorcycle to be.
For the HSCA’s grassy knoll advocates, such as Blakey, Barger’s testimony was a disaster.
Blakey later understated the disaster when he wrote, “Barger turned out to be not very persuasive.
All of the virtues that had made him a fine scientist worked against him as a witness.
Although Barger, as Blakey said, was poor at explaining himself, everyone who understands the English language easily understood his testimony that he was only confident that two of the four impulse sounds were actual gunfire, not false alarms.
Since the Warren Commission presented a massive amount of testimony that three shots were fired over the same period of time that Barger and his people analyzed, hearing two of those shots meant nothing.
Barger went on to say that there was only a probability of “somewhere between 60 or 70 percent” that three shots were fired.
Barger capped his damaging testimony by saying his findings were only a “potential corroborating force” for a finding of four shots , quickly adding that they were also a “potential discrediting force” to such a theory.
On the evening of Barger’s testimony, the HSCA staff huddled to work out a strategy in the hope of reducing the uncertainty of Barger’s analysis.
They didn’t want to leave the question of a conspiracy in the Kennedy assassination to the flip of a coin.
If they could only refine BBN’s work and come up with better percentages that might help eliminate some of the doubt.
They called on Mark Weiss and Ernest Aschkenasy again and asked if they might be able to take the data further, but initially neither man was optimistic.
However, after additional consultations with Barger, Weiss and Aschkenasy came up with a mathematical extension of BBN’s approach that they thought could reduce the element of chance in their findings.
HSCA Report,80) Weiss and Aschkenasy realized that the reason Barger was unable to say that the grassy knoll shot actually existed with any certainty greater than fifty-fifty was because the position of the alleged motorcycle with the open microphone was unknown at the time of the test firings in Dallas.
Consequently, and for practical reasons, Barger’s team was forced to place test microphones at 18-foot intervals along the motorcade route and fire from only one of many possible locations behind the stockade fence atop the grassy knoll in the hopes of “catching” the position of the motorcycle and the shooter in a subsequent analytical comparison of the resulting test echo patterns with the impulse sounds on the police tape.
As previously noted, because of these practicalities, Barger used a .006-second coincidence window that allowed for the possibility that the open microphone was at least near, if not exactly at, one of the test microphone positions.
But the downside of using such a large window was that it increased the possibility of including false alarms in the test results, and therefore, the probability of deducing an actual gunshot was limited to 50 percent.
Weiss and Aschkenasy assumed that they could increase the level of confidence in the result by finding a way to reduce the coincidence window to .001 of a second or less.
Theoretically, they reasoned, this was possible because BBN’s tests had already narrowed the likely location of the motorcycle with the open microphone at the time of the third shot to a small area at the beginning of Elm Street.
One way to rework the study would be to go back to Dealey Plaza and place test microphones 1 foot apart and fire from various locations atop the grassy knoll.
This approach, however, could not be implemented because of the limited time and funds available to the committee.
Weiss and Aschkenasy figured that the only practical way to acquire the necessary test echo patterns was to predict them analytically.
Weiss and Aschkenasy located one sequence of impulse sounds on the Dallas tape that was “very similar” to the sequence of predicted echoes.
A visual inspection showed that “almost all” of the impulse sounds and predicted echoes fell within the .001-second coincidence window they had established.
Weiss and Aschkenasy noted that the “high degree of correlation” between the impulse sounds and the echo predictions did not preclude the possibility that the impulse sounds on the Dallas police tape, identified as coming from the grassy knoll, were something other than gunshots.
However, the probability that the impulse sounds on the tape would match the echo pattern predictions (within .001 of a second) and not be gunshots was very small, less than 5 percent.
The path of the microphone, as it received the muzzle blast and its echoes, extends for about 6 feet along Elm Street.
The uncertainty in the initial position is plus or minus 1 foot, which corresponds to the accuracy of measurements made on the topographical survey map” . tone wonders how Barger could feel that Weiss and Aschkenasy had really validated his work.
Though they were in agreement that the head shot was fired at frame 312, Weiss and Aschkenasy disagreed with every other impulse sound that Barger had identified as a gunshot.
Barger, and particularly Weiss and Aschkenasy, had to know that they were on the cusp of becoming important historical figures, and there was an intoxicating buzz, not only among them but also among Blakey and his closest associates.
On December 11, 1978, Weiss and Aschkenasy, along with Barger, met with committee members in executive session and presented their united position.
Although some had seen it coming, many of the committee members were surprised by the finding.
They took turns quizzing the experts, struggling to come to terms with what it meant if the experts were right.
Nine days later , one of those in attendance, Congressman Sawyer, broke a no-leak policy and told a Grand Rapids, Michigan, radio audience about the executive session and the finding of a 95 percent certainty that a shot had come from the grassy knoll.
Blakey later pointed out that everyone seemed to forget the fact that the evidence wasn’t new at all, but rather a refinement of evidence that Barger had discovered in July and presented in public hearings in September.
Chief among the tasks was confirming that there actually was a motorcycle in the position predicted by the scientists, a necessary and key step to validating their conclusions.
On December 29,1978, in the eleventh hour of the HSCA’s existence, the committee met in the Caucus Room of the Cannon House Office Building for one final day of televised hearings.
But the inclusion of five of Blakey’s seven witnesses is more than questionable.
Yet Landis also wrote that he “was not certain” about the origin of the second shot.
One of them, Royce Skelton, reported what he “guessed” was a bullet hitting the pavement near the president’s car late in the shooting sequence, scattering the cement from the pavement toward the southwest, “in direct line from the Texas Depository”— which, of course, was consistent with the Depository, not the grassy knoll, as the firing source.
Following this rather unpersuasive prelude, Blakey called Mark Weiss and Ernest Aschkenasy to testify.
But he had a worthy adversary in HSCA deputy chief counsel Gary Cornwell, who, in questioning McLain, conjured up the image of the lionhearted fighter who, though being clubbed to the canvas over and over again, continues to stagger to his feet for more punishment until miraculously, he ultimately prevails.
Since Curry gave this command on channel 2, this testimony by McLain seemingly tore the whole mathematically constructed theory of the HSCA asunder.
The committee knew that since the shots fired during the assassination were believed to have been recorded over Dallas radio channel 1, if McLain’s microphone was switched to channel 2, not 1, then the alleged gunfire transmission could not have come from his motorcycle.
McLain remembered catching up with the presidential limousine on the Stemmons Freeway as the motorcade crossed Continental Avenue during its race toward the hospital.
McLain by HSCA investigator Harold A Rose on September 26, 1977). tAlthough Cornwell’s carefully crafted questions had managed to elicit from McLain at least a little uncertainty over which channel his radio was set at on the day of the shooting , thereby still being able to hold onto McClain as the cyclist with the radio open to channel 1 whom they needed.
House Representative Robert W Edgar of Pennsylvania asked McLain whether, considering his duties that day as a motorcycle officer, it would have been common for him not to be on channel 2, which Chief Curry was using to handle the motorcade traffic.
During the course of his testimony, McLain identified himself in a series of still frames taken from two amateur films.
But by inference from his testimony, it couldn’t have been clearer that McLain himself did not share the HSCA’s conclusion.
As HSCA members Samuel Devine and Robert Edgar wrote in their dissent to the HSCA conclusion, “There is another reason to doubt the open-microphone evidence.
McLain of the Dallas Police Department was identified by the acoustics experts as being the operator of the motorcycle with an open mike to the left and rear of the President’s limousine.
But, apparently, the officer himself rejects the assumption, which led to the test and reenactments.
Barger added that he was “very pleased” to hear that Officer McLain’s memory of where he was relative to the time of the first shot did, in fact, correspond— though it clearly did not (McLain saying he was midway between Main and Elm on Houston, Barger estimating that the motorcycle with the open mike was very It should be noted that this quote from McLain is not in McLain’s HSCA’s published testimony.
The only challenge to the HSCA’s acoustic work at the time, ultimately rejected by Barger and the HSCA, was submitted by Anthony J Pellicano, president ofVoice Interpretation & Analysis Ltd. in Chicago.
Pellicano’s conclusions were based largely on the sound of sirens, which appear for the first time on the channel 1 open microphone recording more than two minutes after the presumed time of the shots.
Pellicano noted that channel 2 dispatcher Gerald D Henslee thought at the time that the open microphone was on the Stemmons Freeway, telling an officer handling security for the motorcade that there was an “unknown motorcycle officer up on Stemmons with his mike button stuck open on channel 1.
Barger testified that he disagreed with the claim that McLain’s motorcycle would have picked up the sound of Chief Curry’s siren immediately after the shooting if McLain had been where Barger said he was.
It would require the most unlikely and unreasonable of assumptions—that the presidential limousine itself didn’t have its siren on while en route to the hospital.
After working on the project for several months, Berkowitz disagreed completely with the HSCA acoustic experts.
Seconding Pellicano’s conclusion, not only did Berkowitz’s research find that the motorcycle that picked up the suspect impulses was parked somewhere outside of the motorcade through Dealey Plaza, but worse yet, he said the impulses weren’t even those of gunfire.
Indeed, a later report said that on the open mike channel 1 recording, the “clear and unambiguous sounds ... of sirens . . . from a group of at least 3 vehicles” could be heard.
And as Jim Bowles, who knew McLain well, said, “In an emergency situation an officer doesn’t add up and subtract sirens in an effort to decide what to do.
At the conclusion of the committee’s final hearing, Blakey had the Zapruder film shown again, this time synchronized to the 1978 test shots fired in Dealey Plaza, which had been edited to match the four sound events described by the acoustic experts.
Blakey later wrote, “It was as if we had all been returned to Dealey Plaza to hear, as well as see, the assassination.
On Sunday, December 31, 1978, the HSCA, in a seventeen-page report from Chairman Stokes to Clerk of the House Edmund L Henshaw, announced its judgment, reached after six hours of heated discussion behind closed doors, that “scientific acoustical evidence established a high probability that two gunmen fired at President John F Kennedy” and that the president was “probably assassinated as a result of a conspiracy.
Correlating the Zapruder film to the channel 1 Dictabelt, the committee additionally concluded that Oswald fired his first shot at 12:30:47.
But at the very eve of its dissolution last week, the committee,” in a “rush to judgment,” went off in a “diametrically opposite direction.
So just two weeks before the testimony of Weiss and Aschkenasy, and after two years of intensive investigation, the HSCA was prepared to conclude that there was no conspiracy in the assassination.
With just a survey map of Dealey Plaza, a ruler, a hand calculator, a length of string, and an oscilloscope, the two young professors from Queens got the HSCA to reject not only the findings of the Warren Commission, but also its own findings after two years of investigation.
If the fourthshot conspiracy conclusion of the professors at least had a little common sense behind it, that would be one thing.
The Justice Department, whom the HSCA asked to review the acoustic evidence among other things, responded with anger that the committee was asking the department to finish what the committee started.
The HSCA conclusion, if believed, also was in direct conflict with its own finding that 80 percent of the witnesses in Dealey Plaza heard three shots and 10 percent only two.
So 90 percent of the witnesses heard three or fewer shots, not hearing the fourth shot the HSCA came up with.
Therefore, the acoustic conclusion rejected the on-site hearing of 90 percent of the Dealey Plaza witnesses and accepted the hearing of 3. percent.
It didn’t take long for the HSCA’s questionable acoustic evidence to begin unraveling like a bargain-basement sweater.
McLain met with James C Bowles, who, as previously indicated, was a Dallas police radio dispatch supervisor around the time of the assassination, and Bowles gave him an opportunity to listen to both channels of the police radio transmissions, including the channel 1 recording that allegedly originated from McLain’s stuck microphone button.
While McLain recalled many of the motorcade instructions heard on channel 2, he didn’t recognize any of the sounds on channel 1.
Among them was the fact, he said, that the sound of the motorcycle clearly indicated the cycle was traveling way too fast to have been in the motorcade; though he had turned his siren on, there were no siren sounds from the motorcycle with the stuck microphone; and when the sound of sirens did appear, they seemed to be passing a stationary unit.
McLain felt he had been sucker-punched by the committee, coaxed into giving answers in response to counsel’s “could this be” questions that fit the committee’s acoustic theory.
Asked why he testified as he had in Washington, McLain replied that the committee’s counsel had asked him only “ could that have been my microphone, and I said, ‘Yeah, it could have been.
McLain is one of the important witnesses in the Kennedy assassination saga who has not been interviewed that much, so I decided to contact him, even at this late date, to see if there was anything he could add to his testimony published in the HSCA volumes.
In a series of conversations with him over a two-year period, there were a few points.
One is that he specifically asked the people from the HSCA who worked with him when he went back to Washington to let him listen to the channel 1 and 2 tapes.
Moreover, after he told me this, I looked in the HSCA volumes to see if there was any reference to this matter.
The only thing I could find, though not explicit, tends to support what McLain said.
The HSCA Report says, “McLain was asked by the committee to come to Washington to testify.
The Los Angeles Times’s Jerry Cohen, who was present in Dallas when McLain emerged from a room with Bowles after hearing the tapes, wrote in the next day’s Times, “McLain said committee members had not played the tapefs] for him Friday in Washington, but instead had shown him three photos of a motorcycle, which he identified as his.
It was even later, when I looked once again at what Jim Bowles had told Larry Sneed for Sneed’s book, No More Silence, that I saw something I had missed when Sneed’s book came out in 1998.
Bowles told Sneed that after he played the tapes for McLain when McLain returned from Washington, and McLain had told him there was no way it was his mike that was stuck open, and that the HSCA “didn’t let me hear those tapes,” Bowles said McLain added, “They just gave me what they wanted me to hear.
My conclusion is that Bowles, in his July 1990 interview with Sneed, was recounting a conversation with McLain twelve years earlier and simply misquoted McLain on this point.
When I called Cornwell, who is now practicing law in Beaumont, Texas, he said.
The importance of McLain being ordered to be on channel 2 and remembering many of the channel 2 transmissions during the motorcade cannot be overemphasized.
It literally, by itself, destroys the HSCA’s acoustic conclusion of a fourth shot—at least if the committee is basing it on McLain being the cyclist with the open microphone.
The second point McLain wanted to make, after repeating that he was “sure” the stuck mike was not his, was that the sound on the channel 1 cycle was “not the sound” of his cycle, a two-wheeler that day, explaining that he had ridden “both twoand three-wheelers” on the force, and “this was a three-wheeler.
He added, “These people back there had already made up their minds and they tried to tell us what happened and they weren’t there.
They had a specific place where they needed know why I wouldn’t have let him listen to them, unless there was some obstacle like the tapes not being in my hands, or a recorder not being easily accessible, or we were rushed for time.
He said he does not recall telling McLain that there was no need for him to hear the tapes.
A former Dallas police officer who knows and likes McLain told me that “this was fifteen years later, and H B. simply got rattled in his testimony” (Telephone interview of former Dallas police officer, who spoke to me for nonattribution, on January 20, 2006). tDallas Police motorcyclist Bobby Joe Dale, who was a part of the motorcade, told me he has a copy of the subject channel 1 tape and that he and others in his unit were all convinced that the sound of the motorcycle engine on the tape “clearly sounded like that of a three-wheeler.
McLain by author on April 1, 2004, May 26, 2004, June 1, 2005, and January 11, 2006) Returning to the all-important matter of McLain recognizing many of the channel 2 transmissions when Bowles had him listen to the tapes in Dallas, I called Bowles and asked him if, assuming for the sake of argument that McLain was on channel 2 and heard Curry’s instructions, this would mean, by definition, that he could not have had a stuck mike on channel 1.
If it had been stuck on open, he would not have been able to hear any broadcast.
Also, by being on channel 2, he could not have had any activity of any kind in connection with channel 1.
For confirmation of the fact that all cyclists in the motorcade like McLain literally had to be on channel 2 during the motorcade, I called some Dallas police motorcycle escorts in the motorcade.
Bobby Joe Dale (who was pulling up the rear on Houston at the time of the shots) said he “was on channel 2” at the time of the shooting.
There were no communications by motorcade officers on channel 1 during the motorcade or within minutes after the shooting” (Telephone interview of Jim Bowles by author on January 29, 2006). tThe police radio on a motorcycle has two components, the receiver and the transmitter.
The receiver has two positions for operation, channels 1 and 2, which the cyclist chooses with the selector switch.
It was the “push-to-talk button ” that would be stuck in the “on” position.
Courson agreed that “if McLain was on channel 2 like everyone else, and as he was supposed to be, it would have been impossible for him to have an open mike on channel 1.
Lumpkin was on the left side of Elm, Leon Gray was in the middle, and Steve Ellis was on the right.
When I spoke to Lumpkin, he couldn’t remember the number of the channel he was on, but he said that “I know that all of us in the escort were on the same channel, the motorcade channel,” which is the same as telling me he was on channel 2.
His lengthy 1979 rebuttal, eventually published in 1993 as an appendix to Gary Savage’s JFK First Day Evidence , offers such a wealth of information that had the HSCA been privy to his insights, it might have saved itself a great deal of time, money, and embarrassment.
When Bowles learned about the HSCA’s investigation of the police Dictabelt, he immediately contacted HSCA investigator Jack Moriarty, whom he knew, and offered to tell the HSCA all he knew about the tapes and the interpretation of them.
Indeed, as noted earlier, it was Bowles who converted the tapes into transcript form for the Warren Commission.
When a few months went by and he didn’t hear back from Moriarty, Bowles called Moriarty to find out why he wasn’t receiving a subpoena to testify.
Moriarty told Bowles, “Blakey has decided not to call you as a witness.
None of the characteristics of a motorcycle escort are heard in the channel 1 recording.
The motorcycles accompanying the motorcade are known to have stopped periodically to maintain their position alongside the motorcade vehicles; revved their engines in short, attention-gathering bursts to help move crowds back out of the street; and made additional brief stops as the motorcade navigated accordion-like turns at intersections like Main and Houston.
Instead, there is the steady, uninterrupted beat of an engine moving at more than three times the known speed of the motorcade.
In addition, Bowles found the recording is conspicuously absent of crowd noise, which he said can clearly be heard “on at least ten channel 2 transmissions” emanating from the motorcade.
Moreover, it is difficult to imagine that the open microphone was so unreceptive to sound that it could not pick up any part of the sounds of the large, cheering crowd, which were amplified by the canyon-like effect of buildings around them on Main before turning onto Houston, the inevitable very loud noise apparently being reduced to complete nonexistence on the police microphone.
Bowles, who should know, pointed out that the HSCA acoustic experts only concerned themselves with the possible sounds of gunshots on the tape and never analyzed the motor sounds of the cycle.
The Investigations performance, over-head-74” cycle that McLain was riding.
This fact alone, he said, “conclusively eliminated McLain as the suspect operator” of the open mike cycle.
The HSCA, in its attempt to explain away the sound of sirens that first appear approximately two minutes after the shooting, and then appear to rise and recede in intensity,^ a fact conceded by the HSCA , offered a variety of what Bowles calls “foolish” explanations, none of which hold up under scrutiny.
Number one, “you don’t ‘forget’ or decide not to use your siren,” as the HSCA suggested was the case with McLain.
Number two, had the motorcade been given a 15to 20-second head start on McLain (as the committee postulates), because of traffic it would have been physically impossible for him to catch up within two minutes, let alone pass the cars in the motorcade, which were traveling at high speeds.
Nor could he have then fallen back (as the committee suggests to explain the sirens fading out) since McLain was one of the first to arrive at the hospital, assisting Mrs.
More importantly, Bowles pointed out the HSCA’s own internal contradiction that while McLain was allegedly catching up with the rest of the motorcade (which would have required *Bowles, echoing McLain, told me, “There’s a more precision, shall I say ‘executive’ sound and tone on the two-wheeler than the little flathead engine on the three-wheeler.
It’s like listening to the difference between a new Lincoln and a Model-T” . tBowles said that the “siren episode” started at 12:33:01 on the channel 1 tape and continued for some thirty-three seconds to 12:33:34.
In a telephone interview and a letter to me, Bowles elaborated on the Doppler effect.
It’s more than just a sound rising and then receding in intensity, which anyone could hear and which would not justify attributing the name of an individual to it.
It refers, Bowles said, to the “instant” when the change in sound occurs.
In this case here, Bowles said that “at 12:33:01, channel 1 recorded the starting of low siren sounds.
Bowles said, “It is impossible to ignore the Doppler effect which occurred at the time and place where the motorcade was, and where the open microphone had to be as well.
The HSCA acknowledged the Doppler effect [actually, the HSCA didn’t, only acknowledging the sound rising and receding in intensity, an acknowledgment, however, that automatically would give rise to the Doppler effect] and at the correct time, but conveniently ignored it thereafter without an explanation why.
This was the only time and place where the Doppler effect could have and did happen.
Bowles concluded that the open mike was most likely among a group of three-wheelers dispatched to a motor pool detail at the Trade Mart awaiting the president’s arrival for his scheduled luncheon.
Bowles added that to believe that McLain’s motorcycle carried the open microphone is to believe that a truly incredible thing happened.
In addition, he would have heard absolutely nothing that he had been trained, prepared and expecting to hear—vital motorcade instructions from Chief Curry for the conduct of the motorcade.
Bowles said the HSCA “carefully calculated their intended direction, then carefully worded their questions to elicit the desired answers.
Unless it is wholly impossible, the only truthful answer would be ‘yes.’ was not asked to relate to probabilities.
McLain was carefully coached into giving answers which supported counsel’s preconceived positions.
By limiting the range of information available to him, they allowed McLain to consider only that material which they had selected.
Although Bowles himself was not present during these tests, he said that the Dallas Police Department had a motorcycle with its engine on in the plaza, and with an open mike picking up the sounds from the tests for transmission back to the Dictabelt at the dispatcher’s office.
He assumed that the HSCA acoustic experts had used Dallas Police Department radios to conduct their tests.
After this there are no voices for ten seconds and then you clearly hear the sound of gunshot, even the echo, on the tape.
This sequence was repeated on the tape several times, all followed by a clearly audible shot.
What Bowles has in his possession is extremely powerful evidence that by itself refutes the HSCA’s conclusion of a fourth shot in Dealey Plaza.
When I called Blakey for his response to Bowles’s tape, he didn’t question the tape’s authenticity but reaffirmed that the HSCA used thirty-six microphones to pick up the sounds, not a Dallas police motorcycle with an open mike.
When I said that my readers would find it difficult to understand why the HSCA “would not attempt to do everything possible to replicate the exact conditions that existed in Dealey Plaza on November 22, 1963, including using an open microphone on a Dallas police motorcycle, and a Dallas police Dictaphone and Dictabelt to record the sound,” I have to say I was surprised when I heard Blakey say, “We did not attempt to replicate or reconstruct what happened in 1963.
We went there to scientifically measure sounds in Dealey Plaza from the firing of the rifle and pistol.
At 12:33:01 the open mike picked up the sounds of sirens on Industrial Boulevard approaching the open microphone.
The microphone was mounted in the same place, in the middle of the crossbar that extends between the left and right handlebars.
The engine was still about 18 to 20 inches below the mike, separated by the gas tank.
Yes, but the weight of the evidence is lessened by the fact that it surfaced publicly so very late, even though it was always supposedly available.
In my December 8,2005, telephone interview with Bowles, he casually mentioned to me that it was “Willie Price’s three-wheeler at the Trade Mart” that had the open mike.
I had never heard of Price’s name before and was taken aback by the matter-of-fact reference to him, someone who supposedly could clear up the mystery of the open mike and in the process, by himself, demolish the HSCA acoustic conclusion.
Bowles’s full transcription is in Gary Savage’s book, JFK First Day Evidence.
It was common knowledge in the traffic division that it was Willie’s cycle.
Bowles proceeded to tell me that he did tell HSCA investigator Jack Moriarty about Price, but had no way of knowing if Moriarty passed this information on to HSCA chief counsel Blakey.
When I asked Bowles if his interview with me was the first time he had mentioned Price’s name to anyone outside of Moriarty and Dallas law enforcement, he said no, he had told Larry Sneed for his book, No More Silence , in a July 11, 1990, taped interview.
Bowles sent me the transcription of the portion of the tape that dealt with this matter, and although Bowles doesn’t mention Price’s name, he alludes to Price in response to Sneed’s statement that “obviously, you don’t believe the motorcycle was present in Dealey Plaza,” by saying, “I can’t because I know whose motorcycle it was.
He [Bowles says he was referring here to Moriarty] knows whose motorcycle it was.
There were several people who knew whose motorcycle had the stuck transmitter.
But the main thing is, the man has had a heart attack, and his wife had a heart attack.
Sneed did not put the above portion of his interview of Bowles in his book.
He kept telling me he had “no proof” it was Price, despite my telling him more than once I knew he didn’t, that I only wanted to know if it was “common knowledge” it was Price.
The officer was so weak that it was clear to me he didn’t want me to use his name in the book, and when I told him I wouldn’t, he was relieved.
CE 705, 17 H 462) I decided to call McLain to get his input on this issue and when I did, he said, “No, it wasn’t Price.
When I got back from Washington, J C. and I tried to figure out who it was and we concluded it was Leslie Beilharz.
When I called Bowles back, he said he always knew that Beilharz “was a possibility,” but that he still thought it was Price because Price had told him and other people his mike was stuck that day and Beilharz had only said his “might” have been.
Also, in a sketch with measurements Bowles had prepared (which he sent me a copy of), Price’s location at the Trade Mart in the motorpool area, per Bowles, “lines up perfectly with the Doppler effect,” whereas Beilharz’s position on Industrial Boulevard right next to the Trade Mart did not.
Per my suggestion, Bowles called Beilharz and played him the tape over the phone and Beilharz said he was unable to verify that it was his whistling on the tape.
One was former Dallas police officer Paul Bentley, who helped take Oswald into custody at the Texas Theater.
However, he said, “I heard other names too,” though he couldn’t recall these other names.
When I told Professor Blakey about Bowles’s assertion that he told Moriarty about Willie Price having the open mike and asked him if Moriarty told him this, he said, “I don’t remember Moriarty telling me that Bowles thought he knew the identity of the cyclist with the open mike, and the name Willie Price rings no bell for me.
Moriarty was a fine investigator, and if anything he always told me more than I needed to know.
Blakey suggested I call his former chief deputy for the HSCA, Gary Cornwell.
Sheriff Bowles, a good and honorable man, admits to having a failing memory at his age of seventy-seven.
This conclusion of mine is reinforced by the fact that Bowles admits that Price was embarrassed and didn’t want to get involved, and this, together with the ill health of Price and his wife, is why he never mentioned Price’s name in his 1979 essay or his 1990 tape-recorded conversation with Sneed.
To believe the opposite I’d have to believe that Moriarty didn’t give Blakey Price’s name, which makes no sense, or that if he did, Blakey did not have his people contact Price, which would be a serious dereliction of duty that I simply do not believe Robert Blakey would engage in.
Yet Bowles is insistent he gave Moriarty Price’s name, saying he gave “Price’s name to Mr Moriarty because he and the committee were conducting a lawful investigation.
One has to realize that it is no honor to be identified as the officer who had the stuck mike on the day of the assassination, not just because a Dallas police motorcyclist was not supposed to have his mike stuck, and the fact that his was caused problems for the Dallas police dispatcher on the most important day in Dallas Police Department history, but because a United States congressional committee spent millions of dollars reinvestigating the assassination and concluded there was a conspiracy only because it believed there was a stuck mike in Dealey Plaza that picked up a fourth shot.
So perhaps most people, if it was their mike that was stuck, and they weren’t in Dealey Plaza, they wouldn’t be too eager or happy to acknowledge this.
This is why I’m inclined to give some weight to the statement made to me by former Dallas police officer Leslie Beilharz when I called him on a Saturday afternoon in January of2006.
He retired from the Dallas police in 1989 after thirty-five years, worked for the Department of Defense for several years, and then as a substitute high school teacher.
In recent years right through the present, he has worked four days a week as a security officer at a large Cadillac dealership in Dallas.
As an interesting aside in today’s more evanescent world, he and his wife not only have been living in the same Dallas home for forty-seven years, but also have had the same telephone number for close to half a century.
Beilharz told me that his assignment on the day of the assassination on his threewheeler cycle was to go to the Industrial off-ramp of the Stemmons Freeway near the Trade Mart and keep it closed to all traffic until the president was inside the Mart.
When he and Vernon Glasgow, the Dallas patrol officer assigned to ride on the back of his three-wheeler, saw the presidential motorcade drive by the Trade Mart at a high rate of speed without stopping and going into the Mart as scheduled, they left their assigned post and followed the motorcade.
He said the motorcade reached Parkland before he and Glasgow did, so he did not see the president being wheeled into the hospital.
When his three-wheeler arrived at Parkland, he walked into the emergency room area and someone told him it looked like the president was dead.
Then Beilharz proceeded to tell me, “When I called in ‘269 clear,’ at that moment I started hearing radio transmissions from the police dispatcher.
In addition to the point I made earlier, that having the stuck mike is nothing to be proud of, Beilharz’s credibility is further enhanced by the fact that he has never tried to profit from this in any way—monetarily by selling his story, or seeking publicity.
For instance, he has only told three people the above story, and in each case they called him.
He first told Bowles this in the late 1970s when Bowles asked him to come to his office to listen to the police tapes after the HSCA had completed its investigation.
Bowles then had a Dallas Morning News reporter call him on the phone about it, and then he received my call some thirty-five years later.
Bowles added that if it’s not a short but the mike is sticking anyway, you also, of course, have to bring it to the shop.
CE 705, 17 H 396) A very good argument could be made that it was Beilharz’s mike that was stuck open.
There is much evidence that the stuck mike was on a three-wheeler like Beilharz was on, not a two-wheeler like McLain was operating.
We can know from evidence already discussed that the motorcycle with the open, stuck mike was not in Dealey Plaza, but in a stationary location where the sirens of cars in the motorcade approached and then passed, which Beilharz’s location would fit perfectly.
What an incredible coincidence it would be that Beilharz just happens to be the only Dallas motorcyclist that he, Bowles, and McLain apparently knew who whistled all the time while on his cycle.
But there is one piece of evidence that by itself might prove it was not Beilharz’s mike.
And Bowles, listening to the transmissions subsequent to this point on the channel 1 tape, estimated to me that Beilharz called in (Beilharz’s transmission [“269.
I am through with my second assignment”] can be heard on the tape) from Parkland somewhere around 12:39.
But by this time, the open, stuck mike had already been cleared for three minutes, meaning that Beilharz did not clear any stuck mike at 12:39.
The only possibility, which Bowles and Beilharz agree on, is that while Beilharz was inside Parkland (for only, he said, around two minutes or so), the mike could have cleared itself (not uncommon, per Bowles and Beilharz) when, in the crowded, hectic situation in the parking area at Parkland Hospital, someone accidentally moved or jostled Beilharz’s three-wheeler.
CE 705, 17 H 396) When I asked Beilharz whether he had heard that it may have been Willie Price’s three-wheeler that had the stuck mike, he said he hadn’t.
When I asked him to try hard to recall, he said, “I believe I first heard about it being Willie’s mike by hearsay in the department back in 1963 and 1964.
And it was probably in 1978, around the time of the HSCA, that Willie told me personally that it was his mike.
When I asked him if he could give me the name of any other officer in the department who could personally attest to me that Price had told the officer it was his mike, he said he couldn’t.
Bowles told me that one of the officers I spoke to, in particular, had told him that Price had told him the stuck mike was his, and also that he knew that Price had his cycle into the repair shop after the assassination for some type of repair, the officer assuming it was to fix his microphone.
To go back to an important issue only touched on earlier, although the mathematics behind acoustic theory and the formulas used by Dr.
James Barger, Mark Weiss, and Ernest Aschkenasy to arrive at their conclusions are well over my head , it is obvious from their own testimony that for the acoustic evidence they developed to be valid, a motorcycle with an open microphone had to have been present at the precise location predicted by their statistical analysis.
In other words, the acoustic evidence still cannot stand without verification of the motorcycles’ existence where the HSCA acoustic experts placed it, since all of their conclusions stem from this locational premise.
According to HSCA chief counsel Blakey, the committee had the best evidence possible, photographic evidence that there was a motorcycle where the acoustic evidence had said it was.
Yet, from the very beginning it was obvious that the HSCA lacked the photographic support necessary to verify the work of its acoustic experts.
In fact, as you’ll see, the evidence that the HSCA ultimately relied on proves the experts were wrong.
As previously indicated, during his first public appearance before the HSCA on September 11, 1978, Dr.
Although the search for photographic verification reportedly continued after Barger testified, the HSCA’s primary focus was on reducing Barger’s uncertainty about a fourth shot from the grassy knoll.
As we’ve seen, to do that they turned to Mark Weiss and Ernest Aschkenasy.
Yet, Weiss and Aschkenasy’s calculations also assumed that Barger’s placement of the motorcycle with the open microphone was correct, a point that Barger himself conceded hadn’t yet been verified with films and photographs.
He would have been more accurate if he had said that the acoustic evidence would be destroyed by such proof.
Unfortunately, the Hughes film sequence ends before McLain’s motorcycle gets much farther north on Houston than the crosswalk at Main and Houston, which leaves the question of his exact position at the time of the shooting unresolved.
The Hughes film clearly shows that the presidential limousine had already turned the corner onto Elm before McLain started north on Houston,t increasing the distance, by around 20 to 30 feet, that McLain would have had to make up.
Since McLain would have no reason to concentrate on what car was “turning the corner,” and he was never asked, the Hughes fdm indicates he would have had to have seen, not the dark blue presidential limousine, but the black Cadillac Secret Service follow-up car or the steel-gray Lincoln vice presidential car.
Barger said that before the cycle slowed down to a greatly reduced speed, it had only been traveling around 11 mph (2 HSCA 68), which, of course, would never have allowed it to pick up the 50 to 70 feet it would have had to in order to get where the HSCA said it was at the time of the first shot.
It clearly appears that McLain didn’t close the gap between his motorcycle and the president’s car at all, which he would have had to do to validate Barger’s conclusion.
Although Barger testified that McLain closed the gap, he offered no evidence, only speculation.
And it is very noteworthy that with every opportunity to ask McLain on the witness stand if he, in fact, sped up on Houston (which he would have had to do to get to where the HSCA said he was), HSCA counsel carefully avoided this obvious question.
But when we turn to that page we find that McLain testified to no such thing.
Even though it acknowledged it was “not able to evaluate” Groden’s photographs, the HSCA inconsistently and gratuitously noted in its final report that these photographs “supported the committee’s conclusion” , an indication that at the very least the committee accepted Groden’s word that the additional evidence was further proof that McLain was indeed where the acoustic evidence predicted, and therefore, the acoustic work was valid and true.
According to Sprague, who had first seen the film when he visited Dorman back in 1967, the Dorman film depicted McLain’s motorcycle approaching the corner of Elm and Houston well after the last shot, not at the time of the first shot, as Groden claimed.
Sprague was equally hard on the Hughes film, pointing out what the HSCA should have already known, that McLain couldn’t have covered the distance necessary to verify the acoustic evidence in the 3.5-second period that Sprague estimated was available to him.
In essence, then, no motorcycle was in a position to transmit the sounds of gunfire.
In January 1980, Sprague wrote a letter to United States Attorney General Benjamin R Civiletti requesting an opportunity to meet with him personally to discuss information he supplied to the HSCA “concerning the analysis of the acoustical and photographic evidence of the assassination of President Kennedy,” explaining that “a few days before the committee’s final hearings on the acoustical evidence, which eventually led them to a conclusion of conspiracy, I called to their attention some important photographic evidence.
This evidence proves that the acoustical analysis by the committee’s outside consultants at Bolt Beranek and Newman, and by Professors Aschkenasy and Weiss, is faulty.
I called this faulty analysis to the attention of the outside consultants, the committee’s staff, and the committee’s members, both before the last hearings and during the hearings, as well as during the period when the staff was working on the final report.
Despite the early rumblings that the HSCA’s acoustic evidence was not all it was cracked up to be, the release of the committee’s final report in July of 1979 offered nothing to counter the criticism on the acoustic evidence, sticking to the conclusions reached during the eleventh-hour hearings the previous December.
Three members of the twelve-person HSCA panel vigorously dissented from the fourth-shot acoustic conclusion, contending that the evidence was insufficient.
However, he disagreed with the fourth-shot conclusion and later wrote a fourth dissent to the HSCA’s acoustic conclusion, but it was submitted too late to be included in the report.
Neither Blakey nor Chairman Stokes (Telephone interview of Louis Stokes by author on March 29, 2005) could recall if Burke voted.
A former staff member of the HSCA told me for nonattribution that Burke showed modest interest in her duties on the HSCA, which would tend to go in the direction of her not showing up to vote.
But since her apparent state of mind is that she was in favor of the conspiracy conclusion, I’m counting her, without assurance, as a vote for conspiracy based on the acoustic findings.
The bottom line is that four of the twelve HSCA members dissented to the HSCA’s conclusion of conspiracy based on the acoustic findings, and a fifth In a roll call vote of the HSCA’s conclusion of conspiracy on December 29, 1978, Burke was present but didn’t vote.
The vote in favor of conspiracy was 5 to 2, Dodd and Edgar being the dissenters.
The press jumped on the committee for embracing a “conspiracy” on such flimsy evidence.
Per the HSCA’s recommendation, the Justice Department turned the committee’s acoustics report over to the FBI in December of 1979 for reevaluation (Echoes of Conspiracy, 2EOC10.1, November 9, 1980); however, little was accomplished during the next seven months.
In July 1980, former HSCA chief counsel Robert Blakey, confident that the Justice Department’s reevaluation would validate the HSCA’s acoustic work, complained that the federal government was dragging its heels.
In reaching his conclusion of four shots, Blakey didn’t put his own two and two together.
We know he firmly believes that Kennedy was hit only twice, both shots coming from the three shots fired by Oswald to Kennedy’s right rear.
We also know the learned professor believes organized crime was behind the assassination, no one else.
Therefore, the gunman who he believes fired one shot at Kennedy from the grassy knoll had to have been employed by organized crime.
So if Blakey is right about a fourth shot being fired from the grassy knoll, this means that even if organized crime employed Oswald to shoot at Kennedy , it also, in planning to commit the biggest murder in its history, employed a rifleman to shoot at Kennedy from the grassy knoll.
And he turned out to be such a horrendously bad shot that not only didn’t he hit any part of Kennedy’s body, he couldn’t even hit any part of the presidential limousine.
Dennis denied that department investigators were stalling but admitted that they had not yet worked out a procedure for the acoustic reevaluation.
Dennis said that if the evidence proved that more than one person was involved, the department was prepared to reopen the case.
This extreme unlikelihood, completely apart from all the evidence, points irresistibly away from the HSCA’s second-gunman-on-the-grassy-knoll position.
The charge by the critics that the Justice Department was stalling continued unabated.
In an October 1980 letter to former HSCA chairman Louis Stokes, Robert L Keuch, special counsel to the attorney general, defended the Justice Department’s efforts, writing, “In November, 1979, the FBI was asked to conduct a series of specific . . . investigative tasks” based on information from the HSCA, the public, and earlier FBI investigations.
Keuch wrote that the FBI, CIA, and National Security Agency were all asked to help review the acoustic evidence, but the CIA and NSA stated that they didn’t have the “specialized equipment or expert personnel” to help.
The FBI report concluded that the HSCA experts failed to prove either that the recorded sounds were shots or that they came from Dealey Plaza.
In fact, FBI investigators found that using the same correlation method advocated by both BBN and Weiss and Aschkenasy, they could match the recorded sound of a gunshot fired in Greensboro, North Carolina, in 1979 with the impulse sounds on the 1963 Dallas police tapes thought by the HSCA acoustic experts to be a shot fired from the grassy knoll.
Finally, the FBI report pointed out that it was impossible to determine how Weiss and Aschkenasy arrived at the conclusion that the impulse sounds were the result of a gunshot blast and not some other sound.
The FBI noted that scientific literature shows that all sounds produce echoes off hard surfaces, one of the ways the HSCA acoustic team said they had determined these were gunshots.
Second, detecting a shock wave (the other way Weiss and Aschkenasy attempted to distinguish sounds) accurately is very difficult, even under highquality forensic conditions, since the shock wave itself produces a set of delay echoes which combine and change many characteristics of the muzzle blast sound.
In sum, the FBI’s Technical Services Division concluded that the findings of the HSCA’s three acoustic experts were almost a joke.
Television cameras captured the moment, including the sounds of gunshots.
We find that the FBI failed to understand either the methods that we used or the nature of the problem that was posed to us.
Meanwhile, CBA chairman Norman Ramsey began distributing copies of the HSCA acoustic report and the FBI Technical Services Division report to members of the CBA for study prior to their first scheduled meeting, set for late January 1981.
While the HSCA acousticians worked on the project for eight and a half months, the CBA would eventually take more than fifteen months to study all the existing reports and conduct its own independent investigation before issuing its ninety-six-page report.
Of particular interest to Ramsey and other members of the CBA was a letter they had received from a citizen, which ultimately proved to be central to their final report and devastating to the HSCA’s conclusion that there was a second gun in the Kennedy assassination.
In the summer of 1979, Steve Barber, a twenty-four-year-old musician from Shelby, Ohio, who describes himself as a “progressive rock-jazz drummer,” picked up a copy of the July issue of the girlie magazine Gallery after learning that as part of the magazine’s special coverage on the JFK assassination it contained a thin, plastic, tear-out, three-minute SSW-rpm recording of excerpts of the transmissions from Dallas police radio channel 1.
The excerpts included the segment on which the HSCA had based its conspiratorial finding.
At his home on September 12,1980, and using, he said, a “beat-up turntable with a cheap Montgomery Ward Airline receiver,” Barber, who at the time believed there was a conspiracy in the assassination, transferred the recording to magnetic audiotape and began to study the sounds picked up by the open microphone.
But he apparently had retained enough of his auditory capacity to make a startling discovery, hearing something that all of the experts had not.
That he discovered it from a cheap, multigenerational recording makes his finding even more remarkable.
Right at the point where the channel 1 recording was thought to have captured the sound of gunfire, Barber heard a faint transmission that sounded like a portion of something that Dallas sheriff Bill Decker had said over channel 2 of the police radio shortly after the assassination.
Nova, PBS, November 15,1988) About a minute after the shooting, Decker instructed the Dallas police radio dispatcher to “have Station Five move all men available out of my department back into the railroad yards there in an effort to try to determine just what and where it happened down there, and hold everything secure until the homicide and other investigators can get there” (NAS-CBA DPD Tapes, C2,12:31 m.
Barber assumed that the channel 1 open microphone must have gotten close enough to a second police radio that was receiving broadcasts from channel 2 and that it inadvertently picked up part of Decker’s message and rebroadcast it over channel 1.
This phenomenon, known as cross talk, is quite common and, in fact, occurs at many points throughout the Dallas police radio transmissions of November 22, 1963.
However, Barber noted that this particular instance of cross talk might prove to be the undoing of the HSCA’s conclusion that the tape recording contained the sounds of gunfire in Dealey Plaza.
He pointed out that the complete recording of channel 2, over which Sheriff Decker was broadcasting, showed that he made the “hold everything secure” transmission approximately one minute after Steve Barber’s discovery of cross talk, per se, during the open microphone segment was nothing new.
That led Barber to the unavoidable conclusion that, if he was right about the identification and timing of the Decker cross talk, the impulse sounds identified by the HSCA acoustic experts as gunfire could not have been gunshots ., and hence, the HSCA’s conclusion that there was a high probability that two gunmen had fired at President Kennedy was invalid.
To resolve the issue scientifically, the CBA turned to the FBI’s Technical Services Division and had investigators there use their exceptional sound analysis equipment to produce sound spectrograms, or “voiceprints,” of the Decker transmissions as heard over channels 1 and 2 of the Dallas police radio.
They found twenty-seven points of correlation over the course of the three-and-a-half-second transmission, leading them to conclude that what Steve Barber thought he heard was true— Decker’s “hold everything secure” transmission on channel 2 was indeed picked up as cross talk on channel 1, and did in fact overlap the impulse sounds identified by the HSCA as gunfire.
This is particularly devastating since the HSCA staff A spectrogram is a photograph of sound frequencies that plots the elapsed time of sounds along the horizontal axis, the frequency along the vertical axis, and the intensity of the frequency in shades of gray, with the darkest shades representing the loudest portions of the sound . tDr.
Barger’s report to the HSCA erroneously said that Dallas police radio dispatchers for channels 1 and 2 used two different clocks that were synchronized with each other at the beginning of each month.
Police tapes “read out” the time “in full minutes only,” though estimates of the seconds into each minute could be made from the transmissions after each minute.
An FBI study concluded that by the end of each month the clocks could differ by as much as one minute.
The HSCA’s “best estimate” as to the time of the first shot in Dealey Plaza as indicated frc t n ms on the channel 2 clock was 12:30:12m., and on the channel 1 clock, 12:30:47 m.
It has to be noted that irrespective of the precise time of the shooting in Dealey Plaza, the CBA said that “the President received his mortal shot at least 30. seconds before the impulses” on the channel 1 tapes identified by Barger, Weiss, and Aschkenasy as gunshots.
Additionally, as opposed to the channel 1 recorder, which ran continuously through the period in question, the channel 2 recorder operated intermittently and was supposed to stop after 4 seconds of silence.
So the CBA said that this “missing time” had to be added to the “at least 30. seconds” for the channel 1 tape.
Analyzing the “missing time” on the channel 2 recorder around the time of the assassination, the CBA concluded that one minute was the approximate time after the shooting that the impulse sounds took place.
The CBA findings were consistent with the conclusion that the stuck mike was not in Dealey Plaza.
For instance, the CBA said that “no siren sounds are heard on channel 1 at a time when they should have been heard by an open microphone in the motorcade ; sirens are not heard for approximately two minutes after the impulses attributed by BRSW/WA to assassination shots, following which clear and unambiguous sounds from a group of sirens occur on channel 1.
The sirens seem to come from a group of at least 3 vehicles with the intensity of the sound first increasing and then decreasing.
This is consistent with sirens heard at a stationary point if the presidential motorcade had passed close by.
Completely apart from all the elegant and esoteric mathematical computations that Barger and his associates used, simple common sense tells us that the open mike was not, as the HSCA concluded, in Dealey Plaza at the time of the assassination.
This resulted, the CBA report said, in the omission of a “number of essential tests to confirm” their findings.
One test that Weiss and Aschkenasy omitted was so basic that even I, a nonscientist, recognized that it had to be done.
Scientists always try to test their hypotheses against known realities.
This is so fundamental that it is even done in such scientifically superficial disciplines as polygraphy.
Though I’m not an expert on polygraphy, I know from my days down at the Los Angeles DA’s office that polygraphers always ask “control questions,” questions that are unrelated to the matter the subject is being questioned about, but which the subject will almost assuredly lie about.
In fact, sometimes the polygrapher will even tell the subject, when asking his name, to give a false name.
The physiological response to the control question is then used as a basis for comparison with answers the subject gives to questions germane to the matter under investigation.
The results of such an analysis,” the CBA said, could “not be considered reliable” unless the method had been “adequately tested on some other cases.
When the CBA scientists released their final report on May 14, 1982, proponents of the HSCA’s acoustic work were quick to react to the news.
Blakey, though initially shaken by the scientists’ conclusion, ultimately thought their study was inadequate.
But they did conclude that the four impulse sounds, whatever they were, could not have been gunshots fired at President Kennedy.
And since, as assassination researcher Todd Vaughn says, “the acoustical tests were the basis for their conclusion of conspiracy” (Livingstone, Killing the Truth ,348), the HSCA’s legs had been cut out from under them.
Not a single soul saw a gunman firing from the grassy knoll, nor was any physical evidence ever produced to suggest that shots had been fired from that location.
Finally, Blakey’s claim that the HSCA acoustic evidence matched the Zapruder film “so well” is incorrect.
As we’ve shown in the section on the Zapruder film in the text, only the HSCA’s proposed first and last shots seem to fit the images captured on film.
Likewise, there is absolutely no visual evidence on the Zapruder film of a bullet strike coinciding with the HSCA’s supposed third shot at Z295-296, the one allegedly fired from the grassy knoll.
Blakey immediately sent a copy of the CBA Report by overnight mail to Barger.
The CBA Report must have hit Barger hard because he took more than eight months to respond to Blakey, the man whom he had unwittingly led down a road to professional embarrassment.
Barger wrote, “Barber discovered a very weak spoken phrase on the DPD Dictabelt recording that is heard at about the time of the sound impulses we concluded were probably caused by the fourth shot.
The NAS Committee has shown to our satisfaction that this phrase has the same origin as the same phrase heard also on the Audograph recording.
The common phrase is heard on Channel 2 about a minute after the assassination would appear, from the context, to have taken place.
Barger did not want to let Blakey and the HSCA drown without at least holding on to one end of the rope they were grasping.
Barger, in flat-out, direct contradiction to what he had just written, went on to tell Blakey that the CBA “did not examine the several items of evidence that corroborated our original findings, so that we still agree with the HSCA’s conclusion that our findings were corroborated,” adding that “further analysis is needed to decide whether the Barber hypothesis is correct,” and suggested several ways to test it.
They were not about to abandon the only scientific evidence they have ever found which allows them to argue, albeit incorrectly, that multiple gunmen fired on the I guess I’m dating myself by reference to this routine sign-off by 1940s radio comedians George Burns and Gracie Allen.
Trying to keep the acoustic argument alive by throwing a few logs on the fire, Mack charged in his newly founded conspiracy newsletter, Coverups!, that one of the flaws in the CBA’s debunking of the HSCA acoustic evidence was the CBA’s detection of “automatic gain control” within the Decker cross talk transmission.
Automatic gain control , or AGC, is a name given to specialized circuitry built into most radio equipment since the 1940s that allows a radio signal to automatically adjust the loud and soft sounds being received into a constant, consistent level.
Mack countered the CBA’s conclusion by claiming that engineers familiar with the 1963 Motorola Sensicon radio system used by the Dallas police “emphatically denied” that AGC was present in the circuitry and, therefore, could not have produced the effect detected by the committee.
Although the CBA scientists said they found the presence of AGC on both channel 1 and 2 police tapes, according to Mack the presence of AGC indicated that the Dictabelts in evidence were copies, not originals, and that such copies could easily have been altered (accidently or on purpose) to include the Decker cross talk transmission.
Of course, this explanation doesn’t take into account the fact that the channel 2 recording is time compressed, requiring anyone interested in faking cross talk on channel 1 to do much more than simply play the channel 2 recording in the background, as Mack suggests.
The advertisement lists an “input attenuator” present in the recording system.
The report, which picked up where the CBA left off on the issue of AGC, effectively eliminated the argument that the Decker cross talk was dubbed onto the recording after the fact, as Gary Mack and others alleged.
Yet, when the IBM team offered Mack an opportunity to present evidence in support of his claim, Mack failed to respond.
Garwin wrote, “I told Gary Mack that I would be most interested in a written report or letter from experts at Motorola, perhaps including test results on FM receivers.
I told him also that I would be willing to test such a receiver if they found it for me.
The only means of alteration left for the critics to maintain the Decker cross talk was a forgery is some form of editing, wherein the original Dictabelt sounds might have been copied to magnetic audiotape, altered, then recorded back onto a new Dictabelt to disguise the alteration.
Once the objectionable material is excised, the audiotape can be restored by rejoining the two remaining halves with adhesive tape.
The resulting taped splice can be “hidden” from anyone physically examining the audiotape by simply making a copy of the recording and presenting the copy as if it were the original.
Yet, we know that couldn’t have happened in this case because the Decker cross talk actually overlaps the impulse sounds the HSCA acousticians thought were gunshots.
The only way to achieve this overlapping effect is by taking the channel 1 and 2 recorded transmissions, playing them back simultaneously, and re-recording them onto a third recording medium—a possibility the CBA conclusively and effectively ruled out.
They determined that ENDNOTES what was thought by both HSCA acoustic teams to be the sound of a “bell” on the channel 1 recording (when there was no bell in Dealey Plaza, the closest being, Anthony Pellicano discovered, in the tower of a church near but not within earshot of Dealey Plaza) was actually an “electrical disturbance” recorded simultaneously on both channels 1 and 2.
This verified the relative speed and timing of the two channels, providing another means of synchronizing the two police channels independent of the Decker cross talk, again proving that the impulse sounds thought by the HSCA’s acoustic experts to be gunshots were recorded at least one minute after the assassination.
Die-hard critics continued to argue the merits of the acoustic evidence in obscure conspiracy publications and over Internet newsgroups as if nothing had been resolved.
Several years passed before a new Author Gerald Posner writes that Dallas sheriff Jim Bowles “discovered the source of the unusual bell tone on the tape.
This time the attack on the CBA’s finding came from a heavyweight, an expert on fruit flies.
On March 26, 2001, the Washington Post reported that a study published in the British journal Science & Justice , a quarterly from Britain’s Forensic Science Society, had validated the HSCA’s original conclusion that four shots were fired at President Kennedy, one of which was fired from the grassy knoll.
The author of the study, Donald B Thomas, an entomologist working for the United States Department of Agriculture’s Subtropical Research Laboratory in Weslaco, Texas, and a part-time conspiracy buff, told the Washington Post that “the failed to take into account the words of a Dallas patrolman that show the gunshot-like noises occurred at the exact instant that John F Kennedy was assassinated,” and that the odds were now only 1 in 100,000 that the CBA was correct in concluding that the impulse sounds, described as being gunshots by the HSCA, were recorded one minute after the assassination.
But in a poor parallel, just as a wise man can say something foolish and a foolish man something wise, Thomas cannot be blithely ignored, despite his background.
Thomas became interested in the Kennedy assassination after seeing Oliver Stone’s 1991 fictional epic JFK , and believed that the shot from the grassy knoll (number three in the HSCA’s sequence) was the one that killed the president.
Thomas, Fox & Friends, Fox Television Network, March 31, 2001; George Lardner Jr., “Study Backs Theory of ‘Grassy Knoll,’ New Report Says Second Gunman Fired at Kennedy,” Washington Post, March 26, 2001,A3) The heart of Thomas’s claim that the HSCA’s acoustic evidence was valid, and the CBA was wrong, centers around an instance of cross talk that appears on the channel 1 recording several minutes after the shooting.
When this cross talk is used to synchronize the two channels, it shows, he says, that the impulse sounds detected by the HSCA acoustic experts correlate exactly with the time of the assassination.
He believed that the channel 2 recording represented a nearly continuous recording during the 3-minute interval following the assassination (at one point going so far as to say, “No time was lost on channel 2 after the shooting”), a fact that is demonstrably false.
The new recording showed that, contrary to BBN’s linear regression analysis and Thomas’s subsequent claim, the channel 2 recorder did not run continuously during the 3-minute period after the assassination.
One wonders how all of this escaped Thomas’s attention, since he obviously must have had a copy of the CBA Report.
Just eight months after Blakey and some in the media had said that Thomas’s new study supported the conclusion that a second gunman fired at Kennedy, the Although Thomas seems to have been given credit by the conspiracy community for the Bellah cross talk “discovery” to attack the CBA findings, Gary Mack, who started the whole Dictabelt analysis movement back in 1976, was way ahead of Thomas.
Thomas, in his article, did not acknowledge Mack’s earlier discovery, but Mack said this was not intentional on Thomas’s part.
Mack satisfied that Thomas was “unaware” of his earlier discovery at the time he wrote his article.
Unlike his earlier pronouncement, which garnered a considerable amount of national press, Thomas’s retraction received no publicity.
In fact, his retraction was so unknown that even Blakey, one of the principal supportersof the acoustic fourth-bullet theory and someone who had trumpeted Thomas’s original report as corroborating Barger, Weiss, and Aschkenasy, never heard about it.
Neither did I until months later, and when I informed Blakey of it by telephone on November 15,2002, he could hardly believe it, saying he was “stunned” and that he intended to call Thomas immediately.
My guess is that there was no connection between Blakey’s presumed call to Thomas and a speech Thomas gave just eight days later at a JFK Lancer conference in Dallas, since Thomas’s speech was detailed and the transcript of it does not look like it was prepared at the last moment.
In his presentation at the conference, Thomas seemed to have all but forgotten what he had said a year earlier, concluding that the CBA’s “reliance on a single instance of crosstalk [the Decker transmission on Channel 2 picked up on Channel 1] does not establish a synchrony between the sounds identified as gunshots and the time of the assassination.
Right after these words, Thomas said, “But that doesn’t mean that the hypothesis is correct, only that the hypothesis is now plausible.
In Thomas’s November 23,2002, speech at the JFK Lancer Conference in Dallas, he came up with a second cross talk that he says confirms his position.
Thomas stated that “there are five . . . simulcasts during the motorcycle (with the stuck open microphone) segment.
Thomas believes that the Fisher transmission “I’ll check it,” on channel 2, can be found as cross talk on channel 1 at a point nearly simultaneous with the purported sound of shots.
If Thomas is right, as he believes he is, then the acoustic shots would be in sync with the actual time of the assassination as the HSCA concluded.
Since no one I know of has demonstrated the auditory ability to hear and decipher sounds on the Dallas police tapes as much as Steve Barber, I asked him to respond to Thomas’s allegation on the alleged Fisher cross talk.
Don Thomas, of course, needs the NAS-CBA to be wrong if the acoustic debate is to survive.
Of the five simulcasts or crosstalk instances mentioned by Don Thomas, four of them occur after the assassination.
The first of the ^'/-assassination simulcasts is known as the “Decker crosstalk,” which I discovered on channel 1 in September, 1980, and it occurred about a minute after the shooting.
The others that follow were made within 2 to 3 minutes of the Decker transmission.
The so-called “crosstalk instance” in dispute—the Fisher transmission—is the first of the five crosstalk instances mentioned by Thomas, though, in reality, it is not crosstalk at all.
Fisher in the minute before the assassination, is being picked up by the open microphone that the acoustic experts, Bolt, Beranek and Newman , said recorded the gunshots.
This transmission is called “crosstalk” by both Thomas and James C Bowles, the communications supervisor for the Dallas Police Department at the time of the assassination.
Thomas and Bowles believe that the suspect transmission heard on channel 1 is identical to a known transmission made by Deputy Chief Fisher on channel 2, and that this “crosstalk” ties channels 1 and 2 together just 2 seconds before the sounds identified as gunshots by BBN begin on the channel 1 recording.
Although Fisher did indeed say the words “I’ll check it” on channel 2,1 am extremely confident that these words were not picked up by the open microphone as crosstalk, and recorded into channel 1.
In the letter to me, Gary said, “The ‘Alright, Jackson’ statement was identified to me by Mark Weiss.
His conclusions came after the BBN report had been written, and was based on the original recording and the first generation tape copy.
Gary went on to say, “You’ve made several assumptions about the voice in your letter.
First, listening conclusions are almost useless when compared to scientific measurement, and when they come from a 10th generation recording (Gary is referring to the Gallery record) they are useless.
I’m not saying you’re wrong— I am saying that while you may be right, the vast weight of the evidence is that the name is Jackson.
What I find most impressive is the fact that the transmission is accompanied by heterodyne tones, a scientific impossibility if the transmission were actually “crosstalk” as Thomas and Bowles believe.
A heterodyne tone is an audible beep-like sound that occurs when a police officer attempts a radio transmission while another police officer is already transmitting over the same frequency.
Since the motorcycle with the open microphone was already transmitting sounds over channel 1, the moment the officer who said what sounds like “Alright, Chaney” opened his microphone, a heterodyne tone was produced.
The moment that officer stopped transmitting, the heterodyne tone stopped.
If one listens carefully to the transmission on channel 1 that Thomas and Bowles believe to be Deputy Chief Fisher, you will hear a heterodyne tone accompanying the transmission.
This is indicative of two competing open microphones attempting to share the same frequency simultaneously, not “crosstalk” as Thomas and Bowles surmise.
If the transmission in question was “crosstalk” (i.e., one open microphone was picking up the sounds of a second radio turned to another channel) there would be no accompanying heterodyne tone because two microphones would not be competing for the same frequency.
Only one microphone would be open—not two—if the suspect transmission was truly “crosstalk,” as Thomas and Bowles contend.
And if the “Fisher transmission” is not “crosstalk,” and I firmly believe the presence of heterodyne tones proves that it is not, then the “Fisher transmission” cannot be used to tie channels 1 and 2 together as Thomas and Bowles claim.
In addition to this, “I’ll check it” is not the complete transmission made by Fisher on channel 2.
Neither Bowles nor Thomas have accounted for the words “That’s alright” missing from the transmission they refer to as the Fisher crosstalk on channel 1.
In addition, a 2005 article published in the British “Scientist and Justice” journal written by authors Ralph Linsker, Richard L Garwin, Herman Chernoff, Paul Horowitz, and Norman F Ramsey—all prominent physics scientists who participated on the 1980-82 NAS-CBA panel— published sound spectograms establishing beyond question that the Fisher transmission on channel 2 and the crosstalk on channel 1, which Thomas erroneously believes to be identical, are in fact two separate and distinct transmissions—a point that I was able to deduce with my own ears.
But someone should inform Mr Thomas that scholars and historians have examined the documents released through the JFK Act and they offer no support for his position.
Professor Blakey has acknowledged to me that because of the CBA’s findings, “I have less confidence in the acoustics conclusion of a fourth shot than I once did.
A reasonable person could say, yes, the CBA conclusion of no acoustical evidence of a fourth shot is correct.
This, of course, has already been done, but computer animator and assassination researcher Dale Myers, using a sophisticated threedimensional computer model of Dealey Plaza (developed by Myers over the course of numerous trips to Dallas to take photographs and measurements), took the proof to a new level with his scale-model, computer-animated reconstruction of the motorcade through Dealey Plaza, for which he won an Emmy for graphic and artistic design in 2004.
Gary Mack told me he does not know of any study in support of Thomas’s position.
Though Mack himself agrees with Thomas, he said, “If there are any studies by others out there that agree with , I haven’t heard of them.” tYears of studies and counterstudies have left most uninformed Americans feeling rather confused about the validity of the acoustic evidence in the Kennedy assassination and whether there really is any hard evidence of a conspiracy in the murder.
The Kennedy Assassination: Beyond Conspiracy , ABC News Special, November 20, 2003; “Secrets of a Homicide: The JFK Assassination,” ©1995-2004, Dale K Myers) Indeed, if Myers is correct, McLain is also not where even McLain thought he was, midway between Main and Elm on Houston.
But both McLain and Myers agree on the critical point that McLain was nowhere near where the HSCA put him at the time of the assassination.
In fact, you can see Betzner lowering his camera in the sprocket area of the Zapruder film in succeeding frames.
Yet, according to the frame count, at least six In a letter to me, Blakey wrote that “putting aside the issue of proof (I can’t comment on computer reconstruction, as I have not seen the study to see if did it right)” on the ABC special, the special “did not show a photo of the position at the appointed time with no motorcycle in the appointed position.
I said that if it could be shown that no motorcycle was there, it would falsify my position.
But Blakey knows that his acoustic experts built their whole case around Officer McLain.
McLain is the only cyclist they specifically and expressly talked about (e.g., “Officer McLain’s motorcycle,” in Barger’s testimony in 5 HSCA 650), and McLain is the only Dallas police motorcyclist they took testimony from on the police Dictabelt issue.
Since the Dorman and Hughes films show no motorcyclist in front of McLain on Houston around this general time, and the closest cyclist to his rear was Jimmy Wayne Courson, who Blakey’s own HSCA Report says was “several car lengths” behind McLain , for Blakey, over twenty-five years later, to raise, I think for the first time, the possibility of an unknown cyclist being where McLain was supposed to be was surprising to me.
Clearly, McLain could not have been the one with an open microphone on his motorcycle, nor could anyone else in the motorcade, since both amateur films prove that there were no other motorcycles at the location and time that the acoustic evidence demanded.
The remarkable point is that not only do we know that neither the Hughes nor the Dorman footage “supported,” as the HSCA said , the HSCA’s conclusion as to where McLain was, but if the committee read what it wrote in one of its own volumes, the Hughes film, the main film it relied on, clearly disproved its own theory.
Blakey, to his credit, would later candidly write in his book The Plot to Kill the President that although Barger had not delivered for him and his people, “By this time we could not help feeling competThe exact amount of time that elapsed, Myers said, is not known because Dorman stopped filming for a brief period during this sequence.
The only way he could have reached that point in five seconds would have been for him to suddenly increase his speed to 23.1818 mph.
McLain wouldn’t have had any reason to do this and there is no evidence he did.
We had been led by the evidence to date to suspect an event that we had come to want to prove.
In the final analysis, the validity of the HSCA’s acoustic evidence collapses under the weight of its own requirements.
The HSCA presented no photographic or testimonial evidence that any police motorcycle with an open microphone was at the point on Houston Street where such a motorcycle would have had to be at the time of the assassination for its hypothesis to be possible.
More importantly, the very police Dictabelt recording that the HSCA relied on to conclude that a second gunman fired at the president proves beyond all doubt that the impulse sounds committee members thought were gunfire were recorded at least one minute after Oswald shot Kennedy in the head.
In addition, common sense tells us the fourthshot acoustic evidence must be wrong since it is completely incompatible with the overwhelming evidence in this case that only three shots were fired in Dealey Plaza, and those three shots came from the sniper’s nest.
That, of course, is not what conspiracy theorists would have you believe.
In the best of worlds, they would prefer that the question of conspiracy remain open.
Mack chastised Barber, writing, “There was a conspiracy— you know it and / know it.
Your theory may be right, but if it isn’t, someone is using it to conceal what really happened to President Kennedy.
But conspiracy theorists should think about what they’ve done, in this instance, to their own already rickety credibility, by clinging tenaciously to acoustic evidence of a fourth shot that exists only in their minds, not in reality.
As any prosecutor will tell you, if you can’t even rely on your own star witness, you’re in deep trouble.
The HSCA’s acoustic evidence has gone beyond being rendered void and invalid.
In the process, the HSCA’s acoustic experts also embarrassed Robert Blakey and the majority of the HSCA’s members whom they misled, though I’m sure unintentionally.
Human nature being what it is, it’s entirely conceivable that in their possible zeal to become famous by discovering a conspiracy in the Kennedy assassination, they stretched here and there to come up with whatever mathematical computations they could find which would provide the desired result.
Let’s not forget that although science and mathematics are themselves precise and objective, the way they are applied to a given set of circumstances can result in all kinds of mischievous falsehoods, a manifestation of Disraeli’s observation that there are three types of lies—lies, damned lies, and statistics.
What we do know is that the HSCA’s finding of a fourth shot from the grassy knoll has been so thoroughly discredited that it has become an indelible stain on its legacy, a very large asterisk to its otherwise excellent reinvestigation of the assassination.
Today, only those with a self-interest, the uninformed, and the fringe conspiracy community subscribe to the HSCA’s acoustic conclusion, the majority of the mainstream conspiracy community, though still strongly believing a shot or shots were fired from the grassy knoll, accepting the reality that the HSCA’s acoustic evidence did not stand up to scientific scrutiny.
A measure of the extent to which the Barger, Weiss, and Aschkenasy findings have been rejected is that in the London trial, where my opponent, Gerry Spence, used every argument and piece of evidence he and his staff could find to raise a reasonable doubt of Oswald’s guilt in the jury’s mind, thereby hopefully ensuring a verdict of not guilty, Spence never even raised the HSCA’s acoustic finding of the fourth shot, knowing how easy it would be for me to discredit it.
Other than the evidence, nothing is more important to a trial lawyer than his credibility with the jury.
And Spence, one of the greatest trial lawyers of our time, was not about to do something that he knew could only result in his looking foolish in the eyes of the jury.
That stain is darkened by the transparent effort the HSCA staff made to change their past findings so they would be compatible with their later and final acoustic-led draft.
In the December 13,1978, draft of their final report (at a time when Dr.
The game-playing by the HSCA staff to bolster the new conclusion of conspiracy extended elsewhere, though to a lesser extent.
With respect to the entire HSCA’s forensic pathology report, which of course would include the critique of the autopsy, one of the members of the forensic pathology panel, Dr.
But HSCA chief counsel G Robert Blakey told me that “all of the doctors had input.
But the notions of a very poor autopsy and a complete lack of qualification by the surgeons who conducted it have been perpetuated by those who were in a far better position than Dr.
Michael Baden, the distinguished head of the HSCA’s forensic pathology panel, and his coauthor Judith Adler Hennessee, in which a number of errors were made.
Baden, one of the top forensic pathologists in the nation, is an extremely busy man, and if I were to wager, he coauthored this book on the run, leaving much of the detail to his coauthor, who is not a doctor.
On page 9, the authors write, “He knew he had never done one [an autopsy from a death by gunshot] like it before.
On page 10, the authors write, “Colonel Finck, it turned out, had never done an autopsy involving a gunshot wound, either.
For almost a decade he had been in charge of reviewing the records of United States military personnel who had died of gunshot wounds.
Two people who were not professionally trained in what they were doing were watching each other.
Finck didn’t offer guidance because it never occurred to him that Humes needed any.
And Finck had been reviewing records of United States military personnel for two years, not a decade as the authors claim.
Pierre A Finck) In addition, Finck certainly did offer guidance and was there to assist Humes in every specific request of his.
In fact, Finck is known to have directed the procedures in the last part of the autopsy.
The only photographer authorized to take autopsy photos was John T Stringer Jr., the senior medical photographer at Bethesda.
Later testimony and affidavits show it actually took at least four hours to complete the autopsy.
Finck’s arrival, and shortly before the president’s body arrived at the Bethesda morgue, Dr.
Humes spotted “a guy with a speed graphic camera in the building and didn’t feel like running after him,” so he went to the loading dock, where the president was to be brought in, and where he saw several military people milling around.
General Wehle immediately dispatched someone to corral the photographer.
While reviewing the autopsy report the morning of November 24,1963, Dr.
McDonnel concluded that there was no evidence that the X-rays had been altered in any way.
Mantik, who claims that “this critical posterior area was never examined for authenticity,” says that in 1994 he took optical density readings from the area of the X-rays showing the 6.5-millimeter “fragment,” and that the results of his readings suggest that the cardboard was superimposed onto the X-ray film to create an object looking like a bullet fragment.
This Warren Commission and HSCA ballistic expert Larry Sturdivan and assassination researcher Dr.
Chad R Zimmerman have in later years analyzed the object seen in the X-rays.
Sturdivan concluded it was not a bullet fragment but Zimmerman is not sure.
Mantik says that since the object has the same diameter as the ammunition used in Oswald’s Mannlicher-Carcano rifle and it was in the back of the skull, this is consistent with a shot from the rear, where Oswald supposedly was located in the sniper’s nest at the sixth-floor window.
The thought that they would risk getting caught doing this to implicate Oswald in a case in which he and his rifle were already overwhelmingly connected to the assassination is irrational on its face.
The HSCA photographic panel likewise determined that the autopsy photographs had not been altered.
Zimmerman wrote that “Larry and I both believe that the 6. mm fragment on the frontal x-ray is real and was not added later, as Mantik posits.
Basically, Larry nor I know what it is because it wasn’t. . . retrieved.
I feel that it is real because of the lack of film grid lines in the surrounding area, which, in my opinion, are an absolute must... in order for it to be a post-autopsy forgery.
Since it is not seen on the lateral x-rays, it is by definition an artifact.
Mantik doesn’t want us to believe the “fragment” was superimposed on the X-rays after the Warren Commission had already concluded that Oswald was the lone gunman.
Indeed, in his 2001 writing on the subject, Mantik says the forgery was accomplished “shortly after the autopsy,” which would be before the Warren Report came out, ten months after the assassination.
But the single most important discovery, and one that establishes with absolute and irrefutable certainty that the autopsy photographs have not been altered, is the fact that many of the photographs, when combined in pairs, produce stereoscopic images.
Stereoscopic images enable us to see a photographic scene in three dimensions, as opposed to the normal two-dimensional view we’re used to seeing in family snapshots.
That’s because a pair of stereo images (i.e., two separate photographs, taken from two slightly different vantage points) adds depth to our perception in the same way our two eyes, separated by the space between them, perceive depth.
According to photographic expert and HSCA panel member Frank Scott, the ability to view an image stereoscopically allows the human eye to easily spot the differences between two photographs that make up the stereo pair.
Any attempt to alter either image causes the altered portion of the image to appear to “float” or lie either in front of or behind the plane or “space” in which it should actually be lying.
In short, a detailed stereoscopic image is impossible to alter without detection, and therefore, any pair of images that can be viewed in this manner, without revealing the obvious signs of forgery, have to be authentic.
Fortunately, the autopsy photographer who photographed the president’s body took two or more pictures, from approximately the same viewpoint, of each part of the body being photographed.
Some of these, because of the slight differences in the position of the camera, can be combined into stereoscopic pairs.
Another member of the photographic panel, Calvin McCamy, testified that he agreed with Scott’s conclusions, adding that in his own analysis, he discovered two additional views of the president’s body (the back wound and the throat wound) that could be seen stereoscopically and were Sawyer’s View-Master, produced by the Sawyer Corporation of Portland, Oregon, for children of all ages, is one of the most popular examples of commercially available stereoscopic viewers.
Two similar images, produced from the perspective of each eye, are assembled on a disk in such a way that when the disk is inserted into the viewer, the two images are combined into a single scene that exhibits apparent depth.
McCamy testified that on the issue of alteration of the photographs, he and his colleagues “considered the possibilities of various photographic techniques that could have been used in a train of events to produce these photographs.
Which means, of course, that all of the president’s wounds, as depicted in the autopsy photographs, are exactly as they appeared the night of the autopsy, and that the photographs have not been “doctored,” faked, or altered in any way.
This fact alone demolishes the conspiracy theorists’ allegations that photographic fakery was used to conceal the plot to kill the president.
It also destroys another prime conspiracy belief—that the eyewitness descriptions of the president’s wounds that were offered by the Parkland Hospital doctors (and later by some eyewitnesses to the autopsy) are proof that the autopsy photographs had been altered.
Obviously, if the autopsy photographs are genuine and unaltered , then eyewitness descriptions of the president’s wounds that contradict those photographs are not proof of alteration, as some critics claim, but nothing more than examples of understandable, mistaken recollections, or if not that, then deliberate and outright falsehoods.
Yet conspiracy theorists continue to tie themselves in knots trying to convince their converts not to give up the ship and go home.
One critic, Harrison Edward Livingstone, in his ironically titled book Killing the Truth , simply closes his eyes and pretends the HSCA accomplished nothing, proposing that the HSCA photographic panel “overlooked various matters and was seriously flawed in its work.
In fact, as Livingstone should know, all of the key autopsy photographs that show the president’s wounds, copies of which have been published in bootlegged form in a variety of conspiracy books (including Livingstone’s), produce stereoscopic images.
Lay witnesses at criminal and civil trials who have no photographic expertise at all routinely authenticate photographs under oath.
The widely held belief among students of the assassination that the bootlegged autopsy photographs are second-generation copies of the originals improperly obtained by Robert Groden when he was a photographic consultant for the HSCA in 1978 was confirmed by Groden himself.
Groden’s theft would have had to take place at the National Archives, where the autopsy photos were stored.
Indeed, in 2003, someone very high up in the HSCA hierarchy who wished to remain anonymous on this matter assured me he had “firsthand knowledge” of the fact that the FBI had investigated Groden and concluded Groden had stolen autopsy photos.
The family thought about it and decided against getting involved in a criminal case over the matter, and after consulting with their lawyers, also decided against bringing a civil action against Groden.
Though the HSCA claimed otherwise, the HSCA did not authenticate the images.
This accusation stems from a deceptive memorandum prepared by Doug Horne, the chief military analyst for the ARRB, and an avowed conspiracy theorist.
Horne found a March 27, 1978, letter from HSCA chief counsel Robert Blakey to Secretary of Defense Harold Brown that confirmed receipt of a navy camera from the Department of Defense on March 8,1978, that was possibly used to take the JFK autopsy photos.
If the navy was correct in saying that the camera it provided ‘‘‘'was indeed the camera used at the autopsy” (the navy only said the camera was “believed to be” the autopsy camera), then either, he says, all the autopsy photographs are authentic and were indeed taken by John Stringer, and a benign but Where does this allegation of Dr.
But apart from the great improbability that the HSCA staff was a bunch of criminals , Dr.
Aguilar doesn’t explain why the HSCA staff, which clearly was trying to prove a conspiracy (they ended up so concluding), would deliberately suppress evidence of a conspiracy.
This second possibility is apparently meant to conjure up images of a mysterious, unknown photographer shooting a second set of autopsy photographs after the autopsy was completed (a set of images that presumably concealed the true nature of the president’s wounds), which were then substituted for the official set of photographs taken by Stringer.
We know through stereoscopic analysis that the photographs in evidence (even if they are substitute photographs of the autopsy taken by someone other than Stringer) are authentic and unaltered.
We also know from the HSCA anthropologists and the odontologist that the skull is that of John F Kennedy.
What this all means is that irrespective of the camera and lens, whatever the photographs show must be the true condition of the president’s body at the time of the autopsy.
The authentication of the existing photographic collection eliminates the possibility that any photographs that might have disappeared from the collection, either by removal or by substitution, could show anything other than what we now see.
After all, there was only one body and the wounds in that body either show that shots were fired from the front or they don’t, no matter how many photographs are substituted or removed.
Surprisingly, this obvious fact seems to have escaped the conspiracy theorists.
The navy reported, “Although other lenses were also in use at the Medical Center during that time they have been replaced.
The answer to that question is in the testimony of the autopsy photographer, John Stringer, who said that “a 50-millimeter lens” would have normally been used to photograph an autopsy.
Stringer also testified, “We had a series of lenses that we could choose from,” including a 28-millimeter wide-angle lens.
The Kennedy autopsy photographs were clearly taken with a normal lens setting , as evidenced by the wide-ranging depth of field (i.e., the relative sharpness of both foreground and background detail in the image), which is uncharacteristic of a telephoto lens, and the lack of edge distortion, which is typical of wide-angle lens photography.
Both of these factors were no doubt the basis for the HSCA photographic panel’s findings.
Horne’s memo says that the HSCA reported that “the Department of Defense was unable to locate the camera and lens” used at the autopsy.
It further appears that the camera body located by the navy most likely was the one used at the autopsy.
When I spoke to Stringer, I learned that President Kennedy’s autopsy was Stringer’s first murder autopsy, although in Vietnam, where he was a medical photographer, he took autopsy photos of many soldiers who had died from gunshot wounds.
At the time of the assassination, Stringer was the director of medical photography at the National Naval Medical Center at Bethesda and had taken photos of fifty to sixty non-homicide autopsies, including of people who had died from accidents and those who had committed suicide by gunshot.
He said he only saw his Kennedy autopsy photos once, a few years after the assassination, and they appeared very clear to him.
Humes directed me to take the photos where he wanted a photo of, and an autopsy photo is an autopsy photo.
And, indeed, in the autopsy report, the 6millimeter measurement refers to the “scalp,” not the skull.
The autopsy report’s further statement that there was a “corresponding wound through the skull” is accurate in the sense that the wound to the skull was right behind the wound to the scalp and of a similar size, though there is no indication that the diameter of the skull wound was measured.
Conspiracy theorist Ronald D Rice has made the argument that since, at Zapruder frame 312, Jackie Kennedy appears to be almost in front of JFK to his left front, if a bullet had been fired by Oswald from Kennedy’s right rear it would have had to have gone on to hit Mrs.
Since we know it didn’t, this means, Rice argues, that the head shot did not come from Oswald at Kennedy’s right rear, but from some assassin to his left rear.
Although the contention of Rice and Smith cannot be dismissed out of hand, several realities negate it.
At frame 312, Kennedy’s head is turned somewhat to the left, and trajectory analyses by both the Warren Commission and the HSCA show that the entering bullet from behind, if proceeding on a relatively straight trajectory , would have exited right where we know it did, to Kennedy’s right front, not his left front where Jackie was.
Secondly, a bullet fired from Kennedy’s left rear, as posited by Rice, would be likely (though not for sure) to enter the left rear of Kennedy’s head whereas we know the bullet entered the right rear of his head.
Three of the pathologists for the HSCA had already reviewed part of the autopsy record and evidence: Dr.
Wecht, who went to the archives himself in 1972 to look at the photos and X-rays; and Dr.
Spitz and Weston were already on record as agreeing with the conclusion of the Warren Report, Wecht on record as being in disagreement.
Indeed, a pair of hands is seen in the photograph holding a ruler alongside the wound, as if measuring its location.
The HSCA forensic panel also noted that the stereoscopic viewing of a second series of photographs , identified by Drs.
The HSCA forensic panel reported that the anterior-posterior and right lateral X-ray views of the skull show a “sharp disruption” of the normal smooth contour of the skull 10 centimeters above the external occipital protuberance, from which radiates a number of fracture lines.
In a prepared statement to the House Committee on Government Operations (Conyers Committee) on November 17, 1993, Robertson said that from his examination of the autopsy X-rays he concluded that the autopsy surgeons and the HSCA were both correct, to a point.
Robertson claimed Kennedy “was killed when he was struck in the head by two bullets instead of one as previously reported,” and there were indeed two wounds in the back of his head, the one the autopsy surgeons saw, which was an entrance wound, and the one the HSCA saw (by X-rays and autopsy photos) close to 4 inches higher.
It’s astonishing that a professional man such as Robertson would take a position so patently erroneous.
To believe Robertson, one would have to believe that the three autopsy surgeons conspired to conceal from the world this second wound to the back of the president’s head.
One would also have to believe that all of the many other pathologists in later years who looked at the autopsy photos and X-rays either joined in the conspiracy or simply didn’t see the second wound.
Only Robertson, no one else, saw two wounds to the back of the president’s head.
Robertson also had no explanation for how a bullet entering the right front of the president’s skull could leave an exit wound that was small and circular, as the autopsy surgeons and HSCA said it was, as opposed to larger and irregular.
Leaving aside that they did not, as the autopsy surgeons did, actually see the wound, I say that for two main reasons.
First, even if I assume the autopsy surgeons were utterly incompetent (a proposition that, from the evidence, I have rejected), they didn’t have to be skilled forensic patholoigsts to see, with their own eyes, an entrance wound which they all agree was “slightly above” the external occiptal protuberance.
In fact, you or I or the local cabbie is as capable as the most skilled forensic pathologists in the world at looking at the distance between the bone and a hole in the head and estimating the distance.
That the three autopsy surgeons would use the words “slightly above” to describe four inches somehow doesn’t ring true to me.
It may be that the location of the entrance wound was somewhere between where the autopsy surgeons and the later pathologists said it was.
But if, indeed, the autopsy surgeons were correct on the lower location of the head entrance wound, how this would affect the trajectory analyses, and be compatible with the minute missile fragments traversing on a line from back to front higher up on the head, is beyond my knowledge and expertise.
However, we mustn’t forget that since the president’s head was inclined slightly forward at the time of the head shot, a bullet traveling on a downward trajectory would be proceeding on a higher path, anatomically, through the president’s head.
Quizzed as to what the lesion in the cowlick area could be if not the entrance wound, the three autopsy pathologists had little to offer.
Of course, the HSCA and Clark Panel based their opinions not only on the autopsy photographs but also on the autopsy Xrays.
Although you would think this would have been the end of it, it wasn’t.
Despite the overwhelming evidence that the autopsy report is in error with regard to the precise location of the entrance wound and despite his somewhat vague concession in open hearings that the HSCA forensic panel (and the earlier Clark and Rockefeller panels) were correct in placing the entrance wound about 4 inches above the external occipital protuberance, Dr.
Humes dug in his heels and stubbornly repeated his belief that when it comes to locating the entrance wound in the back of the head, the accurate record is the autopsy report.
Any suggestion that Humes might have been misquoted in the JAMA article was dispelled when Drs.
Humes and Boswell wrote a joint letter to the editors of JAMA in 1992 stating, “The appearance and location of the President’s wounds were exactly as described in the original autopsy report.
That report was prepared within 48 hours of the assassination and delivered to the White House physician early in the evening of November 24,1963.
Humes had changed his mind before the HSCA, but “I’ve talked with him since then.
Posner said that the pathologists told him they had erred, that the wound was indeed 10 centimeters higher than what they wrote in the 1963 autopsy report and reported to JAMA in 1992.
Posner’s assertion has since been challenged by assassination researcher Dr.
Boswell in the spring of 1994 in which Boswell denied having the subject conversation with Posner.
Humes and Boswell, they asked him for his notes of the conversation and Posner said he would furnish them to the board if Humes and Boswell would agree to his releasing his notes.
The review board said that its “initial contact with Posner produced no results.
When a person is interviewed for a book by an author, unless he expressly states otherwise, the person gives the author the right to quote him in the author’s book and the author can tell the person’s story to the world.
To suggest, then, that the person might not want the author to turn over the author’s own notes of the conversation to a third party seems illogical.
Because the notion is irrational on its face (authors bequeath their work to universities and libraries in which notes of their interviews with literally hundreds, sometimes thousands of people are included), there is a possibility that Posner never spoke to Dr.
Although at one point he admitted that the lesion in the cowlick area “does seem to be the wound,” Humes added, “The photographs [Black and White Nos., 16; Color Nos. and 43] I think create ambiguity ... much to my displeasure and dismay.
Boswell and Finck, unlike Humes, have been adamant from the beginning that the entrance wound was low in the back of the president’s head, never wavering on the record* (2 H 377, WCT Dr.
Well, first and foremost, it’s clear that the autopsy report was incorrect, despite the three autopsy pathologists’ refusal to concede their error.
Second, it’s equally obvious from the record that the autopsy surgeons decided, in the end, to rely on the language they drafted in the original autopsy report and not second-guess their contemporaneous records with recollections that were decades old.
James Humes testified that even though the X-rays showed thirty or forty tiny dustlike particle fragments, he and his two colleagues (Boswell and Finck) did not see any of them as they explored the brain.
X-rays, Humes explained, tend to magnify these minute fragments, so they were not too surprised they didn’t see them during the autopsy.
At first, the autopsy pathologists could only speculate that the bullet exited somewhere within the margins of the large hole on the right side of the skull, but had no direct evidence of the exact exit point.
Pierre Finck noted in a 1965 memorandum that, aside from the large defect, no precise exit wound was identifiable during the initial examination of the skull.
Two additional fragments, making a total of five, were recovered from the scene of the shooting after the autopsy.
On the issue of the locus of the head exit wound, perhaps the most overlooked piece of medical and scientific evidence in books on the assassination that proves the exit wound was in the right front of the president’s head is the fact that of the three fragments of the skull found inside the presidential limousine, the HSCA forensic pathology panel said that autopsy X-rays show that the largest one, triangular in shape, contained “a portion of the right coronal suture.
The “edge on the longest straight margin... meets a much sharper straight edge which represents an obvious fracture margin.
At the junction of these two margins is a semicircular defect, described in the autopsy report as showing outward beveling, with small particles of radiopaque materials.
Although the bullet fragmented upon striking bone in the president’s head, the HSCA concluded that the main part of the bullet literally exited along the coronal suture line to the right front of the president’s head.
This would, to us, mean that a missile had made this wound from within the skull to the exterior.
Michael Baden told me, “The autopsy photographs clearly show that the semicircular defect was half of a bullet wound with an exit beveling, and this caused most of the damage to The coronal suture is the juncture between the parietal and frontal bone.
It is a seam or line approximately a third of the way back from the front of the skull that goes in a slightly irregular semicircle across the top and side of the skull.
The low point of the coronal suture is located about 2 inches straight in front of the top of each ear lobe.
Although the autopsy report doesn’t expressly mention whether the pathologists attempted a reconstruction of the head using the three fragments they received late that night, and some critics have charged that because of the alleged incompetence of the autopsy surgeons, none was done, Dr.
Humes strongly indicated to the Warren Commission in 1964 that a reconstruction was attempted when he said that he and his fellow surgeons “found that the three pieces could be roughly put together to account for a portion of defect” to the right side of the president’s head.
The fact that the largest fragment found of the president’s skull was along the coronal suture, that this triangular fragment was one of three that, in the aggregate, lined up, on reconstruction, with the large defect to the right front of the president’s skull, and that this large fragment of bone was beveled on its outer surface, rather than its inner surface, provide conclusive evidence of an exiting bullet to the right front of the president’s head.
And let’s not forget the commonsense observation that if in fact the bullet had first entered the president’s head not from the rear, as the evidence shows it did, but at the right side of his head, as the conspiracy theorists allege (claiming the shot came from the grassy knoll), the bullet would never have caused the massive defect we know the president had to the right side of his head.
That obviously was an exit defect, not an entrance wound, which would have been small and circular.
Cairns arranged to have color slides taken of the fragment in the hospital’s medical photography department.
Admiral Burkley did receive another skull fragment on November 27 from Secret Service agent Robert I Bouck, which Burkley noted had been “turned over to the Secret Service by David Burros.
Although the Harper fragment was lost, two 35-millimeter color slides taken of it shortly after the assassination survived and were available for Dr.
Angel was not the “Burros fragment” but was the largest of the three bone fragments delivered to the autopsy room and x-rayed on Dr.
Cairns stated that the fragment contained a small grayish discoloration suggesting lead had stained the bone.
Cairns had an opportunity to look at the actual bone fragment, there is no evidence that he examined it in anywhere near the depth that Dr.
Angel studied the color slides of the fragment, nor was Cairns, a pathologist, an authority, like Angel, on skeletal remains.
It should be noted that for years the conspiracy community has alleged that by the Harper fragment being found “south” of where the president was shot, south meant “behind, in back of,” and if, indeed, the fragment came from the occipital area of Kennedy’s skull, finding the fragment to Kennedy’s rear would be consistent with this and would support the inference that the head shot came from Kennedy’s right front , not the rear, where Oswald was.
More importantly, perhaps, when Harper told the FBI he found the fragment “south” of where the president was shot, the normal inference would be he meant to the left , not behind, which would be more east than south.
On John McAdams Web site, he reports, “Researcher Millicent Cranor, in 1997, managed to locate William Harper and ask him to mark on a map the location the fragment.
This would seem to finally put to rest the allegation of the conspiracy community that the Harper fragment was found to the rear of where the president was shot.
One side of the fragment, adjoining the exit bevel, was determined to be a portion of the coronal suture.
Angel and the HSCA forensic panel also took note of the semicircular defect, or notch, first spotted in autopsy photographs of the cranial cavity (Black and White Nos. and 18 and Color Nos. and 45) by Humes, Boswell, and Finck in 1967.
On January 20, 1967, Humes and Boswell returned to the National Archives to review the autopsy materials again, this time in the company of the third autopsy pathologist, Dr.
It was Finck’s first opportunity to see the autopsy photographs taken the night of the assassination.
However, the HSCA forensic pathology panel ultimately concluded in 1978 that the cranial cavity photographs, in fact, depicted both wounds —the entrance wound in the back of the head (i.e., in the cowlick area), seen in the background of the photographs, and the semicircular portion of an exit wound located in the right front region of the skull , as seen in the foreground of the photographs.
But the keys to the correct orientation of the images are the lip of a glass specimen jar on, and a drainage hole in, the autopsy table, which are both visible in the photographs and are located at the top of the autopsy table.
These details show that the photographer was standing at the head of the autopsy table, looking down into the cranial cavity, with the president lying on his back.
In other words, all three outwardly beveled defects were portions of the same exit hole.
Assassinologist Dale Myers believes that these gaps necessarily mean that there was more than one significant exit hole within the large defect to the right frontal area of the president’s head.
Though there may very well have been, as Myers said, at least two exit holes, it would not be automatic.
But a January 6, 1964, memo from Secret Service chief James J Rowley to Warren Commission general counsel J Lee Rankin would seem to contradict Purdy’s memo.
Though it would be a non sequitur to conclude that a gap has to be caused by an exiting, fragmented bullet, the missile that struck bone in the president’s head (even though not a fragmenting, dumdum bullet [2 H 356, WCT Dr.
James J Humes]) could easily have and most likely did fragment at least partially on impact, causing other very small and insignificant exit points when and if the bullet fragments emerged from the president’s head.
The point has to be made that whether or not the bullet that struck the president in the head fragmented before or after it exited his head into the fragments found in the presidential limousine doesn’t change the incontrovertible conclusion that only one bullet, fired from above and behind, struck the president in the head.
All we’re talking about here is what happened to that one bullet after it entered the president’s head.
And the only possible relevance of a second exit hole somewhere within the large defect to the right front part of the president’s head is that if it was a major defect , though this would not alter presidential limousine on the night of the assassination and delivered by the Secret Service to the autopsy surgeons, Secret Service special agent Morgan Dies and an unidentified officer named Davis removed the bloodstains and the debris from the limousine late Sunday evening, November 24.
How many fragments of bone were found, what was their size, and what was done with them is not known.
But we do know they could not have been a part of the skull reconstructive effort by the autopsy team two nights earlier.
The HSCA forensic pathology panel said it was frustrated in its effort to pinpoint the exact location of the back wound by the fact that in describing the location of the wound, the autopsy pathologists used body landmarks that change with different body positions rather than fixed body landmarks.
However, the HSCA did point out that the X-rays demonstrate that the bullet missed the scapula and ribs.
But in the process of articulating just where it was, the HSCA resorted to language not only unfit for a publication intended to be read by the public, but demonstrably in error.
The wound was neither in the middle of the shoulder blade, nor, as the HSCA’s own drawing shows, midway between the spine and the end of the shoulder blade to the right.
A point that conspiracy theorists have raised over and over in their books is that the entrance holes in the president’s coat and shirt were more than 2 inches lower in the back than the actual entrance wound in his body.
Like virtually all criticisms by Warren Commission critics and conspiracy theorists, it doesn’t “go anywhere,” to use a trial lawyer’s term.
But the discrepancy would only mean something if one were able to thereby conclude that the president was shot twice in the back, once where we know the entrance wound in the back was, and once below that where the holes in the coat and shirt were.
But one can’t conclude this because there is no evidence of a second entrance wound to the president’s back, and no evidence of any holes to the back of the president’s coat and shirt other than one to the coat and one to the shirt.
In any event, there is a perfectly sensible explanation for the apparent discrepancy.
In fact, Kennedy had been waving to the crowd so much during the motorcade that even when he wasn’t waving to the crowd, one can see that his coat behind his neck remained elevated, or bunched up, from all the prior wavings, covering his back collar.
The best examples of this are the Robert Croft photo (approximately frame 161) as the limousine is proceeding down Elm , and the James Altgens photo of Kennedy and Connally as the presidential limousine is proceeding north on Houston Street just before the turn onto Elm.
In both photos, Kennedy is not waving, but his suit coat is still all bunched up from his prior waving.
Connally, on the other hand, did not wave during the motorcade, and his coat is not bunched up.
As a result, a good inch or so of the white collar on his shirt is clearly visible.
In fact, even when the president wasn’t waving, every photo of him in the motorcade shows him with his right arm elevated, resting on top of the side of the car, causing the back of his suit to bunch upward.
Though Humes only referred to the coat in his answer, he made it clear shortly thereafter that he meant to include the shirt.
Some critics have suggested that the slits in Kennedy’s shirt and tie were caused when doctors frantically cut away his clothes upon his arrival at Parkland Hospital.
The HSCA, however, could find no evidence that the shirt collar or tie knot were cut during removal, noting that the slitlike irregularity of the tears in the fabric were typical of an exiting bullet.
The panel concluded that the slitlike tear in the shirt and the nick in the tie knot were caused “beyond a medThe Croft photo is the best photo I have seen that clearly shows the bunching up of the president’s coat on his back, but the black-and-white reproduction of it in an HSCA volume was not as clear as I would have liked it to be to illustrate this point.
When I found out from my sketch artist, Patrick Martin, that Croft had a very clear photo of this image, I wrote Croft at his home in Wyoming on March 5, 2005, and he was kind enough to authorize me to use the photo for this book.
Gary Aguilar, Cyril Wecht, and Rex Bradford take issue with several points in the FBI’s laboratory investigation of the president’s coat and shirt.
However, FBI special agent Orrin Bartlett, the bureau’s liaison with the Secret Service, delivered the president’s coat and shirt to the FBI lab on November 23, 1963.
If there is an earlier FBI lab report on this, I was unable to come up with it, and the HSCA gives no citation for its statement.
They also interpreted the HSCA’s statement, made over fifteen years after the event, that it could not draw “any independent conclusions based on its own observations” of the fibers because of the “intervening handling of the clothing” in the previous decade and a half , a position the HSCA would have to take, as somehow strengthening their argument that the president’s back wound may not have been caused by a shot from the rear.
All FBI agents, indeed all law Aguilar, Wecht, and Bradford don’t really say what their point is.
Their purpose is to find any theoretically possible problem with the case they can and then proceed, without bothering to ask if their finding “goes anywhere,” to conclude that the theoretical problem either negates the Warren Commission evidence on this point or points to the existence of a conspiracy, and then go on to the next theoretical problem or inconsistency they can find in the massive literature on the assassination.
This worthless nitpicking is so very typical of the conspiracy community.
John H Ebersole, acting chief of radiology at Bethesda Naval Hospital, testified that at about 10:00 to 11:00m. “a communication had been established with Dallas and it was learned that there had been a wound of exit in the lower neck that had been surgically repaired.
The autopsy finding as to the track of the bullet that entered the president’s back was buttressed by the HSCA forensic pathology panel’s 1978 examination of the X-rays taken during the autopsy.
Of questionable validity is the observation of one of the Parkland doctors, Dr.
We know from the autopsy X-rays and photographs that these doctors were wrong in placing the exit wound to the right rear of the president’s head, but it’s hard to believe that any medical doctor would confuse the occipital bone with the right rear of the president’s head.
Nurse Doris M Nelson told the Globe , “It’s not true,” when shown the tracing.
Robert Grossman for his alleged observation in Trauma Room One for the simple reason that there is no strong evidence he was actually inside the room.
If he was, and he saw all the things he claims to have seen, it’s curious why assistant Warren Commission counsel Arlen Specter didn’t have him testify before the Warren Commission, as he did with virtually all the other Parkland doctors who were present.
Moreover, Grossman never prepared any medical report of his observations that day.
Yet in the Boston Globe interview with reporter Ben Bradlee, and subsequent articles he has coauthored in the medical journal Neurosurgery , not only does he claim to have seen a lot, but all of his observations are consistent with the findings of the Warren Commission.
That itself is not disturbing, since there is very persuasive evidence that the main medical findings of the Commission were correct.
First, he apparently kept them to himself for eighteen years, the first time he spoke publicly on the matter being with Bradlee for the Boston Globe in 1981.
Perry and Carrico, saw any wound to the back of Kennedy’s head, the most important reason being that Kennedy was on his back throughout his time in Trauma Room One and was never turned over.
In their Warren Commission testimony, the fifteen doctors who were in Trauma Room One, attending to the president in one way or another, all referred at one time or another to other doctors who were present and what they were doing.
Grossman, and it was not the type of reference that would inspire confidence in what Grossman had to say many years later.
Nowhere else does Grossman’s name appear in the testimony of the fifteen Parkland doctors who testified before the Commission.
But if Grossman did what he claims he did in his 2003 article in Neurosurgery , and was seen doing it by his colleagues, how is it possible that not one of them, including Dr.
Robert McClelland categorically stated that one of the autopsy surgeons had “taken this loose piece of scalp, which is hanging back this way . . . and pulled the scalp forward to take a picture.
Though we know from the autopsy Xrays and photos, as well as from the personal observations by most of the witnesses, including all three autopsy surgeons, that there was no gunshot wound to the left side of the president’s head, several witnesses in addition to Dr.
Even though we know the Parkland doctors never turned the president’s body over (3 H 382, WCT Dr.
Malcolm O Perry), one Parkland doctor says he saw the rear of the president’s head.
Robert G Grossman told the ARRB in 1997 that he lifted the president’s head and observed not a large gaping hole but a small circular puncture wound in the occipital region (which he characterized as an entry wound), approximately 2 centimeters in diameter (ARRB MD 185, Meeting Report, Interview of Robert G Grossman, April 14,1997, 1; see earlier endnote discussion of Dr.
Five others provided testimony that is so contradictory to the known facts or to other statements they themselves made, that one questions whether their observations are even worthy of mention.
Karnei, who acknowledged that he was not in the autopsy room when the president’s body was brought in, claimed that he saw the president being undressed on the autopsy table (the body arrived nude), and said he had a “vague recollection” of pants being removed from the president’s body.
Jerrol Custer, an X-ray technician, said that most of the destruction to the head was toward the occipital area.
When Sitzman said the president was “hit” on the side of his face, common sense tells us that she would have no way of knowing where he was hit, and she was only referring to where she saw the horrible wound.
They obviously would only be referring to the result of the hit, what they saw, not whether the wound was an entrance or exit wound, which they would be in no position to determine.
Yet intelligent people like conspiracy author David Wrone actually seize on this loose language as meaning that the shot came from the grassy knoll, not Kennedy’s rear.
Indeed, one conspiracy theorist, radiologist Randy Robertson, swears he can see what no other human can.
The most comprehensive article yet written to support the position that the gaping exit wound was to the “back of JFK’s head” is by Dr.
But Paul Mandel, writing for Life magazine on December 6,1963, was much worse.
Trying to reconcile Perry’s statement that the bullet entered the president’s throat from the front with Mandel’s belief that Oswald did all of the shooting from the rear, Mandel, remarkably, says that the Zapruder film “shows the President turning his body far around to the right as he waves to someone in the crowd.
Kennedy did not do what Mandel said he did , and where Mandel came up with this terrible distortion is unknown.
It’s hard to believe he made it up, since he would know the film would prove the falsity of his statement, though in point of fact, the American public would not see the film for themselves until 1975, twelve long years later.
Paul C Peters did not see the wound before the tracheotomy, but testified that the doctors in attendance speculated that the throat wound was a wound of entry and the bullet exited the large gaping wound to the right side of the president’s head.
He said he ran his hands “up his back ... all the way up to his neck very briefly” but “felt nothing other than the blood and debris.
Carrico said that standing in back of the gurney, he put both of his hands—one on the president’s right side, one on the left—under the president’s back, a little above the waist.
He added that even if his right hand had reached the president’s upper back wound, he would “very likely have passed over it.
Marion Jenkins was asked whether any examination of the president’s back was made before the president expired, he responded in his Warren Commission testimony, “No, no.
John K Lattimer wrote in his 1980 book, “Actually, the chief anesthesiologist, Dr.
Jenkins, was aware that there was a hole in the back of the President’s neck, because in the process of positioning and stabilizing Kennedy’s head and pushing up on his neck to straighten the airway for easier passage of the oxygen he was pumping in, his spread fingers had felt the small hole on the back of the neck.
Its presence was completely overshadowed by the desperate efforts of resuscitation, and Dr.
Parkland Hospital nurse Diana H Bowron reportedly told conspiracy author Harrison Edward Livingstone in 1993 that she saw the entrance wound in the president’s back while preparing the body for placement in the coffin.
Crenshaw came out with his book containing the highly unlikely LBJ allegation, someone came out of the woodwork to support his story, and just as predictably it appeared to be a phony story.
Now we have a man who writes the facts as he witnessed them, and some writers, who do not have enough initiative to do their research thoroughly, want to call it a pack of lies.
I refer to the review by Larry Sutherland, Dallas Morning News , June 28 th , of Dr.
There are still people who have not come forward yet, that could have helped Mr Sutherland get his facts straight had he bothered to check.
Bartlett’s problem is that although Sutherland may or may not have researched his story, unfortunately for her, David Perry, the debunker of assassination kooks, did, and it clearly appears that Bartlett, like hundreds before her and hundreds after, made up her story.
Perry called Charles Jack Price, the administrator of Parkland Hospital at the time of the assassination, and Bartlett’s boss.
Price told Perry that he did not believe that Lyndon Johnson called Parkland Hospital, as Crenshaw said in his book, and personally told Crenshaw this when Crenshaw called him at the time Crenshaw’s book came out.
Price said the switchboard staff reported to him, and told Perry there simply was no way a switchboard operator would get a call from the president of the United States and not tell everyone about it.
He also felt it was inconceivable that a call from the president would be forwarded to a “junior resident” like Crenshaw.
Yet she reported receiving all types of other calls that apparently were much more important for her to take notice of.
But LBJ simply wasn’t important enough to pass muster for Bartlett’s report.
But this appears to be an embarrassingly weak effort on Bartlett’s part to cover up.
Number one, we’ve seen that her report included all types of crazy calls, like the one asking to hypnotize Oswald and the one claiming she could bring the dead president back to life.
But again, LBJ couldn’t make the cut to be mentioned by the very discriminating Ms.
And for a second I couldn’t, you know, I was still thinking of Kennedy.
JAMA editor George Lundberg and JAMA national correspondent Dennis L Breo interviewed autopsy surgeons James Humes and J Thornton Boswell for two days in a Florida hotel in April of 1992.
JAMA staff writer Dennis Breo wrote a ten-page article based on the interview and the presiThe third autopsy surgeon, Dr.
In the autopsy surgeons’ autopsy descriptive sheet containing two drawings, one of the front, the other of the back side of the president’s body , in the one of the back side the surgeons placed the entrance wound far enough down the president’s back so that it is actually a few inches below the exit wound in the throat.
Therefore, to the unschooled mind, the bullet could not have been fired from up above, where Oswald allegedly was.
Thornton Boswell, who said he prepared the diagram during the autopsy, would later say, “This was unfortunate.
Though conceding that the dot he put for the entrance wound was too low, he said the notes he wrote on the drawing did locate the wound correctly.
Humes told Dan Rather in 1967, “The outlines of the figure” on the autopsy descriptive sheet “are already prepared.
Humes went on to say that precise measurements are inserted on the margins of the autopsy descriptive sheet.
The Warren Report , part II, June 26, 1967, 11, CBS Television Archives) And this is the position taken by the HSCA, which referred to the drawings as “a crude representation used as a worksheet primarily to assist in the preparation of the report and was not necessarily an exact representation of the wound.
The autopsy surgeons would have had no way of imagining that generations of conspiracy buffs would be scavenging endlessly for any discrepancy at all to attack the autopsy findings.
Coupled with the fact that they knew there were photos and X-rays of the president’s wounds to establish their exact location, the autopsy surgeons therefore didn’t make a sufficient effort to be precise, and Dr.
Articulating this reality in one of the HSCA’s paragraphs gave rise to a response so typical in the conspiracy community.
In 7 HSCA 87, the forensic pathology panel wrote that upon examination of photographic enhancements of the autopsy photos of the entrance wound to the president’s back, “when the body is repositioned in the anatomic position (not the position at the moment of shooting) the direction of the missile in the body on initial penetration was slightly upward, inasmuch as the lower margin of the skin is abraded in an upward direction.
It would seem to be that by straightening Kennedy’s body out into an anatomic position, not only does the bullet track go upward anatomically, but since the entrance wound is a part of that track, it too is now abraded upward.
Indeed, when I spoke to two members of the HSCA forensic pathology panel about the language in 7 HSCA 87, their attempted explanations were so incomprehensible and incoherent that they don’t lend themselves to repeating.
And on the issue of whether 7 HSCA 87 is incorrect with respect to its “ abraded upward” language, the HSCA pathologists didn’t, of course, see the actual entrance wound, only photos of it.
Humes, however, did see the wound, and apart from the fact that we know the bullet was traveling on a downward trajectory, the abrasion collar itself indicated that it was to him.
Robert K Karnei Jr., who was present at the autopsy, but whose recollections have proved to be questionable , stated in 1996 that Dr.
Since a bullet truly going in an upward direction at the time it entered the president’s back could not have come from any of the buildings to his rear, even from the ground floor, which would still be above him, the assassin would have had to be lying flat on his back on Elm Street and to have fired the shot after the president’s limousine passed over his prostrate body.
To the student of the assassination, or even the casual observer, the forward inclination of the president’s upper body looks awkward and unnatural, and hence, the thought enters the mind that this inclination is not accurate.
Because I thought there was a chance that Gerry Spence would not raise the issue at the London trial, and because I knew that if he didn’t, I wouldn’t have the opportunity to raise it myself on rebuttal (because the prosecution’s rebuttal is restricted to responding with witnesses and evidence to matters raised by the defense during the presentation of its case), I touched on it myself during my examination of Dr.
Just because a defense counsel doesn’t raise an arguable weakness in a case I am trying (Spence may not have raised the issue because he knew I had a response to it), doesn’t mean that one or more of the jurors will not.
After all, a jury consists of twelve people with a collective human experience of over five hundred years, and if just one of them sees a weakness in my case and talks about it in the jury room, then all twelve know about it since the knowledge of one is the knowledge of all twelve.
I wanted to make sure that if any of the London jurors spotted the apparent weakness in my case and was discussing it back in the jury room, that they’d at least have something from me to rebut it.
Although I didn’t want to highlight the problem in my examination of Dr.
If we take the upper end, 18 degrees, as being accurate, since the angle of declination of the bullet, per the Warren Commission, was around 17'/2 degrees , the president’s upper body (not his head, however) would be hunched forward at a slightly greater degree than the downward angle of the bullet, accounting for the lower margin of the wound, at least per the HSCA, being abraded upward.
So, in essence, the president was not leaning forward, but rather was only hunched forward in the upper torso area.
The artist’s drawing of the path of the bullet through Kennedy’s neck as well as his drawing of the path of the bullet through Kennedy’s head could hardly have been more inaccurate in depicting the orientation of Kennedy’s upper body and head at the times of the shots to the back and head, and therefore could only have confused the Warren Commission staff.
Law with Eaglesham, In the Eye of History ,296), his drawings were clearly way off.
With respect to the shot that traversed Kennedy’s throat, Rydberg’s drawing is wrong in that we know from the Zapruder film that Kennedy’s upper body and head were never in the straight-back, anatomic position that Rydberg drew.
Earl Rose, the Dallas medical exam258 ENDNOTES iner at the time of the assassination and a member of the HSCA’s forensic pathology panel, about the location of the entry wound and the conflicting positions of the HSCA and Warren Commission on it, I told him that to me, a layperson, “lower neck and upper back” were two slightly different anatomic positions on the body.
Where did the bullet to the back side of the president enter, the upper back or lower neck, I asked.
In a 1966 interview by United States News & World Report, Specter said, “I was shown one picture of the back of a body which was represented to be the back of the President, although it was not technically authenticated.
And we know that Francis O’Neill is not talking about fake photographs, as the conspiracy theorists claim.
Shown autopsy photograph number 42, Sibert said, “Well, I don’t have any recollection of it being that intact, as compared with these other pictures.
They intended to show the entrance wound to the upper right rear of Kennedy’s head.
But in order to photograph the entrance wound properly, the surgeons were looking for a way to get an unobstructed view of the entrance hole.
This was a challenge, because the president was lying on his back on the autopsy table, and in this position several long, tattered, shreds of scalp (which had been blown loose from the right front top of the head by the explosive power of the exiting bullet, yet were still attached to the back portion of the skull) were hanging back, draped over and partly obscuring the entrance wound.
In order for the entrance wound photograph to be taken, the autopsy surgeons lifted the president’s right shoulder from the autopsy table, and rolled him onto his left shoulder.
Though the act of pulling the loose scalp forward across the top right of the head made the entrance wound visible, it also briefly covered the large exit defect on the right front side of the president’s head.
Consequently, the right front of the president’s head appears intact (except for a piece of loose skull attached to the right front of the skull) and less bloody than almost all the other views of the head wound.
There is no evidence at all that anything has been doctored, phonied, or fixed up as conspiracy theorists want so desperately to believe.
Another related allegation is that several key autopsy photographs are missing.
Conspiracy theorists claim they were destroyed as part of the cover-up to keep the true nature of the president’s wounds from the American people.
Unlike the allegation that the surviving photographs and X-rays have been “doctored,” this one has the barest thread of truth to it.
When Stringer was asked why he would sign a statement that all the photographs were there, when in fact they weren’t, he offered no explanation.
Pierre Finck, who had been recalled from a tour of duty in Vietnam for the occasion, joined Humes and Boswell at the National Archives for a second review of the autopsy photographic inventory.
It would later become obvious that the Justice Department was behind the push to have the three pathologists sign off on the autopsy photographs.
There is this unfortunate reference in the Warren Commission report by Dr.
The idea that some of the autopsy photographs had disappeared did not, however, go away with the affidavits.
Of the two, Humes was particularly emphatic that one had been taken of the interior chest to document the bruise over the top of the right lung.
Boswell and autopsy photographer John Stringer support Humes’s recollection of a chest photograph (or photographs) being taken.
One of the two “missing” views described by autopsy pathologists is not missing at all.
Correctly identified during the 1966 inventory, the autopsy pathologists changed the identification in 1967 when they noticed a portion of the exit wound in the foreground of these images.
The camera was alternately loaded with both black-and-white and color film, and multiple exposures were routinely made from each viewpoint.
Therefore, two missing views could actually constitute four or more photographs.
Bouck’s probable mistake was in counting the images and not the number of sheets of film, both exposed and unexposed.
Originally, the typed receipt listed eight Graphic View film holders with color film and six GraphicView film holders with black-and-white film.
These were changed to eleven and nine, respectively, by hand and initialed by Captain John H Stover.
Five unexposed black-andwhite negatives, also listed among the miscellaneous items, met the same fate of being loaded and unloaded without an exposure being made.
However, the two unexposed color transparencies described under “miscellaneous items” might explain the discrepancies between the early listings and the current inventory, and the issue of “missing” photographs.
Adding two film sheets to the current inventory would mean that the eleven film holders were loaded on both sides , which would square with the autopsy photographer’s recollection that all the film holders were fully loaded.
Humes testified what the two missing photographs depicted—the inward beveling of the entrance wound as seen from the inside of the skull (which, unless I’m misreading 7 HSCA 129, has not been lost), which proves it was an entrance wound, and the interior of the chest showing the bruise over the top of the right lung, which corroborates the track of the bullet through the neck.
Second, and perhaps most importantly, the “missing” photographs can’t show something different from all the many remaining photographs, which were authenticated by the HSCA in 1978.
The suggestion that only two views were singled out for destruction makes no sense considering that the photographs and X-rays that were presumably left behind prove beyond any doubt that the president was shot from above and behind.
There are several other tales of photographs allegedly taken during the autopsy that critics claim have since vanished, but I should emphasize that even if these alleged missing photographs exist somewhere , they can’t possibly show something that contradicts what we already know to be true about the president’s wounds.
Again, simply by virtue of the fact that the autopsy photographs and X-rays that are available are authentic and unaltered and depict the condition of President Kennedy’s body on the night of the autopsy.
So, any additional photographs or X-rays that might exist (or might have existed) can’t depict something else.
One hundred or one thousand sworn testimonies about missing photographs would not change this unshakable truth.
Spencer said Fox told her that he needed the film developed and a print made from each of the negatives, adding that they were autopsy pictures from Bethesda and that she shouldn’t peruse them more than necessary.
Spencer soon realized that the photographs were from President Kennedy’s autopsy, but were unlike any autopsy photographs she had seen in her previous duty at Pensacola, Florida.
Unlike the nine official autopsy photographs shown to her by ARRB counsel Jeremy Gunn, there was “no blood or cavities” or “matted hair” on the president’s head in these photos.
David Mantik makes much of the fact that Fox showed up with color negatives, rather than color transparencies, pointing out that only color transparencies were exposed at the autopsy.
These color negatives are, of course, the internegatives (i.e., a negative created from slide or transparency film in order to produce photographic prints) created by Fox on November 27, 1963. tin 1981, Kennedy family representative Burke Marshall authorized the Boston Globe to pick a panel of experts to look at all fifty-two autopsy photographs, as well as the autopsy X-rays, stored at the National Archives.
Ben Bradlee Jr. of the Globe, who was present during the viewing and examination of the photographs, wrote that all the experts disagreed with Groden’s position that there had been alterations to the photos, saying they could detect “no evidence” of this.
According to Spencer, the top of the head was not visible in any of the photos, and no damage was seen on the right side of the head.
One photo, she said, showed a full length of the president’s body from a 45-degree high angle.
Spencer said that none of the photos showed the scalp peeled back on the skull.
Spencer said that other than the wound to the back of the president’s head, she saw no other wound to the head.
When shown the official autopsy photographs in 1997 by ARRB counsel Jeremy Gunn, Spencer said that “there is no similarity,” that the photos were far bloodier than the ones she remembered.
She also said that all of the official prints shown to her by Gunn had a Kodak watermark that was “smaller” than that used at the NPC in 1963, and the paper was not the paper used by the NPC in 1963.
Spencer’s testimony, of course, has raised the question in the conspiracy community of whether there was a second set of photographs taken of Kennedy’s body at the time of the autopsy (a set conspiracy theorists presume showed the “true” nature of the president’s wounds) and that this second set was squirreled away as part of the cover-up.
Speculating about the reason for taking the kind of pristineBradlee did go on to say that “the photo experts agreed with Groden that there was an area at the back of the President’s head where the hair appears to be abnormally dark, but they said this must have been because the hair was washed before the photos were taken to make the wound visible.
For starters, keep in mind that Spencer’s recollection of events was thirty-four years after the fact.
But more importantly, her recollection is at odds with almost the entire official record.
While the official autopsy photographs were processed, as Spencer remembered, at the NPC, the rest of the documentary record details a completely different and rather divergent series of events which, I think you’ll agree, is quite unlike Spencer’s account.
Madonia recalled that the NPC did produce color negatives and prints that weekend, though he didn’t recall if they processed any color transparencies.
On December 9, 1963, twelve days after their first visit, Agent Fox and White House photographer Robert Knudsen returned to the NPC with the color internegatives, made during their first visit, and supervised the creation of a set of color prints.
Both the internegatives and the prints (Fox thought that one or two sets had been made, while Knudsen reported that seven sets were made) were delivered to Secret Service agent Robert Bouck later that evening.
Spencer insisted that the film she developed for Fox must have been color-negative film because she recalled ( thirty-four years later) developing it in a “color negative C-22 process,” and an “internegative cannot be processed C-22”; that the event happened before the JFK funeral on November 25 ; and that Fox was alone, not with Knudsen.
Spencer concluded that the day Fox was referring to in the memorandum must have been on a day different from the one she remembered.
This could be a reference to Saundra Spencer and Carol Ann Bonito, who Spencer said assisted her in developing the autopsy photographs (ARRB MD 233, Call Report, Telephone Interviews of Saundra Spencer, December 13, 1996,2, and January 9, 1997,l). tKnudsen confirmed the essence of the visit, although he believed the negatives were developed November 23 and that the prints were made on November 24, 1963.
Knudsen recalled that James Fox, Vince Madonia, and another technician were present, but he couldn’t recall if the technician was Saundra Spencer.
We know she’s wrong when she says the photographs she saw show a “blownout chunk” in the center of the back of the president’s head.
Because apart from the observations of all three autopsy surgeons, the official autopsy photographs and X-rays conclusively, and without question, depict the body of President Kennedy at the time of the autopsy and show none of what Spencer described.
Further, the documentary records of the event in question (although fuzzy in some areas) fit what we do know to be true better than anything Ms.
Extraordinary claims require extraordinary proof, and in this case, Saundra Spencer doesn’t have the goods.
One possibility that might explain Saundra Spencer’s recollections of the photos she saw depicting the president’s head in a “pristine” condition is the proposition that a series of photographs were taken of the president’s body lying in repose after the embalmers had done their restorative work following the autopsy.
The prime candidate for taking such photographs, if any were taken, is Robert Knudsen, the White House photographer.
The family also said that Knudsen met Air Force One when it arrived back from Dallas on the day of the assassination and didn’t come back home for three days.
And since Knudsen’s family said he was extremely close to JFK and took his death very hard, it makes sense that he might have wanted to take photos of the president when Kennedy once again approximated the handsome, dynamic leader he once knew, and that could only have been after the embalming process.
Still, the possibility of Knudsen taking a “second” set of photographs after the embalming process is remote and speculative at best, since there is not one shred of documentary evidence to support such an event, nor, more importantly, has this supposed “second” set of photographs ever surfaced.
Boswell has let it be known that he no longer wants the intrusion of this case on his private life (he’s no longer at the only address I’ve ever gotten for him, and has moved with no forwarding address—not even Drs.
When Humes was shown the same photographs Spencer was shown, and asked if there had been any cleaning at all of the president’s hair and scalp, he allowed, “It looks like there might have been.
When one recognizes this reality about Spencer’s testimony, one can only conclude that her recollections after thirty-four years were either very faulty, or correct but of absolutely no significance.
Setting aside speculation that Robert Knudsen might have taken photographs of the president after the embalming, there is an entirely different aspect to Knudsen’s statements worthy of exploration—statements that add yet another tale of missing photographs to assassination lore.
Others have offered similar statements about a photograph depicting probes sticking in the president’s body.
Robert F Karnei Jr., the officer on duty for the Naval Medical School the night of the autopsy, told the HSCA in 1977 (and the ARRB again in 1996) he recalled that “photographs were taken of a probe in the president’s body” while Dr.
In another account, the probe was captured in an X-ray, not a photograph.
Jim Snyder of CBS’s Washington bureau reported in 1967 that he was personally acquainted with Dr.
Although Humes eventually gave the interview , the X-ray was never mentioned, nor is it among the inventory of autopsy materials.
Stringer’s assistant, Floyd Riebe, recalled that a probe was used by Dr.
Two of the four sources for this story have further sullied their credibility with other outlandish claims.
For instance, in addition to the aluminum probe story, Joe O’Donnell told the ARRB that Knudsen showed him approximately 5X7 inch, black-and-white photographs taken at Kennedy’s autopsy, including some that showed a grapefruit-size hole in the back of the head, and a %-inch hole in the president’s forehead, above the right eye.
The Medical Evidence Decoded,” in Fetzer, Murder in Dealey Plaza ,245), O’Donnell is hardly a credible witness.
In addition to his tale about two sets of autopsy photographs, O’Donnell claimed to have been at Andrews Air Force Base when the president’s body arrived, demanded to speak to Mrs.
Kennedy entering the navy ambulance and its subsequent departure, all without a hint of the presence of O’Donnell.
As if that wasn’t enough to send most sensible people running, O’Donnell also claims he showed Mrs.
Kennedy the graphic Zapruder film of her husband’s murder within a few weeks of the assassination.
O’Donnell told the ARRB that no one was present at the screening except him and Mrs.
Kennedy and that after seeing the head shot sequence, she told him, “I don’t ever want to see that again,” which O’Donnell took as an “order to alter the film” and remove the head shot sequence.
O’Donnell stated he knew it was wrong but he subsequently removed ten feet of the film.
O’Donnell said he was sure he had projected and altered the original Zapruder film and that it was in a 16-millimeter format.
Kennedy told him that she scrambled over the trunk of the limousine to retrieve a part of the president’s head.
John F Kennedy) Knudsen’s version of events has been tarnished as well.
As noted, they said that Robert Knudsen told them sometime after the assassination that he alone had photographed the autopsy.
Knudsen also told them that he witnessed and photographed probes inserted in the president’s body, and that the Secret Service took his film as soon as he had exposed it.
For instance, the photographer at the autopsy, by all accounts, was John Stringer, not Robert Knudsen.
Under those circumstances, the Secret Service could hardly have confiscated his film, as the Knudsen family claims Knudsen told them, since Knudsen couldn’t have shot any film.
In addition, the claim that Robert Knudsen appeared before government investigators in mid-1988 is equally false.
The last hearings of the last official government investigation, the HSCA, was in December of 1978 (HSCA Report,19), ten years before Knudsen’s alleged appearance before the phantom government body.
David claimed that the slides and prints showed a round, Yh to 3 /s-inch-diameter hole in the right front temporal area of the president’s head, just below the hairline, and that the 16millimeter film showed a gaping wound in the back of the president’s head.
John Stringer, who took the official autopsy photographs, told the ARRB in 1996 that he knew Bill Pitzer but that Pitzer wasn’t at the autopsy.
At first, Jerrol Custer, another 1992 Pittsburgh conspiracy conference attendee, recalled seeing a uniformed “chief,” believed to be Pitzer, taking movies at the autopsy.
According to Custer, Pitzer’s filming created “a few upset people from the gallery.
I’m not sure if it was—It could have been brought to my recollection that night that we had the get-together in Pittsburgh.
Finally, when it comes to missing photographs, there is the story that many conspiracy books mention—that of a naval corpsman whose film was allegedly taken from his camera and exposed to light as he snapped pictures in the morgue.
Painted by conspiracy theorists as a blatant destruction of evidence, the truth surrounding the incident is far less exciting.
Another first class corpsman, Robert W Rittmeyer, also assisted by bringing additional film to the morgue door when needed and handing it through the door to Riebe.
According to Groden, the exposures were all very dark, the first being the brightest, and each subsequent exposure darker than the previous one, until after four or five exposures it was impossible to tell if there were any other images on the film.
For years conspiracy theorists have charged that the “missing” autopsy photographs are, in their minds, one more indication of a conspiracy in the assassination.
But everyone (except conspiracy buffs) knows that even if no one other than ourselves and our immediate family have custody of our old photographs , they often somehow get lost or misplaced.
Here, with literally hundreds of people from various official investigative agencies (e.g., Dallas police, FBI, Secret Service, HSCA, Clark Panel, ARRB, employees at the National Archives, etc.) examining and working with the photos throughout the years, I not only don’t find it suspicious, I find it completely predictable that one or more photographs ended up missing, misplaced, or expropriated by people through whose hands they passed.
And we know that autopsy photographs would very likely be coveted and the object of outright theft by many people.
In fact, as we’ve seen by his admission at the O J Simpson civil trial, while he was working as a consultant to the photographic panel of the HSCA, Robert Groden, the chief photographic expert for the conspiracy theorists, must have himself either directly stolen or made copies of some An incident involving a possible aborted theft of autopsy photographs in the summer of 1978 concerned Regis T Blahut, a CIA officer who was assigned as a liaison officer to the HSCA to assist the committee in securing the CIA documents it wanted.
There are conflicting reports as to what happened, but the CIA and HSCA agree that Blahut, without authorization, had rummaged through files containing autopsy photos.
One report said he had gained access to a locked safe that contained the files, another that he had not gained entry to the safe.
But coming to work early one day, some HSCA employees found the photos outside of where they were supposed to be and in a state of disarray.
One source told the Washington Post that it looked like “someone had just run out” of the room.
The conspiracy community screaming about missing photographs when their leading expert photographer was stealing or making unauthorized copies of some of the photographs.
As I said at the beginning, there is little reason to place importance in these kinds of accounts of a few allegedly missing or altered photographs.
Because they can’t possibly show something that contradicts what is depicted in the many photographs that do exist and are available.
More importantly, as I’ve stated frequently, the photographic experts of the HSCA unanimously agreed that the existing photographs were authentic and depicted the president’s body as it was on the night of the autopsy.
And they prove beyond any doubt that the president was shot from above and behind.
Consequently, any missing or “altered” photographs cannot show something else, as the conspiracy theorists claim.
In addition to the allegedly missing or doctored photographs, conspiracy theorists often refer to the missing “draft notes” that Dr.
Humes burned in his fireplace in the early morning hours of November 24 after he handwrote a draft of the autopsy report.
Critics see this act as highly suspicious, and consequently conspiracy books cite the burning of the draft notes as evidence of some cover-up.
Josiah Thompson writes, “It is unclear just what this earlier draft contained.
With the state of art being what it was back in 1963, there is no way that such a clear enlargement could have been made from anything but the negative.
The controversy all started with some illchosen words by Humes in his testimony before the Warren Commission on March 16,1964.
Humes said he handwrote a first “draft” of the autopsy report in the privacy of his home in the early morning of Sunday, November 24, “revised” it , then burned the first “draft” in the fireplace of his recreation room.
Humes did not explain the reason for burning the first draft or draft notes to the Warren Commission, nor did the Commission ask.
Humes brought this supposedly second handwritten draft to Bethesda Naval Hospital, where he met with Drs.
Together, the three pathologists went over the language of that second draft and made minor corrections before submitting it to a typist, who prepared the final document.
He said that what was destroyed wasn’t a first draft of the report at all, but original handwritten notes taken during the autopsy.
The “other notes” Humes refers to here almost assuredly refer to notes taken by Drs.
Finck told the HSCA in 1978 that “the notes I took at the time of the autopsy were turned over to Dr.
However, Leonard D Saslaw, PhD, claimed in 1996 that in the week immediately after the assassination, while in an Armed Forces Institute of Pathology lunchroom, he overheard Dr.
Finck complaining to two other officers with whom he was eating “that he had been unable to locate his handwritten notes that he had taken during the autopsy on President Kennedy.
Finck elaborated to his companions . . . that immediately after washing-up following the autopsy, he looked for his notes and could not find them anywhere.
He further recounted that others who were present at the autopsy also had helped him search for his notes, to no avail.
Humes made it very clear that the materials he burned were draft notes prepared in the autopsy room , not the draft of the report written at his home on the evening of November 23 and the early morning hours of November 24.
But the conspiracy theorists respond with what they maintain is their own circumstantial evidence that when Humes told the Warren Commission that he “burned” a “draft of report” , he meant precisely what he was saying.
Boswell, In earlier testimony before the HSCA in 1977, Humes had elaborated on the reason for burning the notes.
He explained that not long before the assassination, he served as an escort officer for twenty to thirty foreign physicians who were being given a course of instruction in the United States.
During their visit, Humes took them to Henry Ford’s Greenfield Village in Dearborn, Michigan, which had on display the chair that Abraham Lincoln was sitting in when he was assassinated.
The back of the chair was stained with a dark substance that many thought might be bloodstains.
The foreign physicians were appalled that the American public would allow an object stained with their president’s blood to be put on public display.
Humes, too, was bothered by the display, and so to avoid the same type of thing happening to the bloodstained notes from the Kennedy autopsy, Humes destroyed them.
In his deposition before the ARRB in 1996, Humes reiterated his reason for burning his original autopsy notes.
When ARRB counsel Jeremy Gunn showed Humes some autopsy notes handwritten by his colleague, Dr.
Humes responded that it was one thing to destroy notes “of my own making.
I didn’t, wouldn’t have the habit of destroying something someone else prepared.
One is that Humes had never testified before (i.e., in his testimony before the Warren Commission and HSCA) that he had burned his original autopsy notes and his handwritten draft of the autopsy report.
So common sense tells us that unless he was confused, he wouldn’t, over three decades later, contradict his earlier sworn testimony.
Moreover, we know Humes did not destroy the handwritten draft of the autopsy report because it is a Warren Commission exhibit.
Yet this seems highly unlikely considering the time available to Humes.
He slept a bit, then took his son to a religious function (his First Communion) before returning to Bethesda sometime between 10:30m. and noon.
Perry in Dallas, learned about the tracheotomy, and reportedly met with Boswell and Finck.
Obviously, preparing a draft of an autopsy report on the president of the United States would have to take several hours.
Although critics have been aghast at Humes’s destroying his original notes, this is not an uncommon practice.
For instance, at the time of the assassination and for years thereafter, it was the policy of the FBI that after dictating from the original notes and comparing the dictation with the notes, the notes were destroyed.
But even a cursory review of the record shows that the only likely thing these autopsy notes contained that was different from what appeared in the final draft of the autopsy report was a reference to the pathologists’ mistaken belief that the bullet that struck the president’s back didn’t exit at the throat, but instead stopped short and worked its way out of the wound during cardiac massage.
As we know, this erroneous conclusion was corrected the following morning when Humes telephoned Dr.
Perry in Dallas and learned that the tracheotomy incision that Perry made had obscured an exit wound in the throat.
Although this fact may have proved embarrassing (something that might partially explain why the autopsy notes were burned in the first place), it hardly denotes a conspiracy to cover up the true nature of the president’s wounds.
Just a moment’s reflection on the allegation by the conspiracy theorists that Humes burned his first draft of the autopsy report (which presumably pointed away from Oswald as the killer) reveals its outlandish dimensions.
If, in fact, Humes had done such a thing, this would make him a willing and conscious accessory after the fact to Kennedy’s murder, a very serious crime.
The conspiracy theorists, whose taste for conspiracy skews their thinking processes, are not stopping to realize the obvious.
Bouck added that he and Burkley drove the materials to the archives and transferred them to Mrs.
Lincoln said in 1978 that she did not open any of the containers to see if the inventory of things she signed as having received from Dr.
In 1996, KenVrtacnik, a medical photographer at the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology , claimed that he saw President Kennedy’s brain during the 1964—1965 period at the AFIP’s National Museum of Health and Medicine, where it had been kept in a locked room.
What was reportedly on display was one long section, tan in color, immersed in liquid, lying in a stainless-steel tray inside a glass case.
Vrtacnik said it had wooden pegs through it marking the paths of the bullet, and was labeled “President Kennedy’s brain,” or words to that effect.
According to Mastrovito, about 1969 or 1970 he received a plastic or glass vial with a piece of Kennedy’s brain in it.
The vial came from the AFIP lab, where it had been sent after the autopsy at Bethesda, and was given to him by his supervisor, Walter Young, chief of the Intelligence Division.
Mastrovito told the ARRB that he destroyed the vial and the contents in a machine that destroys food.
Cyril Wecht, pursuant to permission granted by Kennedy family representative Burke Marshall, viewed the autopsy photographs and X-rays of the president’s brain at the National Archives.
He said that photographs of the top of the brain disclosed a “sizable foreign object” that could be “a flattened bullet fragment,” thus raising the spectre of a second bullet.
The panel members noted that it was “an oblong area of blue discoloration” that was u within the bullet track” of the bullet that entered the rear of the president’s head, thereby virtually eliminating the likelihood that it was a second bullet having the same bullet track as the other one.
Wecht told me, “I concur” with the HSCA finding in 1978 that the sizable foreign object he saw back in 1972 at the archives from an examination of the president’s X-rays and photographs turned out not to be a bullet or bullet fragment.
Moreover, the examination of the president’s body on the night of the autopsy continued, Humes said, into “very early the next morning” , after which, as we know, the autopsy surgeons stayed with three civilian embalmers from Gawler’s Funeral Home for several hours to help embalm and dress the body.
However, Roger E Boyajian, USMC sergeant in charge of the Marine barracks security detail that guarded the Bethesda morgue the night of the autopsy, reported that “the casket was removed from the morgue” at 3:45m. (which agrees with the embalmers’ reported 3:30m. end time) and that Mrs.
James Humes testified before the ARRB on February 13, 1996, his recollection of when the brain examination took place was understandably fuzzy.
This, then, would put the supplementary brain examination, in his recollection, around November 27 or 28, 1963, the latter date being just one day from November 29, the day Finck said it took place.
So actually, when it comes to recollecting the date of the brain examination, Humes and Boswell aren’t that far off at all from Finck’s date of November 29, 1963.
True, they’d still have to worry about Stringer contradicting them by saying it was earlier, but they’d have to realize that it would be much more damaging to have laboratory records and their fellow autopsy surgeon, Dr.
Finck’s date of November 29, though probably correct, is not necessarily so.
Two Different Brain Specimens in President Kennedy’s Autopsy,” in Fetzer, Murder in Dealey Plaza ,303) But Horne is embellishing here.
Finck’s memorandum to General Blumberg in which he sets forth the November 29 date says his report is based on his “personal notes,” not a daily diary.
But in addition to lab technician Paul O’Connor’s demonstrably incorrect statement that virtually the whole brain was “missing,” there were others who have said that most of the right hemisphere was missing.
The answer is that the president’s brain did not lose much brain matter.
Baden says he saw the photographs taken of the president’s brain at the time of the autopsy, and under his direction the HSCA’s medical illustrator, Ida Dox, drew a diagram of the brain viewed from the top.
If you squash a tomato, some would look at it and loosely say that most of the tomato was missing, but actually it’s still all there, only it’s mashed.
That’s the only explanation I can give you for how some people have said that a big part of the brain was missing.
If the formalin fluid is more concentrated, then it will remove fluid from the brain and make the brain slightly lighter than it was on removal from the cranium.
If the formalin fluid is less concentrated, then the brain can gain fluid by absorbing water from the formalin and getting slightly heavier.
I don’t know which was the case here, but usually the brain is weighed before it is put in formalin.
It should be added that it is only an assumption that President Kennedy’s brain weighed around 1,400 grams before the assassination.
Actually, the average weight of the brain for someone the president’s age is 1,366 grams, and the range is from 1,069 to 1,605 grams.
And the average weight increase after formalin That time plays tricks with one’s memory is illustrated by the confusing testimony of Dr.
J Thornton Boswell before the ARRB in 1996, thirty-three years after the autopsy.
In apparent conflict with his own autopsy report which only said the right hemisphere of the president’s brain was “markedly disrupted,” he told the ARRB that “probably half of hemisphere was missing,” that is, about a quarter of the president’s brain, a considerable amount of missing brain.
The latter technique results in less weight increase than the immersion technique.
That even a medical doctor who is not a pathologist can become confused about terms is illustrated by Dr.
When Humes was asked, “Earlier in the deposition today, you made reference to a sectioning of the brain.
Mantik had the whole transcript of Humes’s testimony, and quoted liberally from it throughout, he didn’t tell his readers just what Humes’s prior “reference to a sectioning of the brain” in his testimony was.
Humes responded, “Not at that time ,” but added, “We did take certain sections” later at the supplementary brain examination.
Indeed, Humes’s answer only pertained to when the “sectioning” took place.
Livingston is the person who claims that just hours after the assassination, when there was mass confusion and no one knew anything for sure about the trajectory or origin of fire, he reached Dr.
Mind you, Livingston claims he told Humes this before Humes learned from Dr.
Livingston and after reading parts of his deposition said, “Well, this is ridiculous.
In his deposition, Livingston admitted that although the information he had was important, he never contacted the Warren Commission, HSCA, Clark Panel, or any other official investigation, but that when he finally did take action (in April-May of 1992), he only wrote letters and met with known conspiracy theorists—Peter Dale Scott, David Lifton, Gary Aguilar, and Harrison Edward Livingstone.
This obviously had nothing to do with the ARRB’s very limited mandate to release assassination-related documents to the public.
Few in the conspiracy community have influenced more people than the British producer Nigel Turner, whose series The Men Who Killed Kennedy has been seen by millions of people.
Yet when a palpable fraud, former army lieutenant colonel Dan Marvin, contacted the ARRB in 1966 with his fabricated story (see endnote discussion) that a CIA officer asked him in 1965 to murder William Pitzer (who, conspiracists believe, took film of the autopsy—he wasn’t even present—that controverts the official version), Timothy Wray of the ARRB sent a copy of the Nigel Turner TV segment dealing with the Pitzer matter to Dr.
David Vance, a former United States Special Forces officer Marvin had implicated in the murder, seeking Vance’s reaction to the film and charges.
Shaw’s postoperative report and subsequent interview by the Warren Commission do not mention any “significant undermining or abrasion” on either side of the wound.
The second and by far the most logical interpretation of the oval entrance wound is that the bullet was out of alignment with its trajectory just before striking the skin.
In other words, it had begun to “yaw” or “tumble” before striking the governor’s back, causing the elongated entrance wound.
Yet, the only bone struck by the bullet, before it exited, was a relatively soft rib located near the exit point on the right side of Connally’s chest, the bullet hitting the bone as it was about to exit.
Either situation (a bullet coming from the right, which we can be very confident never happened, or a bullet hitting Connally at an angle only because we know Connally was turned to the right) would explain why the bullet causing the exit wound to Kennedy’s throat, which was believed to be around a quarter of an inch in diameter , just approximately two feet later caused an entrance wound to Connally’s back that was around six-tenths of an inch in diameter, over twice the size of the exit wound to Kennedy’s throat.
ENDNOTES literally causing the bullet to strike sideways in relation to its flight path.
The likely other intervening object would be the president’s knotted tie, which we know the bullet passed through after exiting the president’s throat.
Unlike the analysis performed on the president’s clothing, which aided investigators in determining which wounds were entrance and exit wounds, the governor’s coat, shirt, and trousers had been cleaned prior to their receipt at the FBI laboratory.
Flying bone fragments from the fifth rib ripped the pleural cavity (i.e., the lining of the chest cavity) open, and the vast majority of rib fragments exited with the bullet below the right nipple.
Shaw emphasized that the bullet did not pass through the thorax (the chest cavity) but was essentially “a chest wall” wound, passing along the edge of the chest cavity, with much of the inner chest damage being caused by the shower of rib fragments blown into the chest when the bullet struck the fifth rib.
Gregory easily concluded that the wound on the back of the wrist was the entrance wound based on several factors, including the fact that bits of dark Mohair cloth from Connally’s suit coat had been carried into the wound and deposited between the skin and the bone.
Gregory had also noted the wound to be “ragged” , and concluded that the ragged appearance of the wound was characteristic of an entrance wound caused by an irregular-shaped bullet—that is, one that had become distorted from having struck an intervening object.
The sharp edges of such a distorted bullet not only would produce the ragged edges of the entrance wound but also would explain how bits of cloth from Connally’s suit coat were caught and dragged into the wound.
Gregory also noted that the branch of the radial nerve that runs along the back of the hand was partially severed and, in the same area, a tendon leading to the thumb was totally severed.
Shires testified that the fragment was 1 to 2 millimeters in diameter , while Dr.
Jack Reynolds, the Parkland radiologist who examined the Connally X-rays on November 22 and wrote a supplementary report on November 29,1963, reported that the X-rays showed the fragment to be irregular in shape, but roughly oval.
Reynolds’s opinion that the fragment “was just under the skin and was not deep within the thigh in the femur bone,” as had been reported by Dr.
Gregory, without taking cognizance of the merely glancing blow to the rib by the bullet, testified, “I think that to pass through the soft tissues of the would certainly have decelerated the missile to some extent.
Having then struck the governor and shattered a rib, it is further decelerated, yet it... presumably retained sufficient energy to smash a radius.
Moreover, it escaped the forearm to penetrate at least the skin and fascia of the thigh, and I am not persuaded that this is very probable.
There is a slight ambiguity about exactly what happened, although the Tippit family did get the money.
In Zapruder’s testimony before the Warren Commission, he said, “$25,000 was paid and I have given it to the Firemen’s and Policemen’s Fund ... with a suggestion for Mrs.
Tippit” , the implication being that Zapruder only suggested that the money be given to Mrs.
As to the number of photographers who were present in Dealey Plaza at the time of the shooting and who took film or still pictures of the motorcade before, during, or after the shooting, another HSCA document (Reference Copy, JFK Collection, HSCA ; see also 6 HSCA 136) seems far more accurate.
Though it denominated “the twenty-two photographers in Dealey Plaza and where they stood,” three additional ones are penciled in, and I have added “the Babushka Lady” and five more, for a total of thirty-two.
Still photos were taken by Phillip Willis slides (transparencies, which were more popular in those days), Hugh W Betzner Jr. (blackand-white photos), Robert Croft , James Powell , Jim Towner , Wilma Bond , Mary Ann Moorman (black-andwhite Polaroids), James W Altgens , Richard Bothun , Jack A Weaver , Harry Cabluck , Frank Cancellare , Thomas Dillard , Arthur Rickerby (black-and-white photo and color slide), Jay Skaggs , “the Babushka Lady” (unknown Arguably, an Argus 8-millimeter color movie taken by Jack Daniel could be included in the list of Dealey Plaza films.
He and his three sons were positioned on the west side of the Triple Underpass, hence, outside of Dealey Plaza.
He took approximately ten seconds of fdm as the presidential motorcade was driving through and emerging from the underpass.
In February of 1964 he told Kenneth Armstrong, editor of the Toronto magazine Liberty, that he was present in Dealey Plaza at the time of the shooting and had taken photos of the motorcade.
Indeed, he showed Armstrong a few photos, but they were of no consequence.
However, he said he had another photo, which was presently being developed, that showed two men in the sniper’s nest window, which he promised he would send to Armstrong.
Similas also said that the day before the assassination he interviewed and photographed Vice President Lyndon Johnson and spent one hour with Jack Ruby at Ruby’s club.
Similas told Armstrong he sent him the photo in the mail, but Armstrong said he never received it.
By the time the Royal Canadian Mounted Police interviewed Similas on September 16, 1964, he realized that the authorities were taking his allegation seriously enough to investigate, and he toned down his story.
At the same time as I took the first picture I heard the first shot fired.
Similas said it was the reporter who spotted the two men in the window in one of the photos.
But unfortunately for Similas’s little fairy tale, we have proof that this isn’t so.
En route home to Toronto on the day after the assassination, Similas stopped by the Chicago office of the Associated Press and gave the negatives to the night photo editor, Waldo Butler, and the day news photo editor, Ray Jefferies.
Jefferies emphatically stated that there would have been no remote possibility of discerning human forms in any of the windows of any building appearing in the background of the street scenes photographed by Similas.
In the early morning hours of March 24, 1964, another Canadian got into the act, calling Dallas police headquarters and being put on the phone with Sergeant Patrick Dean.
He turned out to be an alcoholic named Ralph Henry William Smele, who admitted making the call under the fictitious name Ralph Simpson.
He said he had never been to Dallas and had made the story up, and apologized.
Marie Muchmore and her friend Wilma Bond left work at the Justin McCarty Dress Manufacturers company early so they could watch the presidential motorcade.
They were standing about 30 feet north of the northwest corner of Houston and Main as the motorcade turned from Main onto Houston when Muchmore took some motion picture film of the motorcade with her 8-millimeter Keystone movie camera, and Bond some still photos with her 35-millimeter camera.
As the limousine turned from Houston onto Elm, the two left their position and moved to the concrete wall on the south side of Elm Street.
Bond told the FBI that because of the excitement she did not take photographs at the time of the shooting, though she snapped nine post-assassination photographs that have become famous because they clearly depict the scene in the immediate wake of the shooting, including spectators having dropped to the ground.
And her photo number 6 is important in that it shows several spectators running toward the top of the grassy knoll.
But when film from her camera was later developed, it turned out she definitely had, for about three seconds around and including the head shot at Muchmore frame 42.
Subsequent frames pick up the First Lady on the trunk of the limousine, and Secret Service agent Clint Hill attempting to climb aboard the limousine.
Armed with an 8-millimeter Keystone Olympic motion picture camera and a German-made 35-millimeter Leica camera, Bronson took film and still photos of the presidential limousine proceeding down Main to Houston, and some film of it proceeding north on Houston.
Bronson did not film most of the limousine’s progress down Elm Street, but did pick up the president’s car at the precise time the shots were fired.
The Bell & Howell Director Series spring-wound camera, which retailed for about $200, was capable of shooting approximately seventy-three seconds of continuous film when fully wound.
Jackson saw the film, he instructed that all rights to the historic film be purchased.
Lyndal Shaneyfelt testified that frames “171 through 434” were prepared, an obvious misstatement or typographical error.
The full transcript of the Commission’s last executive session on September 18,1964, is not at the National Archives and has never been located.
Indeed, it is not known if the stenographic notes of the session were ever typed up.
The only Warren Commission executive session transcript regarding the September 18 session that apparently has survived and that the National Archives has is one in which Warren opens the session by saying, “The Commission will be in order.
But transcription of the words spoken at the session abruptly ends with these words, and from that point on, the six-page document only contains a summary of motions made and their disposition.
Though conspiracy theorists have speculated that Warren ordered the destruction of the transcript or stenographer’s notes, it is difficult to see what he would have gained from that.
No one has ever suggested that important matters were discussed at the session, the knowledge of which has been lost to history—that is, not even Russell has alleged, “We discussed a very important matter critical to the case.
Russell’s two-page formal dissent has survived and it is known that his motion was denied.
The six-page document on the September 18,1964, executive session does not contain a reference to Russell’s motion, which it should have.
There aren’t too many books on the assassination written by scholars who have less credibility than Gerald McKnight’s Breach of Trust , which is filled with one outrageous conclusion by the author (e.g., President Johnson, J Edgar Hoover, the Justice Department, the Secret Service, the United States Navy, the CIA, and the Warren Commission were all, from the very beginning, determined to cover up the assassination ) after another, contains extremely biased and selective discussion of the issues, and has sloppy citations.
Russell’s dissent shows how lacking in substance the basis for his conclusion was.
It reads, “I do not share the finding of the Commission as to the probability that both President Kennedy and Governor Connally were struck by the same bullet.
The expert testimony, based on measurements and surveys, including reenactment of the motortrip . . . presents a persuasive case.
If McKnight is correct, which he may be, this would be a very serious deception on Rankin’s part, one that is inconsistent with his sterling reputation and splendid handling of the case as the Commission’s general counsel.
Note that what Russell essentially said is that there were too many things he had questions about, and because of these unanswered questions, instead of concluding he didn’t know what happened, he tended to believe there was a conspiracy.
Maybe if Russell had acted like a responsible public official, he would have learned the answers to his questions.
And if Russell had a little more common sense, that would have also helped.
Russell is the same person who on October 22, 1962, right in the middle of the Cuban missile crisis and the threat of an Armageddon-like nuclear war with Russia, actually urged war rather than a peaceful resolution to the crisis.
It has to be noted that six of the seven Commission members kept their regular jobs (Allen Dulles was retired) during the entire Warren Commission period; for example.
Senators Russell and John Sherman Cooper didn’t stop being United States senators and Chief Justice Earl Warren didn’t stop performing his duties as chief justice.
Only the fourteen assistant counsels and J Lee Rankin, the general counsel, worked full-time.
And realistically, it was the assistant counsels and Rankin, not the seven Commission members, who knew the most about the case.
But to my knowledge, in all the ensuing years since the Commission issued its report, Russell is the only one of the Commission members and assistant counsels who has directly stated a belief in a conspiracy.
To Russell, possession of nuclear weapons wasn’t a deterrent to war but a golden opportunity to blow up the planet.
So the January 13, 1964, supplementary report is itself internally inconsistent.
A further indication that the January 13 report merely repeats, without reflection, the essence of the December 9,1963, FBI report is that the January 13 report did not concern itself with the autopsy.
Yet he believed that Oswald fired all three bullets that were fired in Dealey Plaza.
Fuhrman believes that the whole bullet passing through Kennedy’s body went on to cause the small dent in the chrome strip on the top of the inside of the windshield.
But a whole bullet traveling at about 1,800 feet per second upon exiting Kennedy’s throat would have, as FBI firearms expert Robert Frazier testified, “torn a hole in the chrome,” not merely caused a small dent.
It was driven under escort to the White House garage at 22nd and M Streets, N.W., Washington, D.C., arriving at approximately 9:00m.
Initially, it was examined by Secret Service agents, but at 1:00 m. a team of five FBI agents arrived at the garage, including Robert A Frazier, and the “meticulous examination” of the car and its interior continued until the examination was concluded at 4:30m.
However, we did not tear out all of the rugs on the floor, for instance.
We examined the rugs carefully for holes, for bullet furrows, for fragments.
With respect to the damage to the inside of the windshield and the dent inside the windshield chrome, this damage was very minimal.
It should be noted that there are indications that the damage to the chrome strip, which Frazier attributed to a fragment from the bullet that hit the president’s head, may have had nothing to do with the assassination.
As to the crack in the windshield, corroboration for Frazier’s assertion that it was caused by a fragment of the bullet that struck the president’s head exists in the form of two photographs taken by AP photographer James W Altgens.
The first photograph, taken after the second shot had been fired, shows no damage to the windshield.
The next photograph, taken just after the third shot , clearly shows the spider-like cracks in the windshield that Frazier attributed to a bullet fragment.
Despite the overwhelming evidence and testimony showing that the windshield was only cracked by a small bullet fragment striking it from the inside, some critics contend that the windshield was actually penetrated by a bullet fired by a second sniper located in front of the limousine.
They inevitably cite a report by Richard Dudman, a reporter for the St.
Louis Post-Dispatch, which appeared in the December 21, 1963, edition of the New Republic.
I could not approach close enough to see on which side the cup-shaped spot, that indicates a bullet had pierced the glass from the opposite side,” was.
In a 1987 interview, Ellis claimed the bullet hole was “just above the metal near the bottom of the glass” , but photographs—including the one taken by James Altgens seconds after the head shot—only show a radial pattern of cracks high on the windshield, just left of the rearview mirror.
More importantly, the FBI’s Robert Frazier testified that the windshield was made of safety glass—two layers of glass separated by a thin layer of plastic that bonds them together.
According to Frazier, this was all evidence that the windshield “could only have been struck on the inside surface” from a bullet coming from the rear.
The report went on to say (in a rough analogy to the beveling of bullet wounds on the inside of the skull when the shell is struck on its outer surface) that when laminated glass is struck, the “glass opposite the side of impact is put into a state of tension which results in cracks in the glass opposite the side of impact.
It is accepted as fact that current United States senator Arlen Specter was the architect of the single-bullet theory, and he has done everything to encourage this belief in people.
But from the first moment that I heard that Specter had come up with the single-bullet theory, it made very little sense to me since the theory was so obvious that a child could author it.
And here we were dealing with lawyers on the Commission staff of very high intellect, many of them graduating at the top of their law school classes.
Since they all knew that the bullet, fired from Kennedy’s right rear, had passed through soft tissue in Kennedy’s body on a straight line, and that Connally was seated to the president’s left front, the bullet, after emerging from Kennedy’s body, would have had to go on and hit Connally for the simple reason it had nowhere else to go.
But in the absence of any evidence to the contrary, I went along with it for the moment, intending to pursue the matter further if I found the time.
In the profile on Norman Redlich I saw something I had previously missed.
This went in the direction of confirming my initial thoughts, but obviously I needed further confirmation.
Though I’ve received a very good response to my letters during my writing of this book, including from former presidents and CIA directors , and Specter himself years ago, Specter did not answer my letter.
Although I’m aware he is battling cancer and is very busy with his duties as the chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, I’m also aware that he works every day and finds time for print and television interviews, and that a reply to my question would only take a few minutes of dictation to his secretary.
Most of all, I’m aware that he knows that perhaps his most well-known legacy, one that will be a part of his obituary, is that he was the author of the single-bullet theory.
If, indeed, he was the sole author of the single-bullet theory, surely he would find a minute or two over a year or so to respond to someone who was potentially going to tamper Ford was a member of the Warren Commission, not the nuts-and-bolts staff, so was not in the best posito know precisely the origin of something starting at the staff level, particularly when Specter was the spokesman for the matter.
On the other hand, if he wasn’t the sole author, he may have made the decision that to say nothing would be better than to admit that he wasn’t the sole author (in which case all of his prior pronouncements would be viewed as less than truthful), or state an untruth and take the risk I could prove it was so.
Unlike Specter, who is a politician, and who with justification trumpeted his many achievements, when I asked Redlich if he wanted to make any general comment on the case for my book, he said, “Well, I’ve maintained quite a silence through the years.
Whatever I know about the assassination is in the report and that’s still the case.
I give the reader this prelude to the main reason why I called Redlich as an indication that this is someone of considerable substance and stature who is certainly not likely to distort the official record for his own self-aggrandizement.
When I asked him to comment on Specter leading people to believe that it was he who came up with the single-bullet theory, he responded, “I like Arlen and have always gotten along well with him and don’t want to get into a dispute with him over this.
I’ve never felt the urge or desire to take issue with Arlen taking the credit.
My sense is that Redlich, who by almost all accounts worked harder on the case than anyone else, was a team player only interested in doing his job well.
And as Specter’s superior, and having many other supervisory responsibilities, he was only too happy to let Specter run with the ball on this issue.
And as we’ve seen, Specter ran well, perhaps too well for the historical record.
If I have done a disservice to Specter in what I have written above, I apologize to him.
But I did give him an opportunity to respond to this issue, and he declined.
If he decides to do so in the future, I would draw his attention to two remarks he has made in the past in which he may have inadvertently betrayed what happened.
Epstein asks no follow-up questions, but the phrase “more than anyone else” certainly is not completely compatible with the notion Specter advertises to everyone that he came up with the theory.
So if he responds to what I have written in this book, he should address himself to the “more than anyone else” language, which could open up a subjective can of worms for him.
I should add that I could find no documentary evidence expressly dealing with this issue of authorship of the single-bullet theory, although what is out there is definitely not helpful to Specter.
In addition to Redlich, Specter, and Eisenberg (and for the second meeting only, Belin) attending both conferences, the attendees at the first conference included, among others, the three autopsy surgeons, six FBI agents , and Secret Service inspector Thomas Kelley.
Alfred Olivier, chief of the Wound Ballistics Branch of the Biophysics Division at Edgewood Arsenal, Maryland; Dr.
Charles Gregory and Robert Shaw from Parkland Hospital; and later in the conference, Governor John Connally and his wife, J Lee Rankin, and Warren Commission member John J McCloy.
At each conference the Zapruder film and slides prepared by Life magazine were shown and analyzed in detail by the attendees, who struggled to determine just when each of the two shots hit Kennedy or Connally.
Therefore, if Governor Connally was in the path of the bullet it would have struck him and probably caused the wounds he sustained in his chest cavity.
A second memorandum Eisenberg wrote, on April 22 (this one of the April 21 conference), doesn’t indicate that anything substantive came out of the second meeting not dealt with in the first conference on April 14, except Connally saying he was of the opinion that he had been hit by frame 231.
But again, this was before the tests at Edgewood Arsenal proved that it could.
Eisenberg’s memorandum for each conference says that the attendees concurred that Connally could not have been hit in the back where he was “after frame 235” because he had turned his body to the right at that point and “would have presented a side view to the assassin rather than back view,” which would have been required for Connally to have received the back wound he did.
At both conferences, the only reference to Specter is that he disagreed with everyone else present on this point, saying he felt Connally could have received his back wound “up to 242.”t This has nothing to do with the single-bullet theory.
In fact, it goes precisely in the opposite direction, since if Connally could have been hit as late as frame 242, virtually everyone agrees it would have had to have been from a second gunman.
The only other document I could find tangentially dealing with the issue of authorship is one from Redlich to Rankin on April 27, 1964, in which he implies, without expressly saying so, that by April 27, he and his colleagues had preliminarily concluded that Connally and Kennedy had been hit by the same bullet.
As our investigation now stands, however, we have not shown that these events could possibly have occurred in the manner suggested above.
He said that as far as he could recall only he and Specter from the Warren Commission staff went to Dallas for the reenactment.
Virtually the only person participating in the FBI’s reenactment of the assassination who expressed any doubt at all about the single-bullet theory was FBI firearms expert Robert Frazier, who simulated Oswald in the sniper’s nest during the reenactment.
But the reason for his hesitancy to jump on the single-bullet-theory bandwagon renders his position of no consequence.
This, of course, is true, but those who were in a position—the pathologists from the Warren Commission and HSCA—said the bullet that entered Kennedy’s upper right back passed through soft tissue on a straight line through his body.
So we see that Frazier’s reservation about the single-bullet theory amounts to no reservation at all.
However, he made it clear that any hesitancy on his part about reaching the conclusion of a single bullet hitting Kennedy and Connally was only confined to his resolving the issue by a consideration of the path the bullet took through Kennedy’s body.
He reached the same conclusion based on other evidence, testifying that if the bullet that passed through Kennedy’s body did not go on to hit Connally, “it would have struck somewhere else in the car, and it did not strike somewhere else.
An early allegation that a fourth bullet was recovered near a “manhole cover” on the south side of Elm Street has never been substantiated.
Two photographers standing nearby, Jim Murray and William Allen, began snapping pictures.
Over the next minute (the Hertz sign atop the Depository read 12:39 to 12:40m. in the Murray photographs ), several photographs were taken that show Walthers lighting a cigarette, bending down, and probing the turned-up sod with his hand.
Then, as Foster and Walthers look on, an unidentified plainclothesman with a raincoat over his arm approaches, bends down, and appears to examine the clump of grass with his left hand.
Not so with the statements of two Dealey Plaza witnesses, Wayne and Edna Hartman.
According to the Hartmans, they walked to the area right after the shooting when they saw a police officer and young boy looking at the turf.
ENDNOTES photograph in the series shows the plainclothesman with his left hand in his pocket.
The bottom line is that no bullet is visible in any of the Murray-Allen photographs.
Still, critics have interpreted these photographs as proof that police recovered a “fourth bullet” at the crime scene.
In support of their charge, theorists point to a curious sequence of subsequent press reports and eyewitness statements.
There can be no doubt that the “spot” referred to was the Elm Street sewer cover.
Louis Post-Dispatch reporter Richard Dudman reported, “A group of police officers were examining the area at the side of the street where the President was hit, and a police inspector told me they had just found another bullet in the grass.
Although on the surface Dudman’s report seems to fit with the events surrounding the investigation in the vicinity of the sewer cover, somehow it just doesn’t have a ring of truth to it.
Dudman’s report sounds more like hearsay than anything he heard firsthand.
It should also be noted that Dudman doesn’t even give the name of his source.
In Walther’s testimony before the Warren Commission, he was asked directly if he had “found any spent bullet” at the subject location.
There seems to be little question that shortly after the shooting in Dealey Plaza, while Dallas law enforcement and others were examining a patch of grass on the south side of Elm Street near a sewer cover, the speculation was voiced that a “bullet” may have struck the earth there.
The allegation surfaced again in December 1967 when New Orleans district attorney Jim Garrison appeared on a Dallas television station and showed several of the Murray-Alien photographs claiming, this time, that they depicted a “federal agent” picking up a .45 caliber bullet near the Kennedy assassination site.
Garrison said the bullet proved that someone other than Oswald, who was firing 6.5-millimeter ammunition, was firing at the president.
Walthers, who was shot and killed on January 10, 1969, while investigating a suspicious-person call, was never asked if he knew the identity of the plainclothesman who appears in the Murray-Allen photographs.
But it is very clear from the photo (the man bending down and Foster and Walthers standing nearby watching) that the man was a member of law enforcement and someone they knew.
As assistant Dallas district attorney Bill Alexander says, “I knew Buddy Walthers well.
In fact, it was Foster who provided the most lucid account of what happened, in a 1987 interview with interviewer Larry Sneed.
That’s when I found where the bullet had struck the concrete skirt by the manhole cover and knocked that clump of grass up.
Buddy Walthers, one of the sheriff’s deputies, came up and talked to me about it, and we discussed the direction from which the bullet had come.
It struck the skirt near the manhole cover and then hit this person [a reference to eyewitness James Tague] who had stood by the column over on Commerce Street.
He came by and had a cut on his face where the bullet had struck the column.
You could see where it scraped across the concrete and the column where it struck the pedestrian.
It appeared to have come from the northeast, approximately from the Though Walthers couldn’t have been clearer that he found no bullet in the turf, many conspiracy theorists to this day maintain he did.
So Walthers told a considerable number of people, but Decker got him to lie and change his story.
On its face this is a preposterous story, with people as prominent as Sheriff Decker and Inspector J Herbert Sawyer of the Dallas Police Department in a conspiracy to cover up the facts of the assassination.
And there is no corroboration of Tagg’s assertion, for which he offers no citations.
Both Craig and Sawyer testified before the Warren Commission, and neither indicated any knowledge of a fourth bullet being found.
Craig merely said that ten or twelve minutes after the shooting “Lemmy Lewis or Buddy Walthers” told him in Dealey Plaza “that one of the bullets had ricocheted off the south curb of Elm Street,” not that any bullet was found.
And this was way before Sheriff Bill Decker would have had any chance to tell Walthers to say he hadn't found a bullet.
And even after Craig left the sheriff’s office, became a conspiracy theorist, and turned on Decker and everyone else in Dallas law enforcement who he thought had covered the conspiracy, he never said one word, in his 1971 self-published essay, “When They Kill a President,” about Walthers telling him he had found a fourth bullet, which would have indicated a conspiracy.
And in his essay, he had every opportunity to do so, once again mentioning that he spoke to Walthers shortly after the shooting in Dealey Plaza.
The caption says the man is Walthers, although since the face is not shown it could be the hand of he still-unidentified plainclothesman.
In any event, there are those in the conspiracy community who believe that the object held by the hand in the photograph is the fourth bullet, but the object clearly is far too large and thick for it to be a bullet, much less a part of any bullet.
And photographer Jim Murray, who took some of the photographs, told author Richard Trask, “At the time I was photographing, my honest opinion was that it looked like there had been heel marks, and something like a spiked heel had come out of the dirt and created a little mound of damp earth.
While it is obvious that police investigated the claim that a bullet had struck the concrete skirt surrounding the sewer cover (as Police Chief Curry said and crime-scene photographs support), it is equally obvious, contrary to the critics’ allegations , that no bullet was found.
None of this is evidence of a fourth bullet, only evidence of what may have happened to Oswald’s first missed shot or to a fragment of the bullet that struck the president in the head.
From my concerted effort to identify this person, in which I received significant assistance from former representatives of the FBI, Secret Service, ATF , Dallas Police Department, and Dallas sheriff’s office, I believe he was not employed by any of these local or federal agencies.
Despite the oft-cited references to a bullet being recovered near the sewer cover, if a bullet were actually recovered, it is difficult to believe that no record would exist.
After all, the plaza was full of spectators at the time of the alleged discovery, the story was covered by numerous reporters, and the actual event was captured on film by two photographers.
The allegation makes no sense unless you believe (as many critics do) that Oswald had been chosen well in advance of the shooting to be the fall guy.
But for that to be true, you’d also have to believe that the Dallas Police Department was in on the conspiracy to murder Kennedy, an allegation for which there is no evidence.
And if the police were not involved in the conspiracy to murder Kennedy, then you’d have to believe that within nine minutes after the assas312 ENDNOTES sination, they found out who the killers were and agreed, along with spectators, photographers, and reporters, to cover up the conspiracy for the killers.
I think most rational people will agree that things like this just don’t happen in the real world.
But the entrance wound to Connally’s back was far more markedly ovoid, to the point of being described as “linear” by Dr.
When the bullet exits the rifle barrel, the explosive gases propelling it from behind are now free to expand and move past the bullet.
This makes the bullet temporarily unstable, causing it to wobble slightly off center.
Fuhrman was a competent robbery-homicide detective for the LAPD but not a firearms expert on the force.
Robert Shaw, in his testimony before the Warren Commission, said that although he was “not a ballistics expert . . . there might have been some tumbling” to the bullet that struck Connally in the back.
In his analysis of the case, he concluded that the first shot Oswald fired was at Zapruder frame 206, and then, without citing any support at all for his conclusion, goes on to say that this first shot “struck and ricocheted off the top of President Kennedy’s head.
Rosemary and her older sister, fourteen-year-old Linda Kay, had gone to Dealey Plaza to watch the motorcade with their parents.
Their father, Phillip L Willis, a retired air force major, had a camera and took several color slides of the presidential limousine in the motorcade.
By Z200, about two and a quarter seconds after Z160 , she comes to a complete stop.
The Zapruder film shows that at this same moment, Rosemary’s father is in the process of taking his famous photo , determined to have been taken around Z202.
Roberdeau isn’t troubled by the fact that maybe the little girl just wanted to resume looking at the president passing by.
Nor is he troubled by the fact that several other people in the same frames, including two Dallas police motorcyclists, keep looking in the same direction as they previously were, not looking to the right front.
Roberdeau also isn’t troubled in the least by the fact that even the HSCA, who claimed a shot was fired from the grassy knoll, doesn’t agree with him.
Though this is probably true, Liu, by omission, was being less than truthful in his article about Rosemary Willis’s recollections.
Eight months earlier, Liu told the HSCA that Rosemary said to him that “she recalls stopping because she saw the bullet hit Kennedy’s back , not because she heard the sound of the shot.
Of course, Rosemary Willis’s earlier claim that she actually saw the bullet hit Kennedy in the back couldn’t possibly be true.
If he had gunned the accelerator at that time, an accurate shot by Oswald would have been much more difficult.
Since even before slowing, the limousine was only traveling around eleven miles per hour on a straight line with the barrel of the rifle and on a declining road, Kennedy, as Lutz said, was already essentially a stationary target, and the limousine merely slowing down further to seven or eight miles an hour probably didn’t give Oswald, in the sniper’s nest, too much more of a break than he already had.
Author Gerald Posner, pointing out that the sniper’s nest is on a straight line with the oak tree and where Tague was, theorizes that the bullet was “fragmented against a tree branch,” not the pavement, and it was the copper jacket, separated from the lead core by the tree branch, that struck the pavement on Elm.
The lead core, he believes, remained on a straight line in its flight and struck the Main Street curb near Tague over five hundred feet away, sending a chip of concrete into Tague’s cheek.
However, whichever bullet it was, the probability is very high that it was a bullet fragment that hit the curb near Tague.
The fact that no copper was present (the Mannlicher-Carcano bullets were copper-jacketed) strongly suggests that a fragment from the lead core of a bullet struck the curb.
Contrary to the Commission’s conclusion, the second shot can at least be eliminated as the possible source of the mark on the curb since this bullet was recovered at Parkland Hospital.
That means that the curb mark was caused by a fragment from either the first or third shots fired in Dealey Plaza.
He speculates that a possible reason for Hoover’s cover-up was that the FBI was saying only three shots were fired, and, per Tague, the curb shot might go in the direction of four shots and a conspiracy, which the FBI did not want to find.
But although the FBI originally said it couldn’t find the very small mark, which is not surprising at all, in a letter from Hoover to J Lee Rankin, general counsel for the Warren Commission, which Tague himself cites, Hoover tells Rankin that the mark was finally located and lead and traces of antimony were found at the point of impact, although no copper was found.
He also says the piece of curbing that was cut out by the FBI on August 5,1964, to be transported to the FBI lab for analysis, is now at the National Archives, and says it had been “patched by a mortar-like substance” before it went back to the lab, but gives no citation to support this assertion, which he couches in a sinister context without telling the reader what his specific point is other than that he smells a cover-up.
No one knows for sure how the Warren Commission first learned of the curb shot, but an assistant United States attorney in Dallas, Martha Jo Stroud, had learned about it from photographer Tom Dillard and wrote Rankin on June 9, 1964, enclosing a photograph of the curb.
And on June 11, Assistant Counsel Arlen Specter sent a memo to Rankin requesting that Tague be deposed by the Commission.
But he gives us no evidence to support this, and the fact remains that before and after the Warren Commission learned of the curb shot, its belief was always that only three shots were fired.
Olson and Turner base a good deal of their thesis on the testimony of Phillip L Willis who, as alluded to in an earlier endnote, took a number of color slides of the motorcade that day with his 35-millimeter camera.
According to Willis, one slide in particular, the fifth in the series, was taken simultaneously with the shot that hit the president, which Willis believed to be the first shot.
Olson and Turner realized that // Willis was right about snapping slide number 5 at the sound of the first shot, then there must have been a second gunman, since Kennedy was still hidden from Oswald’s view by an oak tree at the time of Z202, and therefore presumably couldn’t have been shot from Oswald’s sixth-floor sniper’s perch.
Willis, himself, can be seen lowering his camera on frames after Z140, indicating that he had just taken slide number 4.
Kennedy began her head turn), was indeed taken at the time of the first shot.
The authors of the 1977 article felt that the bullet that grazed the transverse process caused “some degree of trauma capable of creating a lesion of his spinal cord The same radiopaque anomalies were noted by Dr.
Russell H Morgan of the 1968 Clark Panel, who thought they might represent metal fragments left behind by the bullet.
Thorburn’s article described a patient who was admitted unconscious to a Manchester, England, hospital on June 5, 1886, with a fractured dislocation between the fifth and sixth cervical vertebrae.
Thorburn wrote that “all the muscles of arms were paralyzed with the exception of the biceps,... the consequence being that the elbows were flexed, the shoulder abducted and rotated outwards, and the hands and arms the position indicated” on the illustration in the original Thorburn article.
Drawing a parallel between the fixed, locked nature of the Thorburn position and the president’s posture in Z226-236, Dr.
One, the Thorburn illustration shows the person’s forearms are flexed upward, not toward each other as they are with Kennedy, Kennedy’s two hands almost touching each other.
Michael Baden, the chief forensic pathologist for the HSCA, said that he has the greatest respect for Lattimer, who made a private slide and film presentation of his Thorburn argument to the HSCA in 1978 , but his expertise is as a urologist, not as a forensic pathologist.
I then asked about the two tiny radiopaque splinters of bone that Lattimer saw near the tip of the transverse process of the sixth cervical vertebra on the right side of the president’s neck.
Baden said he believed there were thirteen autopsy X-rays of Kennedy’s neck that his forensic panel examined, and that “we did see Dr.
Lattimer’s two pinhead-sized radiopaque specks, but we concluded that they were artifacts [abnormalities not in the body but from other causes, such as dirt getting onto the X-ray plate during the developing process, a rather common occurrence], not bone splinters or metal fragments.
Baden said there are an endless variety of ways people respond to being struck by a bullet, and one should not jump to the conclusion that the president was exhibiting the Thorburn position simply because of the similarity between that position and Kennedy’s.
Baden said the bullet did not touch any part of the president’s spinal cord (Telephone interview of Dr.
During the American Bar Association’s 1992 mock trial of Oswald in San Francisco, Failure Analysis Associates president Dr.
If the bullet had gone on to hit any substantial part of the president’s spinal cord, the argument could be made that the injury to the spinal cord may have neutralized or anesthetized the nerves in the cord to the extent that the later shot to the head could not have caused the neurological response believed to be responsible for the president’s head snap to the rear.
Absent this rationale for the head snap to the rear, one is left with the “jet effect” argument, which is not as persuasive since the outward explosion to the right front of the president’s skull would cause the movement of the president’s head, in reaction, to be propelled more to the left than to the rear, which was the main direction in which the president’s head was propelled.
The possibdities stated here, of course, give hope to conspiracy theorists who are certain the head snap to the rear was caused by a shot from the president’s right front, not from his rear as the Warren Commission concluded.
However, as pointed out in the text, a bullet weighing a third of an ounce (the weight of the bullet hitting the president) would be incapable of causing the president’s head to be propelled backward 8 inches, as we know was the case.
It was this splitting-of-the-hairs analysis by the defense, involving just three frames , that was the basis of the mock trial’s defense argument rejecting the single-bullet theory, hardly a robust basis for such a conclusion.
Robert Piziali, the prosecution’s expert witness at the ABA mock trial, believed that Kennedy and Connally were struck by the same bullet, and makes an interesting observation as to why he believes Kennedy’s reaction to being hit was an involuntary as opposed to a voluntary response.
Believe it or not, there are those who actually believe that Governor Connally was Oswald’s target that fateful day, not President Kennedy.
But obviously, with Oswald’s dreams of grandeur and his immersion in the fortunes of Marxism on a national and international scale, a state governor would be small potatoes to him.
When Governor Connally was asked, within days after the assassination, about the speculation that Oswald had been after him that day, he scoffed at the suggestion.
If he wanted, he could have done so countless times in Dallas and elsewhere in Texas.
I had been campaigning all over Texas ... for 11 months this year riding in parades, horseback, open cars, on street corners, with no security whatever.
Additionally, the argument that Oswald may have hated Connally, blaming him for his “undesirable” discharge from the Marine Corps Reserve, has no merit.
Although Oswald wrote Connally, then secretary of the navy, in 1962, seeking to have his undesirable discharge changed to honorary, he received a letter back saying that Connally was no longer secretary of the navy and that his request would be turned over to Connally’s successor.
It was Marina herself who is believed to have given birth to the notion that maybe her husband had been out to kill Connally, not Kennedy.
His best shot at Connally would have been when the presidential limousine was proceeding northbound on Houston.
Even Marina later acknowledged she was wrong about her Connally opinion when some Secret Service agents pointed out to her that by the time of the fatal head shot to Kennedy, Kennedy had already been wounded and was leaning toward his wife, his body no longer in alignment with Connally’s body.
But Warren Commission counsel never asked him the obvious question of when that was.
Instead, he asked if Connally was in the right position at frames 235,240,249, and 255, for all of which Frazier said he was not.
But the Z200-206 possibility was completely speculative with no evidence to support it.
The first observation, eventually dubbed the “hat flip,” was originally mentioned in a 1966 Newsweek article challenging Governor Connally’s claim in Life magazine that he wasn’t hit by the same bullet that struck Kennedy.
Although perceptive and valid, the observation lay dormant for the next fifteen years.
Then, in 1981, assassination researcher Johann Rush, who had filmed Oswald passing out Fair Play for Cuba leaflets in front of the International Trade Mart in New Orleans in the summer of 1963, spotted the same thing while looking at a videotaped copy of the Zapruder film at a TV station in Hattiesburg, Mississippi, where he worked as a reporter and cameraman.
By comparing color slides of the Zapruder film with “amorphous blobs” on the rolling tape, and watching it forward and backward, he says, “at least two-hundred times,” he concluded that for a brief moment, between frames Z226 and Z228, Connally’s right arm and hand, and the beige Stetson hat that he had been holding, suddenly snap up in front of his face.
However, it wasn’t until February 1992 that the “hat flip” came to the attention of the national scientific community.
Michael West, a dentist who was also the medical examiner in Hattiesburg, Mississippi, and a conspiracy theorist before he met Rush, made a fifteen-minute video presentation they had been working on for three years to a group of forensic scientists, including Dr.
Michael Baden, meeting at the national convention of the American Academy of Forensic Scientists in New Orleans.
However, it also should be noted, as conspiracy theorists have pointed out, that the digitized version of the Zapruder film shows Connally holding his hat with his right hand well after frame 225, when the HSCA concluded Connally was hit.
Baden explained to me that it was “presumptive to believe that any injury to Connally’s right wrist would automatically cause him to release his grip on his hat.
He recalled, as an example, the murder of mobster Carmine Galante in a Brooklyn restaurant in 1979, where he was shot more than thirty times all over his body and died instantly, yet still had his cigar lodged firmly in his mouth.
Michael Baden by author on April 13, 2000) Larry Sturdivan, the HSCA’s expert on wound ballistics, says in his book, The JFK Myths , that although Connally’s “radius was shattered, the other bone in his forearm, the ulna, was intact, stabilizing his wrist and hand.
All the tendons, muscles, and motor nerves that powered his fingers and thumb were also undamaged On May 25,1991, more than a half year before the New Orleans presentation, Rush sent me a video copy of his and Dr.
West’s findings, and I too had a difficult time making out any hat flip.
The smashing of the radius disabled the rotation of his forearm, a loss he never completely regained.
A second observation—a bulging of the right lapel of the governor’s suit coat— may pinpoint the moment Governor Connally is hit to be at Z222-224, just as he reemerges from behind the Stemmons sign, but not for the specific reason given.
Initially noticed in April 1975 by assassination researcher Robert P Smith of Pittsburgh, the so-called lapel bulge or flip has taken its place next to the hat flip in assassination lore.
Smith brought his finding to the attention of one of his associates, Dr.
Cyril H Wecht, who telephoned Robert Olsen, a staff member of the Rockefeller Commission looking into illegal CIA activities within the United States, and as a subset of that, allegations that the CIA was involved in the assassination of President Kennedy.
He described a “dramatic” distortion of Connally’s suit coat as the exiting bullet passed through it.
In frame 224, the very same frame in which we know Kennedy had to have been in the process of raising his elbows up high in response to being struck by a bullet, we see that the right lapel, in one-eighteenth of a second, has bulged out and is covering much of the white area of his shirt.
Anti-conspiracy theorists argue that this is proof that Connally was struck at Z224, around the same time Kennedy is seen reacting to being shot, thereby conclusively proving the single-bullet theory.
The only problem is that the “lapel flip” label is not accurate in its implications.
It has been considered to be accurate because the photo of the front of Connally’s suit coat shown in the Warren Commission volumes is a poor copy and doesn’t show where the bullet actually exited his coat.
But I secured from the National Archives a photo of the bullet hole in the front of Connally’s suit coat, and it is not on the right lapel, or even close.
The corresponding hole to Connally’s shirt was measured to be 27. centimeters below the shoulder seam, and again, 15. centimeters to the right of the midline.
Indeed, the exit hole being in the right lapel never did make any sense since we know the bullet exited from the governor’s body right below his right nipple, nowhere near the right lapel.
However, although the lapel flip cannot be used to argue that the bullet exited the lapel around Z224, since we know it didn’t, it is certainly possible that the bullet exiting Governor Connally’s body beneath his right nipple around this very time caused the sudden change and bulge in his right lapel.
But even here, we have to allow for the possibility that Connally’s lapel bulge was caused by something else, such as a gust of wind.
The wind was very gusty in Dealey Plaza at the time of the shooting, but the likelihood that it caused the lapel bulge in that particular eighteenth of a second, and additionally, to the same side of Connally’s suit coat that we know the bullet penetrated, is extremely remote.
John K Lattimer and three colleagues, Angus Laidlaw, Paul Heneghan, and Eric J Haubner, attempted to verify Dr.
Robert Piziali’s findings by duplicating the shooting in Dallas as closely as possible.
A white dress shirt, necktie, and tropical worsted jacket were placed over the rib cage to simulate the clothing the governor wore that day.
An array of arm bones, encased in simulated forearms, was arranged in front of the right lapel of the “governor” to simulate Connally’s arm, and the entire mock-up was backed up with a bullet trap, where the test bullets were recovered.
The experimenters fired Western Cartridge Company 6.5-millimeter ammunition through an identical model Mannlicher-Carcano rifle.
A video camera and a highspeed 35-millimeter motion picture camera captured the results.
Lattimer knew from his previous experiments that the test bullet would almost certainly “tumble” after passing through the simulated neck (just as the bullet did during the assassination) and strike the mock-up of the governor’s “back” at about the point where he was actually hit.
Sure enough, as the bullet tumbled and plowed into one of the ribs, removing 4. centimeters (1 3 /4 inches was destroyed during the actual assassination), it exited at a point compatible with the exit wound in Connally’s right chest.
The flying fragments of rib and soft tissue, which were blown out by the tumbling bullet, ripped a large ragged hole in both the shirt and the jacket, just as Oswald’s bullet had done in Dealey Plaza.
The test bullet then struck one of the forearms arrayed in front of the jacket, and was finally stopped by the bullet trap just beyond.
Lattimer and his associates discovered that the suit coat bulged out about six inches in one-tenth of a second, snapping back shortly thereafter.
Without the tumble caused by the bullet’s passage through the simulated neck, there was no billowing of the jacket.
It is difficult to imagine why Connally would reverse his three-decade-old position that he and Kennedy were hit by separate bullets, especially when we know that just a few months earlier, Connally wrote a letter in which he clearly and unequivocally stated he was not hit by the bullet that hit Kennedy.
However, the Warren Commission, knowing that one of the three shots fired by Oswald missed the presidential limousine, entertained the “possibility” that the second shot was the head shot and the third shot missed the limousine.
Chad R Zimmerman, a Boulder, Colorado, doctor of chiropractic, elaborated on the neuromuscular reaction of Kennedy.
When the brain is so rapidly disrupted, chemically mediated neuronal synapses occur on a grand scale, producing rapid, but short-duration contractions of skeletal muscle tissue.
The result is movement in the direction of the contraction of the stronger muscles.
In most cases, back and neck extension occur because of a strength predominance of those muscles.
For example, the quadriceps are more powerful than the hamstrings, so the quadriceps would win the contraction battle and the net result would be knee extension and hip flexion.
However, the gluteal muscles are stronger than the quads, so the hip joint would extend.
This so-called jet effect, first enunciated in 1969 by author William H Hanson in his book The Shooting of John F Kennedy: One Assassin, Three Shots, Three Hits—No Misses, was most prominently advocated in 1976 by Nobel Prize-winning physicist Luis W Alvarez.
Alvarez saw that the critics were treating the problem as though it In 1945, Alvarez was assigned the job of measuring the explosive energy of the atomic bombs dropped on Japan and was actually on the plane that followed the one that dropped the A-bomb on Hiroshima on August 6,1945.
He was not in the air three days later when a second A-bomb was dropped on Nagasaki.
But he did have a letter attached to a test gauge dropped prior to the bombing of Nagasaki.
But he knew that any analysis had to involve three masses, the bullet, the head, and the spray of brain matter seen at Z313.
We see the rocket going directly upward into the sky even though the fuel the rocket ejected is going downward in the opposite direction.
To confirm the conclusion he had reached as a result of sophisticated mathematical calculation, Alvarez conducted (with the help of colleague Sharon Buckingham and assassinologist Paul Hoch) filmed test shootings in June of 1969 on But perhaps a better analogy, because we are much more familiar with it, is given by Larry Sturdivan, a wounds ballistics expert who participated in the tests for the Warren Commission at the Edgewood Arsenal.
He says a “jet engine forces a very large mass of gas rearward at very high velocity.
So a shot from the sniper’s nest (where all the evidence shows the shot to the head came from) could be expected to push the president’s head not only forward but to the left.
So in addition to the jet-effect principle set forth above, the president’s head was already to the left at the time of the subsequent head snap to the rear.
At frame 312, the HSCA determined that “Kennedy was turned partially away from Zapruder approximately 25° past the 90°, or profile, direction.
It would clearly appear that the combination of factors that existed (Kennedy’s head already tilted 25 degrees to the left, the shot proceeding from right to left, and the expulsion of blood, tissue, and bone to the president’s right front producing a jet-effect force in the opposite direction to the left) more than explains why Kennedy’s head following impact at Z313 is seen going not only backward but also to the left.
But to the conspiracy theorists, the president’s head going to the rear and to the left is completely consistent with the head shot coming from the grassy knoll to the president’s right front.
Almost invariably, the melons, upon being struck with a bullet, were driven not in the direction the projectile was traveling (which a layperson would naturally believe would be required by the law of physics), but counterintuitively in the opposite direction—that is, back toward the gun.
Although a neuromuscular reaction makes sense to my lay mind, the jet-effect principle, accompanied, as assassination researcher Milicent Cranor has put it, by “nearly impenetrable mathematical formulas,” is still one that I am not completely comfortable with in that I sense that the rocket-recoil analogy may involve factors different from the Kennedy case that are beyond my knowledge of physics, which is virtually nonexistent.
David Mantik has pointed out, some tests other than those conducted by Alvarez had a converse result.
In 1964, filmed tests were conducted for the Warren Commission at the Aberdeen Proving Ground’s Vulnerability Laboratory in Aberdeen, Maryland, in which a Mannlicher-Carcano rifle was fired at ten skulls filled with gelatin tissue simulant.
In all cases, the skull was pushed forward in the direction of the bullet.
Conspiracy theorists have offered up their own “evidence” that the fatal head shot came from the front.
But what they have come up with is not really persuasive evidence at all.
For instance, they note that after the head shot, and starting at around Z343, Jackie Kennedy can be seen getting up from her seat and crawling backward on the trunk of the limousine.
Indeed, Secret Service agent Clint Hill, who climbed on the car from the rear, grabbed the First Lady, and put her back in her seat, testified that “it appeared to me” that Mrs.
However, he added, “But I cannot say there was” anything, and he never mentioned seeing anything like brain matter or part of a skull behind the president.
The First Lady herself testified that “there were pictures later on of me climbing out the back.
Kennedy would seek to grasp a portion of her husband’s skull flying, as the conspiracy theorists allege, backward.
It should be noted that although the First Lady could never have acknowledged this, and indeed, it may not be true, the mostly off-the-record stated belief by many throughout the years is that her attempted exit from the rear of the limousine was simply a mechanical and unthinking instinct on her part to remove herself from the line of fire, in that three bullets had already been fired at that point in time.
Between this possibility and the one that she was trying to recapture a flying piece of skull, the former makes the most sense to me, although if she had been thinking rationally at the moment, diving on the floor of the limousine would have been much more efficacious if her intent was to protect herself.
With respect to the pieces of Kennedy’s skull found on Elm Street, imprecise and inadequate questioning by Warren Commission counsel has precluded us from perhaps learning just where at least one of the pieces was found.
Dallas County deputy constable Seymour Weitzman testified that several minutes after the shootThough it doesn’t deal with a part of the president’s skull, conspiracy theorists have used essentially the same argument for a large chunk of the president’s brain.
Parkland doctor Marion Jenkins, on a San Francisco television special on the assassination onNovember 18,1988, said that in Trauma Room One Jacqueline was “carrying her hands like this , and at one other time—I can’t tell you how many times she was in the room—she nudged me with her elbow and handed me what she had in her hand.
Jenkins told JAMA in 1992 that it was “a large chunk of her husband’s brain tissue.
The Case for Conspiracy , New Frontier Productions, 1993) Jenkins’s story is certainly possible, but it’s curious in that only he, of all the doctors and nurses in the room, told such a story, and that the story first surfaced in 1988, a quarter of a century later.
She is more likely to have gotten it when she was sitting next to him in the presidential limousine when she was cradling his head in her arms.
John Connally testified that “after the third shot she said, ‘They have killed my husband.
Further imprecise questioning didn’t pinpoint where the piece was found—now, apparently, by Weitzman.
But the approximate location on Elm Street in which it was found, which would be some evidence of whether it flew off the president’s head in front of or behind where the limousine was at the time of Z313, was never established.
Even if it had been, the location would not be conclusive evidence of the direction in which the piece of skull flew off , since hundreds of people were walking and running across Elm Street before the piece of skull was found and it could easily have been kicked from its original landing location.
The second piece of the president’s skull (which has become known as the “Harper fragment”) was found the following day by a young college student, William “Billy” Harper.
The argument that the location of the Harper fragment is evidence the shot came from the president’s right side is not overly persuasive in that it is not automatic that a bullet entering the right side of the president’s head (which grassy knoll adherents believe), and which we know did not go on to exit anywhere on the left side of his head , would result in a piece of the president’s skull landing on his left side.
Martin; 6 H 294—295, WCT Bobby W Hargis), indicating, the theorists say, a shot from the front.
But the high-contrast photo of Zapruder frame 313, per a 1976 Itek Corporation study, showed that large particles of brain matter were all to the front, establishing the shot as coming from the rear.
Clearly, the wind could be expected to carry the particles of blood and gray matter backward onto Martin and Hargis.
Finally, we know there was no exit wound to the left side of the president’s head that could explain the blood and tissue ending up on Martin and Hargis.
The Harper fragment and brain matter ending up to the president’s left is completely consistent with their being driven there by the force and direction of the bullet entering the back of the president’s head from the president’s right rear and proceeding in a right-to-left direction.
Moreover, all of the physical evidence shows the bullet came from the sniper’s nest.
Itek Corporation, which enhanced the photo and had its scientists examine it closely, took this down a shade by saying, “There is no question that the explosion from the bullet impact radiates matter in all directions.
It has to be noted that the position of the conspiracy theorists that the “law of physics” requires that an object hit by a projectile has to be pushed in the same direction the projectile is traveling is not one that they should be citing in this case, since it is self-defeating.
When the theorists say Kennedy’s head was propelled backward and to the left by the shot from their gunman on the grassy knoll, it is not clear at all from the subsequent Zapruder frames just how much, if at all, his head was pushed to the left at impact.
What is very clear is that his head moved very dramatically to the rear.
The big problem for the conspiracists is that if the head shot was fired, as they claim, from the grassy knoll, since their grassy knoll gunman was approaching being perpendicular to the president, using their law of physics theory the president’s head should have been pushed much more to the left than to the rear.
Another piece was found in the footwell in front of the backseat of the presidential limousine.
His conclusion was that there would be “a very slight movement” of Kennedy’s head toward the front as a result of being struck from the rear.
This erroneous belief appears to be the centerpiece of Josiah Thompson’s conclusion that more than one gunman fired at Kennedy and hence, the existence of a conspiracy.
As indicated, Thompson goes on to say that what prevented Kennedy’s head from being thrust substantially forward was the shot from the front (which Thompson says was fired a fraction of a second later) reversing the direction in which the president’s head was being propelled, and knocking it back 8V2 inches.
He told host Walter Cronkite that while studying the frames of the Zapruder film published in Life magazine, he noted that “at frame 227, the highlights of the windshield of the car are all drawn out into rather pronounced streaks.
And you see that in the frame ahead the highlights are individual dots.
So something rather violent happened to the line of direction of Mr Zapruder’s camera in frame 227.
Alvarez right, the Zapruder film might contain a record of the number of shots fired.
Fascinated by Alvarez’s “revelation,” the CBS staff conducted an experiment to test its validity.
They found that even when two volunteer cameramen were specifically instructed to “hold cameras as steady as possible, and keep filming no matter what happens,” their reaction to shots being fired above them “was obvious.
The Warren Report , part I, June 25, 1967,18, CBS Television Archives) Alvarez later wrote an in-depth exposition of his theory in the September 1976 American Journal of Physics.
He found five blurs, which he called “streaks” in the film, and was sensible enough to observe this did not mean five shots.
Alvarez saw an almost equal train of streaks immediately thereafter, between Z330 and Z334.
Lesser streaks were Two years before Alvarez, Warren Commission critic Harold Weisberg had noticed the same blurring Alvarez did, but had not been quite as explicit as Alvarez in describing the possible connection between the blur and shots being fired.
William Hartmann, senior scientist at the Planetary Science Institute in Tucson, Arizona, and Frank Scott of the Perkin-Elmer Corporation, each conducted a separate blur analysis of the Zapruder film at the committee’s request.
This time, however, all of the Zapruder frames were analyzed, and hence, Dr.
Hartmann found a blur at Z158—159, and Mr Scott one at Z158—160, the time when other evidence shows the first shot was fired.
The CBS experiment proves that a gunshot will normally cause a cameraman’s neuromuscular system to go into, as Dr.
So the three gunshots that day would have almost assuredly caused a startled reaction in Zapruder and, hence, a blur on his film.
The demonstrable defect in blur or jiggle analysis is that although a gunshot will produce a blur (and hence, the absence of a blur is very strong circumstantial evidence of the absence of a gunshot), a blur obviously does not necessarily have to be caused by a gunshot.
Any number of other things—a cough, an unintentional nudge , a gust of wind, movement of Zapruder’s feet, even his efforts to keep an object in frame—could also cause a blur.
Zapruder himself testified before the Warren Commission that his images weren’t very clear for the simple reason that his camera movements were magnified by the telephoto lens setting he was using.
Further, the emotional reaction of what one sees through the viewfinder could also easily cause a startled reaction.
This would explain the fact that Alvarez, Hartmann, and Scott all detected blurs in the Zapruder film not only around the time of the head shot at Z313, but also around Z330-334, a second later, when he was fully absorbing the horrific sight of the president’s head having exploded in front of him.
It was an awful thing and I loved the president, and to see that happen before my eyes—his head just opened up and shot down like a dog—it leaves a very, very deep . . . impression with you.
Because of all of the above variables and imponderables, and because there is no known way to distinguish a blur or jiggle caused by an involuntary reaction from one caused by, for instance, a voluntary pan/search movement, blur or jiggle analysis can never be conclusive on the number or timing of the shots fired in Dealey Plaza and should not be given great weight.
On November 27, 1963, just four days after the assassination, three FBI firearms experts (there was no assertion by the Warren Commission that they were also expert riflemen—these were simply the experts who examined Oswald’s Mannlicher-Carcano rifle and his revolver to determine if they were the murder weapons, although one senses that one of the firearms experts, Robert A Frazier, was also an expert rifleman) tested Oswald’s Mannlicher-Carcano mostly to determine the speed and the accuracy with which it could be fired at short range.
In testimony before the Warren Commission, Frazier said that each of them, using the telescopic sight, fired three shots at close stationary targets, one firing in 9 seconds, another in 7, and he in 6 seconds.
But then he went on to say that he alone fired two series of three shots at a short-range target with the primary purpose being to determine the speed with which the rifle could be fired and the secondary purpose being accuracy, and he got the rounds off in 4. and 4. seconds.
Though all six shots were high and to the right of the aiming point , this was because of a defective scope, which Frazier said he could have compensated for if he had wanted to by firing low and to the left, but didn’t.
However, the important thing is that in one three-shot burst, the bullets landed within a two-inch circle, indicating accuracy.
On the four targets, the three bullets, all landing high and to the right of the aiming point , hit within a threeto five-inch circle.
On the more interesting question of the accuracy with which one can fire two shots within 1.66 seconds, the HSCA Report, upon scrutiny, is not clear at all.
Another expert hit one of three targets, with the time between two shots being 1. seconds.
Not only has the single-bullet theory been proved by all the evidence, but as set forth in the main text, Oswald had more time than 1.66 seconds to fire his first and second shots.
It has to be noted that the HSCA got all caught up in the 1.66-second requirement because of Dr.
James Barger, the acoustics specialist who analyzed the Dallas police Dictabelt recording of sounds and transmissions around the time of the shooting in Dealey Plaza and convinced the majority of the committee that there was only 1.66 seconds between the first two “impulse patterns” on the recording.
Hence, unless there was a second gunman, Oswald had to have fired the first two shots, one of which missed, in 1.66 seconds.
The farther away from the muzzle you get, the less a consideration this is.
However, a master sergeant in charge of marksmanship training at the Marine Corps school in Quantico, Virginia, told the Warren Commission that if Oswald had used the scope on his rifle, it would have been a distinct advantage over the iron sights in not only slow but also rapid fire, but he did not address himself to the issue as to which sight enabled one to fire more quickly, his emphasis seeming to be on accuracy.
The testimony didn’t address the issue of whether *HSCA chief counsel Robert Blakey, who was present with his chief deputy, Gary Cornwell, at the test firing at Lorton, reported in a March 22,1979, letter to “All Committee Members,” that “it is not difficult to fire two consecutive shots from a Mannlicher-Carcano within 1.66 seconds, and to ‘point aim,’ if not carefully ‘sight’ it, on the target on each shot.
Cornwell fired the rifle twice in 1. seconds and I fired it twice within 1. seconds.
In both cases, the second shot missed, but was close to the silhouette.
But he said if there was such a thing, he couldn’t imagine how it would inhibit or interfere with Oswald’s use of the scope.
In testimony before the Warren Commission, Marguerite Oswald said that she and her son Robert were left-handed, and also, “Lee was left-handed.
Robert Oswald, who said he himself wrote left-handed but did everything else righthanded, said, “Mother was wrong,” on Lee being left-handed.
Also, as with all military rifles, Oswald’s Carcano “has a right-handed action” , meaning the bolt action is on the right side of the weapon.
Though a left-hander could certainly learn to fire a right-handed bolt-action rifle with a fair amount of speed, it is much more natural and easier for a right-handed person to do so.
However, assassination researcher Jerome B Agel has a dramatically different viewpoint.
Eventually, the weapon came to be owned by Crescent Firearms, which sold it to Klein’s Sporting Goods.
He gave her $10,000 up front with the balance of $35,000 to be paid if he got clear title to the weapons.
However, the FBI had seized the Carcano and revolver right after the assassination and refused to relinquish possession of them to King, claiming that the Carcano and Oswald’s revolver “had been forfeited to the United States” by virtue of their having been purchased in violation of the Federal Firearms Act when Oswald used a fictitious name to buy them.
The Carcano and the revolver were, of course, designated as protected items by the United States attorney general, and on November 1,1966, the United States government acquired formal title to the two weapons.
A footnote to all of this is that William Suchur, the owner of International Firearms Company of Montreal, informed the FBI on March 12, 1964, per a letter from J Edgar Hoover to the Warren Commission of April 22, 1964, that “in the 1930’s Mussolini ordered all arms factories to manufacture the MannlicherCarcano rifle.
However, no other Mannlicher-Carcano with a serial number of C2766 has ever surfaced, although one with a serial number of 2766 without any prefix did.
Albans, Vermont, which in turn sold it on July 5,1962, to a firm called Aldens in Chicago.
The weapon’s history beyond this point was not determined by the FBI because Alden’s records were not available.
Earlier, the witness, on his own, volunteered that rifle tests were conducted at the Aberdeen Proving Ground.
Eisenberg didn’t ask where this was located, but its in Aberdeen, Maryland, and we can assume that the tests with Oswald’s Carcano were also conducted there.
It’s unlikely they took place in 1963, since not too much time was left in 1963, and also, these tests were conducted for the Warren Commission, and the first formal meeting of the Warren Commission staff didn’t take place until January 20, 1964.
We don’t even know the full names of the riflemen who participated in the tests, Eisenberg not asking Simmons who they were.
But one way or another, through their own in-depth questioning and more precise FBI reports, the Warren Commission elicited all the information about the case any reasonable person could ever hope for, and then some.
But while we’re on the subject, surprisingly, even the lawyers on the Commission staff who had trial experience, like Joe Ball and Albert Jenner, often found it difficult to ask the automatic preliminary questions of time and place (which sometimes have absolutely critical importance), and for the researcher the information frequently has to be secured from other sources.
For example, oftentimes the witness, without being asked, had the common sense to volunteer the information.
The feasibility of anyone, including Oswald, firing with the requisite accuracy within a given period of time caused a flap prior to the trial in London.
I had asked my firearms expert, Monty Lutz, to see if he could duplicate what Oswald did, and to put his test firing on film with audio.
On June 13,1986, in Fond du Lac, Wisconsin, he fired at stationary targets located fifty-seven, seventy-two, and eighty-seven yards from him, and in one series of shots, and with the clock starting to run with the first shot, he hit all three targets in 3. seconds.
On two of the series, he was able to squeeze off the second round in only 1. seconds after the first shot, though he missed the target.
A few weeks before the trial, the producer, Mark Redhead, called to say that his people had found a military range in Wales where they could substantially approximate the Dealey Plaza firing conditions and he wanted Lutz to attempt to duplicate what Oswald did on film for the jury.
I agreed it would be, but I told him I was against it, and the reason was obvious.
Besides, I told Redhead, I already had a film of Lutz beating Oswald’s time which I intended to present to the jury.
Redhead wasn’t too happy with this, wanting Lutz to do it “again” while being filmed by his people.
Two days later he called back and said some union in England wouldn’t permit me to show my film at the trial because it was filmed in Wisconsin with nonunion people (as it turned out, when Redhead saw Lutz’s film he didn’t think it was of sufficient quality to show to the jury anyway), and he asked me again to let Lutz be filmed.
If he couldn’t duplicate what Oswald did, the defense would obviously call him to so testify.
I was confident my cross-examination of the defense expert would neutralize whatever advantage the defense intended to gain by the failure.
And I told Redhead that if the defense expert succeeded, the defense just as obviously would not call him as a witness, and I agreed not to call him either.
He was persistent and wanted Lutz to try to duplicate Oswald’s marksmanship and timing in Wales for the London jury.
In the interim I had been talking to Lutz and he was eager to let London Weekend Television film his effort in Wales, being very confident he could repeat his Wisconsin expertise.
Because of Redhead’s persistence and Lutz’s eagerness and confidence, and because I knew that if Lutz succeeded it would definitely help my case, I told Lutz I would not refuse to let him do it, but in all deference to his marksmanship ability, I was opposed to the British test and it was my professional advice and opinion that he not do it.
I did, however, have Lutz testify before the London jury about the test he took in Wisconsin and the results, without the accompanying film.
When Oswald fired for the record in the Marines, the four positions were standing, kneeling, sitting, and prone.
Such a position would not quite be the same as the sitting position Oswald was in when he shot for record in the Marines, where the rifle is between the legs and each elbow is locked in snugly by the knees.
It should be noted that whether or not Oswald, at the time he shot Kennedy, was seated on the carton Frazier was on, while he was waiting for the motorcade to come by it would seem that one of the places he almost undoubtedly would have lighted on was the carton of books to the left rear of the three cartons at the window.
Since the angle of declination of the bullet that struck the president in the back was scientifically determined to be around 20 degrees, it is curious how much higher estimates of the angle of decline were made.
FBI agents James Sibert and Francis O’Neill, who were present at the autopsy, wrote that Dr.
On December 5, 1963, the Secret Service conducted its own separate inquiry in Dealy Plaza into the trajectory of the bullets that struck Kennedy by conducting a reconstruction of the crime with a man and woman in a limousine simulating the president and his wife , and a motion picture camera in the sniper’s nest window capturing the movement of the vehicle at several key points.
The Secret Service also analyzed the Zapruder film, various still photographs, statements of witnesses, interviews with the Parkland doctors, and the clinical and autopsy records.
All the Secret Service was willing to say was that “both of the bullets which struck the president were fired from a position to the rear of and above” the president.
Although the Croft photo, taken from the president’s left side, doesn’t actually show the president’s right shoulder, Canning points out that “we know that he has not turned sharply to his right.
The key information here is the way in which he is seen to hunch forward.
The Willis photo shows not only that the president’s head is turned rather sharply to his right by Z202, but also that his shoulders had not turned much.
A still photograph taken by Hugh Betzner Jr. , from a position behind and to the left of the limousine, fixes the relative positions of the two men.
Governor Connally is not visible in the picture, apparently hidden by the right shoulder of a spectator who stepped in front of Betzner just as he snapped the shutter.
However, the relationship of the parts of the limousine that are visible from Betzner’s perspective makes it possible to determine the governor’s position relative to the president, who is seen sitting in the backseat.
To establish Betzner’s line of sight, the photographic panel, in a sketch, drew a straight line from Betzner’s camera position, across the edge of the handhold on the left rear corner of the trunk, past the tip of the president’s left shoulder, to the right edge of the window frame just in front of the right rear door.
JFK Exhibit F-136, 2 HSCA 182, upper left photo) Although, as indicated, the governor is not seen in the photograph, it is clear that he must be seated to the left and the president to the right of Betzner’s line of sight.
Two stereophotogrammetric studies (which involved viewing pairs of Zapruder frames in a stereoscopic viewer to produce a single three-dimensional image), one performed by Itek Corporation in 1976 and the other undertaken by the HSCA photographic panel in 1978, confirmed that Kennedy was seated close to the right inside surface of the car while Connally was seated well within the car.
Based on these studies, Thomas Canning’s team fixed the distance from the exit wound in the president’s throat to the entrance wound in the governor’s back at approximately twenty-four inches.
The slope over that distance was determined to be 22 degrees below true horizontal.
There is no consistency in the estimates of the degree of declination of the bullet entering Connally’s back.
For instance, during a September 1978 meeting with Governor Connally, HSCA forensic pathology panel chief Dr.
This 45-degree angle of declination of the bullet entering Connally’s body is consistent with Dr.
Finck’s estimate of the angle of declination of the bullet entering Kennedy’s back (2 H 380, WCT Lt.
But during Governor Connally’s appearance before the Warren Commission, Dr.
Robert Shaw measured the angle of declination between the governor’s entrance and exit wounds and concluded that the bullet proceeded through the governor’s chest on a downward angle of 25 degrees (4 H 137, WCT Gov.
Thomas Canning’s conclusions unequivocally put him in the single-bullet, no-conspiracy camp.
Since Canning couldn’t possibly be saying that his conclusion about the single-bullet theory was actually wrong, he necessarily must have been referring to the HSCA’s acoustic conclusion of a grassy knoll shot, which his work did not include, and which he may have assumed, at the time, was true.
Though Canning’s letter to Blakey was dated January 5, 1978, which was before the HSCA acoustic tests were conducted in the summer of 1978, the 1978 date on the letter is wrong, an example of people commonly still using the previous year’s date on letters written at the start of the New Year.
The postmark on the envelope of Canning’s January 5 letter is stamped January 6, 1979, and a “JFK Routing Slip” for the letter (Routing Slip 014258) is dated January 13, 1979.
However, Dale Myers, a computer animator and student of the assassination, points out that Canning’s team apparently failed to accurately position the president’s head before calculating a firing source.
The panel then chose the photograph which they felt best matched Zapruder frame 312.
Canning explained that the “interpretation of features is certainly one of the major sources of potential error,” in calculating a trajectory.
However, he did not specifically address the issue of the obvious differences in pitch between Z312 and the panel’s calibration photograph.
It is readily apparent, even to the casual viewer, that Myers and Dodd are correct.
However, any new trajectory based on a more precise orientation of Z312 would most probably easily fall within the very large margin of error for the head wound trajectory set forth by Canning in his calculations.
As technology has continued to evolve, computers have been brought to bear on the concepts of the single-bullet theory.
For instance, investigators for the 1988 PBS television program Nova used a computer model to illustrate how a bullet might have passed through Kennedy and Connally.
Their efforts, however, made no attempt to match up their computer model to known photographs of the shooting.
As alluded to in the main text, in 1992 the American Bar Association hired Failure Analysis Associates to create computer animations of the shooting for a mock trial at its annual convention in San Francisco.
The FAA computer experts used the Zapruder film to fix the positions of Kennedy and Connally but only in the key frames of the film.
Neither the Nova nor the FAA computer studies attempted to create an animated computer model that matched the entire filmed record as captured by Abraham Zapruder’s camera.
To ensure a high degree of accuracy, Myers based his three-dimensional computer models on the historic record.
A survey map of Dealey Plaza, and calibration photographs taken by Myers, were used to build a model of Dealey Plaza, Elm Street, and its surrounding structures.
The original blueprint of the modified 1961 Lincoln convertible in which the president was riding designed by the Hess & Eisenhardt Company of Cincinnati, Ohio, served as a guide in modeling the presidential limousine.
Clay busts of both President Kennedy and Governor Connally were sculpted from photographs and converted into computer models.
The result of Myers’s efforts is a remarkably compelling view of the assassination of President Kennedy that is consistent with the Warren Commission’s and HSCA’s conclusion that Kennedy and Connally were, indeed, struck by the same bullet, Myers concluding at frame Z223.
The Warren Commission’s published sequence of Zapruder’s frames was taken from color slides of the original film and was furnished to the Commission by Life magazine.
However, the so-called missing frames were included in all copies of the film made before the original at Life magazine was damaged, including the Commission’s own intact copy, which it made from a Secret Service first-generation copy.
However, by definition, these firstand later-generation copies could not have quite the clarity of the original frames that were accidentally destroyed at Life.
In addition to the four missing frames eventually accounted for by Life magazine in 1967, there are two additional missing frames that Life officials never mentioned.
Two other alteration theorists, Mike Pincher and Roy Schaeffer, claim to have found a discrepancy in the blinking pattern of the presidential limousine’s frontmounted emergency lights.
According to the two, the emergency lights were controlled by an electronic circuit and should have blinked once every 0.41 second (the equivalent of about seven Zapruder frames)—as determined by measuring the blinking pattern in the Robert Hughes film, an amateur film showing the presidential limousine on Main Street about two minutes before the assassination.
First of all, they base their timing of the blinking pattern, as indicated, on what is seen in the Robert Hughes film, yet, unlike the Zapruder film, no tests were ever performed to determine the frame rate of the camera Hughes was using that day.
Without the frame rate, it is impossible to calculate the timing of the pattern.
Second, the Hughes film shows that the blinking pattern is not evenly spaced, as Pincher and Schaeffer contend.
The Hughes film shows the left-side light is on for seven frames, while the rightside light stays on for ten frames.
Third, it is nearly impossible to obtain, for comparison purposes, an accurate blinking pattern from the Zapruder film.
Unlike the Hughes film, which shows the limousine in deep shadows, the Zapruder film depicts the limousine in bright sunlight and at an ever-increasing angle to Zapruder’s camera, which makes it nearly impossible to tell (especially in the later portions of the film) whether the emergency lights are on or off at any given moment.
Even so, an examination of the earliest portion of the Zapruder film , when the blinking pattern is more easily discernible, only confirms the pattern observed in the Hughes film—which of course would mean that no alteration had been performed on the Zapruder film, as Pincher and Schaeffer claim.
Other alterationists contend that a great many of the frames are composites— combinations of two or more images made to appear as one.
Between frames Z193 and Z194 the camera moves left, which, according to critics, should produce a blur but doesn’t.
Between frames Z194 and Z195 the motorcade occupants appear clearly, even though both the background and the foreground are blurry in Z195.
And both frames contain blurred backgrounds and foregrounds, more so in Z195.
The reason is because Zapruder pans left in Z193-194, then reverses direction, panning right in Z194198.
The Stemmons sign is blurred in Z212 but the masonry wall holes in the background are quite well defined.
The unpublished 1974 manuscript by Fred Newcomb and Perry Adams, “Murder from Within,” contains interviews by the authors with witnesses, the majority of whom thought the limousine had stopped.
As indicated in an earlier endnote, witnesses who said that the limousine “slowed” are the ones who are correct in their recollection.
Another leading alterationist, Harrison Edward Livingstone, who has become quite knowledgeable about the film, and goes considerably beyond Lifton in his analysis, agrees with Lifton on this basic point.
In addition to noting that “I have personal knowledge of the sorts of processes and effects that were available to film-makers in 1963 and I can state categorically that the Zapruder film has not had anything added to it or removed from it apart from the splices that everyone knows about,” he finds the hypothesis set forth by Livingstone and Lifton ludicrous on its face.
Burgess tells of the enormous complexity, and ultimate futility, of such an endeavor.
He writes, “Any attempted modification would necessitate the enlargement of the film to 35 mm (to maintain clarity, and reduce changes in color saturation and balance, contrast, and grain), various types of optical printing with traveling mattes, and then reduction back to 8 mm.
The conspirators would have to begin by rear-projecting each frame onto the back of an animator’s drawing table and tracing each successive frame of Kennedy onto a piece of paper.
These drawings would then be transferred to animation cels and painted.
The area around the painted wound on each cel would then be painted black.
Another set of cels would then be copied, but with the wound painted black and the rest of the cel clear.
Next the Zapruder film enlargement would be run through an optical printer with film 2 on top in correct frame register, producing film 3.
Film 3 would then be rewound and film 1 (the wound surrounded by black) would be run through the printer exposing fdm 3 again.
Since black does not expose the film, the surrounding black of film 1 wouldn’t expose the already exposed Zapruder film and, if the copying of the cels was done exactly and the job was done properly on a high quality optical printer, the painted wound would fit right into the unexposed hole in film 3 like a moving jigsaw puzzle piece.
He then goes on to discuss “the problem of registration,” keeping each frame in the same relative position.
He writes that “it was easy ... to describe the process of rotoscoping and optical printing, but it would have been impossible for anyone to have been able to maintain perfect registration of the wound on the head.
Without perfect registration the wound would move around on the head, as if it weren’t attached.
Not only would the animated wound have to move back and forth and up and down in perfect synchronization with Kennedy’s head, but it would also have to shift with changes in depth and angle; it would have to show foreshortening in exact calibration with Kennedy’s head movements.
This is impossible since even a half a grain’s shift would cut the animated wound free of Kennedy’s head and make it look like some grotesque free-floating balloon.
Indeed, part of the flap in front actually flops about in reaction to the violence of Kennedy’s head movements.
A necessary line told by the buffs to sell their snake oil is that the techniques for performing these alterations have been around for years.
They cite a scene from the 1903 silent classic The Great Train Robbery , in which a locomotive appears to be bearing down on the audience through a window; or the 1933 horror classic King Kong , in which humans seem to be battling a giant gorilla; or the 1964 Disney classic Mary Poppins, which utilized cutting-edge traveling mattes to combine animated characters with live-action footage.
In fact, matte lines and film registration errors give away these efforts, both being examples of problems with early special effects.
Matte lines were the result of a slight mismatch between the matte (which masked out a portion of the image) and the image replacing the “hole” left by the matte.
These matte lines—appearing as black, and sometimes blue lines—could be seen surrounding the portion of the image that had been altered.
Motion picture film contains sprocket holes that run alongside the edge of the film.
A gear in the camera uses these holes to grab and advance the film as each frame is exposed.
The microscopic differences between the size of the sprocket holes and the teeth on the gear that moves the film through the camera cause small slippages in the film as each frame is advanced.
These differences become apparent when two pieces of film are locked together (as is necessary in any special effects technique utilizing a traveling matte), because two pieces of film that are run through the same camera will not line up, or “register,” exactly the same, frame to frame.
The result of these registration errors is that the added or altered portions of the image appear to move around in relation to the rest of the scene.
This problem was eventually reduced for large-format films by adding a second set of sprocket holes opposite the existing set and/or increasing the number of sprocket holes, both of which helped prevent the film from slipping.
Small-format films are unable to accommodate additional sprocket holes because of the films’ original size.
The reality is that even today, it is highly doubtful that any of the most modern technological advances available in film and photography could do what the buffs said was done over four decades ago.
Not even the conspiracy theorists who hold to the alteration theory agree on a time frame.
In what would be a defiance of all the evidence showing that Life magazine came into possession of the original Zapruder film on November 23, the morning after the assassination, Harrison E Livingstone says that the nephew of Zapruder’s partner, Erwin Schwartz, told him that Life never got the original until November 27.
Pincher and Schaeffer allege that these documents are evidence that the CIA secretly altered and copied the Zapruder film.
Horne said McMahon, the manager of the NPIC color lab in 1963, told him that William Smith, the Secret Service agent who delivered the Zapruder film to him at the NPIC, said the film was sent there because it was known that the NPIC had state-of-the-art enlarging equipment, which Kodak did not have.
In 1975, the Rockefeller Commission, which was investigating CIA activities within the United States, asked the CIA for documents pertaining to the NPIC analysis of the Zapruder film, including those establishing when it took place, but the CIA couldn’t locate any document or documents to nail this down.
So the commission contacted Captain Pierre Sands, who received the film from the Secret Service, and Sands, in May of 1975, twenty-two years before the ARRB inquiry, couldn’t recall.
At one point McMahon told Horne that he started work on the film, which he said he was sure was the original, around 1:00 in the morning , but then corrected himself and said it was more like 8:00 m.
In any event, he said the NPIC work and analysis was done “1 or 2 days” after the assassination, and involved working throughout the night.
McMahon’s thirty-four-year-old recollection that he was dealing with the original and his remembering the details of the delivery of the film are very questionable, particularly since he acknowledged that he had various health-related memory problems.
He even quotes ARRB fellow conspiracist Doug Horne as telling him that when the word Hawkeyeworks was allegedly used by some unidentified CIA employee in an ARRB interview and he, Horne, wanted to pursue the matter to learn whether the Zapruder film had ever been to Hawkeyeworks, he was told that if he pursued the matter he would lose his job.
Horne also told Lifton that the CIA succeeded in having the “classified term” Hawkeyeworks deleted from the ARRB report.
Hunter added that it was his belief that the majority of the NPIC notes analyzing the Zapruder film were created during a second session by others at the NPIC after he and McMahon did their original work.
Both Hunter and McMahon later reviewed the NPIC handwritten working notes on the original briefing boards and agreed that only one of the six pages of working notes contained their handwriting.
Life Magazine ,” and on the other, “Based on 18FPS as Reported in Life Magazine ,” and the 18 frames-per-second rate was first printed in the December 6 edition of Life , the November 29 edition of Life containing no reference to the 18 frames-persecond rate.
Over the course of well over forty years, no evidence has ever emerged to dispute this fact.
Pincher and Schaeffer weren’t just wrong on whether the NPIC had the capability of altering the Zapruder film.
Their reconstruction of when the Zapruder film was altered ignores the known whereabouts of the original Zapruder film and the three copies made in Dallas during the late afternoon and evening of November 22, 1963.
Though we don’t know when the Secret Service delivered the Zapruder film to the NPIC, we do know it was not on the night of the assassination.
But as indicated, according to Pincher and Schaeffer, the original Zapruder film was delivered to the NPIC in Washington, D.C., “not long after 10:00m.” on the night of the assassination.
Dallas time (11:00m. in Washington) that Zapruder, who continued to hold the original film in Dallas, even released two of the three copies made of the film to the head of the Dallas Secret Service office, Forrest Sorrels.
One of those copies was forwarded to Secret Service chief James Rowley in Washington, D.C., and was likely the one later delivered to the NPIC by Secret Service agent Bill Smith.
Therefore, since the original Zapruder film could not have been in Washington, D.C., at around 10:00m. on the evening of the assassination, as the alternationists claim, Pincher and Schaeffer are not only out of the ball game with their theory, they can’t even get inside the ballpark.
As set forth in the main text, the master or original Zapruder film never left the physical possession of Zapruder until some time after 9:00m. in his office, on Saturday, November 23, 1963, the day after the assassination.
In a phone conversation the previous evening, Zapruder had agreed to meet at his office with Richard Stolley, the representative of Life magazine, which was seeking to purchase the exclusive rights to the film.
After Zapruder projected the film for Stolley and some Secret Service agents, Stolley, seeing that other members of the media (in competition with Life for the rights) were arriving in Zapruder’s office, asked to speak to Zapruder in private, where after a brief negotiation Zapruder signed a contract to sell the print rights to the film to Life for $50,000.
In an article in Esquire magazine in 1973, Stolley wrote that after Zapruder signed the contract, “I picked up the original of the film and the one remaining copy and sneaked out a back door of the building.
The original film was immediately flown to Life's Chicago headquarters, where selected frames of the film were to be included in its revamped November 29 issue.
However, Josiah Thompson, an authority on the film (having been a consultant to Life magazine, which originally owned it), says that “the Secret Service called up Dallas TV station KRLD on the afternoon of Monday, November 25, 1963, and asked if they had a projector to show a 16 mm. color print of the Zapruder film.
Dan Rather was in the studio at the time and viewed the film in the company of studio people and the Secret Service.
To pull off the alteration of the film the alterationists contend took place, Wrone writes that on the evening of November 22, the “conspirators would have had to enter Zapruder’s home, locate the film, steal it, whisk it to the airport, and fly it to Washington in an almost three-hour flight.
Robert Hughes had his film developed on Monday, November 25, and voluntarily took the film to the Dallas FBI office on November 26 , long after most of the alteration theorists claim the conspirators had done all their dirty alteration work to the Zapruder film at a CIA lab in Washington, D.C., on the evening of the assassination.
Marie Muchmore brought her film, at that point undeveloped, to the Dallas office of the UPI on November 25, telling an initially disbelieving employee that she had Wrone makes a point of how diligent Zapruder was in ensuring throughout the day of November 22, 1963, that no one altered or made an unauthorized copy of his original film, going to the extent of securing notarized affidavits to this effect from the Eastman Kodak Company in Dallas after it processed the film that day, and from Jamieson Film Company in Dallas after it made three copies of the film for him.
Further, Zapruder and his partner at his dress company, Erwin Schwartz, watched the technicians as they did their work.
As to Mark Bell’s film, assassination researcher and author Richard Trask writes that “the next week Bell brought his film down to a camera store on Main Street to have it developed.
Although he is presently unsure of just how or when Life magazine first found out about his film, a 1967 Life article indicated Bell brought his film to Dallas Life correspondent Patsy Swank.
As far as the film sequences taken by Weigman, Couch, Underwood, and Darnell, all were immediately taken back to their stations and recorded for posterity by being shown that afternoon on their respective media outlets.
But this explanation would require an unlikely event—the magnification of each frame of Zapruder’s original 8-millimeter film to a size large enough that the resulting images could be rephotographed without including the original film’s sprocket-hole area.
You’ll recall that Zapruder’s camera captures imagery in the sprocket-hole area, which was never intended to be seen or projected.
Since any attempt to use Zapruder’s camera to rephotograph a forgery would also result in the sprocket-hole area being exposed to the forged imagery, the conspirators’ enlargement and alteration would have to carefully exclude the original film’s sprocket-hole area lest the original, unaltered imagery surrounding those sprocket holes be seen and the forgery detected, then reshoot that altered enlargement so that a sufficient amount of the altered imagery could spill into the sprocket-hole area of the forgery.
How much of the original film’s tiny image area (an area just 0.192 X 0.145 inch—five times smaller than a postage stamp) could be used in the final reconTrask’s magnificent 1994 book, Pictures of the Pain, which I’ve quoted from often in this book, was the result of ten years of meticulous research on the photographic history of the assassination.
The book is an absolutely invaluable reference that has been widely relied upon by the assassination research community.
Enlarging this fraction of the original image to fill the width of forged 8-millimeter film would result in film grain (i.e., the minute dots that make up an image) that was more than 30 percent larger than normal , as well as a final image sequence that wouldn’t match the optics of Zapruder’s camera.
Although there is no evidence that any alteration took place there, we do know that a copy of the Zapruder film was delivered to the center either on the evening of the assassination or shortly thereafter.
Their growing assassination literature on the alteration of the Zapruder film is conspicuously silent on this point.
They don’t even allege that any of these films were altered at the NPIC, or even that they were brought there.
Indeed, nearly all of the alterationists don’t even talk about any alteration ever being done anywhere to these other films.
But then Lifton, who had written in numbing detail about the complexities of altering the Zapruder film and where it was altered, doesn’t go on to write one paragraph, one sentence, or even one word about the forgers actually coming into possession of all or any one of these other films, and where and when they altered them.
The document reprinted in the Warren Commission volumes that was seized from Oswald’s room on Beckley Street pursuant to a search warrant on the afternoon of the assassination (Potts Exhibit A2,21 H 142), is not, as the Dallas Police Department listed it , Oswald’s birth certificate.
It is merely a certification by Henry Lanauge, the deputy recorder of New Orleans, that Oswald’s birth on October 18, 1939, had been recorded in book 207, folio 1321 of the recorder’s office on October 25, 1939.
Whether or not this document is the one Marguerite was referring to when she would later write (see text) that her son Lee had taken “his birth certificate” with him to Russia is not known.
In October of 1961, the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service made an effort to locate Oswald’s birth certificate and was unable to do so.
He did find a declaration by Harvey F Oswald, one of Lee’s paternal uncles, dated October 25, 1939, and attested to by Naomi Drake, the deputy registrar, that Lee was born on October 18,1939, at French Hospital, and learned that in Louisiana such a declaration is allowed in lieu of a birth certificate, but normally only when the birth occurred outside of a hospital and without a doctor, which was not the situation here.
Fourth Decade , May 1997, 18) Armstrong, a committed conspiracy theorist, writes ominously that “a birth certificate for Lee Harvey Oswald has never been made public,” the implication being that if it exists, the unnamed conspirators are suppressing it because the certificate itself holds some kind of a key to the assassination, which, of course, is nonsense.
Whether, assuming the story is true, Pic was aware of this and whether it played a part in the divorce is not known.
One of the myths about Oswald is that before the assassination he only went and was known by the name Lee Oswald, and only became known to the world as Lee Harvey Oswald after the assassination.
Fred Huff, the owner of the Congress Street property, said she had rental records for Marguerite dating from November 10, 1940, but she said Marguerite could have moved into Huff’s house earlier since her records prior to that date had been destroyed (FBI interview of Mrs.
The childhood friend, whom Marguerite hadn’t seen since back then, was Clem Sehrt, who worked at his father’s neighborhood bakery when one of the bakery’s customers was the Claverie family.
If Sehrt did not tell the truth, as appears to be the case, it may be because of his background, per the HSCA, as an associate, lawyer, and financial adviser to a New Orleans banking executive named Louis J Russell, who in turn was a friend of New Orleans mobster Carlos Marcello.
In his testimony before the Warren Commission in 1964, the unmistakable inference is that he only knew Oswald in California.
He also said Oswald allegedly had a liaison with an effeminate boy in Formosa, frequented the Queen Bee Bar in Japan, and may have developed intelligence contacts in Japan.
In addition, he claimed he saw Oswald in the company of a stunning Eurasian girl in Japan.
Japanese man who allegedly traveled to the Soviet Union along the same route Oswald later took), by saying that his superiors had told him only to answer the questions asked.
Since Donovan lost the credibility he seemed to have early on, his statement to Epstein and the HSCA about Oswald and the U-2 cannot be given any weight.
Since conspiracy theorists have made such a major issue out of Oswald’s presumed knowledge of the U-2, it has to be pointed out that the existence of the plane was no secret.
Anyone who happened to be near any one of the bases from which it operated would have been able to see it land and take off.
As far as the Soviets knowing about it, at one base at Giebelstadt in West Germany, pilots had often noticed a long, black limousine parked at the end of a runway.
A simple license plate check revealed that the car was registered to an embassy of an Eastern Bloc country.
For the Soviets, the problem was not finding out that such a plane existed, or even its capabilities.
Francis Gary Powers and his fellow U-2 pilots, then flying the distinctive plane out of Turkey, assumed that Soviet intelligence already knew how many U-2 planes the United States had.
The Office of Naval Intelligence report said the investigation, which included a reenactment of the shooting, “disclosed that all of the wounds on Schrand’s body [“a gaping hole with ragged edges beveled inward in the left axilla ” and “a series of approximately 5 14 inch perforations centered about 2 inches from the left base of the neck on top of the left shoulder”] were parallel to the vertical axis of his body.
Also, the position of the powder burns... indicated that Schrand’s left arm was in a lowered attitude, with the weapon between it and the left side of his body.
As a result, it was deduced that for anyone to have shot Schrand would have necessitated his lying flat on the concrete parking area.
On 15 May 1964, a ‘drop test’ was conducted at Ordnance School, MCS, Quantico, Va., using three Winchester Model 12 riot-type shotguns.
The guns were dropped in a vertical position , cocked and with the safety off, from a height of 24 inches to a concrete deck.
The most vivid account of the incident was told to author Edward Epstein by James R “Bud” Persons, who was on guard duty that night at another hangar, an empty one.
Shortly after the officer-of-the-day passed on his routine check of the guard post, Persons heard bloodcurdling screams from Schrand’s post a scant fifty yards away.
He found Schrand lying in a pool of blood on the concrete, about six feet from his riot gun.
A scattering of Christmas candy appeared to have been blown from Schrand’s shirt pocket.
Donald Camarata, who had also been with Oswald and Schrand since Jacksonville, said, “Either en route back to the United States or subsequent to my return, I heard a rumor that Oswald had been in some way responsible for the death of Martin Schrand.
The rumor that Oswald might have somehow been involved in the shooting seems based on two notions, that some of his comrades in arms found him a peculiar and not too likable character, and that he allegedly was also on guard duty that night—although, given the penalties for leaving one’s post, that actually makes it less, rather than more likely that Oswald had anything to do with it.
For his part, Epstein interviewed nine officers and enlisted men who were at Cubi Point that night and was unable to find any evidence of Oswald’s involvement.
The Marine doctor who interpreted Oswald’s medical records for the Warren Commission, Captain George Donabedian, testified that Oswald first sought medical attention on September 10 for the burning sensation during urination, but Donabedian may have said September 10 because there is one nearly illegible entry in Oswald’s medical records that could be read as September 10.
However, typed records clearly say September 16, although it’s possible Oswald first saw someone at Atsugi about his problem on September 10.
But on September 16,1958, Oswald was at sea, and unless there were several outlying dispensaries on his ship, AKA 105, and Oswald was helicoptered back to Atsugi to have a smear taken, none of which makes sense, the doctor’s testimony was incorrect on this point.
CE 1961,23 H 797) Second Lieutenant Hubert B Cherrie, the squadron duty officer that night, gave a different version of the scene.
He called an ambulance but Schrand was dead on arrival at the hospital.
Corporate of the Guard Ronald L Rowe was with Cherrie in the jeep, and he told Marine Corps investigators that when he and Cherrie arrived, Schrand was unconscious and did not move; however, he groaned about two or three times.
When Rowe examined the weapon Schrand was carrying at the time, it had one discharged shell in the chamber.
But see HSCA Report, page 220, which says that Oswald’s military records indicate that he “had not spent substantial time, if any, in Taiwan,” and that except for his “3 Vi month period of service in the Phillipines,” the records showed he had always remained at Atsugi with the rear guard unit.
Oswald’s medical records for his treatment of the gonorrhea, which show him receiving treatment from September 10, 1958, through November 3, 1958, a period when his unit was in Taiwan, cannot be used to resolve the discrepancy, since his medical chart would follow him and the entries on the chart by naval doctors could have been made on Taiwan as well as at Atsugi.
But Oswald himself said he was in “Formosa” in an interview with a UPI reporter on November 14, 1959.
A zany conspiracy theorist, John Armstrong, has come up with his own solution to the problem the HSCA has raised.
Unbelievably, Armstrong maintains that there were two Oswalds involved in this apparent discrepancy, each of whom looked almost exactly like the other, and with almost identical names—Lee Harvey Oswald and Harvey Oswald.
The real Oswald, Lee Oswald, remained back in Atsugi in a rear guard unit, and his impersonator, Harvey Oswald, per Armstrong, was sent to Taiwan.
However, Snyder testified before the HSCA that after discontinuing his brief employment with the CIA in March of 1950, he had no further contact with the agency other than a letter he wrote to the agency in 1970 or 1971 inquiring about working for it on a contractual basis.
Although American defections were very rare, particularly in the pre-Gorbachev era, two other Americans had recently defected to the Soviet Union, Nicholas Petrulli ofValley Stream, Long Island, and Robert Webster of Cleveland, Ohio.
Petrulli had no Communistic sympathies or ideological leanings toward the Soviet Union nor any grievances against the United States.
He was simply an American laborer who was on a $965 organized tour of Western Europe and the Soviet Union and decided to stay in Russia when he felt the country presented a good opportunity for gainful employment.
He actually formally renounced his citizenship at the United States embassy in Moscow.
While in Russia he acquired a girlfriend, the hostess at a hotel suspected of being a KGB agent, and told her he wished to divorce his wife and return to Russia to marry her.
Originally, the Soviets tried to discourage Webster from defecting but when he convinced them he could help them make the Rand spray gun, they actually accepted his application for Soviet citizenship and for a while attempted to use his defection for propaganda purposes.
The Department of Justice told the HSCA that there would have been serious obstacles to such a prosecution.
That statement, of course, was contradicted by his denial to the FBI, upon his return to the United States, that he had ever made such an offer.
In the prosecution of a criminal case, the Government cannot establish a prima facie case solely on a defendant’s unsupported confession.
The Government must introduce substantial independent evidence which would tend to establish the trustworthiness of the defendant’s statement.
The Warren Report said that the CIA also received a copy of the October 31, 1959, cable but the citation the report gives for this (CE 2752, 26 H 131) does not say the CIA received the subject cable.
This dispatch was sent out by Richard Snyder to the State Department in Washington, D.C., on November 2 and is a much fuller recitation of the events of October 31 than the short October 31 cable.
She may not have referred to her encounter with Oswald in his hotel room on October 31 because it was not a real interview, but the circumstantial evidence is overwhelming that she did, in fact, talk to Oswald very briefly on October 31, 1959.
First, we have Oswald’s diary entry of October 31 where he says that after sending another reporter away that day, “a half hour later another reporter Miss Mosby comes.
However, we know that UPI filed a story that same day saying that Oswald told a UPI reporter in his hotel room that he was defecting for “purely political reasons” (CE 833, 17 H 789), which would have had to be what he told Mosby.
Mosby’s version of the chronology of events, which she gave to an HSCA staff member nineteen years later, is almost assuredly incorrect.
When they told her about a young American who wanted to renounce his United States citizenship, she claims she searched the Moscow hotels frequented by foreigners and located Oswald.
She said she only interviewed him once (she didn’t say when, but the definite implication was in late October) and only saw him on one later occasion at a Moscow theater but did not speak to him.
Mosby’s statement to the HSCA is not only in direct conflict with Oswald’s contemporaneous notes, and her colleague Korengold’s affidavit to the Warren Commission back in 1964 (since Korengold had been to Oswald’s hotel room and knew where he was, we have to believe his story that he told Mosby), but even conflicts with the date she filed her story on her interview with Oswald, November 14, 1959.
None of this information was, however, suggestive in any way of a clandestine relationship.
These were preserved by the State Department and included in the Warren Commission’s volumes of evidence.
Newman, Oswald and the CIA,ll) When the bureau checked its records on October 31, it found “no information identifiable with Oswald other than a service fingerprint card” taken upon his entry into the Marine Corps.
On November 2, the FBI learned that there was no “derogatory information ... in the files concerning Oswald,” and a quick check with the Office of Naval Intelligence that same date revealed they had no record of Oswald.
At the same time, a “stop,” a sort of warning flag, was placed on Oswald’s name in the FBI’s Identification Division, which would alert the bureau if Oswald attempted to reenter the United States under a different identity.
Committee members found satisfactory answers to these questions, while keeping open the possibility that they had not in fact seen everything.
Dennis Ofstein, one of Lee’s coworkers at the Jaggers-Chiles-Stovall photographic laboratory in Dallas in the fall of 1962, also thought Lee had told him that he had been in Moscow for a May Day parade (10 H 203, WCT Dennis Hyman Ofstein), and conspiracy theorists have assumed that this was May Day 1960 (May 1.1960) , the very day Powers was brought down.
Of course, Francis Gary Powers was not in Moscow at the time of the parade.
He was still near where he was shot down, hundreds of miles away at Sverdlovsk, and was flown to Moscow, a three-hour-plus flight, later in the day.
Summers finds it curious that Oswald doesn’t mention the U-2 incident in his Historic Diary, and of the three Mays Days he spent in Russia, only the one of May 1, 1960, is not accounted for in his diary.
He did not know Oswald well, only as a fellow employee for a few months, and was reporting a conversation that was over a year old.
He might have misspoken in his testimony or misremembered what Oswald said, or Oswald might have misinformed him, as he so often did with people.
For instance, Ofstein reported that Oswald had told him that his wife was White Russian , but he only met Marina in Belorussia, she was not from there.
Oswald’s second May Day (May 1.1961) in the Soviet Union was the day after his wedding night in Minsk.
Marina recalled that the day after their wedding she and Lee tried to take a shortcut through Minsk’s Stalina Square, blocked off for the parade, on their way to visit a pair of her old friends.
Although her Uncle Ilya was on duty there in the square, in full uniform, he would not let the young couple through.
By Lee’s third May Day in the USSR in 1962, Francis Gary Powers had already been exchanged for Soviet spy Colonel Rudolph Abel and was no longer in the Soviet Union.
Conspiracy theorists have therefore settled on May Day 1960 as the likely date of an otherwise unreported trip to Moscow by Oswald.
Until recently, the only evidence against this theory was Oswald’s diary entry of May 1, 1960, that he was in Minsk on May Day 1960 watching the parade (CE 24, 16 H 100), but the theorists have dismissed the whole entry as fiction written long after the fact to disguise the presumed Moscow trip.
And there is no other record of Oswald going to Moscow that May Day of 1960.
Almost everyone in the Soviet Union at that time did—the elaborate show trial in Moscow’s immense Hall of Columns, which started on August 17 and ended on August 19 with Power’s conviction and ten-year sentence, was televised in its entirety.
Powers addressed the court in English in his own defense, with a Soviet interpreter for the court and the public.
There is, however, no mention of this fact in Oswald’s diary or, as far as we know, the KGB files, and none of Oswald’s friends or coworkers have ever reported that he was absent from Minsk at that time, nor did any of the handful of people who knew him in Moscow see him there.
Some conspiracy theorists see someone who “looks like” Oswald in the audience at the trial, but it is bizarre to imagine that an agent on a highly secret trip to Moscow would present himself in a place where he would be photographed, filmed, and televised to a worldwide audience.
The story is just one of the many will-o’-the-wisps conjured up by the conspiracy-minded from the inevitable curiosities of the historical record.
Apart from the fact that this conjecture has not a speck of evidence to support it, it should be mentioned that Marina Oswald testified before the HSCA that she did not recall whether or not Lee Harvey Oswald had ever even spoken to her about the Powers incident.
Note that if Lee would later admit attempting to murder Walker to Marina, we can assume he would have very proudly boasted of having a hand in the shooting down of the U-2, and if he had, surely Marina would have remembered this.
The letter was forwarded to the United States State Department, which took no action on the matter, none being needed by that time.
As the wife of an American citizen, Marina was legally entitled to a nonquota immigrant visa.
Knowing, however, that if it did not approve Oswald’s petition for Marina, Oswald would most likely stay in the Soviet Union with her, the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service found a way to keep Oswald from coming back to America even though, on his own (since the State Department had ruled that Oswald had not expatriated himself and renewed his American passport), he was free to do so.
The INS decided to invoke a section of the Immigration and Naturalization Act , which it normally waived, that prohibited the issuance of immigrant visas to those in countries which have unduly delayed accepting the return of persons sought to be deported from the United States.
Pursuant to this, on February 28,1962, the San Antonio office approved the petition, but inexplicably in the “Remarks” section of its letter to Oswald in Minsk, which he received on March 15, there is no reference to the nonwaiver.
Instead, the words “Enclosed is your marriage certificate submitted to support the visa petitions” were typed in.
Nevertheless, the reality is that the INS was not going to allow Marina in the country, and the petition itself, which was not sent back to Oswald, presumably contained the non-waiver of sanctions language in it.
On March 27,1962, Michel Cieplinski, the acting administrator in the Department of State, wrote a letter to Raymond F Farrell, the INS commissioner, seeking a reversal of the INS ruling.
Oswald is not issued a visa by the Embassy, the Soviet Government will be in a position to claim that it has done all it can to prevent the separation of the family by issuing Mrs.
Oswald the required exit permission” but that this country was “preventing her from accompanying her husband and child.
That same day, June 18,1962, Oswald attempted once again to have his Marine Corps undesirable discharge set aside.
What is curious about his brief is a statement near the very end of it that the purpose of his application was to have his undesirable discharge set aside so he could “ remain a member of the U.S.M.C.R.”—that is, remain a member of the reserve.
He went on to say, “I would like to include a request for the recommedation for reenlistment regarless of the finding’s of the Board” on his current application.
If this was an attempt by Oswald to reenlist for active duty in the Marines, it came out of the blue, in that there is nothing else in the record to indicate he ever wanted to do so.
One allegation that Oswald was being watched appeared in The Minority of One in 1964.
Gary E Taylor, a member of the Russian emigre community, told the Warren Commission on March 25, 1964, that he thought either Oswald or Oswald and Marina may have lived at the “Coz-I-Eight” apartments at “1404 North Beckley” (actually, 1306 North Beckley) during this period.
Although it’s possible that Oswald may have stayed at the Cozi-Eight during the period in question, it is unlikely.
The FBI’s report of a February 27,1964, interview of him reads, “Taylor reiterated that he had no knowledge of a place of residence for Oswald for the period mentioned above [“October 19, 1962 to November 3, 1962”]; however, he thought that he once went looking for the Oswalds somewhere along N Beckley, Dallas.
Most importantly, the resident manager of the Cozi-Eight apartments at the time, Mrs.
Johnny Perez, and the owner of the apartments, Sam Morris, said Oswald never lived there (CD 735, FBI interviews of Mrs.
Conspiracy theorists have made much of the fact that Jaggers-Chiles-Stovall did some classified work for the Department of Defense involving the making of maps.
In any case, all such work was carried out in a separate department of the company by personnel who had security clearances, and an ordinary employee like Oswald had no access to that department or the material used or produced there.
Dennis Ofstein told the Warren Commission that Oswald had once asked him if he knew anything about “microdot” printing—a means of reducing type or photographs to a very small form.
Oswald told him spies sometime sent messages and pictures this way under a postage stamp.
But Ofstein told him he knew nothing about this, and didn’t know whether Oswald had read about this or acquired knowledge of it some other way.
Oswald’s teacher, Gladys Yoakum, told the FBI that the school had a policy of dropping students after four absences, and so Oswald was dropped on April 8, 1963, the last class he attended being, she believed, on March 28, 1963.
Apart from a brief period in New Orleans, when he was getting dirty while working at the coffee company and lost interest in his personal hygiene, the record is consistent throughout Oswald’s life, from witness after witness, of his always appearing neat and clean.
This document, seemingly Oswald’s political manifesto, is printed out on nine pages of lined paper.
There were also several additional pages on which he tried to sketch out, more in outline form, the principles of a new form of government.
That the right of free enterprize and collective enterprize be gauranteed.
B That Fasism be abolished C That nationilizism be excluded from every-day life.
E the right of the free, uninhibated action of religious insistutions of any type or denomination to freely function G Univeral Sufferage for all persons over 18 years of age.
H Freedom of desimanation [dissemination] of opions through press or declaration or speech.
I that the desemanation of war propaganda be forbidden as well as the manufactor of weapons of mass destruction.
K nationalization or communinizing of private enterprize or collective enterprize be forbidden.
M That combining of separate collective or private enterprizes into single collective units be considered as communistic.
N That no taxes be levied against indivuals O That heavy grauated taxes of from 30% to 90% be leveled against surplus profit gains.
Marina’s memory as to the sequence of some of the events surrounding the Walker shooting are understandably foggy, and I have gone with what she told her biographer, Priscilla McMillan, if for no other reason than that she would have had more time, with McMillan helping her, to determine the sequence.
Buchanan’s book is riddled with factual errors, and the allegation that Walker’s phone number and name were in Oswald’s notebook seems to be one of them.
As expected, the conspiracy theorists have had fun with the Walker shooting, and just as predictably, there was fodder for their ruminations.
The first suspect in the Walker shooting was a drifter named William Duff whom Walker had befriended, letting him stay at his home in return for what Duff called being a “batman,” an officer’s servant.
He was not living with Walker on April 10, 1963, and allegedly told the daughter of an anonymous lady who called a secretary in Walker’s office that he had been in on the shooting of Walker.
More tantalizing, two days before the shooting, and a couple of hours before Walker returned to Dallas from Operation Midnight Ride, Robert Alan Surrey, a printing salesman and associate of the general, drove to his house about eight-thirty or nine in the evening.
Surrey also noticed a dark-colored Ford sedan, brown or maroon, without license plates, parked in the alley.
When the men got in the car and drove off, Surrey followed them into downtown Dallas.
Eventually they made an odd turn, which suggested that they had spotted him and were doubling back, and Surrey gave up the tail.
He reported the incident to Walker the next morning, and Walker reported it to the police, but nothing came of it, and there was no license number to trace.
One of the photos Oswald took of the back of Walker’s house shows a lightcolored car parked there, and the area where the rear license plate would normally be mounted had been torn out of the print.
The hole in the photograph is not confined to the small license plate area.
It is a very large hole, encompassing almost one-third of the rear trunk area.
It is likely that the hole was accidentally torn out by someone, perhaps even Oswald.
But Marina, who might have been expected to notice a hole in the middle of the photograph when Oswald showed it to her, testified that she had not seen any hole in the photo when Lee showed the photo to her.
On the other hand, she also testified that it also was not there when the FBI showed her the photograph months after the killing of the president.
The issue can never be resolved, but it has been suggested that Oswald himself made the hole to prevent identification of the car, presumably because it belonged to a supposed accomplice.
But it makes no sense at all that a conspirator planning to assassinate General Walker would have parked his car directly behind Walker’s house in broad daylight, and even less likely that his supposed co-conspirator, Oswald, would have included it in one of his surveillance photographs if he had.
From this meager collection of facts, conspiracy theorists have constructed a case that Oswald must have worked with accomplices.
Even author Albert Newman, who does not believe that Oswald had accomplices in the Kennedy shooting, thinks he did in the Walker shooting.
Two of the cars in the church parking lot the night of the shooting were driven, per Newman, by lookouts, and one of them also served as the getaway car.
The car in the photograph identified as Charles Klihr’s also belonged to one of the accomplices, per Newman.
Oswald, per Newman, may have met one or more of these accomplices six months earlier, in October 1962, when he was supposed to be at the YMCA but wasn’t—Newman implies that he was staying with one of the accomplices who lived in Oak Cliff.
Newman bolsters his accomplice theory with another observation, that bus service from Walker’s neighborhood, for instance, was thin or nonexistent at that hour of the night—although it was at least two hours after the shooting before Oswald turned up at Neely Street, in which time we know he could have walked home.
No one saw the brown or maroon Ford or the car identified as Klihr’s on the night of the shooting.
Neither of the two men in the church parking lot, who were described by Coleman in great detail, clearly resembled Oswald.
Moreover, both apparently were drivers and we know Oswald didn’t drive.
Also, although sightings of Oswald became as common after the assassination as sightings of Elvis have been for years, no one ever reported seeing Oswald with anyone whom one could even postulate as being an accomplice, either in October 1962, in April 1963, or any time in between.
The only virtue of Newman’s theory is that there is no way to prove it wrong.
However, as a theory it remains considerably less plausible than the account of the incident Lee himself told Marina, and it requires a much different Lee Oswald than the one we know from the story of his life.
For instance, Lee worked at JaggersChiles-Stovall for months without being able to establish even a casual relationship with any of his coworkers apart from Ofstein, and he couldn’t even bring himself to eat lunch with him or accept a ride home in Ofstein’s car.
He did not say in the dirt , and he may have buried it under some leaves in the field.
In any event, even if he did bury it in the dirt, it’s a non sequitur to conclude that he would have been incapable of disassembling the weapon thereafter and cleaning it completely.
George said that Lee “shriveled” at his joke and didn’t say anything, but he had a peculiar smile on his face, and George knew at the time that the remark had an effect on Lee (9 H 249), although this may be the clarity of hindsight.
Also, it would have been remarkable if George had really noticed the profound effect his remark had on Lee and then neither said nor did nor apparently thought anything more about it.
But Jeanne told the Warren Commission that the night before Easter was the first time she had been to the Oswalds’ apartment.
The main reason she believes this is, she says, “the rifle was not in the apartment on April 13.
Three days after the Walker attempt would be Saturday, April 13, the day before Easter.
Somewhat ironically, it was Oswald’s own brother Robert who brought the Nixon incident to the attention of the authorities.
As indicated in an earlier endnote, after the assassination Marina became very close to James Martin, who served as her financial adviser, and she lived with him and his wife for awhile.
Sometime in early January 1964, Marina confided to Martin about the Nixon incident, and on a visit to Martin’s house by Robert Oswald on January 13, 1964, Martin told Robert what Marina had told him.
Later that day while driving Marina to the cemetery to visit Lee’s grave, Marina confirmed to Robert what she had told Martin.
Robert brought it to the attention of his lawyer, and on the advice of his lawyer, Robert turned over his diary, containing the reference, to the FBI on February 18, 1964.
He also told the FBI the information in an interview on February 19, 1964, and retold the story to the Warren Commission on February 21, 1964.
Conspiracy theorists have questioned this date because of a passing remark made by Lillian Murret that “Lee had come to my house on a Monday” , which implied a gap of four days between his arrival in New Orleans on April 25 (after leaving Dallas on the evening of April 24) and his arrival at the Murrets’ house.
But Murret was talking about another event at the time and Warren Commission counsel had no reason to question her apparent slip of the tongue that Oswald had arrived on a Monday.
By that Monday, April 29, Oswald had already visited the Louisiana Division of Employment Security office on the preceding Friday, wearing a suit and tie , which he would not have had until he unpacked his bags at the Murrets.
Lillian Murret testified that he had no adequate clothes until Dutz Murret drove Lee back to the bus station on the evening of the day he arrived to help him recover his luggage from storage.
Warren Commission counsel played around with three addresses in his questioning of Mrs.
Jesse Garner, who was the manager, with her husband, of the apartments on Magazine, and though establishing that the Garners lived at 4911 Magazine (the FBI introduced yet another address, 4909, saying the Garners lived there ), he couldn’t manage to ask her where the Oswalds lived.
However, the inference from the fact that neighbors could see Lee inside reading is that the Oswalds lived in the front apartment, and Mrs.
By the time Marina testified before the Warren Commission, she had grown to dislike Ruth.
However, when she told the Warren Commission, “I did not like her too well” , she was referring, from the context of her testimony, to when she was living with Ruth.
But the circumstantial evidence of all Ruth was doing for her at that time, their later letters to each other when Marina was in New Orleans in which Marina expressly told Ruth, “I like you” , and the fact that the main thing Marina cites for not liking Ruth (Ruth, per Marina, wanting attention and publicity after the assassination) had not yet happened, causes one to conclude that Marina was sloppily conflating the two periods of time.
And Douglas Jones, the owner of the company, told the FBI that although he could not be sure the man who ordered the printing of the handbills was not Oswald, he did not think it was.
He thought the man was a “husky type person” on the order of a laborer.
The likelihood is that the original letter notifying Oswald of the board’s decision had a date on it that did not come through in the copy in the Warren Commission volumes.
There are some conflicts with respect to the dates that the New Orleans FBI contacted Mrs.
Garner, in her testimony before the HSCA, said that Hosty gave the date of June 17 in his testimony before the Warren Commission and there is no indication he was reading the date from an official FBI document in front of him.
If he learned about Oswald’s presence in New Orleans on June 17 or earlier from some other source, his report does not mention this.
Hosty testified that it wasn’t until “early August” that he received a verification from the New Orleans FBI office that Oswald was living in New Orleans , consistent with Kaack’s report that he spoke to Mrs.
Since Oswald moved in on May 9, and Marina a few days later, this would put the FBI visit to Mrs.
Garner around June 10, close to the time Hosty says he was contacted by the FBI office in New Orleans.
Of course, Hosty only says he was informed by the FBI office in New Orleans that Oswald was apparently living in the city, not where , whereas Mrs.
Yet New Orleans FBI agent Milton Kaack’s report says he didn’t speak to Mrs.
Absent any other evidence, one would normally have to go with Kaack’s official FBI report, which is specific as to the date, and assume that Mrs.
Garner, trying to recall, fifteen years later, when the FBI first came to her door, was simply off by about two months.
But there’s another conflict on dates involving Kaack that throws into question the accuracy of his report with respect to dates.
Murret told the Warren Commission that Lee and Marina came to the Murrets’ home to visit on Labor Day , and “the next day or the day following that,” two FBI agents came to her door asking if the Oswalds lived there, and when she told them they didn’t, they asked her if she knew where they lived.
She told them and they returned the next day to tell her that “a lady with a station wagon was there,” whereupon Mrs.
But to do so I have to say that Kaack’s FBI report stating that he visited Mrs.
The conflict in the above dates would appear to be irreconcilable at this point in time and the only thing that is certain about the mess is that the contradictions in the dates do not seem to have any relevance or consequence to the story of the case.
Martello thought there might be some tie-in between Oswald’s FPCC group and Reissman, particularly since he recalled that FPCC literature was found in the 1000 block of Pine Street, which was near the residence of Reissman at 1121 Pine.
When Martello asked Oswald if he knew Reissman or had meetings at Reissman’s house, Oswald never gave him a direct answer, but Martello felt from Oswald’s reaction that there was possibly a connection between Oswald and Reissman.
CE 3094, 26 H 705) In a November 24,1963, FBI report, just two days after the assassination, there’s a one-sentence assertion that while Ruth Paine was in New Orleans, she had “introduced Oswald to Dr.
The source is given as John Rice, the special agent in charge of the FBI office in New Orleans.
It’s not clear how Rice came into possession of this information, but the day after the assassination, Mrs.
There is no indication what course Professor Reissman taught at Tulane, but Oswald’s aunt, Lillian Murret, recalls his telling her that he had gone to the home of a professor of languages at Tulane to show slides.
Harold Gordon Alderman, a Tulane student, said that in the summer of 1963, a fellow student, Hugh Murray, mentioned to him that he had picked up an FPCC leaflet being handed out on campus, possibly at the library.
After the assassination, Alderman called the New Orleans FBI office and offered to furnish the leaflet to them, but agents told him they already had the handbill.
Bruneau, who was described as a “big-time gambler” by New Orleans Crime Commission director Aaron Kohn, and was an associate of New Orleans mobster Nofio Pecora, told the HSCA that he had known Dutz Murret for many years, had “stood for” Dutz and his wife when they got married, and had been a godfather to their son Eugene, though their families never visited with each other.
Bruneau, who went on to become president of the World Boxing Association, said that on the subject occasion, one of the women in the Murret family called him to get Oswald paroled.
He had never heard of Oswald before, and called someone—he can’t remember who—who had parole power.
Although he said “all elected officers and judges” had parole power, other public officials did too.
He made that one call and never heard about the matter anymore, saying that no one, not even the FBI, had interviewed him about it prior to the HSCA investigation.
Conspiracy theorists thought they were on to something when they learned that on the very same day that Oswald applied in New Orleans for his Mexican tourist card, September 17,1963, the person who got the tourist card immediately preceding his was—hope against all hope—someone with CIA connections.
Number 24084 was issued to William G Gaudet, a New Orleans editor of a weekly newsletter, Latin American Report.
When the buffs also discovered that Gaudet’s name was mysteriously missing from a list of people who got their Mexican tourist cards that same day in New Orleans, they just knew they were on to something big.
Also, although Gaudet had observed Oswald at the New Orleans Trade Mart, he did not know him and did not travel to Mexico at the same time as Oswald, Gaudet leaving on September 19, 1963, a week before Oswald.
The unwitting Warren Commission simply published that incomplete list (which omitted names in addition to Gaudet’s), a list it did not prepare.
And the Warren Commission did not, as some conspiracy theorists have alleged, expunge Gaudet’s name from the records.
The fact of his being issued a fifteen-day tourist card in New Orleans on September 17,1963, was preserved for posterity in Warren Commission document number 75, pages 573, 588, and 652, declassified by the FBI in 1975.
Parenthetically, when Gaudet was interviewed by two conspiracy theorists, Bernard Fensterwald and Allan Stone, in 1975, and the allegation that his magazine was a front for the CIA was brought up, he strongly implied this was not so when he said, “Well, I mentioned to my wife.
If readers have a lot of time on their hands to throw away, I would recommend Fensterwald and Stone’s interview of Gaudet.
Almost the entire, dreadful sixty-two-page interview is replete with the most obvious of foundationless speculation by Gaudet.
Among other things, he tells his interviewers that just watching Oswald distribute his leaflets outside the Trade Mart, he formed the opinion that Oswald appeared to be “a miserable creature” and “a nut,” and although he never personally met Oswald, he found it “inconceivable” Oswald could have pulled off the assassination.
We also learn from Gaudet that the anti-Castro Cubans in New Orleans whom he had met had the greatest respect for CIA agent E Howard Hunt, and although he never knew Hunt personally, he was very confident that after the assassination the CIA probably asked Hunt what had happened “in connection with a conspiracy [to kill Kennedy] among the Cubans,” and Gaudet said, “I’m sure Hunt knows who was involved” in the assassination.
There is some confusion as to the number of the Continental Trailways bus that took Oswald to Laredo.
Mirabel was surprised that the card seemed very new—and that Oswald carried such a document.
Mirabel himself had been a Communist for some years at that point, but it was not the custom for Cuban party members to carry identification.
Nechiporenko’s presence and role in the Oswald affair became known only on March 25,1992, when, accompanied by a Hollywood agent, Brian Litman, he held a press conference in Moscow shortly before the publication of his book on the Oswald affair.
Three other former KGB colonels attended the press conference, all represented by Litman and all planning to write their memoirs.
Because Oswald’s visits to the Cuban and Soviet consulates, and the sequence of what was said, and to whom, is understandably fuzzy, the Warren Commission, probably realizing it couldn’t resolve the exact sequence of events , covered the entire Oswald Cuban-Russian consulate issue in less than one and a half pages.
Although we know ENDNOTES Oswald did go to the Russian embassy the following day, Saturday, it’s possible that the inclusion of the Cuban embassy in the Warren Report was merely loose writing.
So by Friday afternoon, all the ingredients or factors necessary to have the subject heated confrontation with Oswald already existed, and it is likely it took place at that time, not the following day.
A much briefer reference to de Barreiro in CE 2121,24 H 586, is possibly incorrect, not just because of its brevity, but because it quotes her as saying she saw Oswald three or four times, but that he only ate there once.
O Lee,” with reservation and purchase order number 14618 for seat number 12) left on the 8:30m.
It was the opinion of the ticket salesman and the dispatcher for the bus line, Francisco Alvarado, that the name “OSWLD” had been made by the baggage handler, Lucio Lopez Medina.
But Alvarado was quite certain that the individual designated on the list as “OSWLD” did not purchase a ticket and did not travel on the 1:00m. bus.
Indeed, no ticket number was recorded for “OSWLD,” and a search of the company’s records in Monterrey failed to locate a ticket stub that was not otherwise accounted for in connection with that trip.
All that appears for seat number 12 is the name “Chihuahuenses,” for the ticket agency, Agencia deViajesTransportes Chihuahuenses, that sold Oswald his ticket.
So apparently, Oswald saw these two movies his first weekend at the Paine residence.
Rachel was born October 20, and October 12 and 13 fit Marina’s recollection much more, of course, than October 19 does.
Interestingly, Loken’s research did not show that Suddenly was shown in Dallas at the time We Were Strangers was, or at any other time between early October and the day of the assassination.
However, he pointed out that last-minute substitutions are frequently made in TV showings.
Also, Oswald could have seen Suddenly on a more remote TV station in Austin or Texarkana that Ruth Paine’s TV set picked up.
The only showing of Suddenly on Dallas TV the agency could find during the general time in question was on February 26,1963, at 10:30m. on Channel 11.
It is not absolutely certain that Oswald came out to Irving with Wesley Frazier that Friday evening, November 8.
And Ruth Paine recalls Oswald “writing something [his letter to the Russian embassy in Washington, D.C.] on the early morning of Saturday” November 9 (3 H 41, WCT Ruth Hyde Paine), which would suggest that he had spent the previous night there.
Oswald didn’t get the job, per Marina, and if Marina was correct, we can assume Oswald somehow found transportation out to Irving afterward on that Saturday, November 9.
The empty space before the number ”2” was undoubtedly filled by the number “1” on the original, as page vii of volume 16 says.
Also, no other letter is known to have been written by Oswald to the Soviet embassy on November 2,1963, or on any other day in November.
In 1993, Hugh Slough, one of the tenants at 1026 North Beckley, told author Gus Russo that on Wednesday evening, Oswald, who usually stayed in his room and didn’t socialize, appeared in the living room during the evening newscast.
Suddenly, Oswald came out of his room, stood behind the couch, staring intently at the television set.
Jerry [Duncan, employed at the service station across the street, who had come over to socialize with Slough, and had previously met Oswald] kept trying to introduce me to Oswald, and frankly couldn’t get his attention.
Fourteen years after her Warren Commission testimony, Marina’s memory had faded to the point that in describing, in broken English, the same incident, she said, “Well, I think maybe I try my best to remember.
I think that prior to that maybe we had disagreement or argument about something like him hiding ... his real name from the landlady and maybe we had argument over that.
Returning to the question of whether, after all is said and done, Lee and Marina truly loved each other, it is probable Lee did love Marina, in his way, and we’ve seen he professed love for her while he was alive.
And in a 1988 interview with Ladies’ Home Journal , Marina said, “In behavior, he was capable of acting like a wild dog.
For her part, we know Marina has given conflicting and ambiguous answers through the years to the question of whether she loved Lee, but her statement to the Ladies’ Home Journal seems the clearest and most heartfelt.
Whenever Lee was hurt,” Marina continued, “I felt physical pain for him.
With Kenneth [the man she married, divorced, but continued to live with], I don’t feel that way.
The Warren Commission overlooked putting the American Rifleman advertisement in its volumes.
But conspiracy theorist Sylvia Meagher points out that the advertisement was for a $12.88 Carcano that was 36 inches long, weighed 5 Vi pounds, and had a catalog number of C20-T750, though we know the $19.95 Carcano that was sent to Oswald was 40 Vs inches long and weighed 8 pounds, which was closer to the 40-inch Carcano weighing 7 pounds advertised in the November 1963 ad in a different magazine, Field and Stream.
There is some ambiguity about the adjustable sling that was found on Oswald’s Carcano rifle.
If Shaneyfelt is correct, this indicates that Oswald went from one homemade sling, at the time of the backyard photos, to another one before the assassination.
If this is true, it would mean that Oswald had not, as Frazier believed, put together a homemade sling for his rifle.
But my guess is that this was an error, like others, that crept into the text of an HSCA volume.
Second, Frazier was the point man for the FBI on this issue in 1963 and 1964, and was the one who ordered the replica.
For the HSCA to say, fifteen years later, that in effect Frazier didn’t know what he was talking about, and that others at the FBI found the sling that came from the seller of the replica to be almost identical to Oswald’s, makes little sense.
The telescopic sight had been sold to Klein’s Sporting Goods by Martin B Retting, the owner of Retting Gun Shop in Culver City, California.
The Warren Commission’s firearms experts did not accept the stamping as proof of the rifle’s caliber—they chambered a 6.5millimeter round and checked it for fit, then made a sulfur cast of the inside of the barrel from which they measured both the diameter between lands and the depth of the rifling grooves with a It is not known if Oswald used the sling when firing at Kennedy.
In this manner, they determined that the stamping was correct, that the rifle barrel was indeed a 6.5-millimeter caliber—the equivalent of an American .25 caliber barrel.
The evidence amassed by FBI agents tended to support Marina’s second account.
The Communist newspapers Oswald is holding were dated March 11 and March 24 (the Worker ), and the FBI learned they were mailed on March 7 and 21, respectively, by second-class mail.
Robert knew the camera well, his brother having left it with him in Fort Worth before he left for Russia in 1959, and regaining possession of it when he returned to America in 1962.
CE 750, 17 H 524) But the ownership of another camera of Oswald’s (where he got it and whether it was even a camera) has been surrounded by confusion, a confusion that exists to this day.
In a search of Ruth Paine’s garage on November 23, 1963, pursuant to a search warrant, Dallas detective Guy F Rose seized a “sea bag” of Oswald’s that contained, among other items, a small German-made Minox camera, used as a “spy camera” by both the Allies and the Axis in the Second World War.
Rose described it as about the size of “a half-pack of cigarettes,” and he said it was loaded with film.
But former FBI agent Warren de Brueys, who with fellow agent Vincent Drain delivered to the FBI in Washington, D.C., all of Oswald’s personal belongings that had been seized and turned over to them by the Dallas Police Department, told Dallas Morning News reporter Earl Golz in 1978, without any reservation, that there was no effort not to disclose anything.
And in a January 27,1964, memo, FBI agent Thomas Lenihan in Washington, D.C., wrote that the item the Dallas Police Department turned over to the FBI (de Brueys and Drain) “should be listed as a Minox light meter,” not a camera.
I had one myself, and in fact it’s about fifteen inches from me on my desk right now.
Apparently this small German-made camera was not that uncommon, and was not—as conspiracy theorists would want us to believe—only used by those in intelligence work.
In a matter that some conspiracy theorists have erroneously thought applied to Oswald’s Minox camera, Earl Golz of the Dallas Morning News wrote that “the serial number of the Minox camera reportedly obtained from Mrs.
As the reader can see, no one has nailed down the facts with respect to the Minox camera issue, but since it was a camera that was owned by civilians as well as those in intelligence work, and since there’s no evidence that Oswald was ever employed by any United States or foreign intelligence agency, this whole issue seems to be a lot to do about nothing.
In other words, instead of simply disposing of the little camera, the evil conspirators who murdered Kennedy put it in the archives and by trying to prevent it from being opened, hope that the Armstrongs of the world won’t be able to find the information they’re seeking from it.
Several of the publications furnished the Commission with the prints they had used, or described their retouching efforts in correspondence to the Commission.
Except for the admitted retouching, the pictures were identical to the original.
The idea that police might have switched rifles to frame Oswald jumped a notch in the mid-1970s when conspiracy theorist Jack White, a former Fort Worth advertising executive and graphic artist with an intense interest in the photographic evidence surrounding the Kennedy assassination, noticed that the alleged assassination rifle looked different in many of the photographs taken of it that weekend.
The HSCA photographic panel realized at the outset that many Warren Commission critics, like Jack White, had failed to take into account the effects of perspective when an object is photographed.
The panel pointed out that when a camera lens projects an image of our three-dimensional world onto a two-dimensional sheet of him negative, the result can make parallel lines in space appear to conHSCA photographic expert Cecil Kirk discovered yet another first-generation print just a few days before he testified to the HSCA in September 1978.
To his amazement, it was not, as previously thought, a second-generation copy of a copy but a first-generation print from the original negative, identified with a rubber stamp as the Dallas Police Department photograph that Captain Fritz showed Oswald.
ENDNOTES verge and join at the horizon, when in reality we know they remain an equal distance apart.
Someone laying a ruler on the resulting twodimensional photograph, as Jack White did, is going to get different measurements depending on the angle of the rifle to the camera.
To prove this fact, the panel undertook extensive “tilt” studies using photogrammetrical mathematics, which allowed them to compute and compare the true dimensions of ten distinctive features on the Mannlicher-Carcano for any given degree of tilt.
But White, one of the leading conspiracy proponents of the theory that the backyard photographs were fakes, had much more to say when he was invited to testify before the HSCA in 1978 and detail his work for committee members.
When asked by the committee why he thought the fake photographs had been made, White replied, “It is fairly obvious . . . that they were made to implicate Two other experts had made public statements attesting to the “fakery” of the backyard photos by the time of the HSCA’s analysis.
Pickard, appeared in a Canadian Broadcasting Company segment of The Fifth Estate, and denounced the backyard photos as fakes.
Marina did the normal thing in taking several photos of her husband holding the Carcano.
So White was clearly out of his depth, though he was a hero to his fellow conspiracy theorists.
Calvin S McCamy, chairman of the photographic standards management board of the American National Standards Institute, and Sergeant Cecil W Kirk, head of the District of Columbia’s Metropolitan Police Department’s photographic services unit.
The experts were easily able to determine that the first two prints, the ones found in Mrs.
All the other prints, all slightly to substantially larger, were printed manually using an enlarger.
The HSCA experts were certain that the backyard photographs were taken, as Marina Oswald testified, with Oswald’s Imperial Reflex camera to the exclusion of all other cameras.
The twentytwo-member panel compared test photographs taken with the subject Oswald camera against the backyard photographs and found unique scratches and imperfections, known as frame edge markings, identical to both.
Again, the frame edge markings were identical to test negatives shot in Oswald’s camera.
In reaching their conclusion, the photographic experts also used the principles of photogrammetry to resolve the question of fakery.
Panel member Calvin McCamy, who supervised the committee’s analysis of the backyard photographs, testified that a vanishing-point analysis of the backyard photographs proved, without question, that the photographs are not composites, as critics claimed.
McCamy explained that the vanishing point in a photograph is the point at which parallel lines (e.g., railroad tracks receding into the distance) appear to converge.
In the case of the backyard photographs, the shadows cast by objects in the scene were used to determine the vanishing point.
When McCamy applied this technique to the backyard photographs, he discovered that all of the shadow lines did, indeed, intersect at the same vanishing point.
If any part of the photo had contained a portion of another superimposed photo taken when the sun—or other source of light—had been at a slightly different position, the shadow lines would not have converged at the same point.
One aspect of the photos that has troubled critics is the fact that the shadow under Oswald’s nose does not change position even though the head is tilted differently in each photo.
Although the vanishing-point analysis correctly accounted for that, the panel went further and asked the Rochester Institute of Technology to create an exhibit that would make it clear to anyone as to how that can happen.
When the head was vertical and facing directly toward the camera, the nose shadow pointed directly downward toward the centerline of the lips.
When the head was tilted only slightly to the left, the shadow moved quite noticeably, pointing toward the left side of the mouth.
However, when the head, while still tilted to the left, was rotated slightly toward its right, the shadow swung back and once again pointed directly toward the centerline of the lips.
Without moving the head further, the photographers then moved the camera slightly to the left, just enough to compensate for the earlier rotation of the head, and restored the full frontal view of the face, with the shadow still pointing directly toward the center of the lips.
It was a very simple demonstration of the effect seen in the backyard photographs, one a high schooler could duplicate out in the yard on a sunny day.
Again, contrary to critics’ claims, there was nothing whatsoever unusual about the shadow under Oswald’s nose.
Next, the photographic panel tackled one of the great obsessions of the conspiracy theorists—the claim that a faint line visible on one of the photographs (133A), which cut irregularly across Oswald’s chin, betrayed the point at which Oswald’s head had been superimposed onto someone else’s body and chin.
While it seems absurd that anyone would join a head to a chin instead of following some natural line in the photograph—like the shirt collar, for instance, which would have better disguised the deception—the committee’s photographic experts examined the first-generation prints under magnification.
First, it was apparent that the line was more visible in secondand third-generation prints than in first-generation prints, owing to a buildup in contrast as copies were made.
As contrast builds in successive copies, the light areas grow lighter, the dark areas darker.
Second, the line proved not to be photographic at all—it was much finer and more continuous than the photograph’s grain would have allowed.
It looped down from the ear, crossed the chin, looped down again, and then back up to the ear, forming a continuous loop.
The panel determined that the “line” was, in fact, the edge of a water spot, caused by a fine deposit of minerals left on the negative.
Other such lines were discernible all over the photo, including on the shirt and on the butt of the rifle.
What looks like the lower edge of Oswald’s chin is in fact simply where the shadow cast by the sun begins.
The lower part of the chin, with the cleft, is in such heavy shadow that it is virtually invisible.
In addition, both the negative and the prints were scanned into a computer and digitized, which allowed the images to be seen with artificially enhanced contrast and to be analyzed with regard to the structure of the grain—the tiny black dots that appear black or dark gray when large and close together, or that create areas of white or light gray to the naked eye when they are small and farther apart.
Again, no significant variations, as would be expected from composite photos, were found.
Prints of varying density made from the single recovered negative revealed a great deal of detail in the shadows that had been invisible before, including individual leaves of the bushes and their shadows, little stones on the ground, and even the detail on a newspaper lying on the ground.
Severely underexposed prints made by the panel revealed detail in the highlights that had been washed out in normally exposed prints.
An unexpected dividend of the backyard photographs came with the panel’s discovery that the camera had been moved slightly from shot to shot.
The panel determined this fact by comparing the distance between a foreground fence post and background fence pickets, as well as a background door, seen in each of the photographs.
This indicated not only that the photos had been taken with a handheld camera, as Marina Oswald testified, but that the three backgrounds were not identical, as some critics have claimed.
Further, and more significant, it allowed any two of the photos to be viewed—as with some of the autopsy photos—as a stereoscopic pair, giving a powerful illusion of three dimensions.
This in itself, asserted McCamy, was an insurmountable argument against fakery, because any retouching of either photo would have revealed itself by destroying the illusion of depth in that area of the photograph.
If the background had merely been rephotographed, as Jack White and other critics charged, the image would look no different under stereo viewing than it did to the naked eye, quite two-dimensional.
In stereo it was possible to see that a bush in the background had very few leaves (destroying another buff claim that the bush was in full bloom and therefore the picture couldn’t have been taken in March 1963 as Marina testified), because the perception of depth made it easy to distinguish the real leaves from their own shadows behind them.
In its final report, the HSCA photographic panel went well beyond what the critics had even considered on the issue of fake photos.
For instance, the panel discovered that shadows visible in the photographs could be used to determine the sequence in which the photos were taken.
Three linear shadows cast by telephone or power lines lying outside the visible area of the images fell across a post in the background.
As the sun moved across the sky, the three parallel shadows moved across the knot, clearly indicating that the shots were actually taken in reverse order to their exhibit numbers, C first, then B, then A Presumably, there could have been other photos taken in between (Marina’s testimony doesn’t make clear how many photos were originally taken), but if more than the three had been taken, they have never been recovered.
In the second photo the person held the camera more steadily, but cut Oswald’s feet off at the bottom of the frame.
The panel also noted “several practical considerations” that reinforced its conclusion that there was no fakery in the backyard photographs.
The panel pointed out that the FBI had established that Oswald would have had both of the newspapers seen in the photographs by March 27 or 28.
On April 5, Oswald autographed the print George and Jeanne de Mohrenschildt found among their belongings, and he was fired from the photo laboratory where he worked—and where he had access to a darkroom—the next day.
The panel determined that the film used to produce the print, as well as the print itself, was probably developed and processed by an amateur.
Besides the obvious question of why Oswald would have signed a fake photo of himself (even if the photos had been such sophisticated and clever fakes that they were able to survive the scrutiny of the entire twenty-two-member forensic photography panel), the time period within which the fakes would have to have been created was unthinkably short, around ten days.
Moreover, the counterfeiters would have had to have gotten access to Oswald’s rifle (sent from Chicago on March 20, and hence, not likely to have reached Dallas before March 23 or 24), his pistol, the newspapers, and the backyard within this short period of time, which the panel considered to be “unlikely”—a grand understatement.
At the time the HSCA examined the de Mohrenschildt print, additional handwritten notations had been added to the back of the photo.
But, on second thought, she realized that some of the letters were formed in a way uncharacteristic for her.
In fact, it seemed to her to be more like something a foreigner unfamiliar with Russian might have written.
Joseph R McNally, one of the committee’s three handwriting experts, confirmed that impression.
McNally thought the person who wrote over it was probably not really conversant with the Cyrillic alphabet.
The overwriting was also slow, hesitant, very uncertain, almost certainly a tracing.
As we saw in a footnote to an earlier endnote, one of the two experts Groden was apparently referring to, Malcolm Thompson, later recanted his position and said he agreed with the conclusion of the HSCA’s photographic panel.
Pickard, admitted that he made no scientific analysis of the photographs before offering his position of fakery.
An intriguing sideshow involved another prominent assassination conspiracy figure, David Lifton, who not only was a spectator in the courtroom but also was accused by Simpson’s attorneys with supplying the plaintiffs with derogatory information against Groden.
On December 16, 1963, Marina told the FBI that although she saw the rifle in her home in both Dallas and New Orleans, to her best recollection she never saw Lee cleaning the rifle or holding it in her presence in New Orleans.
She stated that she didn’t think that Oswald ever went out and practiced firing the rifle in New Orleans because, as a rule, he stayed home when he was not working.
When he did go out, she did not see him take the rifle, and to her knowledge, he did not have any ammunition for the rifle in either New Orleans or Dallas and never spoke of buying any.
Asked to describe his actions more fully, Marina replied, “I cannot describe that in greater detail.
I can only say that Lee would sit there with the rifle and open and close the bolt and clean it.
I don’t know exactly how he practiced, because I was in the house, I was busy.
The open end of the folded bag was on top, the open end facing the west and almost touching an iron pipe, one of two pipes adjacent to the south wall.
The pin and spring would not be on the exterior of the weapon and, hence, would not leave oil residue on the interior of the paper bag.
Moreover, the FBI only says that as of the date of the report, August 20, 1964 , the weapon was well-oiled.
The FBI report referred to the “present” well-oiled condition of the weapon.
And, for instance, we know that marksmen for the Department of the Army test-fired the weapon forty-seven times at some time before March 31, 1964 , the date Ronald Simmons, chief of the Weapons Evaluation Branch of the Department of the Army, testified before the Warren Commission on the test-firing.
White reported that two nearly identically worded FBI documents, found by a researcher at the National Archives, offered two opposite conclusions regarding the source of the paper Oswald allegedly used to construct the bag.
One version stated that paper samples obtained from the Depository shipping area on November 22 were found to have the same observable characteristics as the brown paper bag recovered from the sixth-floor sniper’s nest.
In a March 12, 1964, letter, Warren Commission general counsel J Lee Rankin asked FBI Director J Edgar Hoover to settle the two ostensibly contradictory FBI reports.
Consequently, the samples obtained by the FBI in December did not match the characteristics of the paper bag found on the day of the shooting.
The second report, dated January 13, 1964, related to samples taken from the Depository on November 22, the day of the assassination.
However, Hoover noted that while the paper bag found on the sixth floor could have been made from the materials available at the Depository, the paper and tape did not contain any watermarks or other significant, unique, identifying features.
FBI agents procured samples of packing tape from Klein’s Sporting Goods in Chicago for comparison purposes, to explore the possibility that the paper bag had been shipped with the rifle.
Since the Depository exhausted a roll of paper around every four working days a month (4 H 96; CE 1965, 23 H 816; but see WR, 136, which says every three working days), and because samples taken from the Depository shipping room on the day of the assassination matched the homemade bag found on the sixth floor, it seems probable that the gun bag had been made not more than four days before the shooting.
In 1996, conspiracy authors Ray and Mary La Fontaine, in their book Oswald Talked, congratulated themselves on their discovery of photographs of curtain rods found in 1993 among the newly released files of the Dallas police.
According to the La Fontaines, they asked Day to compare the clearest print visible in the photo—a right thumbprint—with a photo of Oswald’s right thumbprint, and although the print did not appear to belong to Oswald, Day could not conclusively rule out Oswald as a possible source of the print.
The authors then reportedly had three other fingerprint experts from other cities examine the print, with equally inconclusive results.
Paine was questioned at her home by the Commission’s assistant counsel Albert Jenner in the presence of Secret Service agent John J Howlett on the night of March 23,1964.
Paine took Jenner and Howlett into her garage, where she pointed out two curtain rods that she had in storage and which she had testified about the previous week.
As it turns out, the La Fontaines never mentioned the fact that the “report signed by Carl Day” was a follow-up to this meeting with Mrs.
The form shows that the curtain rods were returned to Howlett on the morning of March 26,1964.
Although the submission form appears to show the specimens arriving on the morning of March 15,1964—an impossibility under ENDNOTES the circumstances—the remainder of the information relates precisely to the events surrounding the curtain rods recovered from Mrs.
Linnie Mae Randle, who first saw Oswald with the package from her kitchen window and then from her kitchen door on the morning of the assassination, described the package as a “heavy brown bag, heavier than a grocery bag” that was “more bulky” toward the bottom than it was on the top.
She also thought the bag might have been about 27 to 28 inches long—the bag found in the Depository was actually 38 inches in length, while the 40 1 /5-inch rifle, disassembled, measured 34 4 /s inches.
When shown the bag found beneath the sixth-floor window, Randle recalled that the bag she saw Oswald with was around the same width.
He showed agents of the FBI how much space on the backseat of his car the package occupied, and they measured the length at 27 inches.
He also thought Oswald’s package might have been an inch or two narrower than the dimensions of the actual bag found on the sixth floor.
However, he added that the bag “could have been the sack or package” he saw in Oswald’s possession but he did not feel he was “in a position to definitely state” it was.
The Warren Commission concluded that Frazier and Randle probably erred in their recollections of the length of the bag , and it was understandable the two had done so.
Neither Frazier nor his sister, the only two people who saw Oswald with the package, suspected that it was of any significance.
Frazier caught only a glimpse of the package on the backseat as he got behind the wheel of his car.
During the walk, the package was partly obscured by Oswald’s hand, arm, and shoulder as he carried it.
In particular, they’ve focused on Frazier’s statements that Oswald carried the bag with one end tucked up under his right armpit and the opposite end, presumably the butt of the rifle, cradled in his right hand.
As they point out, Oswald’s Mannlicher-Carcano couldn’t possibly have been carried in this manner.
Even when disassembled, the rifle was nearly 35 inches long, and the Warren Commission conceded (apparently in view of Oswald’s height) that “the disassembled rifle was too long to be carried” in the way Frazier described.
Yet, Frazier’s statements that the rifle was tucked under Oswald’s armpit is hardly as definitive as the critics claim.
While Frazier’s description of how Oswald carried the rifle was consistent in all of his statements to investigators (CE 2009, 24 H 409, FBI interview of Wesley Frazier on December 1, 1963; 2 H 228, 229, 239, 243, WCT Buell Wesley Frazier), it was clearly inferable from his Warren Commission testimony that this was only an assumption on his part based on his limited view.
Just as importantly, Frazier told the Warren Commission that “I couldn’t see much of the bag from him walking in front of me.
So we don’t even know, for sure, how Oswald was carrying the rifle in front of his body, which Frazier could not see.
While we may never know the precise way in which Oswald carried the package into the Depository Building that morning, we are assured by all of the evidence subsequently discovered on the sixth floor (i.e., the bag itself inside the sniper’s nest, Oswald’s fingerprints on the bag, the fact that curtain rods were not in the bag—Oswald himself later denying saying they were, etc.) that he did so.
As the Warren Commission concluded in 1964, all of this hard, physical evidence overwhelmingly outweighs Frazier’s tentative memory and description.
Moreover, despite the slight discrepancy in length, the general description of the bag given by Frazier and his sister matched the bag found in the sniper’s nest.
Michael Paine saw the blanket that enveloped the rifle several times on the garage floor of the Paines’ home.
He even moved it and had the impression it contained some type of camping equipment.
We don’t know if at this point in time Oswald had disassembled his rifle.
But we can assume that he hadn’t yet wrapped it in the brown paper bag that was found in the sniper’s nest.
When counsel asked him to indicate on a desktop an estimate of the length of the package he had guessed was about thirty inches long, the length Paine indicated was measured by Warren Commission counsel to be XI Vi inches.
Day subsequently took five A far less reliable indication of the length was when Michael’s friend, Raymond Krystinik, estimated, with his hands, the length of the bag that Paine had indicated with his hands around four months earlier.
Warren Commission counsel said that Krystinik’s hands were spread approximately 27 inches apart.
Although there is a difference of opinion among experts as to whether the age of fingerprints can be determined from their appearance alone, some say that the prints on Oswald’s rifle must have been “fresh” because it is unlikely that they would have lasted very long on the trigger housing’s smooth, oily, metal surface.
In Latona’s opinion, the age of a print cannot be based on its appearance.
The agent thought that Day must have found the palm print after the rifle was returned to Dallas on November 24, because if Day saw it before, as he claimed, the agent was envision412 ENDNOTES ing Hoover “going into orbit” when he found out the FBI experts missed it.
After Day explained what happened, he felt it got the FBI off the hook.
Specifically, critics charge that the palm print was created by carrying the rifle to the morgue and wrapping Oswald’s dead hand around the rifle barrel.
In fact, filmmaker Oliver Stone included a scene in his movie JFK that depicts just such an event.
When I asked his son, Richard Harrison Jr., a Dallas lawyer, about the allegation, he said his father had told him everything about his participation in the investigation of Kennedy’s murder.
When I finally was able to locate Williams by phone at his home in Fort Worth, he told me he had never met Mack, the story was not true, and he had never gone to the funeral home where Oswald was.
When I called Mack back with this information, he said he must have been wrong about the name, J Doyle Williams, but he said some FBI agent definitely told him this, although he didn’t know who it was if it wasn’t Williams.
I explained to Mack that I knew from my experience in law enforcement that it is very common for the police to go out to the morgue to get a fingerprint or palm print exemplar from a dead person.
In fact, I personally recall one case where they literally peeled a decedent’s skin off his palm to bring it back to their office.
But they don’t take the gun or knife (or club, bottle, etc.) out to the morgue.
They have a latent fingerprint or palm print on the gun or knife and the whole purpose of going to the morgue is to get a fingerprint or palm print exemplar to see if it matches up with the latent they already have on the gun or knife.
There would be no conceivable reason to take the gun or knife out to the morgue other than to frame the dead man by putting his prints on it.
Mack said it was over twenty years ago but it was his best recollection the agent said they took the Carcano to the morgue.
Oswald, as we know, was shot by Jack Ruby at around 11:20m. on Sunday, November 24, 1963, and was declared dead at Parkland Hospital that afternoon at 1:07m.
After the autopsy at Parkland Hospital, his body was released from Parkland sometime between 10:00 and 10:30m. to be transported to Miller Funeral Home in Fort Worth, where it remained throughout the night and next day until its burial at a Fort Worth cemetery around 4:00m. on Monday, November 25.
The FBI took possession of Oswald’s Carcano rifle at 11:45m. on Friday, November 22,1963.
It was then flown back east to the FBI lab that night, and examined at the lab on Saturday morning, November 23.
Although I could find no FBI report indicating it, the FBI probably did, in fact, take Oswald’s prints at Miller Funeral Home on the morning of November 25, 1963.
Moreover, it appears the FBI itself did not have its own set of Oswald’s prints, and during this period immediately following the assassination, it is well known that each of the various law enforcement agencies was trying to shift blame for the assassination away from itself to the others, and hence, did not want to rely on anyone other than itself.
Although, as indicated, I could find no report of Oswald’s prints being taken, fingerprint cards are reproduced in the Warren Commission volumes on Oswald, indicating prints were taken of him on November 25, 1963, after he died, though no block on the cards indicates where they were taken.
When author David Lifton interviewed Paul Groody, the funeral director at Miller Funeral Home, on July 29, 1980, and asked him if the FBI had taken Oswald’s prints at the morgue, he responded, “Oh, yes, yes, I was there.
I was not in the room at the time, but I had to clean up his fingers after they got through fingerprinting him.
They put black gook on his fingers, and they get it off, so they it up to me to clean his fingers off.
Groody said the fingerprinting took about half an hour and took place sometime between when he completed the embalming at 1:30m. and 5:00 in the morning of November 25.
So if we’re to believe Groody, FBI agents apparently took Oswald’s prints.
Oliver Stone, of course, never gave his audience any of the above information.
All his audience saw was some member of law enforcement planting Oswald’s palm print on the rifle.
One may ask why I would cite Lifton as a source for this information when I have virtually laughed at his theory about the Kennedy assassination.
I have found Lifton to be perhaps the most meticulous researcher in the conspiracy community.
It’s the totally unbelievable inferences he has drawn from his research that I have attacked.
So not only common sense, but also all the available evidence shows that the agents who took Oswald’s prints did not bring his Carcano out to the funeral home.
Assuming that Groody was right about the time he saw FBI agents at the morgue , other FBI agents may have gone to the morgue that day, not at night, but later in the morning, again however, without taking Oswald’s Carcano with them.
He added that many members of the local and national press were there when the two agents arrived.
I asked him about the size of the crime-lab kit he had seen one of the agents carry in.
No way on earth could anyone have put a rifle or disassembled rifle into that little bag or kit.
Madland said the sole purpose of going to the morgue was to take photos of Oswald’s left wrist where he cut himself during his suicide attempt in Moscow.
Moreover, we know from Oswald’s autopsy report that he had a “transverse one and three-quarter inch slightly raised white scar on the volar aspect of the left wrist” that the medical examiner, Dr.
When I asked Madland about the taking of Oswald’s fingerprints at the morgue, he said Oswald’s prints “may have been taken” but he didn’t think so.
Jennings told me Oswald’s prints “probably were taken” but he couldn’t remember for sure, though he clearly remembers the taking of photos.
In summary, we don’t know if Groody and Mosely were talking about the same FBI agents (either Groody or Mosely, looking back many years later, may have simply forgotten the time of day when the agents were at the morgue), or whether there were two sets of agents who went to the morgue.
There is absolutely no evidence to support what Oliver Stone showed his audience—a man, presumably an FBI agent, putting Oswald’s palm print on his rifle at the morgue.
Even though Craig’s version of events doesn’t add up to planted evidence, Dallas deputy sheriff Luke Mooney, who discovered the shells, suggested in 1964 that Captain Fritz had picked the shells up before crime-lab personnel arrived—a real surprise, if true.
Though I don’t automatically discount Mooney’s version of events, I do find it pretty hard to believe that Captain Fritz, a thirty-year veteran and highly regarded leader of the Homicide and Robbery Bureau, would be foolish enough to move evidence at a crime scene, in full view of everyone, before photographs had been taken (even a rookie cop, having just gone through training at the police academy, would know he wasn’t supposed to do this),t then instruct the men around him not to do what he had just done.
I doubt Fritz would have even done that before photographs were taken of the crime scene, but even if he did that we can assume he put the shell back in the same place he had picked it up from.
In later years, WFAA-TV cameraman Tom Alyea, who was trapped inside the Depository when police sealed it, made a similar claim about the shells being moved.
Alyea said that Fritz picked up all three shells and held them in his hand while Alyea filmed them.
But this part of the fdm Alyea claims he shot has never surfaced—a highly unusual circumstance considering that much of Alyea’s film was broadcast unedited over WFAA-TV the weekend of the assassination.
In any event, if he in fact saw Fritz pick up the shells it probably was after the crime scene photos had been taken. tOn the other hand I have to admit that the disturbance of a crime scene before the crime-lab people arrive is unfortunately almost as common as bad debt.
In the Manson murder case, the first officer arriving at the murder scene saw horn-rimmed glasses near two trunks in the living room of actress Sharon Tate, one of the victims.
By the time the Los Angeles police criminologists arrived, the glasses somehow ended up on top of a desk.
Two pieces of gun grip, first seen near the entryway, ended up under a chair in the living room.
As stated in a Los Angeles Police Department report, “They were apparently kicked under the chair by one of the original officers on the scene.
But when the disturbance of a crime scene occurs, it is almost invariably by young, uniformed officers, virtually always the first members of a police department to arrive at the scene, not by very experienced plainclothes detectives or their superiors, like Captain Fritz.
But the Dallas police photographer, Robert Lee Studebaker, said he was, and that when he arrived on the sixth floor “they hadn’t found anything” yet.
Conspiracy author Noel Twyman lifted the allegation of planted shells to new levels in his 1997 book Bloody Treason , arguing that only two empty shells were found, not three, proving that at least one bullet had been fired from somewhere other than the sixth-floor sniper’s nest, and therefore, a conspiracy existed to kill the president.
As proof of his charge, Twyman pointed to a Dallas police document published in the Warren Commission volumes which listed a number of items that were turned over to the FBI laboratory on the night of November 22.
Twyman acknowledged that he originally intended to ignore the handwritten change since it might be explained by a simple correction of an “honest mistake,” but changed his mind when another researcher discovered more “evidence” allegedly supporting Twyman’s theory.
The evidence, per Twyman, had been “buried and suppressed in the National Archives under the guise of national security,” and consisted of two negatives (along with eight prints) showing only two 6.5-millimeter shell casings (and one live 6.5-millimeter round) that had been turned over to the FBI laboratory by the Dallas police on the night of the assassination.
The negatives and photographs, stuffed into an envelope and signed by FBI special agent J Doyle Williams, were apparently taken by the bureau as part of the documentation of the evidence that was submitted to them by the Dallas police.
Twyman also noted that the FBI lab report on the shells, returned to This is a favorite theme of conspiracy theorists—documents and photographs “buried” in the National Archives or in the Warren Commission’s twenty-six volumes of hearings and exhibits.
If we’re to believe the theorists, it apparently never crossed the minds of the alleged conspirators who killed Kennedy to simply get rid of the evidence that could convict them.
Unlike nearly all ordinary conspirators, Kennedy’s killers intentionally and knowingly left evidence behind in the archives and the Warren Commission volumes that could expose them—evidence that only the conspiracists are smart and industrious enough to uncover.
The third shell (along with Oswald’s wallet, identification, and notebook) was retained by Captain Fritz (who, let’s not forget, was in charge of the investigation at this point) “to be used,” Fritz said, “for comparison tests” since his office was trying to determine where the cartridges had been bought.
Fritz kept the shell in his desk drawer until the early morning hours of November 27, when it was turned over to FBI agent James P Hosty Jr.
According to Twyman, the Warren Commission, in its absent-mindedness, published photographic proof of the cover-up, proof that had been glossed over by all of the conspiracy theorists before him.
Both photos are multigenerational prints of two Dallas police photographs taken of the spent hulls lying in the sniper’s nest on the afternoon of November 22.
The conspirators, you see, had attempted to conceal the fact that there were only two empty cartridge cases or shells and one live round of ammunition by darkening the area around the live round, shell “A,” to make it look like a third shell.
He writes, “Somehow, both the authentic photo and the forged photo slipped through to the Commission.
In Twyman’s fuzzy, multigenerational version of the police photograph, it looked like a bullet sticking out of the end of the empty cartridge case.
In the end, Twyman’s “powerful and persuasive” proof of fabricated and planted evidence is nothing more than proof of Twyman’s poor research on this issue, although by and large I found him to be a better researcher than most conspiracy authors and theorists.
Two original prints were made from this negative, numbered 91001/390 and 91 -001/355, and new negatives were made from these two prints.
Studebaker doesn’t say counsel is wrong, only answering, “We have probably got one down there I can get you that is a lot better print than that.
Warren Commission critic and author Josiah Thompson, who focused in on one of the three shells, one that had a dent on its mouth, made another allegation suggesting that there was something phony about the three cartridge cases left behind in the sniper’s nest.
Thompson points out that one of these marks was identified as having come from the magazine follower (the There is a slight possible discrepancy that I am unable to resolve.
One explanation may be that the angles of the subject photos are completely different, Studebaker’s photo being from the top looking down, and Dillard’s photos from the bottom looking up.
Yet this same letter makes clear that all three empty cartridges showed evidence that they had been loaded into and extracted from the chamber of a weapon more than once.
Thompson’s suggestion that the dented shell hadn’t been fired in or ejected from Oswald’s rifle ignores an incontrovertible fact.
As previously indicated, all three cartridge cases were proved to have been fired in Oswald’s rifle to the exclusion of all other rifles in the world.
The letter said, however, that marks from the magazine follower and chamber on one of the cartridge cases were produced by Oswald’s rifle, the magazine follower marks on a second one were produced by Oswald’s rifle, and the chamber and bolt marks on the third cartridge case were produced by Oswald’s rifle. tThe unique microscopic impressions of the bolt face and firing pin were created during the manufacturing process of Oswald’s Carcano, with further unique impressions on the pin and face caused by use, mishandling, and corrosion.
The impressions on the firing pin are left on the primer, located on the base of the cartridge case, when the pin strikes the primer.
When the trigger is pulled and the firing pin strikes the primer, this ignites the mixture, which in turn ignites a propellant powder in the cartridge.
The extreme gas pressure of the powder pushes the bullet through the barrel and at the same time pushes the cartridge case rearward against the bolt face, leaving the bolt face impressions on the base of the cartridge case that firearms experts say are as individual and unique as a fingerprint.
But seizing on the fact that only one cartridge case, per Hoover’s letter, had bolt face markings on it that could definitely connect it to the bolt of Oswald’s Carcano to conclude that the other two cartridge cases did not come from Oswald’s rifle is a non sequitur.
Surely Thompson, who possesses one of the most substantive and objective minds ever produced by the conspiracy community, knows that several markings other than those from the bolt face of a rifle (e.g., ejector, extractor, firing pin, chamber, and magazine follower) can prove that an empty cartridge is connected to a subject rifle.
In any event, on the issue of whether Hoover’s letter supports, in any way, the proposition that the three cartridge cases found on the sixth floor were not fired in Oswald’s Carcano, and hence “conflicts” with Frazier’s testimony, it should be noted that Hoover’s letter only addressed itself specifically to the Commission’s request, which was to “determine if had been loaded into and extractedfrom rifle more than once ” , not whether the three empty cartridges had been fired in Oswald’s rifle to the exclusion of all other weapons, as Frazier and Nicol testified.
So there is no conflict between Hoover’s letter and Frazier’s testimony.
And to repeat, a cartridge fired in a weapon, by definition, has to extract and eject its case from the weapon.
Clearly, the totality of evidence (including the fact that the vast majority of witnesses in Dealey Plaza heard three shots being fired) shows that the three shells found beneath the sixthfloor window were fired in and extracted from Oswald’s Carcano rifle.
It apparently did not occur to Thompson that the cartridge might have been dented while being ejected from the rifle.
The panel of specialists and scientists said that “the four smaller fragments of organic material were determined on microscopic examination to consist of human skin and tissue, but it was not possible to establish the precise body area of origin.
My only guess is that the blood traces that must have been on it were removed by someone early on at the Dallas crime lab or elsewhere almost as a matter of course.
In all the evidence bullets I handled in court in murder cases during my prosecutorial career, none had any visible blood on them.
The only reference in the Warren Commission volumes to this issue was in the questioning of FBI firearms expert Robert Frazier by Commission counsel Melvin Eisenberg.
Two additional FBI experts in the field of firearms identification, Cortlandt Cunningham and Charles L Killion, analyzed all the bullet evidence in this case.
Although they did not testify before the Warren Commission, their findings were the same as those of Frazier and Nicol.
The judge proceeded to exclude the Carcano from evidence, and since the prosecution had built its case around the weapon, the prosecution, feeling it had no other credible case against Oswald, joined Oswald’s lawyers in asking the judge to direct the jury to find Oswald not guilty, which he did, neither side ever making a final argument.
In his March 20, 1964, testimony before the Warren Commission, Tomlinson said that when he arrived at the ground-floor location, he found a gurney (a stretcher on wheels) in the elevator.
He pulled it out and pushed it against the south wall, opposite the elevator doors, next to another gurney that was already partially blocking the entrance to a men’s restroom.
At about 1:20m., after several trips on the elevator, Tomlinson came down in the elevator from the second floor and noticed that the stretcher blocking the restroom door had been pushed out into the narrow corridor, apparently by someone who had used the restroom.
To keep the hallway clear, Tomlinson stepped off the elevator and pushed the stretcher back against the wall.
He walked over and saw a bullet lying between the pad and the rim on the top of the stretcher.
The second agent reportedly remained stationed outside the elevator on the emergency-room level.
Pool recognized Darrell C Tomlinson, whom he knew, operating the elevator.
Pool said that there was only one stretcher outside the elevator and that only one trip was made up in the elevator prior to the discovery of the bullet.
When the stretcher was moved, Pool heard an object fall, bent over to pick it up, and discovered a bullet, which, based on his familiarity with guns, he judged to be 6 millimeters in diameter, bronze, long, pointed, and smooth.
A Secret Service agent was reportedly within ten feet when Pool discovered the bullet.
Pool then gave the bullet to Tomlinson, asking him not to mention his name to anyone.
In both cases, the bullet was discovered on or near a stretcher whose origin remains a little vague.
First, Pool never explained why he waited fourteen years to come forward.
Secret Service agent,” significantly, Pool’s name doesn’t appear in any Secret Service report.
In what has to be, if true, one of the incongruities of the investigation, Wright says he was unable to get an FBI or Secret Service agent interested enough to come and take a look at the spent slug, so Wright returned to the elevator vestibule, picked up the bullet, and put it in his pocket.
To back this up he cites the 1952 book Modern Criminal Investigation (Lane, Rush to Judgment ,424 footnote 70), whose authors couldn’t possibly have analyzed the evidence in the Kennedy assassination eleven years before it happened , all the while ignoring the fact that the firearms experts who did examine the two large fragments for the Warren Commission had no trouble tying them to Oswald’s rifle.
In his testimony before the Pool recalled only one trip being made in the elevator prior to discovering the bullet and that trip involved taking a Secret Service agent to the second or third floor.
Additionally, as indicated, Pool claimed he discovered the bullet ten feet from a Secret Service agent, yet he says Tomlinson had to go “around the corner” to find someone to give it to.
Alfred G Olivier, Sturdivan’s superior who conducted the tests at the Edgewood Arsenal in 1964, did not go into the matter of the decreasing velocity of the bullet as it traversed Connally’s body, but he did with respect to Kennedy’s body, and his numbers varied a little from Sturdivan’s.
The exit velocity from the simulation of Kennedy’s body averaged 1,772 to 1,798 feet per second, depending on the substance through which the bullets passed.
In 1964, at the request of the Warren Commission, an extensive series of tests (on substances simulating live human bodies—gelatin blocks, horse meat, and goat meat for Kennedy’s neck, and “an animal” and “bone structures” for Connally’s rib and wrist bone) were conducted by the Wound Ballistics Branch of the United States Army Chemical Research and Development Laboratories at Edgewood Arsenal, Maryland, by Dr.
Most importantly, they concluded that it was probable that one bullet caused all the injuries to Kennedy and Connally (5 H 84, WCT Dr.
As to the bullet that was fired through the carcass of a goat that broke one rib of the goat in simulation of Connally’s rib injury, it was “flattened” a little more than the bullet that actually hit Connally, although like the Connally bullet the lead core extruded from the base of the bullet in the same way.
Larry Sturdivan explained to the HSCA that this is the first thing that happens when a bullet begins to deform.
But in looking at the photographs of the side and front of the damaged test skull , Drs.
In preparation for the trial in London, I had my firearms expert, Monty Lutz, conduct a test wherein he fired a 6.5-millimeter Mannlicher-Carcano Western Cartridge bullet through a twelve-inch block of gelatin with a three-quarter-inch block of plywood behind the gelatin.
The recovered bullet, with little damage to it, was shown to the jury in London.
But Eric Nelson’s Creative Differences production company in Studio City, California, on a project funded by the Discovery Channel, finally did it, using an Adelaide, Australia, company called Anatomical Surrogate Technologies to conduct the experiment.
The company constructed surrogate torsos with the same builds as Kennedy and Connally and sat them in the target area in the same way they were sitting, per the Zapruder film, at frame 223.
While the actual bullet only glanced off one of Connally’s ribs, the test bullet directly struck and broke two of Connally’s surrogate ribs, traveling sideways at the time it broke both ribs.
Indeed, because of this, the bullet slowed down to the point where after hitting Connally’s surrogate wrist it only had enough energy to bounce off the governor’s surrogate thigh, with no penetration at all.
The Adelaide ballistics expert concluded that based on the test, “I would put my money on the fact that one rifle with one shot, striking the back of Kennedy up in the shoulder there, easily, comfortably was capable of the seven individual wounds” of Kennedy and Connally.
Chad Zimmerman to author dated April 30, 2005, unnumberedll; Letter from Dr.
The Commission’s conclusion that the bullet had come from the governor’s stretcher was based more on common sense than established fact.
His best recollection was that it was on the stretcher that was already in the corridor outside the elevator, not the Connally stretcher he took off the elevator.
We know that the stretcher Tomlinson pulled from the elevator was the one used by Connally.
Upon arrival at the hospital, two stretchers were wheeled out to the limousine.
Although, as indicated, two of the Commission’s firearms experts, Robert Frazier and Joseph Nicol, later confirmed that the bullet had been fired in Oswald’s Mannlicher-Carcano rifle to the exclusion of all other weapons , critics complained that no one could say for sure how the bullet ended up on a stretcher at Parkland Hospital, a stretcher that possibly, one critic says, may not have been connected to the case.
Author Josiah Thompson wrote in his 1967 book Six Seconds in Dallas that the bullet was “very likely found on a stretcher used for a cut and bleeding twoand-one-half-year-old child” , a reference to Ronald Fuller, who was admitted to Parkland’s emergency room fourteen minutes after the president and governor.
Fuller, who was bleeding profusely from a fall, was treated briefly on a stretcher in a hallway near the nurses’ station before being carried into Major Medicine for further attention.
Whether Fuller’s bloodied stretcher was then rolled thirty feet into the elevator corridor, where Tomlinson might have encountered it, is unknown.
Thompson doesn’t address the issue of why a 6.5millimeter Mannlicher-Carcano bullet, the exact type used to kill Kennedy and injure Connally, would have any conceivable reason for ending up not on Kennedy’s or Connally’s stretcher, but the stretcher of an infant.
Indeed, he doesn’t ask himself why any kind of bullet would end up on the child’s stretcher when the child wasn’t shot, unless, that is, Thompson wants us to believe that the sophisticated framers of Oswald goofed on a rather mundane duty, planting the bullet on the wrong stretcher.
The whole issue of what stretcher the bullet was found on, Connally’s or some unknown person’s, is a giant nonissue.
Since we know that the bullet was fired from Oswald’s Carcano rifle, and we know it wasn’t found on Kennedy’s stretcher, it had to have been found on Connally’s stretcher.
Indeed, that it was found on Connally’s stretcher is one of the few points in the Kennedy assassination that virtually everyone, even most conspiracy theorists (with a shaky dissent from Josiah Thompson), agrees on.
It’s just that the anti-conspiracy theorists believe the bullet ended up on Connally’s stretcher after striking him, and the conspiracy theorists claim it was planted on Connally’s stretcher by the conspirators who killed Kennedy.
In November 1973, Nichols, who was doing research at the National Archives, ran across Hoover’s letter, describing the inconclusive results of the FBI’s 1964 neutron activation analysis test, and forwarded it immediately to Guinn.
The two scientists then filed a Freedom of Information Act request in an attempt to get the numerical data behind the FBI’s tests.
The following year, the Supreme Court upheld a lower court’s decision that denied Dr.
Eventually, however, Nichols did receive seventy pages of FBI special agent John Gallagher’s raw data under the Freedom of Information Act and turned the notes over to Dr.
Nichols had tested them by firing them in his own Mannlicher-Carcano rifle, painstakingly assembled over the course of three hundred hours from the parts of thirty other rifles, a perfect instrument for testing the optimum firing characteristics of the rifle.
Valued at over $25,000, the rifle was stolen from Nichols’s office in 1977 and was never recovered.
One unsuitable specimen was what was left of the lead residue that had been on a section of curbstone cut away from Dealey Plaza which was thought to have been struck by a bullet fragment.
The FBI had scraped the section to get a sample for its spectrographic analysis.
Guinn felt that any further scraping would have produced a sample composed mostly of cement, providing little hope of identifying it with a particular bullet.
The container had once held some very tiny particles scraped from the inside surface of the limousine windshield, where a bullet fragment had struck.
The specimen had apparently been used up during the FBI’s earlier spectrographic analysis.
One was a sample of the unfired bullet found in the chamber of Oswald’s rifle.
Guinn’s NAA revealed parts per million antimony and silver within the normal ranges for Mannlicher-Carcano ammunition.
The other one was the mutilated bullet that had been fired at General Edwin Walker in April 1963, over seven months before the assassination of the president.
After he had seen from his own results that only two distinct bullets were in evidence, Dr.
Vincent Guinn took another look at the 1964 neutron activation analysis results obtained by FBI agent John Gallagher.
Guinn discovered that they were not as erratic as he had originally thought.
Gallagher had been comparing apples with oranges, mixing a wide variety of test conditions together to draw his conclusion instead of focusing on one set of conditions.
When Guinn separated the data by test conditions, the 1964 results fell into the same two distinct bullet groups that Guinn had discovered in 1977.
Gallagher had gotten the same results as Guinn, but simply hadn’t interpreted them correctly.
In his 1977 report to the HSCA, Guinn explained, “The FBI reported the results of its tests as inconclusive due to the wide variety of absolute values obtained each time a sample was tested.
Asked during his testimony before the HSCA to provide a degree of certainty to his conclusion that the fragments from Connally’s wrist originated from the stretcher bullet, Guinn stated, “I wish I could put a number on it, as we often can do, that is, calculate a probability, but we really don’t have the background information to make a numerical calculation in this case.
One can only show what information we do have, and that is that you simply do not find a wide variation in composition within individual Mannlicher-Carcano bullets, but you do find wide composition differences from bullet to bullet for this kind of bullet lead.
At the London trial, it was obvious that Guinn was just being professionally cautious in testifying on the record only that it was highly improbable or even very unlikely that the Connally wrist fragments came from a bullet other than the stretcher bullet.
In private conversations, he indicated to me he had no doubt at all that the three fragments came from the stretcher bullet.
Guinn went on to explain that there is always a “measurement uncertainty . . . and you can’t tell whether real numbers are a little higher or a little lower than that.
Since NAA ties the tiny fragments from JFK’s brain ... to the large fragment found in the front seat, and since ballistics shows that the front-seat fragment came from Oswald’s rifle (in the depository behind Kennedy), the front-seat fragment originated in the depository, passed through the head from rear to front and deposited tiny fragments along the way, and came to rest in the front-seat.
More significantly, from the NAA evidence alone, it was now possible to state, with a high degree of probability, that the so-called pristine bullet, the “magic” bullet , had indeed been the bullet that smashed into Governor Connally’s wrist.
For years, NAA conclusions matching a crime scene bullet with a bullet independently connected to a defendant have been based on the premise that each batch of bullet lead is unique in the concentration of its trace elements.
And, therefore, if there was a “match” between the crime scene bullet and the bullet independently connected to the defendant, the matched bullet must have come from the same source and been manufactured at the same time and place.
If true, the assumption is that when the defendant purchased the bullet that has been independently connected to him, he most likely also purchased, at the same time, the crime scene bullet.
Guinn in the Kennedy assassination, emerging empirical evidence seems to support the proposition that the aforementioned premise may not be true, at least not anymore.
The group said, as the earlier studies did, that bullets from different sources can share trace elements in nearly identical amounts.
Agents located only two gun shops that sold 6.5-millimeter Mannlicher-Carcano ammunition in the Dallas-Irving, Texas, area.
However, neither gun shop owner had any recollection of having sold ammunition to Oswald.
Additionally, we are not dealing with a situation in the Kennedy case—common enough elsewhere—where the crime scene bullet differs markedly from the bullet connected to the defendant , in which case we could say they did not have a common origin.
Indeed, even if the new findings were to render NAA, and hence Guinn’s conclusions, invalid, we do know that the stretcher bullet was fired from Oswald’s rifle to the exclusion of all other weapons.
A Rahn and Larry M Sturdivan wrote a two-part article on NAA that was published in 2004 and is excellent except for one fact.
They remarkably ignored the findings of the metallurgical study by the four chemists, Erik Randich and his colleagues, published in 2002 in Forensic Science International.
Gary Aguilar says that the reason why Rahn and Sturdivan could ignore the results from Randich and his colleagues and still get their article published in a distinguished scientific journal is that “different standards are applied if one is defending the official version of JFK’s death than are applied when one questions it.
An observation like this from someone of Aguilar’s stature cannot be automatically dismissed.
I initially thought” ) are completely consistent with all the other evidence showing that Oswald was at the sniper’s nest window and it was his Carcano rifle that fired the only bullets that hit Kennedy.
This other, independent evidence necessarily increases the likelihood that Guinn’s separate NAA conclusions are accurate.
Eric Randich and Patrick M Grant acknowledged the above reality in a 2006 article attacking Dr.
They write that although their analysis of the compositional data from the recovered bullet fragments reflected that “anywhere between two and five rounds” were fired in Dealey Plaza (in the very preceding paragraph they say, “One to five individual bullets”), “stand-alone primary evidence” (i.e., evidence totally independent of NAA) could render their conclusion of a possibility of more than two bullets wrong.
But Guinn was only part of a team, the examination was in the very early stages of NAA when it had not yet been fully developed as a science, and the team did not have the actual bullet and fragments to work with, as Guinn did in 1977.
Randich and Grant, in this JFS article of July 2006, set out to show that the obvious grouping is illusory and that this means that the wrist injury and/or the fatal head wound could have been caused by other bullets.
Randich and Grant would solemnly declare that since you could not tell the bank robbers apart, it could have been any two people that robbed the bank.
Obviously, it isn’t how close the two groups of recovered bullet evidence are to each other that matters, it’s the chance that the lead from a third source could match as well as the other members of the group do.
For this comparison, one must characterize the range of antimony content in the population of bullets available to a potential shooter in the early 1960s, a point that Randich and Grant choose to ignore.
On the other hand, the antimony levels in the recovered evidence was far outside the level found in natural lead ores, indicating that the ‘soft’ lead cores inserted into those bullets contained a small quantity of leftover hardened lead.
Any bullets containing lead from natural ores would have had much smaller quantities of antimony.
On September 1, 2005, the FBI, after conducting about 2,500 NAA tests for local, state, federal, and even foreign investigations (the FBI’s laboratory at Quantico, Virginia, was the only one in the country performing NAA tests) through the years, announced that although it still had confidence in the scientific reliability of the technique, it would stop conducting the tests in light of criticism of how the results were interpreted in court.
Long before the article by Randich and his coauthors was published in Forensic Science International in 2002, critics, who cling to the belief that the stretcher bullet was planted, have argued that the bullet fragments (we’ll get into the disputed number in a moment) removed by Dr.
Charles Gregory during his surgery on Connally’s wrist were really not the ones Dr.
Vincent Guinn conducted his NAA test on— meaning that conspirators not only planted the bullet on the stretcher, but also removed some small fragments from it prior to the assassination and planted them in Connally’s operating room, or at some later date substituted them for the actual fragments Dr.
Not only is this all a tad too much to believe, but, as you’ll soon see, it would have been virtually impossible to accomplish.
Legally speaking, the whole area of the actual number of fragments removed from Connally’s body, and particularly the chain of custody of the removed fragments, is infused with enough confusion that a responsible court of law might have some difficulty allowing the fragments into evidence.
The Warren Commission did not nail the issue down, and although the HSCA admirably tackled most issues in the case, bringing the best minds and technology to resolve them, the select committee seemed to stay away from this one the way the devil stays away from holy water, devoting just a few paragraphs in all of its volumes to the problem, resolving virtually nothing, and acknowledging there is “some confusion” . from near zero to a few thousand ppm.
This prompted him to state that the recovered samples were all in the high range of antimony concentration, not only from that lot, but for any of the four lots of these bullets.
Earlier NAA tests conducted by the FBI, though not disclosed to the Warren Commission, showed results virtually identical to Guinn’s.
The issue, of course, is whether the combined weight of the fragments removed from Connally’s body, coupled with the weight of those still inside, adds up to more than the 2. grains missing from the stretcher bullet.
It is an article of faith among almost all conspiracy theorists that it does add up to more and hence, the Connally wrist fragments did not come from the stretcher bullet, supporting the thesis that the stretcher bullet must have been planted.
Authors, writers, and expert witnesses have been very imprecise in dealing with this problem.
He goes on to say, “A reconstruction of weights based upon the fragments removed by Dr.
But he doesn’t cite the Warren Commission or the HSCA as his source for this, citing instead the testimony of Dr.
Robert Piziali at the American Bar Association’s mock trial in San Francisco in 1992.
There’s no evidence in the Warren Commission volumes that any were removed from any part of his body other than his wrist.
Gregory, who performed the surgery on Connally’s wrist, is dead, and the record he left behind to answer this question is contradictory.
However, FBI special agent J Doyle Williams reported the following day, after interviews with Dr.
Cyril H Wecht) came to the same conclusion in 1978 after reviewing the FBI reports and the notes of the attending physicians.
Gregory told the HSCA staff that although X-rays indicated the possibility of a small fragment of metal embedded in the left thigh, no surgery was performed to remove it.
Gregory’s recollection of removing only two fragments conflicts, of course, with Dr.
The likelihood is that Gregory removed three fragments on November 22, 1963, and five months later in his testimony he forgot the exact number.
His use of the words “I thought I had retrieved two of them” is compatible with this inference.
Gregory’s testimony of only recalling removing two metal fragments could be the result of a simple transposition of fact.
Gregory simply substituted the number of bone fragments for the number of metallic fragments he removed.
It is noteworthy that whether he removed two or three or more fragments, Dr.
Gregory testified that “they were lead colored, silvery, of that color.
The relevance of this, of course, is that we know that the only part of the stretcher bullet that is missing is the soft lead core protruding from the base of the bullet.
And as indicated, with the exception of NAA, the HSCA virtually ignored the entire Connally bullet fragment issue.
But the committee did say that of the “four lead-like fragments . . . the largest fragment weighed 0. grain.
So whether or not there was a fourth bullet fragment from Connally’s wrist that was lost, we know that its weight was infinitesimal, and would not have any effect on the answer to the question of whether the bullet fragments removed from and remaining in Connally’s body exceed in weight the 2. grains lost from the stretcher bullet.
There is a dissent on this issue of weight, but it does not come—pardon the play on words—from a weighty source.
Audrey Bell, the aforementioned nurse at Parkland Hospital on November 22, has become a conspiracy star of sorts, addressing pro-conspiracy conventions like the 1991 Dallas Conference on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
She has become a leading authority for the proposition that the combined weight of the Connally fragments exceeds the weight lost from the stretcher bullet, conspiracy books frequently quoting her telling Anthony Summers in 1978 that “the smallest was the size of the striking end of a match and the largest at least twice that big.
I have seen the picture of the magic bullet [almost invariably, in conspiracy books, which are most of the books written on the assassination, the base of the bullet from which lead was lost is not shown], and I can’t see how it could be the bullet from which the fragments I saw, came” (Summers, Conspiracy ,546 note 11; see also Groden and LivIn support of his position, which I concur with, that the bullet fragments removed from Connally’s wrist did not weigh more than the 2. grains lost from the stretcher bullet, Gerald Posner writes in Case Closed that Dr.
The problem is that at the time she allegedly saw the fragments in 1963 she could not have known about the controversy that would eventually develop, and therefore wouldn’t have had any reason to pay any attention to the size of the fragments.
But fifteen years later she recalls everything very vividly, has become an expert on weights and measurements, and apparently knows all about the damage to the base of the stretcher bullet.
As indicated earlier, a clear chain of custody or possession of the aforementioned fragments removed from Connally’s wrist has never been established.
The situation is thrown into even greater confusion by what the participants told the FBI in interviews conducted on the day after the assassination.
Gregory told him he removed a small fragment of metal (singular, not plural) from the governor’s right arm and turned it over to Nurse Audrey Bell.
We can assume Williams meant “right wrist” when he wrote “right arm,” but in a follow-up interview the same day with Nurse Bell, he quotes her as telling him that Dr.
Gregory turned the small metal fragment over to her, and pursuant to instructions from the governor’s office, she in turn gave the fragment to Texas state trooper Bob Nolan, who told Williams that same day that he turned the fragment over to Captain Will Fritz at approximately 7:50m. on the evening of the assassination.
Charles Gregory, Audrey Bell, and Bobby Nolan on November 22,1963; see also 7 HSCA 156) In view of the fact that when the participants themselves are talking (e.g., Dr.
Gregory’s Warren Commission testimony, Audrey Bell’s statement to Anthony Summers) they refer to “fragments,” not a single fragment, the most reasonable conclusion is that when Williams wrote his report, he erroneously wrote not only “right arm” for right wrist, but “fragment” for fragments.
An argument frequently heard in the conspiracy community is that Oswald could not have been convicted in a court of law because the “chain of custody ” of the evidence against him was not strong enough to make the evidence admissible in a court of law.
The first observation I have to make is that I would think conspiracists like Marrs would primarily want to know if Oswald killed Kennedy, not whether he could get off on a legal technicality.
Second, there is no problem with the chain of custody of much of the physical evidence against Oswald, such as the rifle and the two large bullet fragments found in the presidential limousine.
I can tell you from personal experience that excluding evidence at a trial because the chain of custody is weak is rare, certainly the exception rather than the rule.
Though we cannot feel sanguine about these conclusions, there is one piece of evidence that gives us a certain amount of confidence that despite the less-thanclear chain of possession, all of the fragments ended up where they were supposed to end up.
One may say I am picking and choosing when I cite Bell to support my position, but attack her credibility when her position contravenes mine.
But the charge would be without merit since we are comparing two very different types of things.
Bell not only is no authority on weights and measurements, but also in fact did no such calculations, whereas no expertise is needed to know the name of the hospital envelope she put the bullet fragments in, an envelope she probably frequently used and hence was very familiar with.
Moreover, there are approximately 35,000 words in the English language.
If Bell used three of those words, and in a particular sequence, to identify the envelope, it defies statistical improbability to conclude that the container the Warren Commission and HSCA claim contains the Connally bullet fragments just coincidentally has the very same name as the envelope Bell said she put the Connally bullet fragments in.
Since they were never removed, we cannot be categorical in our answer, but the available evidence strongly suggests they did not.
I would identify these fragments as varying from five-tenths of a millimeter in diameter to approximately two millimeters in diameter, and each fragment is no more than a half millimeter in thickness.
He told the Warren Commission that “the examination of the wrist both by X-ray and at the time of surgery [it is not clear from this whether he was including fragments seen in the wrist at the time of surgery that were removed] showed some fragments of metal that make it difficult to believe that the same missile could have caused these two wounds.
Gregory said, “I would estimate that they would be weighed in micrograms [a microgram is a unit of weight equal to one-millionth of a gram, a gram equaling 15,432 grains], which is a very small amount of weight.
But removing them, he said, could have caused adverse consequences in the process.
Only one other bullet fragment was found in Connally’s body that was not removed.
John K Lattimer, a urologist with an interest in firearms that dates back to his serving as a firearms range officer during World War II, secured a bullet just like the stretcher bullet, and with the help of pathologist Dr.
So the doctors “compressed sideways in a special vise until its configuration was as close as possible to that of bullet 399.
This required great force because of the high structural density of these bullets, but it did cause the softer lead from the center of the bullet to be extruded from the open rear of the encompassing jacket,” the extrusion from the base being identical to what happened to the stretcher bullet.
The sliced-off lead weighed 2. grains, three-tenths of a grain less than the 2. grains estimated to be missing from the base of the stretcher bullet.
Perhaps more importantly, Lattimer was able to slice the extruded lead into forty-one small fragments.
During World War II he served in England, Normandy, and Germany as a medical surgeon dealing with all types of war wounds, including from the type of bullet that was later used to kill Kennedy, and was chief of urology or chief of surgery at several United States Army general hospitals.
Lattimer’s interest in firearms and forensic pathology grew, he became a close friend of Dr.
Through the years, no person or group has conducted as many ballistic and scientific studies relating to the assassination as Dr.
And his stature in this field is such that in 1972, Burke Marshall, a Kennedy family representative whom Dr.
Lattimer had never met, allowed Lattimer to be the first private, nongovernmental doctor to review the previously restricted Kennedy autopsy photographs and X-rays at the National Archives.
So what we seem to have here is the following weights for the bullet fragments— the 0.5-grain weight of the three bullet fragments believed to have been removed from Connally’s wrist plus a fourth fragment that the HSCA said was too small to even weigh, plus the several “flakes” of metal fragments still inside Connally’s wrist, which were estimated to weigh less than a postage stamp, plus the fragment in Connally’s femur that was estimated to weigh a tenth of one grain.
To this we should add the weight of the samples taken for tests by the FBI of the bullet fragments removed from Connally’s wrist.
Samples are invariably extremely small, and here we are dealing with the source themselves being small, so the combined weight of these samples must have been in the low tenths of a grain.
It would appear that the combined weight of all of the above would not even come close to weighing, much less exceeding, the 2. grains missing from the stretcher bullet.
That same day the FBI (the same FBI that many critics charge is part of the conspiracy and cover-up) said it would be in favor of exhuming the body to recover the fragments if the Connally family consented.
It would in no way satisfy the bulk of conspiracy theorists who would develop a whole new set of suspicious circumstances and discrepancies surrounding the exhumation of the body and the testing and weighing of the fragments.
A bullet fragment and a mutilated slug, which critics have touted as evidence of a second rifle, were subjected to analysis in 1978.
The fragment had been found in 1967 by a roofer working on top of the Massey Roofing Company building in the 1200 block of Elm Street— eight blocks from Dealey Plaza.
The roofer gave it to his attorney, Bill Mason, who in turn gave it to the HSCA ten years later, in April 1977.
The technical assistant to the HSCA firearms panel, George R Wilson, determined that it was a jacketed, soft-point .30 caliber bullet, probably manufactured by Remington-Peters.
On November 26, 1976, Richard Harold “Dick” Lester, a Dallas nighttime security guard with a seventh-grade education, called the Dallas FBI office and stated that for several years he had been going to Dealey Plaza “looking around,” and claimed that approximately two years earlier, while using a metal detector in the area of the assassination, he discovered what he believed to be a 6.5-millimeter slug.
On December 1, two Dallas FBI special agents, Robert P Gemberling and Larry Steging, interviewed Lester.
He showed them the slug and said he had found it on the railroad overpass directly above the south side of Commerce Street between the narrow roadway and the fence.
His only explanation for waiting two years to call them was that a KRLD radio talk show on the assassination in the late evening of November 22, 1976, had caused him Dr.
Lester turned the slug, heavily mutilated, over to the agents and they sent it to the FBI lab in Washington, D.C., for analysis.
On July 28, 1977, a National Archives technician delivered two of the testfired bullets from Oswald’s Mannlicher-Carcano rifle to the FBI lab.
Special Agent Robert W Sibert of the Firearms Identification Unit found that the Lester slug was, indeed, not only a 6.5-millimeter bullet, but like those fired from the Carcano, it came from a bore with four grooves and a right twist.
But the slug was a “jacketed soft point” or “jacketed hollow point” bullet, not the “full metal jacket” military-type bullet used in the assassination.
Therefore, the Lester bullet, though the same caliber, was different from the assassination bullets.
Not only did the widths of the land and groove impressions vary by approximately Vioo inch, but the individual microscopic marks on the Lester slug did not match up with those on the two testfired bullets.
The allegation by conspiracy theorists that Jack Ruby planted the bullet on Connally’s stretcher presupposes two points, each of which, by themselves, is preposterous.
The first thing it presupposes is that someone planted it on Connally’s stretcher.
The second thing it presupposes is that Ruby was a part of a conspiracy to murder Kennedy, and pursuant to that conspiracy he planted the bullet on Connally’s stretcher to frame Oswald for the murder.
But not only is there, again, no evidence to show that Ruby was part of any conspiracy to murder Kennedy, but based on what we know about Ruby, the notion that he was out to have Kennedy murdered is just too silly to even talk about.
Because of the above, the allegation is not entitled to any discussion, but for the readers who want to know more about it, the allegation is built almost exclusively on the statement of Seth Kantor, a Scripps-Howard reporter who knew Ruby from Kantor’s days with the Dallas Times Herald.
Kantor told the Warren Commission that sometime just before or after acting White House press secretary Malcom Kilduff announced to the media the president had died (1:33 m.), Jack Ruby tugged on the back of his jacket out at Parkland and extended his hand when Kantor turned around.
One thing everyone agrees on is that it would have been just like Jack Ruby, the town gadabout, to have gone to Parkland.
His prosecutor, Bill Alexander, told author Gerald Posner that Ruby “knew that whether he spent a long time in prison or not might depend on whether he shot Oswald on the spur of the moment or whether there was premeditation.
Visiting Parkland,... hanging out at the jail over the weekend, might be natural for a fellow like Ruby.
Hanging out at the jail where Oswald was, which could be used to argue premeditation, cannot comfortably be lumped together with going to Parkland, where Kennedy was.
Even assuming the earlier time of 1:30, it would have been impossible for Ruby to get to Parkland when Kantor said he saw him there.
And we can assume that the traffic was heavy, perhaps even clogged at that time.
At a legal speed and in normal traffic—again, probably not the case that day—the trip to the Carousel from Parkland was also 3. miles (and would have taken ten At the London trial, Kantor again recalled the incident taking place before the press conference.
I just don’t know,” Kantor responded in the only way he legitimately could have.
Indeed, the only other person who claims to have seen Ruby at Parkland, one Wilma May Tice, has little credibility.
The Commission pointed out that Ruby and Kantor attended “another important event,” the Oswald press conference early Saturday morning in the assembly room of the Dallas Police Department.
One person who was “surprised” to hear of Kantor’s claim that Ruby was at Parkland was Ruby’s rabbi, Hillel E Silverman.
Silverman was at the Trade Mart waiting for the Kennedy luncheon and speech when he learned the president had been shot.
He immediately left for Parkland Hospital, where he Eva Ruby Grant contacted the FBI and told agents that on the day Mrs.
Tice called her and asked if she could come to visit her, which she proceeded to do for four hours.
Tice told Eva that when she and her husband went to pick up their children at a theater, where they had been while she was testifying, she had run away from her husband because he had threatened her.
Tice was “balmy,” but said she had fairly accurately described the clothing her brother was wearing that day.
Tice and her husband told the FBI that Eva and her sister Eileen Kaminsky came to their home on April 30, 1964.
Eva never mentioned her alleged visit with the Tices to the FBI and Mrs.
Tice never mentioned her alleged visit to Eva’s residence, so it is not known who is telling the truth.
Tice how she contacted Ruby’s sisters or how they knew to contact her, she declined to answer the question.
The reason for Ruby’s going to Parkland Hospital is most plausibly set forth in your analysis—to get quick firsthand information on what to do about his nightclubs after the shooting of the President.
Griffin said that “traffic conditions were such as to have made it possible for Ruby to return to the Carousel Club before 1:45m.,” at which time he told his employee, Andrew Armstrong, about his decision to close his clubs.
Domingo Benavides was never shown at a later point the two shells he found to see if he could identify them.
In the succeeding years, Warren Commission critics and conspiracy theorists have had a field day with the four shells for two main reasons, one of which is the chain of custody or possession for the shells, so very often a problem in criminal cases.
But it turns out there was no real basis for Summers’s or Hill’s radio transmissions.
Summers’s source for his transmission was Ted Callaway, who was too far away from Oswald’s weapon to clearly see it, basing his conclusion that it was an automatic on the fact that the “motion” of Oswald’s hands as he carried the gun was like the way Ted carried an automatic in the Marines, hardly a reliable and substantive indicator.
Although a semiautomatic is partly automatic in that it automatically ejects the cartridge case of a fired shot and self-loads a new cartridge into the chamber, it does require a squeeze of the trigger for every shot fired, whereas a truly automatic weapon, like a machine gun, does not require a separate squeeze of the trigger for each shot fired.
As long as the finger of the firer continues to depress the trigger, the weapon spits out bullets until it is empty.
Clearly, Summers’s and Hill’s transmissions were simply routine errors, and the whole issue is much to do about nothing.
By just resorting to the evidence of three witnesses who saw Oswald at the Tippit murder scene (over and above the fact that we know it was a revolver because we know Oswald killed Tippit, and the weapon in his possession was a revolver, not a semiautomatic), we know the killer had a revolver.
On its own, a semiautomatic automatically ejects the shell from the chamber of the gun to the ground the moment the bullet is fired.
Revolvers do not, the shell remaining in the chamber of the cylinder of the firearm until the firer manually removes it by operating a lever extracting the shell from the chamber, and an ejector rod releases the shell from the weapon to his hands or the ground.
And all three witnesses said Oswald removed the shells from his weapon himself.
Domingo Benavides testified he saw Oswald “throw the shells” to the ground.
For that to have happened with a semiautomatic, Oswald would have had to catch the ejecting shells in the air like a frisbee and proceed to throw them on to the ground.
Pardon the play on words, but all of this automatically means the gun was not an automatic.
It should be added that it is extremely rare for law enforcement to find revolver shells at the scene of a killing.
After the killer does his business, he immediately leaves and hopes no one saw him.
Obviously, Oswald removed the shells from his six-cylinder revolver because he wanted to reload for whatever lie ahead.
And, indeed, we know that although Oswald fired at least four rounds, at the time of his arrest six live car* We know four bullets hit Tippit, but Oswald may very well have fired five shots at Tippit and missed once, even though he was firing at close range.
This may be so because although three of the four bullets recovered from Tippit’s body were manufactured by Western-Winchester (the other was manufactured by RemingtonPeters), only two of the four shells recovered from the Tippit murder scene were Western-Winchester .38 Specials , meaning that one Western cartridge case was not recovered.
This alone would not add up to five shots being fired, but since, as indicated, two RemingtonPeters shells were recovered from the Tippit murder scene yet only one of the slugs found in Tippit’s body was a Remington-Peters, then either one Remington-Peters bullet was not recovered, or one used (previously fired) Remington-Peters cartridge case was in Oswald’s revolver before the Tippit shooting and was discarded by Oswald, along with the others, at the Tippit murder scene.
If the former (one Remington-Peters bullet was not recovered), this would mean that Oswald fired five times at Tippit.
And Ted Callaway, the former marine, testified at the London trial that he “heard what sounded like five pistol shots,” although other witnesses heard two to four shots.
On the issue of chain of possession, with respect to the two shells Benavides turned over to the police , Joe Poe, the patrolman Benavides gave the shells to, showed them to Sergeant Gerald Hill when Hill arrived at the scene.
Hill told Poe to put his mark on the shells and turn them over to the crime lab.
The problem arose when Poe was asked to identify the subject two shells when he testified before the Warren Commission in April 1964.
Poe later said he believed he had put his initials on the two shells but just wasn’t certain, particularly since he “couldn’t make them out” from looking at them now.
Conspiracy-leaning author Henry Hurt interviewed Poe in 1984 and Poe told him he was certain he had marked the shells (even though twenty years earlier, when his memory was much fresher, he didn’t know), and despite the fact he could not find his identifying mark on them, he felt certain the shells the Warren Commission showed him were the ones he had taken into evidence at the crime scene.
Poe felt the reason he couldn’t find his marks was that there were so many other marks on the hulls that they had obscured his.
There is an evidence bag that is marked with the offense number along with your initials.
The evidence goes to the crime lab where it is checked and returned to the bag and kept there until trial.
It is absolutely routine in law enforcement to mark physical evidence for chain-ofcustody purposes.
As we’ve seen, Sergeant Hill (who himself later marked all six of the live cartridges course) from different manufacturers.
Indeed, at the time of his arrest, of the six live cartridges found in Oswald’s revolver, three were Western .38 Specials, the other three Remington-Peters .38 Specials, the same manufacturers of the shells found at the murder scene.
The Poe issue will never be resolved, but such unresolvable points are common in the investigation of a complex, multifaceted murder investigation.
The wallet, per Hosty, was Oswald’s, containing his real identification and the false ID of Alek Hidell.
But when author Dale Myers interviewed Barrett in 1996 , Barrett essentially confirmed what Hosty said, only adding that Westbrook never indicated where he found the wallet and never showed the wallet to him.
He had every reason to assume, by Westbrook’s questions, that the wallet had been found at the Tippit murder scene and that it contained the two names in it.
If a wallet with Oswald’s identification in it was found at Tippit’s murder scene, his name would have been all over Dallas police radio by 1:25m., when several Dallas police officers had already arrived at the murder scene.
Moreover, no one other than Barrett ever mentioned Oswald’s wallet, or any wallet, being found at the Tippit murder scene.
The only item mentioned by anyone as being found near Tippit’s body was his service revolver.
Indeed, every civilian and police witness whom Myers questioned said they saw no wallet at the murder scene.
For instance, Ted Callaway said, “I’ll tell you one thing, there was no billfold at that scene.
Myers tracked down some silent WFAA-TV film footage of the Dallas police outside Tippit’s car at the murder scene, and lo and behold Sergeant “Bud” Owens is seen holding Tippit’s service revolver in his left hand and a man’s leather wallet in his right.
Not only that, but Owens is holding the wallet open and showing it to Captain George Doughty, the two officers appearing to be inspecting the inside part of the wallet that contains photos and identification.
So despite what everyone said, and what anyone would have believed, Myers, through his dogged research, proved unequivocally that a wallet was found at the murder scene.
Dallas WFAA-TV cameraman Ron Reiland, narrating the silent footage for his viewers, said it was Tippit’s wallet.
But we know that several officers went to Methodist Hospital, where Tippit’s body was brought into the emergency ward, and they could have brought Tippit’s wallet from the murder scene to either there or Parkland.
There certainly was plenty of time to do so before Tippit’s personal property was inventoried, at 3:25m.
Certainly, the mere absence of any statement or documentary evidence that an item of personal property (the wallet) was added to Tippit’s personal effects would not be strong evidence that such an event never took place.
Nor did Joe Poe and Leonard Jez, two of the first officers to arrive at the scene.
It is inconceivable that members of the Dallas Police Department like Captains Westbrook and Doughty and Sergeant Hill would suppress and keep secret the fact that Tippit’s killer had left his calling card at the murder scene.
If Oswald’s wallet had been found at the murder scene, it is inconceivable that nowhere in the testimony or the reports of Westbrook, Hill, Doughty, Poe, and so on, would they bother to mention this extremely important fact.
Barrett worked criminal intelligence for the FBI, so it was perfectly natural for Westbrook, Identification of the Murder Weapon who knew Barrett and the area of Barrett’s expertise, to ask him at some point during the day if he had ever heard of Oswald or Hidell, but Myers recognizes the “possibility” that Barrett is “mistaken” and Westbrook asked Barrett these questions later at Dallas police headquarters.
One could argue that if Westbrook asked the questions about Oswald and Hidell that Barrett clearly recalls, Barrett assumed the Dallas authorities already had this information so there was no need to refer to it in his report.
It also wouldn’t explain why, as time went by and Barrett most probably became aware that no one was mentioning Oswald’s wallet being found at the murder scene, he didn’t make sure his information found its way into some FBI report and came to the attention of the Warren Commission.
When I called Barrett, who retired from the FBI in 1978 with an unblemished record, and asked him about the wallet incident, Barrett, as adamant as ever that Westbrook asked him about Oswald and Hidell at the Tippit murder scene, acknowledged that the first time he had told anyone about it was when he told Hosty in 1995 while Hosty was writing his book.
When I asked him why he hadn’t brought his information to the attention of the Warren Commission, he responded that Oswald’s guilt for Tippit’s murder wasn’t really “an issue” that was being seriously questioned by anyone at the time.
Actually, Barrett is right to the extent that the Warren Commission was not having any difficulty at all proving that Oswald killed Tippit, and Barrett probably wouldn’t have been aware of the conspiracy theorists who were writing in the alternative press questioning Oswald’s guilt.
If, in fact, it was Oswald’s wallet at the Tippit murder scene, as Barrett believes, Barrett has a reasonable explanation for how it ended up on the street near Tippit’s car.
None of this, however, conclusively solves the mystery of just whose wallet it was.
If I had to wager, I’d conclude it was Tippit’s wallet, and the reason Reiland stated, on WFAA film, that it was Tippit’s wallet is that the police had informed him at the scene that it was.
Quite apart from Barrett, it makes no sense to me that the Dallas police and detectives, several of whom were Tippit’s friends, would keep from the world that his killer’s wallet was found near his body.
Altgens at the time of the shooting (“Oswald looked like and was dressed like the man in the Altgens’ photograph,” declared Mark Lane in his book Rush to Judgment ), even though not one single witness testified seeing Oswald there.
The person in Altgens’s photo is Depository employee Billy Lovelady, who did bear a striking resemblance to Oswald.
But the nutty conspiracy theorists still hung on to the argument, even though Oswald himself, the man they want to defend at all costs, puts himself elsewhere at the time of the shooting—inside the first-floor lunchroom.
In other words, a better way to identify someone is by the clothing he is wearing, not his face.
The source these buffs cite for their position is a March 9, 1964, letter from J Edgar Hoover to Warren Commission counsel J Lee Rankin in which he writes, “On February 29, 1964, Billy Nolan Lovelady was photographed by Special Agents of the FBI at Dallas, Texas.
On this occasion, Lovelady advised that on the day of the assassination of President John F Kennedy, November 22, 1963, at the time of the assassination, and shortly before, he was standing in the doorway of the front entrance to the TSBD where he is employed.
However, in Captain Fritz’s handwritten notes taken at the very time of the interview, he wrote, “at Apt. changed shirt + tr.
The HSCA said that Robert Groden photographically enhanced the Altgens photo and the Bell, Martin, and Hughes frames, all showing Lovelady on the day of the assassination, and compared the shirt shown therein with a photo he took of Lovelady in 1977 wearing the plaid shirt he wore on November 22, 1963.
But the FBI report of the December 4,1963, interview by Special Agents Carl Brown and Robert Butler goes on to say, “She then inquired as to whether the shirt had a ragged elbow.
Upon further examination of the shirt, she observed a hole in the right elbow of the shirt, at which time she quickly stated, ‘Yes, yes.
And although the Warren Report said that Bledsoe indicated that the hole she saw was on Oswald’s “right” elbow, there is no indication in the FBI report, written before her Commission testimony, that she mentioned the right elbow to the agents before being shown the shirt, thereby introducing the possibility that she had no independent recollection it was the right elbow.
We know, however, that McWatters and Jones paid virtually no attention to Oswald, whereas Bledsoe very definitely did.
Another strong piece of evidence that Oswald was wearing the same shirt at the time of his arrest as he was wearing in the sniper’s nest is that we know he killed Kennedy with the Carcano, and tufts of several, fresh cotton fibers were found in a crevice of the butt of the rifle, and these fibers matched fibers from the shirt Oswald was wearing at the time of his arrest.
The Warren Commission concluded, largely because of this, that Oswald was wearing the same shirt in the morning as he was wearing at the time of his arrest.
Conspiracy author Sylvia Meagher claimed that this conversation raises a “very serious doubt about Oswald’s prior knowledge of the motorcade route,” and that there can be only two possible explanations for Oswald’s question to James Jarman.
Perhaps Oswald wanted only to confirm the exact route of the motorcade.
However, Dougherty, being somewhat mentally retarded, doesn’t have too much credibility.
In a June 3, 1964, FBI interview, Charles Givens said he went up to the sixth floor to get his cigarettes around 11:45m.
So he wouldn’t have even gotten back to the sixth floor to get his cigarettes until around 11:50-11:55m. or so.
Conspiracy theorist Sylvia Meagher tells her readers that in an affidavit given by Givens on the afternoon of the assassination, he makes no mention of ever returning to the sixth floor at 11:45 or 11:55m., or at any other time.
This is misleading since the subject affidavit was extremely brief, and hence cannot be relied upon, as Meagher so eagerly wanted to do, to mean that whatever was not in the affidavit never happened.
But this totally ignores the fact that long before Givens was allegedly persuaded, by money or intimidation, to tell the Warren Commission he saw Oswald by the sniper’s nest window, he had told two Dallas detectives the same thing.
And it’s difficult to imagine that Revill (whom Meagher implicitly accuses of improperly inducing Givens’s Warren Commission testimony) would admit to his belief in Givens’s propensity to change his story if Revill had actually been involved in persuading Givens to do so.
She goes on to wonder how Oswald, or any other solitary assassin, could have done all this work and still found time to assemble the rifle, arrange a gun rest, and so on.
But the citation she gives for all her assertions doesn’t support any one of them.
Although there were many cartons, no specific number of cartons is given by the Warren Commission on page 249, and only two cartons (though there were undoubtedly more) are mentioned as weighing in excess of fifty pounds.
Moreover, in Superintendent Roy Truly’s testimony before the Warren Commission, he said that most of the cartons in the sniper’s nest had previously been moved into that vicinity by employees to clear an area for laying a new flooring on the west end of the sixth floor.
However, he was only willing to testify with certainty that the palm print was less than three days old.
Why Jarman, who filled orders just like Oswald, would have Oswald correct an order cannot be discerned.
This device supposedly could determine whether a person was lying from alterations in his voice patterns.
The theory is that under stress, the vocal muscles tighten, causing a diminution of vibrations in the voice called microtremors.
We don’t need a PSE or any other type of instrument to tell us that Oswald told one lie after another during his interrogation by the police.
We know , for instance, he lied when he said it wasn’t he holding the rifle in the backyard photo and that he had never owned a rifle.
Further, as opposed to the polygraph, which has achieved a considerable degree of respectability in the law enforcement community, the PSE has not.
Although some police departments use it today, its primary value is for suspects who think it works and are told the machine caught them lying.
But Horvath says that PSE’s lie detection rate is at “chance levels, the same as guessing.
Everyone, even O’Toole, agrees that the validity of all lie detector conclusions depends, in large part, on the competence and credibility of the operator of the test.
And O’Toole, an avowed conspiracy theorist, has none, at least in the Kennedy assassination.
O’Toole tells his readers that testimony from Earlene Roberts indicated “neither furtiveness nor haste ” on Oswald’s part when he returned to his room after the assassination.
Arnold Rowland and his wife appear in four amateur films taken by Robert Hughes, Orville Nix, Elsie Dorman, and Marie Muchmore, as well as a still photograph by Wilma Bond.
As it turns out, Rowland’s recollection is right on the money on this point.
In addition, Arnold Rowland and his wife, Barbara, testified that she was watching activities surrounding a man having an epileptic seizure when Arnold first told her about see466 ENDNOTES ing the man with a gun, which, as indicated, was around 12:15m.
A few minutes prior to Carolyn Walther’s alleged observation, Charles Bronson, an amateur photographer with an 8-millimeter color camera, was focusing his camera for about eight seconds (from his position standing on a pedestal near the southwest corner of Main and Houston) on the ambulance picking up the epileptic north of him on Houston.
Consequently, the entire twenty-two-man photographic panel didn’t review it.
But eleven photographic and digital image— processing experts, five of whom were panel members, analyzed “several frames” of the original 8-millimeter film (they did not view the film itself in order “to avoid any possibility of damage”), a 16-millimeter copy of the entire 8-millimeter film made by Robert Groden, and several 35-millimeter color slides that were enlargements of individual frames, at the Aerospace Corporation’s Digital Image Processing Laboratory in Los Angeles on December 2,1978.
Because the film was of “superior quality compared to the Hughes film” , which showed the same area around the sixth-floor window, the HSCA panel recommended that the Department of Justice subject it to further analysis.
When author Richard Trask asked his Massachusetts congressman, Nicholas Mavroules, to pursue the matter, Mavroules wrote back on March 4, 1988, saying that he had been told by Assistant Attorney General John Bolton that since the HSCA’s sole basis for a conspiracy had been disproved, an analysis of the Bronson film would not be worthwhile—a non sequitur, of course.
As indicated earlier, Robert Groden, the conspiracy photographer who seems to be able to see things no one else does, analyzed the Bronson film.
First, Walthers said that the second man was standing in the same window as the man with the gun, not in the second pair of windows, ten or twelve feet away, as suggested by the Hughes film.
Second, and of paramount importance, Itek Corporation studied the Hughes film in 1976 using digital enhancement techniques to determine whether the film showed anyone in the southeasternmost sixth-floor window.
While it could be argued that the Hughes film depicts the sixth floor only during the few seconds preceding the assassination, and therefore couldn’t be expected to show an accomplice who had been present a few moments earlier but who had stepped away from the window just before the shots, the point here is that the suggestion that the film supports Walthers is demonstrably false.
Photographs of the subject southeasternmost window on the sixth floor of the Depository Building taken by Tom Dillard “a few seconds” after the last shot was fired, and by James Powell “about 30 seconds” after the last shot, were enhanced by the HSCA but “no human forms were present” in the window.
However, the HSCA photographic panel concluded that “boxes were moved into the window between the time of the Dillard and Powell” photos.
Toney “Ruby” Henderson, did not even claim to see anything of any significance.
She did not know what floor she saw the two men on, but didn’t recall seeing anyone on any floor above them.
Henderson said she got the impression that the two men were workers in the building who were looking out the window in anticipation of the motorcade.
Only a conspiracy theorist could possibly draw any serious conspiratorial inferences from the statement of Mrs.
The Warren Commission concluded that Oswald used the back staircase to get down to the second floor, not a freight elevator, based on the fact that the two freight elevators, which would have provided the only other means of descent, were not available to him on the sixth floor.
Conspiracy theorists see Victoria Adams’s testimony as evidence that Oswald couldn’t have used the stairs to get to the second floor (otherwise Adams would have seen or heard him), and therefore couldn’t have been Kennedy’s assassin.
However, one conspiracy critic, Sylvia Meagher, argued that the affidavits Shelley and Lovelady gave on the afternoon of November 22 don’t mention the excursion into the railroad yards described in their later statements, and as such, support Adams’s testimony that she used the stairwell within a minute of the shooting.
That alone would eat up at least a minute or more, meaning he could not have been on the first floor when Adams got there if, indeed, Adams had quickly descended the stairs within seconds after the shots.
The two earliest such reports were made over channel 2, one at 12:39 and the other at 12:40m.— nine to ten minutes after the shooting —which is not only consistent with the statements of Shelley and Lovelady, but also strongly suggestive, all by itself, that Adams didn’t come down the back stairs immediately after the shooting, as she claimed.
Finally, Meagher doesn’t mention the testimony of Eddie Piper, who told the Commission that he was standing near the back elevators when Truly and Baker ran over, unsuccessfully tried to call one of the elevators down, and dashed up the stairs.
Piper stated that “nobody” came down the stairs before Truly and Baker went up, which Adams and Styles would have done if they had come down the stairs immediately.
The chief architect of what has become known in assassination circles as “Oswald’s alibi” is the late Harold Weisberg, the former OSS agent and United States Senate investigator turned chicken farmer who penned and self-published his critique of the Warren Commission investigation in his 1965, now classic Whitewash: The Report on the Warren Report.
Ironically, Roffman managed to perform the opposite feat in his own analysis.
To begin, Roffman charged that the Commission was fudging with regard to the reconstructed timings of Baker and Truly, and he sought to reduce their time, thereby making it less likely that Oswald, if he had been on the sixth floor, could have gotten down to the second-floor lunchroom in time to meet Baker when he did.
Next, Roffman offered still frames from a news film shot by WFAA-TV cameraman Malcolm O Couch as evidence that Baker actually entered the Depository earlier than the Commission estimated.
According to Roffman, the still frames show Baker’s unmanned motorcycle parked at the Elm Street curb just 10 seconds after the last shot, leading Roffman to conclude that Baker was already at the entrance to the Depository by then—quicker, by at least 5 seconds, than the Commission calculated.
Commissioner Allen Dulles wanted to know from what time the reconstruction commenced.
Then Assistant Counsel David Belin interjected, “The first shot,” the implication being that he was correcting Baker.
While Roffman may be correct that the Commission erred in comparing Oswald’s and Baker’s movements against two different start times (i.e., having Baker begin at the sound of the first shot, and the Secret Service agent portraying Oswald, John Joe Howlett, necessarily beginning after the last shot [7 H 592, WC affidavit of John Joe Howlett]), the other assumptions in Roffman’s own calculations more than make up for the difference.
In particular, Roffman’s suggestion that Baker may have been entering the Depository just 10 seconds after the last shot (compared to the Commission’s reenacted timing of 15 seconds) is wrong.
Roffman based his claim on several still frames of the Couch film that showed Baker’s motorcycle parked at the Elm Street curb.
As indicated, Roffman guessed that the film was made about “ten seconds after the last shot” and that Baker must have been entering the Depository by then.
Even then, Baker is still sixty-two feet away from entering the front door, which realistically would have taken him an additional 13 seconds or so to cover at the pace depicted in the Couch film.
The rest of Roffman’s calculations regarding Baker’s actions are mostly a matter of semantics.
No one can really be sure of the precise timing of all of the actions that Baker and Truly took between the time they entered the Depository and the time Baker arrived in the second-floor lunchroom, certainly not to the degree that conspiracy theorists have tried to break down each and every move that Baker and Truly might have made.
The Warren Commission was right to propose a range of times—both minimum and maximum—in which Baker might have arrived on the second floor.
Note that even if we adjust the Commission’s calculated range downward by 8. seconds (so that both Baker’s and Oswald’s movements are timed from the same point,e., the time of the last shot), then add an Events depicted in the Couch footage can be related, within a second or so, to the same events photographed by Dave Wiegman, another motorcade cameraman.
While Roffman sought to collapse the time it took Baker to get up to the second floor after the shots, making it impossible for Oswald to have already been on the second floor when Baker arrived there, he worked diligently to expand the time it would have taken Oswald to descend four flights of stairs to the second-floor lunchroom.
Roffman is particularly imaginative in conjuring up an additional “15 to 20 seconds,” which he says the assassin would have needed to hide the rifle near the back staircase.
He points to a number of crime scene photographs, as well as the testimony of several police officers who were present when the rifle was found, in his bid to convince readers that the assassin spent a significant amount of time concealing the rifle.
While the crime scene photographs support police testimony that the rifle was well hidden, Roffman’s claim that concealing the rifle in such a manner required considerable effort is not well taken.
But three years earlier, while testifying under oath before the Warren Commission, both Deputy Boone and Weitzman described a different scene.
Boone told the Commission that after the Carcano was discovered, “some of the other officers came over to look at it.
Although the Commission’s counsel didn’t specifically clear up what he meant by these comments , Weitzman’s remarks obviously refer to an isolated close-up photograph of the area immediately surrounding the rifle.
Obviously, Roffman’s contention that hiding the rifle added 15 to 20 seconds to the time it would have taken Oswald to get down to the second-floor lunchroom is incorrect.
In the end, Roffman calculates that it would have taken the sixth-floor gunman “at least a minute and 35 seconds to a minute and 41 seconds” to reach the secondfloor lunchroom , which means of course, that “had Oswald been the assassin, he would have arrived in the lunchroom at least five to eleven seconds after Baker reached the second floor,” assuming Baker arrived in 85 seconds, and might even have arrived “at least 25 seconds” after Baker, assuming Baker managed to ascend to the second floor in 70 seconds.
Unfortunately for conspiracy theorists, Roffman’s calculations are not, as we have seen, supported by the known facts, nor by commonsense inferences from those facts.
In further support of Oswald’s purported alibi, Roffman invokes angles, pathways, and lines of sight to ultimately conclude that when Baker initially caught a glimpse of Oswald moving away from him as Oswald walked through the vestibule into the lunchroom on the second floor , Baker could only see, from his position looking through the small window of the second-floor door, into the “southeast portion” of the vestibule.
But, Roffman argues, the “only way” Oswald could have been in this area of the vestibule visible to Baker is if he entered the vestibule through “the southernmost door,” a door “accessible to him only had he come up from the first floor,” not down from the sixth floor as the Warren Commission postulated.
Oswald had to know from the very words de Mohrenschildt used and the joking way that de Mohrenschildt asked the question that he wasn’t in any danger or situation of crisis.
It appears that Oswald’s response to the question was wholly attributed to his shock that de Mohrenschildt apparently knew that he had tried to kill Walker, believing that his wife, Marina, must have told him.
Cabdriver William Whaley’s memory at the time he testified before the Warren Commission as to what took place at the cabstand was almost assuredly off base, and considerably so, which has to throw into serious question the accuracy of his memory of what actually took place just moments before the incident with the woman who wanted a cab.
Not that it’s necessary, since a map of the area will do, but I’ve walked from where Oswald got off the bus on Main Street between Poydras and Lamar streets to the cabstand where Whaley was parked in front of the Greyhound bus depot on Lamar.
To get to the cabstand, Oswald would have had to take a left on Lamar and walk two short blocks on Lamar past Main and then Commerce to the stand on the right side of Lamar near Jackson.
Whaley’s cab was facing south on Lamar, and Oswald had to walk south on Lamar to get to the cab.
Unless Whaley was seated in his cab with his head turned completely around looking to his rear, or for some reason was looking in his rearview mirror even though he was parked, there’s simply no way he could have seen Oswald approach his cab, except for possibly the last few steps.
But the reality is that Whaley’s testimony is inconsistent with all the other evidence.
To the naked eye, the wall seems mostly decorative and is not “retaining” anything.
Gary Mack believes he has determined the origin of the term grassy knoll.
Mack writes that Don Michael, owner and manager of WRAJ-AM radio in tiny Anna, Illinois , saved all the UPI radio dispatches on the day of the assassination and filed them away, eventually loaning them to the Sixth Floor Museum, where they have been on display since 1989.
In Mack’s study to determine who coined the phrase grassy knoll , he found no evidence that anyone else used the phrase before Don Michael says Smith did.
HSCA Report, 81), the time of the HSCA’s second shot, but before the Warren Commission’s.
One thing we know is that the statement in the HSCA Report that the Altgens’s photograph took place “at the time of the first shot” is incorrect, and most likely is merely loose writing.
In his “Master List of Assassination Witnesses” , Josiah Thompson lists some witnesses as having testified they thought the shots came from the grassy knoll, when they are not clearly in the category of witnesses who thought the shots came from the knoll.
At the time that the HSCA conducted its acoustical analysis in Dealey Plaza on August 20, 1978, it had two experts, with special training and experience in sound, record their impressions of the origin of shots fired that date.
Green found that McFadden was right 93 percent of the time, and Wightman 82 percent.
However, as opposed to the Dealey Plaza witnesses, both expert witnesses were ready for the shots, so there was no surprise that might confuse their auditory perceptions.
The Grassy Knoll,” in the March edition of the magazine Minority of One , that was later republished into a book with the same title as the article.
Feldman notes that almost all of the Dallas County deputy sheriffs thought the shots came from the railroad yards behind the stockade fence on top of the grassy knoll, and gives citations in support of this.
However, these deputies were not close to the shooting, most standing on Main Street in front of the Dallas sheriff’s office located in the Dallas County Criminal Courts Building at Houston and Main.
Indeed, in his calculations of numbers, he doesn’t even bother to mention Secret Service agents like John D Ready , George W Hickey Jr. , Jerry D Kivett , Warren W Taylor , and Hurchel Jacks , all of whom said they thought the shots came from the “right rear” of the president, that is, from the Depository Building.
In fact, the famous AP photograph taken by James Altgens shows some of the agents looking to their right rear.
It’s hard to take Feldman too seriously when he so clearly permits his bias toward conspiracy, rather than his objectivity, to govern his analysis.
Dallas deputy sheriff A1 Maddox said, “When you came out of the jail on the Houston Street side [of the Dallas Criminal Courts Building], you’d hear jets coming over sometimes in the afternoon.
You’d be looking in one direction to see the jets, and they would come over from a different direction.
You couldn’t tell which way because of the reverberation of the sounds.
Some in the conspiracy community have referred to the “man” as the “Black Dog Man” because they feel the figure in the image resembled, from the waist up, a black dog sitting on its haunches on top of the wall.
The reason why most conspiracy theorists don’t point to the Willis photo as indicating the location of their assassin is that if he were there, he’d be on the Elm side of the picket fence, not behind it, and hence would be even more open to view than a picket fence assassin.
And his attempt to escape or run away after the shooting would be seen by everyone.
And then there is the “Head in the Bush” man visible in several Zapruder frames and allegedly seen holding a rifle in frame 413.
The gun-like object appears in front of leaves in the bush, makThree men are seen standing on the steps leading up to the pergola in the left side of Moorman’s photo 2.
The one in the middle, in the light-colored clothing, has been identified as Emmett Joseph Hudson, a park department employee of the city of Dallas.
Hudson said he did not know the men on his left and right but he recalled that one of them stated he “worked somewhere on Industrial Boulevard” in Dallas.
Though the two blacks have never been identified, speculation has been that one of them was the Black Dog Man, but since the Black Dog Man was on top of and/or behind the nearby concrete retaining wall, this would seem to preclude either of the two blacks, who were on the nearby bench, from being the Black Dog Man.
We conclude that the head in the bush is not the same as that of the person visible in Willis #5.
The panel concluded that “color measurements showed no fleshtones consistent with other fleshtones” in the Nix frames, and “enhanced images” of the Nix frames “revealed no ... evidence to support a man and rifle in the pattern in question.
The elevated object visible on the photographs was determined to be some 20 feet beyond these shadows in a parking lot.
A rifleman at this location would have had to fire the fatal shot from 9 feet above the ground to clear existing horizontal obstructions.
Moreover, from this point, a line of sight and line of fire to President Kennedy could have existed only for less than Vso second before the fatal round because of permanent vertical obstructions.
Unless one or more members of the Dallas sheriff’s office, or some other county employee, was a part of the alleged conspiracy to kill Kennedy, the grassy knoll gunman did not drive away in a car parked in the lot.
Gossett, who in turn rented out spaces for three dollars a month primarily to deputy sheriffs who worked in the Dallas County Criminal Courts Building on Main and Houston.
But the main point is that there was only one entrance to the lot, which also served as the exit, and an iron bar, with a chain and lock on it, ran across the entrance-exit.
And the only people who had access to the lot were those who rented spaces in it, each of whom had a key to the lot.
Granted, the absence of cartridge cases from a rifle would only be circumstantial evidence that no rifle was used if there had been more than one shot from the grassy knoll, as most conspiracy theorists believe.
If only one shot was fired, no cartridge case would automatically be ejected from the rifle, the ejection of the case only taking place if the firer pulled the bolt to the rear for the firing of a second shot.
The absence of a cartridge case from a rifle also presupposes that a grassy knoll killer would have used a rifle, as opposed to a revolver, which does not automatically eject its shells onto the ground.
As indicated in the main text, the distances from the grassy knoll to Kennedy for the first and second shots that struck him are around fifty-eight and thirty-five yards, respectively.
And, indeed, in his 1994 book, Cause of Death, Cyril Wecht writes, “There had to be a second gunman shooting from the grassy knoll area.
This seems unlikely, and either Smith had a faulty recollection or the investigator, in the report he transcribed ten days after the interview, said Smith told him something he actually didn’t.
I say that because if the man had told Smith he was Secret Service, Smith wouldn’t have had any reason for not telling the Warren Commission this in 1964.
Instead, he told the Commission he only “believed” the man was Secret Service.
Although I would like to believe what former Secret Service agent James “Mike” Howard told author Gus Russo in 1993, it only has the ring of loose talk.
He told Russo that coincidentally there was a grassy knoll on the way to the Fort Worth airport and “we placed two deputies there.
Russo writes that Howard was told by the now-deceased Sorrels that he had “placed security people in all the obvious areas.
Robert E Jones testified before the HSCA that he prepared an After Action Report on the assignment of his men to the Secret Service on the day of the assassination and believed that it included reports filed by the eight to twelve military intelligence agents who performed the liaison function with the Secret Service that day.
He said that his After Action Report would have been maintained in Oswald’s Department of Defense file.
Hidell had either been arrested or come to their attention,” and by checking the name Hidell he found the name Lee Harvey Oswald.
And this is how Jones was able to contact the FBI offices in Dallas and San Antonio as early as 3:15 on the afternoon of the assassination and furnish them with information from Army Intelligence files in New Orleans, San Antonio, and Corpus Christi concerning Oswald and his alias.
But government officials always feel it is incumbent upon them to live up to two well-earned reputations.
One is that they are bureaucratic automatons whose bloodless daily activities do not admit exceptions to their rules.
And two, as with law enforcement, even though normally innocent they insist on acting guilty so that conspiracy theorists will have more fodder for their charges.
For example, the Los Angeles Police Department in its investigation of the assassination of Robert F Kennedy, and the Memphis Police Department in its investigation into the assassination of Martin Luther King, destroyed evidence after a period of time that should have been forever preserved.
Not only didn’t Ed Hoffman see what he first said he saw, but apparently he wasn’t even where he assured the FBI he was.
Mack said that since Brown would have had a “clear view of Hoffman,” he interviewed Brown around this time and Brown told him that he was “sure” there was no one standing where Hoffman claims to have been.
The following is merely academic, since Earle Brown’s testimony, and Hoffman’s completely changing stories, which even his own father and brother don’t believe, make his story unworthy of any belief.
But if Hoffman was where he said he was, the testimony of Dallas deputy sheriff Eugene Boone would not, as some anticonspiracy theorists believe, negate Hoffman’s story.
However, even if the railroad cars were there, they would have been southeast of where Hoffman said he was and would not have been anywhere near his line of sight to the top of the grassy knoll area to the east.
Another thing that would not have blocked, as some anti-conspiracy theorists have alleged, Hoffman’s view of the area behind the picket fence, was an Old Charter billboard just west of the underpass on the north side of Elm.
She repeated what she had told the sheriff’s department, that when she saw the man running right after the shooting, she immediately “ran across the street” and pursued him.
However, though at some later point she may have run across the street, she didn’t do it when she said she did.
Now listen to what she told conspiracy author Jim Marrs twenty-five years later for his 1989 book.
Featherston, the newsman, has disappeared from her version of the story.
One of them said, ‘You’re coming with us,’ and I replied, ‘Oh, no Fm not.
But then the other guy put a grip on my shoulder and they began hustling me past the front of the Depository.
Incidentally, Jim Featherston confirmed that it was he who brought Hill and Moorman to the Courthouse pressroom.
Another favorite of the conspiracy theorists, though a much lesser one, is Jesse Price.
Price doesn’t quite fall comfortably into the cuckoo bird category, all of whose members, at least to me, either are a little funny or say funny things.
On the afternoon of the assassination, Price gave a statement to the Dallas County Sheriff’s Department that he was watching the motorcade pass through Dealey Plaza while standing on the roof of the Union Terminal Annex Building.
The passenger cars were parked, of course, behind the picket fence on both sides of the railroad spur or siding, and we know several people, including police officers, ran toward this area.
Price said the man he saw was wearing a “white dress shirt, no tie and khaki colored trousers [clearly not the man Jean Hill saw] . . . he had something in his hand.
In Price’s original statement, he did not say where the man was running from.
There are some serious problems with Price’s observations, none of which the conspiracy theorists are troubled by.
And we know that Dallas police officer Joe E Murphy, who confirmed seeing the pickup truck where Mercer said it was, was one of three officers stationed, since ten o’clock that morning, on the Stemmons Freeway overpass above Elm Street.
Accordingly, the FBI report of an interview with Murphy on December 9, 1963, in which it is said that Murphy was on “the Triple Underpass on Elm Street” , is in error.
In a November 22, 1988, anniversary television special on the assassination hosted by investigative reporter Jack Anderson, Summers said that immediately after the shooting, when he and several other Dealey Plaza witnesses ran up to the top of the grassy knoll, “we were stopped by a man in a suit, and he had an overcoat over his arm and I saw a gun under that overcoat.
But before she did, Jim Featherston of the Dallas Times Herald somehow managed to make a copy of it.
By the following day, Moorman’s photo was appearing in papers throughout the country.
The Secret Service and the FBI returned Moorman’s two Polaroid photos to her , and the Warren Commission never published either of the two stills in its volumes.
Moorman loaned her two photos to the HSCA’s photographic panel for examination , and the HSCA published the second photo, the assassination one, in three of its volumes (1 HSCA 109; 4 HSCA 416; 6 HSCA 125), but not the first one, which had no evidentiary value.
I should add that the two aforementioned Moorman photos are the only ones she took that day that are known to the general assassination research community.
However, Gary Mack knows Mary Moorman well, and Moorman told him she took two other photos that day on Elm, one each of police officers she knew.
But to suggest that a presidential assassin not only would not try to prevent others from seeing as much of his body behind the fence as possible, but even more importantly, would shoot at the president while he is holding the rifle in the air without availing himself of support and stability for the rifle that is readily available to him by use of the top of the fence, makes no sense at all.
Gary Mack’s response to Dale Myers’s findings is that “any study of the Badge Man image using a man of ‘average size’ is flawed.
But if Badge Man was only slightly over five feet tall, since the fence itself is five feet in height , Badge Man’s eyes would be at the same level or most likely lower than the fence, making it impossible for him to have fired at Kennedy.
Making it even further impossible for a man that short to shoot at Kennedy is Mack’s own position that Badge Man never rested the rifle on top of the fence, but held it in his hands.
As far as the Coke bottle is concerned, Mack wrote, “No photographs of the assassination scene show a ‘Coke’ bottle on the wall; a bottle appears in some postassassination pictures, but the shape does not suggest that it was the distinctive Coca-Cola bottle shape.
Computer enhancement studies of the UPI print [of the Moorman photo] show absolutely no straight or solid soft drink bottle lines anywhere above the top of the wall.
Gary Mack and Jack White feel that there is support for their Badge Man theory in the testimony of Lee Bowers, the signal operator in the railroad tower who testified that he saw two men behind the stockade fence before the shooting, right where the Badge Man and his partner, the Back Up Man, were.
Bowers said he saw two sets of two men in the general area of the grassy knoll.
The first two men he mentioned were dressed, he said, in regular civilian clothing, not in police uniforms, and Bowers said the two men were about “ten or fifteen feet” from each other and were standing near the “mouth of the underpass,” nowhere near where the alleged Badge Man was in the Moorman photo.
He said that after the shooting when the police came up the grassy knoll to search the area, one of the two men was still there, but he “could not say” if the second was.
Since Bowers never saw these two men carrying anything that attracted his attention, such as a rifle, there’s no reason to believe they weren’t just spectators to the motorcade.
One of them was a parking lot attendant that operates a parking lot there.
His description of the location was brief, and there was no elaboration.
However, Bowers isn’t even sure if he saw one or two men, and he knew who one of them was.
Moreover, wherever the two men were , if they were in the area behind the fence where he said he saw “something out of the ordinary,” it seems hard to imagine he wouldn’t have said, which he never did, that he saw them in the precise area where he saw something unusual happening.
Gary Mack says that “ Arnold told his story about two police officers to Nigel Turner, but Turner’s editing makes it seem that he was talking about only one officer.
Turner admitted to me before the show first aired in 1988 that Arnold’s story was a little hard to follow on television and the editing he had done was simply to make it clearer.
Mack said that Arnold told him that “the cop with the gun was the second cop who approached him and that it was the first man who kicked him.
Among others, still photos by Wilma Bond, Cecil Stoughton, Frank Cancellare, Harry Cabluck, and James Towner, and film by Mark Bell show no man on the ground near the fence being assaulted by a police officer.
Additionally, the Marie Muchmore film taken at the time of the head shot shows no Gordon Arnold figure where Arnold claims to have been.
But Mack wrote me that “Arnold told me in 1982 that he was wearing his tan Army uniform in Dealey Plaza.
The problem with Mack’s position is that we know from all the evidence and “The Grassy Knoll” section of this book that no bullet was fired from the grassy knoll.
Secondly, as discussed in the text, Arnold and his story have no credibility, the story being ridiculous on its face.
So even if he was on the grassy knoll, which the photographic evidence alone shows he was not, this fact in no way proves Mack’s Badge Man theory.
If true, this would mean that Texas senator Ralph Yarborough may have seen Arnold drop to the ground at the time of the third shot when Yarborough’s car was far enough down Elm to see the alleged Arnold figure.
And when author Henry Hurt interviewed Arnold for Hurt’s 1982 book, Arnold made no distinction between the first shot that came from behind him and the first shot that was fired, clearly indicating he dropped to the ground when the first shot was fired.
He said that while on the ground “a second shot was fired” over where he was.
He gave no indication that he heard any shots before or after these two shots.
On the British television show, Gary Mack said that in the Moorman photo “there is a light blob very close to where the Badge Man was , and we weren’t sure what it was, but gradually, as details started coming out with Jack’s photo work, we realized this image was probably Gordon Arnold.
When Earl Golz’s photographer, Jay Godwin, asked Arnold in August of 1978 to position himself, for a photograph, where he claimed to be on the grassy knoll on the day of the assassination, he appears to have positioned himself at the southeast corner of the picket fence, thereby eliminating himself as the “light blob” who was supposed to be, per Mack, right in front and to the left of the Badge Man.
The angle from where Moorman was when she took her photo to either where Mack says Arnold was, or where he positioned himself for the photograph, precludes him from being the light blob.
To have been in the right position he would have had to be at least ten or so feet to the east on the steps in order to be the light blob on the line of sight from Moorman to the Badge Man.
The Dallas Morning News photographic archives didn’t have a print or negative in its files, and even Godwin, after a search for me in his garage in Austin, Texas, couldn’t locate a print or negative of the photo.
For those who want the next best thing, the newspaper print appeared in the Dallas Morning News on August 27, 1978, page 4A, a part of a Golz article that included his interview of Arnold.
But Mack, in placing Arnold to the left of Badge Man (to the left, he says, from Moorman’s position, not Badge Man’s), makes it even less likely, not more, that he was the light blob.
One footnote to the Badge Man discussion: In the 1988 British film The Men Who Killed Kennedy , the images of the top of the knoll area in the Moorman photo, which were not intelligible to anyone, including the twenty-two members of the HSCA photographic panel (who came from places like the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, NASA, and Aerospace Corporation), suddenly, per Gary Mack, become, in a blowup of Gary Mack’s copy of the photo, two very vague human images, the Badge Man and his consort in crime, the Back Up Man.
In a March 16, 2000, telephone interview of Mack, I made an offer to him, which I said I would “put in writing,” that if he sent me a print of the subject part of the Moorman photo he had as well as the blown-up version of it that appeared in the film, I would send them to several former members of the HSCA photographic panel, and “if they say everything is legitimate, I’ll put the photo and blowup in my book and tell the readers the photo itself is legitimate.
He added that he himself had already sent a copy of the photo (though he is not certain, he doesn’t believe he also sent the blowup of it) for review to two of the twenty-two panelists and they were impressed by it.
Roger Craig was aware that his “light green” in his book manuscript conflicted with his “it looked white” in his testimony before the Warren Commission, and to cover himself in his manuscript, he claimed that he had said “green” in his testimony and the Warren Commission altered his testimony to “white,” a ridiculous allegation.
On November 22, the very day of the assasIn a subsequent phone conversation with Mack, he went into more detail on the identity of the experts who saw the subject photo.
Mack said that Davidhazy told him he couldn’t see anything in the photo, but Mack said Davidhazy “spent very little time” analyzing the photo.
Another photographic expert (but again, not on the HSCA panel) Mack had look at the photo was Larry Maver of the Hughes Danbury Optical Systems Corporation.
The only HSCA photographic panel member that Mack sent the photo to was Robert Selzer, and Mack said that Selzer also told him the image “might” be a person.
Baker told me that on Friday evening, when Craig was in his office, the lowered blinds were open, not closed as they are in the photo, and everyone in the outer office, including Craig, was able to see Captain Fritz, Oswald, and others inside Fritz’s office.
He doesn’t know when this photo was taken, but believes it was probably the next day, Saturday, though he has no idea why Craig would have come back then.
Craig himself, in his many statements, has never said he came back again after Friday evening.
By Saturday, the Dallas police had removed the shirt Oswald was wearing over the T-shirt so they could check for fiber matchups.
One possibility I explored was that the man in the photo might not be Craig.
However, Dallas sheriff Jim Bowles showed the photo to “a dozen or so 1960s deputies.
As with every other area of the case, the conspiracy theorists and Warren Commission critics, even those purported to be “scholars,” have distorted the official record.
For example, Edward J Epstein, while a graduate student at Cornell, wrote his master’s thesis on the inner workings of the Warren Commission, which ended up as his 1966 book, Inquest.
But when we go to the author’s citation for this assertion, he only lists four witnesses.
And when we look at the testimony of the four witnesses he cites, we find even more problems in Mr Epstein’s account.
So not only does Epstein have the wrong location for where his witness saw smoke, but the source of the smoke was not, as Epstein suggests to his readers, from a rifle being fired, but from a motorcycle.
With the third of Epstein’s witnesses, Austin Miller, who, along with his friend Royce Skelton was atop the Triple Overpass, he does a little better.
The citation Epstein gives his readers for Miller’s testimony about seeing smoke is wrong.
But Miller did tell the Dallas County Sheriff’s Department on the afternoon of the assassination (the citation for which, by the way, Epstein does not give to his readers) that “I saw something which I thought was smoke or steam coming from a group of trees north of Elm off the railroad tracks.
From Miller’s reference to the smoke or steam coming from “off the railroad tracks” and his not seeing anyone “on the tracks,” it couldn’t be any clearer that he was referring to the westernmost area of the grassy knoll right near the Triple Underpass and railroad tracks, not the easternmost part of the grassy knoll just west of the corner of the picket fence, where the conspiracy theorists claim the shots were fired.
Gary Mack, the Sixth Floor Museum curator, told me that “the steam pipe was nowhere near the corner of the picket fence, the area where smoke was supposedly seen.
Holland, does Epstein present someone who, at least in his own mind, saw a puff of smoke, presumably My guess is that if Epstein had in mind a fifth witness, it probably was Royce Skelton, who was standing on top of the railroad overpass directly above Elm Street, and that Epstein forgot to cite Skelton’s testimony.
Skelton said he in fact did see smoke in Dealey Plaza, but not coming from the grassy knoll area.
Goodhart, who wrote an article about Epstein’s book in the Law Quarterly Review, that “during my interview with Mr Epstein, I requested of him that he submit to me, for approval as to accuracy, any statement which he was going to attribute to me.
In Epstein’s defense, it must be said that he is one of the most objective and perceptive of all Warren Commission critics, and has contributed considerably to the legitimate literature on the assassination.
There is one other person who claimed he saw a puff of smoke in the area of the grassy knoll—in fact, “right behind the fence”—but his allegation, well, went up in smoke.
Though he didn’t say so, since the fence would have been to his back, he either had eyes in the back of his head, or turned around and saw the puff of smoke, which was still visible hanging in the air.
Another Union Terminal Company employee, track supervisor Richard Calvin Dodd, was atop the railroad overpass watching the presidential motorcade approaching when he heard shots being fired.
When Mark Lane got a hold of Dodd for a filmed interview on March 24, 1966, Dodd came up with an observation pointing to conspiracy, just like so many other people before and after him who were interviewed by Lane.
Dodd told Lane that he saw smoke at the time of the shots and “the smoke came from behind the hedge on the north side of the plaza,” in other words, exactly where Lane was pleased to hear the smoke came from—the grassy knoll.
The problem is that when the FBI interviewed Dodd two years earlier, not only didn’t he say anything about seeing smoke coming from the grassy knoll, but he told the FBI, per its report on the interview, that “his attention remained on President Kennedy.
That is, if he actually saw smoke there, which it seems clear he did not.
Beneath a photo of Sam Holland in Thompson’s book, Thompson writes that Holland also saw “cigarette butts” in the same area of the footprints.
But at least in the quoted excerpts from Thompson’s interview of Holland, Thompson did not include that portion of the transcript where Holland mentioned seeing cigarette butts.
Holland made no reference to cigarette butts in his Warren Commission testimony.
Thompson also quotes Richard Dodd, who was on top of the railroad overpass with Holland at the time of the motorcade, as seeing “cigarette butts” behind the fence, quoting as his source an interview of Dodd by Mark Lane.
Conspiracy community photographic expert Robert Groden tried to convince the HSCA that in the background of the Mary Moorman photo of the grassy knoll taken around the time of the shot to the president’s head, he can see “a large puff of smoke” in the grassy knoll area.
It was just another Grodenian observation that the HSCA could not see, nor, to my knowledge, could anyone else.
One, the smoke from a rifle would be very small and, as indicated, would vanish immediately on this windy day.
If what Groden encircled were smoke, it would appear to be smoke from a small smokestack.
If that’s an exaggeration, what is not is that the image is probably fifty times larger than what could be expected from the muzzle of a fired rifle.
Moreover, the large image is not anywhere along the stockade fence, being to the west of the fence near the Triple Underpass.
And finally, Groden has also encircled the presidential limousine on the photo, and it is, as he acknowledges, “disappearing under” the Triple Underpass, meaning that Wiegman’s photo had to have been taken at least a few seconds after all the shots were fired.
That the smoke originally came from a rifle fired behind the picket fence, that instead of vanishing in the wind it actually mushroomed into a large, cloudlike image that Conspiracy author Jim Marrs is more sure than Groden.
Perhaps most importantly, he said the “frames of the Wiegman film that show this white image don’t show any movement of it, which there would be if it was smoke, particularly on a windy day.
Trask also agrees that the image is near the Triple Underpass, not the tree on the grassy knoll.
The only other Dealey Plaza witness who alleges to have seen any puff of smoke in the air in Dealey Plaza has to be dismissed almost out of hand.
In other words, not just one puff of smoke, but three of them hung around on this very windy day in a neat form until he finally saw them above the Triple Underpass.
Though he would only be expected to answer questions while testifying, all Warren Commission witnesses were interviewed by assistant Warren Commission counsel before they testified (Los Angeles Times , December 17,1993,B6), as is the customary situation with all witnesses in criminal and civil cases.
And during this informal session he undoubtedly was asked to tell his interviewer all he saw, and if he wasn’t asked about this, he obviously would have been expected to volunteer the information.
But when author Richard Lewis interviewed the doctor who attended Bowers, Dr.
He was wringing wet when he came in and I wondered because of this whether he had a coronary.
The man was in a state of severe shock, the kind of shock you could expect from the type of accident he was in.
Nearly all of the people conspiracy theorists have named as assassins are accused of murdering President Kennedy.
Tippit, the most prominent being Igor “Turk” Vaganov, a twenty-three-year-old Latvian emigrant with as many aliases as bad checks on his resume.
A reader of Mein Kampf who railed against “Jews and niggers,” Vaganov lived in Philadelphia and worked as a credit manager in a branch of the General Electric Corporation.
On several occasions in 1963 he had requested a transfer to Dallas but was turned down.
On November 7, 1963, he suddenly left Philadelphia with his eighteen-year-old girlfriend, Anne Dulin, marrying her en route, and arrived in Dallas on November 11 or 12.
They took up residence in an apartment in the Oak Cliff area of the city.
FBI agents went to Vaganov’s apartment, interrogated him, and apparently became satisfied that the .38 caliber revolver and a rifle he had in his bedroom had not been recently fired.
When Vaganov provided evidence by way of his wife and the apartment manager that he was at the apartment at the time of the assassination, they eliminated him as a suspect, presumably writing off the episode between Vaganov and Anne as a marital spat.
Anne Vaganov told Berendt that her frantic call to her sister the night before the assassination was due to her fear that her husband was going to harm her or himself—it had nothing to do with the assassination.
Vaganov explained that his reason for going to Dallas was to be able to visit his first wife, who was living in nearby Garland, but once he arrived in Texas a sense of obligation to his new wife prevented him from seeing his first wife.
Conspiracy theorists have suggested that Vaganov may have been Tippit’s assassin, pointing to the fact that he was living just eleven blocks from the Tippit murder scene, owned a .38 caliber revolver (same caliber that killed Tippit), and drove a red Thunderbird.
Tippit murder scene witness Domingo Benavides testified before the Warren Commission that “I think there was another car that was in front of me, a red Ford, I believe.
I didn’t know the man, but I guess he was about twenty-five or thirty, and he pulled over.
Although Benavides changed his description of the red car he gave to the Warren Commission to the extent that he told Berendt it had a white top, as Myers says, “it is now clear that the mystery man was not Igor Vaganov but Jack Tatum, the eye-witness who reluctantly came forward in 1978.
It was also suggested for a time that the discarded light-gray jacket found near theTippit murder scene was Vaganov’s, until it was discovered that the six-foot twoinch Vaganov wore 36-inch sleeves and the evidence jacket sleeves were 32 Vz inches.
The biggest points the conspiracy theorists make is that Vaganov had a .38 caliber revolver and was away from his apartment at the time Tippit was killed.
Berendt wrote, “That thesis held for awhile until Anne [who never got along with Vaganov and was separated from him when Berendt interviewed her] said she remembered distinctly that she had the pistol with her when Vaganov went out.
Sharp [the apartment manager] had come up while she was alone and had told her that a cop had been killed in the neighborhood.
Vaganov had told the FBI that he went to his bank on the afternoon of the assassination, but Berendt, without quoting a source, wrote that Vaganov’s bank had no record of any activity onVaganov’s account for that day.
Vaganov showed no fear of being identified by witnesses asTippit’s killer, readily agreeing with Berendt to meet face-to-face in Dallas with two of the witnesses, Helen Markham and Domingo Benavides.
Berendt observed that Benavides had testified to the Warren Commission only that there was a “red Ford” at the killing site.
No evidence has ever been presented connecting Vaganov in any way with the Tippit killing.
As Berendt concluded after his multimonth investigation, “There is not one shred of evidence linking with either killing that day or with any of the principals involved.
All three almost assuredly were never even in Dealey Plaza at the time of the assassination.
All three came forward for the first time years later (Beverly Oliver, seven years later; Virgil “Ed” Hoffman, the deaf-mute, four years later; and Gordon Arnold, fifteen years later), and all three significantly changed their story every time they told it, although the viewers of the film were not, of course, told this.
The stories of these three witnesses are so far-fetched and contradictory that it is easy to form the opinion that not one of them was even present in Dealey Plaza at the time of the assassination.
As stated in the main text, all of the many forensic pathologists who examined either Kennedy’s body, or the Xrays and close-up photos of his wounds, concluded that Kennedy was shot twice from behind, not from the grassy knoll area.
A sixth segment was added in 1995, and in 2003, on the fortieth anniversary of the assassination, three additional segments were released.
The subtitles for the nine segments or episodes are The Coup d’Etat, The Cover Up, The Forces of Darkness, The Patsy, The Witnesses, The Truth Shall Make You Free, The Smoking Guns, The Love Affair, and The Guilty Men.
Another alleged French assassin of Kennedy, whose proponents are few but dedicated, is Jean Rene Souetre, a member of the French right-wing militant group OAS , a group of former members of the French army who vehemently opposed French President Charles de Gaulle’s decision to grant Algeria independence from French rule.
Seymour, in their book, Triangle of Death, not only give no motive for Souetre killing Kennedy (only saying that next to de Gaulle, the OAS hated Kennedy, though not saying why), but also, unlike the proponents of other assassins, don’t tell us anything about how he went about doing it.
What becomes suspicious to the authors is why Souetre was in Fort Worth and Dallas on the day of the assassination, and their inability (along with France’s SDECE) to find out what federal agency picked Souetre up, which one expelled him, and to which country he was expelled.
However, as a result of his investigative effort, conspiracy theorist J Gary Shaw learned that Souetre had a good friend in Houston, Texas, a dentist named Dr.
Alderson said he hadn’t seen Souetre for “many, many years,” but author Hurt says Shaw told him that Alderson and Souetre corresponded around Christmas time for around ten years.
And some time after the assassination, the FBI started tailing Alderson.
With Shaw asking no questions of Alderson to clarify anything about the interview, Alderson apparently was asked by the FBI why Souetre was in Dallas on the day of the assassination, and Alderson said to Shaw, “I don’t have the vaguest idea according to the CIA when they interviewed me he was on his way to see me.
Alderson by Gary Shaw on October 5, 1977) We can’t know if what Alderson said is accurate, but I am satisfied from reading the transcript of Shaw’s interview of him that Alderson definitely knew Souetre.
The answer to the mystery of who picked up Souetre in Dallas and why he was expelled from the country may be found in Hurt’s Reasonable Doubt.
Without citing any document to confirm it, he says he learned from Shaw “that at least two inspectors for the INS were given urgent orders to pick up specific foreign nationals in Dallas in the immediate aftermath of the assassination.
In response to a request by me to Steve Tilley at the National Archives for any FBI or CIA or INS interview of Bailey or any document pertaining to him, he wrote, “I was unable to locate any reference to Bailey in the JFK database.
First, the FBI conducted the most comprehensive murder investigation in American history in the Kennedy assassination, and if the bureau thought Souetre had murdered Kennedy, it obviously would have arrested him immediately and not had anything to do with expelling him from the country.
And if anyone else had done so without justification, it’s reasonable to assume the FBI would have quickly found out who it was and why he or they expelled Souetre.
Second, Souetre’s being in Fort Worth and Dallas on the day of the assassination, while interesting, is no evidence at all of his involvement in the assassination.
And there is no evidence from anyone that Souetre was even in Dealey Plaza, nor any evidence connecting him in any way with Kennedy’s murder.
Also, with no evidence, other than a bare allegation that Souetre and his group The only FBI interview of Alderson that I was able to find occurred on March 6, 1964, in Houston.
Very little information is contained in the report of the interview, except it is clear that the FBI agents wanted to know how Alderson knew Souetre, which Alderson proceeded to tell them, adding they had exchanged Christmas cards since they had worked together in France in 1953.
Alderson told the FBI he was unaware that Souetre had ever been to the United States, and says nothing about Souetre intending to visit him at any time.
It’s inferable from the report, however, that the FBI felt that Souetre may have been in Houston around the time of the assassination, since the report speaks of checking the records of Pan American World Airways to see if anyone with Souetre’s name or alias left Houston for Mexico around that time.
They found nothing under the name Souetre but did find listings for an apparent husband and wife named Dominique and Vivian Roux leaving Houston for Mexico City on November 22, 1963, and a John, Irma, and Sara Mertz departing Houston for Mexico City on November 23.
ENDNOTES did not like Kennedy, it stretches credulity to believe that with the overthrow of de Gaulle being the primary focus of Souetre and his OAS, he would take a little breather to fly to America to kill Kennedy.
Actually, in June of 1986, Steve Rivele turned over his fairy tale to Michael J Tobin, chief of the Heroin Investigation Section of the Drug Enforcement Agency in Washington, D.C., who told Rivele he would forward Rivele’s material to the FBI, which he did.
Before doing so, Rivele told him that it was imperative that he, Rivele, speak to Michel Nicoli.
When Rivele had asked Christian David if there was anyone who could substantiate his story, David told Rivele to find a man named Michel Nicoli.
Tobin not only put Nicoli, who was living in New Jersey, in touch with Rivele, but interviewed Nicoli himself about Rivele’s charges, which Rivele suggested to Tobin that Nicoli would confirm.
Nicoli said that after Kennedy was assassinated, Christian David told him that he, David, had been approached by Antoine Guerini to kill Kennedy, but Nicoli wasn’t sure, from talking to David, whether Guerini had actually mentioned Kennedy’s name or whether, after the assassination, David “surmised” that Guerini had been talking about Kennedy.
Nicoli said that later, in the latter part of 1965, he and David were in a coffee shop in Buenos Aires with Roger Bocognani, Lucien Sarti, and Sauveur Pironti, and there was a general conversation in which “something was said by someone other than” him or David that “they did something” (what, he didn’t know) involving going from Mexico to the United States (if they were involved in a drug-smuggling operation headquartered in South America, this would be normal) that made him think that Bocognani and/or Sarti was involved in the Kennedy assassination.
All of this, obviously, is pure, unadulterated moonshine, and not just because we already know that all three of the Marseille “petty criminals” were accounted for, in France, on the day of the assassination.
Hemming, a former marine who claims (but has never offered a tad of evidence to support the claim) to have met Oswald when Oswald was stationed in Santa Ana, California, and even provided Oswald with documents to get to Cuba, was an anti-Castroite undoubtedly involved in South Florida, as so many other soldiers of fortune during the period were, in the effort to overthrow Castro.
As such he had the opportunity to rub shoulders with, or come in close proximity to, others like him during this time, such as Roy Hargraves, William Seymour, Frank Sturgis, Lawrence Howard, John Martino, and Larry de Joseph.
One such gullible theorist (in addition to Oliver Stone, who actually hired Hemming as a consultant on his film JFK) is Noel Twyman, a retired engineer and businessman who not only paid for some meals for Hemming but also flew him out to his home in San Diego to enable Hemming to regale him with his nonsense.
Then Hemming started using language hovering between his invented fairy tale and abstract theory by saying that “the teams” used to kill Kennedy “would believe that they were on an operation.
The ones, per the HSCA [which was on your side in alleging JFK was killed as result of a conspiracy], who only got off one round from the grassy knoll, a shot that, although less than sixty yards , not only missed Kennedy, but the entire limousine.
Hemming proceeds to tell Twyman that he doesn’t know who all the killers were, but “we’ve identified two of them.
You can put a smile on the shooter’s face because then he realizes that it’s a super-pro job and there are backup and decoy teams and that’s where those shots are coming from.
Apparently it was an open secret that “they” were going to kill Kennedy and “they” were asking Hemming and everyone else like him to please do the job, literally shopping it around (i.e., the group that was asking everyone to kill JFK was the same group that was afraid to use JFK’s name, using Castro’s name as JFK’s alias, when in a room by themselves?), but Hemming said no.
I wish Hemming had said no to Noel Twyman when he wanted to talk to him, so I wouldn’t have had to read about this silliness in my book.
On May 22, 1990, one John Rademacher, the operator of a lawn service in Granbury, Texas, sent out a “To Whom It May Concern” letter, though the addressee is unknown to this author.
Obviously, Rademacher was another among a great many nuts or con men in the JFK saga trying to make a buck, become a part of history, or both, and no one paid any attention to him.
Hemming did not identify the man, and said Nelson Bunker Hunt was in the room at the time but away from the conversation.
Dallas Morning News reporter Larry Powell, who interviewed Rademacher in 1989, wrote, “Mr Rademacher used no metal detector.
Beginning in October 1987, he and a handful of partners used trowels to probe the soil and found a .222 casing on the second day and a second .222 shell the next month.
Rademacher told the class about his findings and passed out a map showing where he found the two shells, the first one just to the west of the steps on the grassy knoll, but to the east of the picket fence, the second one to the immediate east of the eastern edge of the pergola.
So as of March 3, 1992, and undoubtedly earlier, West became aware of the “dent” or “bite marks” on one of the two shells Rademacher had found.
After talking to Summers, Rademacher immediately started looking in gun catalogs for a strange-looking gun that could fire .222 shells.
He came close, the weird-looking Remington Fireball XP-100 pistol that sits on a little tripod.
The only problem is that the ad clearly says it only fires .221 shells.
Remarkably, Rademacher, or someone promoting him, changed the .221 number in the ad to .222.
In a telephone conversation between Perry and Stimson on April 27, 1998, Stimson told Perry, “Vernon and I got a little crosswise.
I mentioned human dentition could be one of several causes for the dent.
I also mentioned an animal bite, ejector marks and even a vice grip could cause it.
Rademacher turned over the shell with the alleged teeth marks on it to conspiracy theorist Jim Marrs in 1990, seventeen years ago.
Speaking of nuts, if a casing was found, and teeth marks were found on it, they’re most likely from some nut-cracking squirrel.
He also said that for a while, CIA agent David Atlee Phillips was paying him three hundred dollars per month to transport guns to Lee Harvey Oswald in Clinton, Louisiana.
His wife, however, said there was no twin, and Kroll confirmed there was no twin.
Brown says this is of “serious interest” and suggests it is not a “coincidence,” implying that this helps tie Wallace into JFK’s murder.
But since the only thing related to LBJ that Estes could squeal about was his giving unreported money to LBJ, not about LBJ’s involvement with Estes in the cotton allotment scandal , LBJ’s “fear” of Estes could not be eliminated by his murder of Marshall.
Nowhere does Estes even allege in his book, Billie Sol Estes , that LBJ had anything to do with his crooked business dealings.
The start of Estes’ fall was three articles published in the Pecos Independent and Enterprise, a biweekly in the small Texas town where Estes lived.
A Pecos doctor, John Dunn, was a crusader who wanted to get to the truth of Estes’ corrupt business practices, to the extent that he bought the newspaper with an associate in order to publish the results of his dogged investigation.
The three resulting articles became a sensation that triggered a federal investigation of Estes and won a Pulitzer Prize for the writer.
The grand jury, after concluding that “Henry H Marshall’s death was a homicide, not a suicide,” went on to say that “the parties named as participants in the offense are deceased, and therefore it is not possible for the grand jury to return an indictment.
You can have only unindicted co-conspirators where there is an indictment.
Moreover, common sense tells us that if there had been any indictment for murder naming LBJ as an unindicted co-conspirator, surely it would have surfaced by now.
The sources requested anonymity since grand jury testimony is secret under Texas state law.
Estes testified he attended three meetings with Johnson, two in Washington and one at the Driskill Hotel in Austin, at which they discussed the need to stop Marshall.
Unlike the other sources, Robertson County district attorney John Paschall would not reveal the identities of those Estes named, but noted that “they’re all dead,” making it all the easier for Estes to make his charges, and impossible to indict them.
United States district court judge Barefoot Sanders, who was the United States attorney in Dallas from 1961 to 1965, told the Dallas Morning News that the FBI investigated the Marshall case “to some extent,” but the bureau found nothing that tied Johnson, Estes, Carter, or Wallace to Marshall’s death.
Additionally, the United States Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, chaired by Senator John L McClellan , investigated Marshall’s death in 1964 and was unable to substantiate any connection between Marshall’s death and the then-pending investigation of Estes.
Marshall’s death on his Robertson County ranch on June 3, 1961, was not suicide, as Lee Farmer, the local justice of the peace who also served as the county coroner, ruled, without an autopsy, at the time.
In his book, Estes describes himself as a loyal person who would never “turn on my friends,” and he considered LBJ one of them.
Estes justifies what he did by the fact that when he had been prosecuted and convicted back in the 1960s on fraud charges, “I believed Lyndon would protect me,” and he didn’t.
Estes may have been an accomplished con man at one time, but today he couldn’t con a two-year-old.
Carter, according to Estes, told him that he carried out all the details of the assassination, and that Wallace fired the fatal head shot at Kennedy from the grassy knoll.
Billie can have every assurance that no one in their right mind is going to knock on his door asking to listen to the tapes solving the Kennedy assassination.
I’m doing it because, writing a book myself about the assassination, I have to read books by nuts and charlatans like you.
But Billie, if you have Cliff Carter on tape saying LBJ ordered JFK’s murder, put it out and you’ll be rolling in money, really big money, in a very short time.
And for the first time in your life, Billie, you won’t be conning anyone.
Maybe that doesn’t appeal to you and that’s why you’re going to keep the tapes to yourself.
Retired Texas Ranger captain Clint Peoples of Dallas, who spent many years investigating Marshall’s death, testified at the Austin hearing and was “delighted” by the court’s ruling.
He said he now considered the case closed, yet added that he was “satisfied” that Estes’s testimony before the grand jury in 1984 was truthful.
If no other people anywhere seem to believe Estes, apparently Peoples did.
In other words, since novels are fiction, McClellan admits he made these scenes up, gratuitously calling himself a journalist in the process.
Obviously, by the time his reader is reading these conspiracies deep in the book, McClellan is hopeful he has long forgotten the “journalistic novel” reference, assuming he ever read it in the first place.
Faction is a term first applied to Truman Capote’s famous true-crime book, In Cold Blood, to designate a book (on the nonfiction lists) that is actually somewhere between fiction and nonfiction.
Nowhere does McClellan tell his readers when he is inventing scenes and when he is not, and the thrust of his entire book is that the story told therein is true.
To bolster his case that George Hickey fired his weapon, Howard Donahue points out that several people smelled gunpowder at the time of the shots.
One person he cites is Senator Ralph Yarborough, who was in the car behind Hickey’s car.
Manchester cites no source for this, and in Yarborough’s only statement to the Warren Commission, an affidavit on July 10,1964 , he makes no reference to this.
Donahue’s statement that if people on the street smelled gunpowder it could not have emanated from sixty feet above is an assumption for which he provides no support.
One also has to wonder if there was any smell of gunpowder at all, a few people perhaps only imagining they smelled it.
After all, only a small handful of the hundreds of people in the plaza reported smelling gunpowder.
Howard Donahue is proud to point out that two members of the Forensic Ballistics Unit of the New South Wales Police Service in Sydney, Australia (who may or may not have been students of the assassination), wrote Donahue’s publisher, St.
One big reason why Jim Garrison started focusing in on Robert Perrin, other than the fact that Perrin had lived in New Orleans (virtually all of Garrison’s conspiracy villains in the Kennedy assassination, like Clay Shaw, David Ferrie, and even Oswald, lived or had lived in New Orleans), was that Perrin’s wife, Nancy, had worked for Jack Ruby as a bartender at his Carousel Club for close to two months in the summer of 1961.
With Garrison’s very pregnant and paranoid mind, there were no such things as coincidences or innocent associations.
In two interviews with the FBI in 1963, Nancy Perrin Rich (her new married name) spoke of her dislike for Ruby and of her quitting work at his club after a quarrel with him in which he threw her against a wall.
She alleged that after leaving Ruby’s employ, she attended a meeting in Dallas with her husband that Ruby attended in which a uniformed army colonel offered her husband ten thousand dollars to bring Cuban refugees out of Cuba by boat.
Not liking Castro, she had no objection to that, but the second and inconsistent part—that her husband and she were supposed to smuggle Enfield rifles into Cuba—she objected to on the grounds it would be disloyal to the United States, and no deal was consummated.
However, she claims she saw Ruby, with his pockets bulging , and the colonel go into a room, and when Ruby came out of the room, the “bulge” was gone.
Rich, in her testimony before the Warren Commission, told essentially the same story, and admitted that her previous husband, Robert Perrin (Nancy Perrin Rich, twenty-seven at the time of her testimony, had been married four times), had turned her into a prostitute.
Not only have we had confessed assassins in the Kennedy case, but we’ve also had confessed tramps.
In 1991, twenty-eight years after the assassination, one Chauncey Holt, a career con man with a rap sheet longer than his arm who claimed to have been an associate of mob financial wizard Meyer Lansky, came forward and confessed to being the shortest of the three tramps arrested in Dealey Plaza.
Holt claimed he was working as a CIA operative at the time, and though he wasn’t told exactly what was to take place that day (he was under the impression that some incident was to be staged that was to be blamed on pro-Castro forces), his role was to deliver fake Secret Service identification pins to a “contact” in Dealey Plaza he never named.
Indeed, at the Kennedy assassination symposium in Dallas on November 17,1991, Houston police forensic artist Lois Gibson even identified Holt photographically (along with Harrelson and Rogers) as one of the three tramps and said she’d “bet the farm” on her identifications.
Holt said that he and his two fellow “tramps” were taken to a sheriff’s command post, and after producing their phony United States Department of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms documents (more phony than even Holt knows, since the ATF wasn’t known as such until 1966), they were released.
Holt conjectures that he and his fellow tramps may have been set up as alternative patsies.
When you can’t even If Holt was an associate of Lansky , apparently Lansky didn’t know it.
Or, to be fair to Holt, at least apparently Lansky’s biographers never knew of Holt, or felt him to be so extremely insignificant that he wasn’t worth one mention in their books.
See Messick, Lansky ; Eisenberg, Dan, and Landau, Meyer Lansky; Lacey, Little Man. tin early 1992, Holt improved on his tale, dramatically.
It would certainly have been nice if the authors had provided their readers with some documentation to support their charges, but I could only find one in their entire book.
It stands to reason that if Rogers was upset with the United States back in the early 1950s, he probably was also in 1963.
And if he was, it also stands to reason he’d want to kill Kennedy, the leader of our government and from behind the picket fence on November 22, 1963.
This was independently evidenced by the absence, on the “arrest” reports, of an arrest report number and right thumb print.
Wise and Vaughn said that the “arrest” reports for the three hoboes were called “dummy sheets,” used for those who were detained but not booked.
The dummy sheets were usually discarded in sixty to ninety days, and Wise believes these three dummy sheets were not discarded because of the detainees’ connection to the assassination.
During the course of telling his woes, he started talking about his arrest in Dallas on the day of the assassination, at which time the sheriff’s office called the FBI office in Memphis.
Elrod told Special Agents Francis Cole and Norman Casey that on the day of the assassination he shared a cell on the fifth floor of the city jail with an unknown man.
When this cell mate saw a man with a smashed-up face being brought into the jail, he told Elrod he remembered seeing this man at a motel where five men, one of whom was Jack Ruby, had been advanced some money for some type of contract.
Elrod said he had difficulty remembering things because of his extreme use of alcohol.
The La Fontaines are convinced it was none other than Lee Harvey Oswald, because Elrod’s brother told them in 1993, thirty years later, that Elrod had said it was Oswald.
The authors don’t trouble themselves with asking why in the world Oswald, who had been charged with the murders of President Kennedy and Officer Tippit, would want to tell a stranger in an adjacent cell that he had been in a motel room with Jack Ruby.
But the real problem with Elrod’s story and the La Fontaines’ book is that neither Elrod nor any other inmate was in any cell adjacent to Oswald’s.
Detective Jim Leavelle was the Dallas officer who got Oswald out of his cell around 9:30 on Sunday morning, November 24, and brought him down to Captain Fritz’s office, where he remained with Oswald right up to the time that Oswald, handcuffed to Leavelle’s left arm, was shot by Ruby in the basement of City Hall.
He said there were three cells, F1, -2, and -3, to the block, and Oswald was in F-2, the middle one.
However, F-l, to Oswald’s right , had a steel wall on its left , and F-3, on his left, had a steel wall on its right.
Oswald, then, had steel walls separating him from the other inmates at his back and left and right.
The front of the cells had bars, but they “opened to a corridor that had a steel wall on the other side of it.
If the La Fontaines, who live in Dallas, visited the jail site, it is difficult to see how they could have reached the conclusion they did, one that was a central issue in their book.
Not only, then, wasn’t Elrod in a cell adjacent to Oswald on the day of the assassination , but there’s no evidence he was ever incarcerated at all.
The La Fontaines say that “the FBI did not tell the truth” in the report.
Elrod’s arrest report, as if the words arrest and incarceration were synonymous.
The La Fontaines are apparently unaware that it is not uncommon for someone arrested to be released without incarceration when the police immediately recognize the arrest was without merit.
The “release” block on Elrod’s arrest report is blank, meaning he never was incarcerated.
Moreover, Elrod’s arrest report contains no arrest report number nor a right thumb print.
There are, as would be expected, some unanswered questions on this matter.
Another discrepancy is that although we know no one was in adjacent cells F-l and F-3 while Oswald was in F-2, the Prisoners Telephone Contact Form for November 22, 1963, shows that during the same third shift, a Daniel Douglas, in cell F-l, made a phone call.
It’s hard to automatically assume the entry is correct because one “Halleymon,” a civilian employee of the police department, per Leavelle, is listed as the person who escorted Douglas to the phone.
In two others, he wrote over the letter of the cell, seemingly inserting the wrong letter first, and in the Douglas entry, instead of a hyphen between the F and the numeral 1, he has a very strange marking that is foreign to known punctuation.
Thornley wrote two short books on Oswald: Oswald in 1965 and The Idle Warriors (actually a novel, the first draft of which was written before the assassination) in 1991.
An avowed right-winger, Thornley blustered in 1992 on the television show.
When Secret Service agents interviewed Marina on December 10,1963, they asked why her husband used the name “Aleck” (actually, Oswald spelled the name “Alek” on his forged Selective Service card), and she said that was the name given to him by his coworkers in Russia.
They then asked her if he had ever used the name “Aleck Hidell” and she said no.
It is unlikely that Marina was trying to cover up this insignificant matter, since in the same interview, she spoke of her husband’s attempt to murder Major General Edwin Walker.
For whatever reason, she never added that he did use the last name, Hidell, or conceivably, she did say this and the Secret Service agents never bothered to put this in their report.
There is another, less likely explanation than the one Marina gave for Oswald’s use of the name Hidell—as a variation on the name of his hero, Fidel Castro.
Coincidences abound in life, and one such coincidence concerns the name Hidell.
As noted in the main text, a marine by the name of John Rene Heindel (from New Orleans, no less, where Oswald was born) was stationed with Oswald at Atsugi Air Base in Japan.
He told an AP reporter, Mike Cochran, thirty years later , that he turned the notebook over to the FBI, but before he did, he had already dictated every page of the notebook (some thirtyfour pages) into a tape recorder and gave the tape to the FBI too.
Not only would it take well over an hour to do, particularly since the writings on the pages are difficult to read and many are in Russian, but in terms of authenticity it would be virtually worthless, the tape depending for its credibility solely on the word of the transcriber.
But Howard, in telling his implausible story, then proceeded to make it even more unworthy of belief than it already was.
None of this, however, is contained in Oswald’s blue notebook presently at the National Archives, the pages of which are reproduced, as indicated, in the Warren Commission volumes.
On its face, Howard’s story that Oswald said he intended to kill Connally and LBJ has absolutely no ring of truth to it since he had no reason to do so and had never expressed, to anyone that we know of, animosity toward either of them.
Howard did tell the reporter that he mentioned the story earlier, but not to his superiors or the Warren Commission.
As if that’s not ridiculous enough, he then quotes LBJ as bringing up Connally and telling him that the page about Oswald’s plan “to kill Connally was missing when the book got to the Warren Commission,” and LBJ and he speculated that J Edgar Hoover had had the page removed.
Johann Rush, the television cameraman for WDSU in New Orleans who filmed Oswald distributing Fair Play for Cuba leaflets in front of the International Trade Mart on August 16, 1963, has been a student of the Kennedy assassination for years and has come up with a subtle motive for the assassination that, even if we were to assume it is not valid, encompasses several intriguing points.
In a July 23, 1999, letter to me, he wrote, “After many years of thought on this subject, I now think that Oswald acted on two different types of motives.
One was ‘psychological’ or ‘psychiatric,’ which involved his ego, his desire to ‘be somebody,’ his obsessiveness about leftist politics, and his sudden compulsion to shoot the President once he learned the motorcade was going to pass through Dealey Plaza.
But Rush then wrote, “I think Oswald’s personal and conscious motive for the assassination was the one he actually thought about while he was waiting for the Presidential motorcade to enter Dealey Plaza.
That motive was his idea to shoot the President... and hope right-wingers would be blamed for the assassination.
Rush believes that Oswald knew “old-time Communists” would realize they had no choice but to try to exonerate him, and in the process would blame the Far Right for the assassination.
Rush’s theory correctly, I think, presupposes that Oswald was willing to do whatever was necessary to hurt the Far Right (to the extent of even attempting to murder one of their leaders, General Walker) and to further the Marxist movement here and abroad.
But it is hard to accept Rush’s logic that Oswald felt he could hurt the Far Right by murdering Kennedy.
Since he knew his defection to Russia was well known and he did everything possible to publicize his devotion to international Marxism and Castro’s Cuba, he had to know that if he was apprehended, it would be the Communists, not the Far Right, who would immediately be suspected, which we know is precisely what happened.
Even if he was believed to have acted alone, he could only hurt, not help, the cause of Communism.
In so doing he served the Communist cause its worse setback in the forty-six years since its baneful inception,” said the Baltimore News-Post on November 23, 1963, the day after the assassination.
Only if Oswald felt extremely confident he could escape without apprehension or suspicion focused on him would he have any reason to believe the Far Right would be blamed for the assassination (which most in law enforcement did before Oswald’s arrest), since the political climate in Dallas at the time of the president’s visit was a cauldron of right-wing fervor and anti-Kennedy hatred.
But the fact that he left his wedding ring and virtually all his money behind for Marina suggests he was well aware he might not survive his horrendous deed.
While it is true that ultimately (after the initial suspicion following Oswald’s arrest that Kennedy was killed as a result of a Communist conspiracy) the majority of Americans have come to believe that one or more agencies of the American government (or organized crime, which, if anything, would be considered right wing, not left wing) were behind the assassination, it is highly problematic that Oswald would have contemplated this at the time he killed Kennedy, and did so, as Rush posits, to further that end.
He would have little basis for believing that any substantive evidence would ever surface implicating some other person or group in a murder he knew he alone had committed.
However, Rush, who has an intellectually facile mind, has presented a fascinating theory that perhaps requires more exploration and contemplation.
In a December 31, 1999, follow-up letter to me responding to my critique of his theory, Rush wrote, “I’m not saying that Oswald could predict the distant future or even six months into the future, only that he had a very strong belief that rightwingers would be blamed for the assassination if he could carry it out without being detected, and that belief was what pushed him over the edge and made him take the extreme risk.
I say that after he thought of the idea, there was no way he could not go through with it because it became an obsession and a compulsion in his own mind.
By his standards, he couldn’t face himself as a man or a human being if he chickened out and failed to take advantage of the unusual set of circumstances fate had placed right in front of him . . . “ was a natural consequence of his paying attention to the local news in the days leading up to the assassination.
A note about circumstantial evidence: For years, Warren Commission critics and conspiracy theorists have attacked the case against Oswald as being weak because it was “only circumstantial,” the implication being that any case based on circumstantial evidence is not solid.
Indeed, circumstantial evidence has erroneously come to be associated in the lay mind and vernacular with an anemic case, but nothing could be further from the truth.
Whether a circumstantial case is strong or not depends on what type of circumstantial evidence one is talking about.
If it's physical circumstantial evidence, such as the murder weapon being traced to the defendant by bullet matchups , or other physical matchups like DNA or fingerprints (the latter also being present in the Oswald case), the case could hardly be stronger.
The true circumstantial evidence case, and the only kind that is difficult for a prosecutor to try, is one in which there is no direct evidence and there are no bullet, blood, hair, semen, or fingerprint matchups; in fact, there is no physical evidence of any kind whatsoever, such as clothing or glasses, connecting the defendant to the crime.
This latter type of case bears no resemblance to the case against Oswald.
With respect to the distinction between circumstantial evidence and direct evidence, direct evidence is evidence which, if true, proves a fact in issue without the necessity of drawing any inference.
Almost by definition, direct evidence can only be given by the testimony of a witness who purports to have actual knowledge of that fact.
The most common type of direct evidence in a criminal trial is eyewitness testimony.
Circumstantial evidence, on the other hand, is evidence which only tends to prove a fact in issue by proving a secondary fact.
From this secondary fact, an inference can then be drawn that the fact in issue exists.
For example, from the secondary fact of seeing a stolen television set in the defendant’s home, one reasonable inference is that it was he who stole the set, the identity of the thief being the fact in issue.
In another example, if the defendant’s fingerprints are found at the scene of a burglary, this is circumstantial evidence that it was he who committed the burglary.
However, it is not conclusive since he could have left his prints there at some other time.
We can analogize this latter type of circumstantial evidence to the spelling of a word.
But with the addition of each letter, the number of possibilities dwindles.
The witness who testifies to seeing the television set in the defendant’s home is furnishing direct evidence of that specific fact, but only circumstantial evidence that the defendant stole it, since he could have come into possession of the set in other ways.
Actually, all evidence, even eyewitness testimony and a defendant’s confession, requires that some inference be drawn.
When a witness to a robbery testifies he saw the defendant rob the victim, from the secondary fact of the witness’s observation , the jury must still draw the inference that the witness was correct—that is, that it is not a case of mistaken identity, a not uncommon occurrence.
Likewise, the testimony of a police officer that the defendant confessed to a crime still requires the inference that what the defendant said was true, that the confession was not the product of coercion or any other factor.
Arguably, then, it could be said that there is no such thing as direct evidence.
But if the only inference sought is that the fact testified to is true (as opposed to circumstantial evidence, where the inference sought is that some other fact is true), then the evidence is still deemed to be direct evidence.
Warren Commission critic Sylvia Meagher says, “Oswald’s visit to Irving on Thursday night, November 21, may not have been unprecedented” (Meagher, Accessories after the Fact,37), but there is no credible evidence to support this.
Troy Erwin, the manager of the Atlantic & Pacific supermarket in Irving, told the FBI that check G493187, aTexas Unemployment Commission check for $33.00 payable to Lee Harvey Oswald, was cashed at his store on either Thursday, October 31,1963, or Friday, November 1, 1963.
Tarrants, almost five months after the assassination, would be able to look back and recall whether Oswald cashed the check on Thursday as opposed to Friday night, especially since at that time she would have no reason to make note of what night Oswald was at the store.
But Marina Oswald, Ruth Paine, and Wesley Frazier would have every reason to remember that Oswald had never, before November 21, come to Irving on a Thursday night.
Lane does tell his readers that Brennan suffered a trauma to his eyes after the assassination, but puts this in a footnote, and doesn’t say that Brennan’s eyes being “not good” resulted from this trauma after the assassination; that is, Lane definitely leaves the impression that Brennan’s eyes were “not good” at the time of the assassination.
It couldn’t be clearer that Brennan said he had excellent eyesight at the time of the assassination but poor eyesight since the sandblasting incident.
After an FBI interview of Brennan on the evening of the assassination, the interviewing agent wrote that Brennan had “volunteered he has been informed by his optometrist, Dr.
Bonar, Port Lavaca, Texas, that he has ‘perfect vision’ at a distance, or, in other words, he is farsighted.
But they offer no source that suggests the HSCA did not believe Brennan.
The critics use yet another argument to attack Brennan’s credibility with respect to his testimony before the Warren Commission that Oswald “appeared” to be “standing up” with his rifle on his “right shoulder,” and that the rifle was extended out the window.
They have pointed out, correctly, that Oswald couldn’t have been standing at the window.
As is shown in the Tom Dillard photos taken seconds after the shooting , the sniper’s nest window, like all the windows, has a horizontal divider in the middle, and at the time of the shooting only half of the bottom half of the sniper’s nest window (i.e., about a quarter of the whole window) was open.
If Oswald, at close to 5 feet 10 inches tall, were standing behind the window, he could only have fired his rifle through the top half of the window, and we know the top half was not open and the glass on the top half was not broken.
I don’t believe Brennan was ever asked this question but we can assume that he estimated Oswald’s height by extrapolation from what he could see of Oswald’s upper body.
Frazier said that there was no place in the building to buy food, just two soft drink machines.
He added, however, that sometimes an employee would buy his lunch from the catering truck during the morning break.
If she’s not, and the person she saw was not Oswald, we can still safely assume Oswald got off at the subject bus stop, since it was the closest the southbound Beckley bus would take him to his rooming house.
Though one or more of these observations may have been correct, I am not including Bledsoe’s observations as evidence of Oswald’s guilt.
Apart from her probable bias against him, her observations of Oswald’s physical condition were such that if they were accurate, at least one of them would have been noticeable to Roy Truly or Dallas police officer Marrion Baker.
But they apparently saw no such thing, and I can’t reasonably envision anything that Oswald would have done between the time he saw Truly and Baker and was in Bledsoe’s presence that would have caused him to get in such a bedraggled condition.
For years, Warren Commission critics have attacked the credibility of Helen Markham as a witness toTippit’s murder.
Dallas assistant DA Bill Alexander told me, “Helen Markham used to be a waitress at the Courthouse Cafe , She served me a barrel of coffee throughout the years.
Critics have seized on the purportedly inconsistent descriptions of Tippit’s killer that Mrs.
Markham gave, but they aren’t wildly inconsistent at all and one of them did not even come directly from her.
Poe testified he gave Walker “a description of the suspect based on his interviews of Markham and one of the Davis girls,” and it was only similar to but not the precise one Walker called in, which almost assuredly was a synopsis or synthesis by Walker of what several witnesses said at the murder scene.
From this background the Warren Report incorrectly says that “according to Patrolman Poe, description came from Mrs.
Markham about this, she said she did tell the agent the killer was “young looking,” though she doesn’t believe she said 18, remembered telling him he had black hair, but definitely did not tell him he was red-complexioned.
The supposedly inconsistent descriptions by Markham of the killer are much to do about nothing.
Conspiracy author Sylvia Meagher didn’t do her reputation any favors when she made a related attack on Markham.
Markham obviously was thinking “before” meant before the shooting, not before the lineup.
How sad that Meagher would deliberately mislead her readers into believing that Markham “wasn’t sure” of her identification of Oswald when Meagher knows that Markham was sure.
Meagher simply omitted the next questions and answers that followed in Markham’s testimony.
After Markham said she got cold chills when she saw the man, Warren Commission counsel asked Mrs.
I am more than sure that Sylvia Meagher didn’t want her readers to know that Mrs.
A myth that has taken hold among a great number of people outside the criminal justice system is the supposed unreliability of eyewitness identification.
An eyewitness to a crime has always been and will always be a critically important (in fact, usually the “star witness for the prosecution”) witness at a criminal trial, highly prized by the prosecution and given great weight by the jury.
Pointing a finger at the defendant from the witness stand and saying, “He’s the man who raped (or robbed, etc.) me” or “the man I saw shoot the victim” has sent countless defendants to prison and death row throughout the years.
The basis for the value of eyewitness identification is that there is something incredibly distinctive about a human face.
So unique that out of the over six billion people on the face of the globe, no two people, other than identical twins, look exactly alike.
So unique that we oftentimes recognize people we only knew very casually ten to twenty years ago.
So unique that even newborn infants in a crib, even animals, easily recognize a face.
The fragility of the latter (fleeting glance) has been demonstrated by the erroneous identifications that are so common in staged-crime experiments, like someone running into a room of students, grabbing an object like a briefcase, and running out, all within seconds.
But when people get a good, meaningful look at someone on a clear day, as was the situation with the witnesses in the Tippit murder, to dismiss their positive identification of Oswald under the bromide “eyewitness testimony is unreliable” is completely unfounded.
So Reynolds, whose recollection could not have sharpened with the passage of time, gave a stronger identification of Oswald before the Warren Commission than he did five months earlier to the FBI, and his first recollection is the one we have to place the most reliance on.
He had only gotten around to pushing two of the thirty buttons that doused the lights of the establishment when an unknown man emerged from behind a filing cabinet and shot him.
The attempted murder of Reynolds went unsolved, although the Dallas police originally arrested a mentally disturbed man, Darrell Wayne Garner, who had been on the Reynolds lot the morning of the shooting trying to sell a used car to Reynolds without having its title, and getting very angry at Reynolds when he wouldn’t buy it.
Mooney was arrested and charged with disturbing the peace a few weeks later and hung herself in the Dallas city jail.
Lewis, who was on the Reynolds lot when he saw a man run by holding a gun.
A witness whom author Gerald Posner puts on the positive-identification list is Domingo Benavides, the driver of the pickup truck who was right across the street from Tippit and Oswald, the closest witness to the murder.
And this, obviously, is the reason why Benavides was never brought to an Oswald lineup.
Posner suggests to his readers that Warren Commission critics who believe that Benavides couldn’t identify Oswald are incorrect (though he doesn’t offer an alternative explanation for why Benavides was not brought to an Oswald lineup), saying that Benavides was able to identify Oswald.
But Benavides’s actual testimony, which Posner didn’t quote, was a little more tentative.
That’s certainly good, but not the unequivocal identification Posner led his readers to believe existed.
To support his case, Posner then quotes what Benavides told CBS News three years later, saying he had “no doubt at all” that Oswald was the man he had seen.
Yet on the afternoon of the assassination Benavides said he didn’t think he could identify the man he saw at Tenth and Patton.
Also, a “single brown, delustered, viscose fiber and several light-green cotton fibers found inside the bag .. . matched in all observable microscopic characteristics” with fibers from the blanket in Ruth Paine’s garage, where Oswald stored the Carcano rifle.
Predictably, witnesses gave different color descriptions of Oswald’s light gray jacket.
Sam Guinyard and William Smith said the jacket that was found looked like the one the man was wearing.
William Scoggins thought it was lighter than the one the man was wearing.
But there is nothing in the three citations the Warren Report gives to back this statement up.
Indeed, the name Bill Shelley isn’t even mentioned in the text referred to by the three citations.
Wondering where in the world the Commission had come up with this, if at all, the closest I could come is in the contemporaneous handwritten notes of Captain Fritz, taken at the time of the interrogation—five brief pages written during twelve hours of interrogation.
On page 1, Fritz writes, “Claims 2nd Floor Coke when Off came in, to 1st fl had lunch, out with Bill Shelley in front.
With respect to Fritz’s handwritten note that Oswald said he had lunch on the first floor after the confrontation with the officer on the second floor, Oswald couldn’t have told Fritz this, since he couldn’t expect anyone to believe that after his confrontation with the officer in the second-floor lunchroom, which had to be after the shooting in Dealey Plaza, he proceeded to go down to the first floor and have his lunch and then left.
And in his subsequent thirteen-page typewritten report of his interrogations of Oswald , Fritz says that Oswald told him he was having lunch on the first floor at the time of the shooting.
When Fritz asked him where he was when the officer stopped him, Oswald said he was on the second floor drinking a Coca-Cola.
When Fritz asked him why he left the building thereafter, Oswald said there was so much excitement that he didn’t think there would be any more work that day.
Fritz makes no reference to Oswald telling him that Shelley had told him this.
It would seem that Fritz’s writing, in his handwritten notes, “Bill Shelley in front” probably was a reference to Oswald telling him during the interrogation that on his way out of the building, he saw Bill Shelley in front of the building.
There were, apparently, a few exceptions, but they don’t change the reality of several of the people who knew Oswald and thought he was the precise type of person who would be expected to do what he did.
Remarkably, Meagher even cites Samuel Ballen, who met Oswald only once, when he interviewed Oswald for a job.
In any event, Meagher doesn’t bother to cite for her readers even one member of the subject community who wasn’t surprised at all that Oswald had killed Kennedy.
Although Case Closed and Conspiracy of One are the best-known books taking an anti-conspiracy position ( Case Closed being considerably more prominent than Conspiracy of One), another, much more obscure book, published in England in 2002, is The JFK Assassination: Dispelling the Myths by Mel Ayton.
Though it’s a good book, the author devotes only a few pages specifically to why the various conspiracy theories make no sense.
New theories routinely surface, old ones are periodically revitalized, and hopelessly out-of-date ones, such as the threat of worldwide communism, have transmogrified into updated theories about the impending takeover of the United States by the United Nations.
A partial exception to this is the obviously unbelievable story of one Judyth Vary (as in very silly) Baker.
The story Judyth came up with was so fraudulent on its face that even most conspiracy theorists have ganged up on her to debunk it.
But Judyth has a solid group of supporters called “Team Judyth” who have been warring with her debunkers for several years on the Internet and elsewhere.
Judyth’s story is so absurd that it is not worthy of citations to sources, and I shall give it none except to say that her story, in bits and pieces, has appeared in a considerable number of places in recent years.
Judyth’s story started when she saw Oliver Stone’s fantasy film JFK in 1998 and decided she had an even bigger fantasy story to tell, partially through the technique of “recovered” memory.
But because Judyth had shown promise at Manatee High School in South Bend, Indiana, for her amateur work on cancer research, even winning a science prize at a local fair, she says she was recruited by Dr.
Jack Ruby, she said, was the bag man who brought the money for the project to New Orleans.
The “cocktail” included a virus to neutralize the bearded one’s immune system and cancer cells to kill him.
It was around this time that she met and fell hopelessly in love with Lee Harvey Oswald, who became a part of the project and with whom she had a torrid sexual affair.
What Judyth has apparently done, from her first “outing” in 1998, when her story was rather skeletal, is read a lot of conspiracy books and, together with her association with other conspiracy buffs, consistently and continuously embroider her tale with virtually every far-out conspiracy allegation extant.
So the remarkable twenty-year-old, in just a few months, had more contact in New Orleans with the leading figures of conspiracy lore than perhaps any other known figure in the conspiracy community.
One problem poor Judyth has with her fantasy story is her former husband, Robert Baker.
Later in the day or the next day, brought home a newspaper and was studying it closely and said, ‘I think I may have seen this guy.
But she said that when Clay Shaw learned about their lack of money forcing them to make love in such places, he felt sorry for them and started paying for their trysts at nice hotels in the city. tThe staff of CBS’s 60 Minutes gave Judyth’s story long consideration before deciding not to do it.
And Judyth claims the National Enquirer offered her $600,000 for her story (an amount the publisher might offer if Jesus returned and his agent promised an exclusive), but Judyth apparently wasn’t interested.
Mary Sherman worked on their research project in Feme’s and Sherman’s apartments in New Orleans.
It is an established fact that the CIA did do research in a CIA lab in the Washington, D.C., area, with highly qualified scientists possessing medical and doctoral degrees, to develop some medical concoction to kill Castro.
But what we didn’t know until Judyth told us was that the CIA decided to also fund the motley group in New Orleans.
Per Judyth, her lover Lee’s role in the plot to kill Castro (we were all wrong about Lee—Lee, per Judyth, was a CIA operative who wanted to kill Castro, not fight for him) was to deliver the “cocktail” to Mexico City, where he was to turn it over to an individual who would smuggle it into Cuba, but Judyth said Oswald’s contact never showed up so Lee himself tried to get to Cuba with the deadly bioweapon, but he couldn’t get a visa from the Cuban consulate.
When this project failed, the CIA and mob decided to go after Kennedy, not Castro.
Lee, Judyth said, didn’t want to be part of the plot to kill Kennedy, but he played along with his co-conspirators for the purpose of thwarting their attempt.
He told her he even got in touch with J Edgar Hoover and told him of the plot, but Hoover never stopped it because he wanted Kennedy killed since Kennedy was going to force him to retire.
Lee told Judyth that another step he had taken to protect Kennedy was to orchestrate the assault on Adlai Stevenson shortly before Kennedy came to Dallas so that the authorities would be alerted to give greater protection to Kennedy.
Lee told Judyth, “Better Stevenson getting bops on the head than the Chief getting bullets in the head.
Judyth tells us that at the time of the shooting in Dealey Plaza, Lee intentionally missed Kennedy with his shot or shots but other assassins killed him.
According to Judyth, two days before the assassination, while she was apparently in school in Florida, she and Lee had a tearful conversation over the phone.
Judyth told Lee she “would never allow anyone to replace you in my heart,” and Lee said he would try to escape from the plotters after the shooting in Dealey Plaza, directing her to wait for him at a “fine hotel” in Cancun.
When Judyth’s debunkers pointed out that Cancun never had fine hotels way back in 1963, just sand dunes, Judyth and her team retreated and said that her coauthor on a book she was writing had put this in her manuscript.
David Lewis was the individual during Garrison’s investigation and prosecution of Clay Shaw who came up with allegations like he knew the names of the people involved in the plot to kill Kennedy, and there were over twenty, and someone shot at him in front of a New Orleans hotel.
Lewis, whom White House correspondent Merriman Smith described as a “dangerous mental case,” was so lacking in credibility that even Jim Garrison never called him as a witness at the trial and, indeed, didn’t even mention Lewis in his book On the Trail of the Assassins.
Of course, just because David Lewis had no credibility doesn’t necessarily mean that Anna doesn’t.
Judyth has also come up with some love letters she said she wrote to Oswald.
She even claims that Lee wrote some inscriptions on the margins of some of his old books but that her dogs chewed those portions of the pages away.
One such inscription remains, however, but she and Team Judyth have not produced an affidavit from even one documents examiner saying that the writing is Oswald’s, only alleging that the “preliminary reports” are favorable.
When Judyth skeptic David Lifton told her that she had made up her wild story to spice up her boring life, she responded with a rebuttal titled “My Boring Life” in which she tries to prove the opposite.
At other times Judyth has claimed she is a descendant of Russian aristocracy, Liberace learned to play piano on her family’s upright when he was a child, and when she was young she was a close friend of Dr.
Judyth presently lives in the Netherlands, saying she fled America because of death threats, presumably from the conspirators who would like to silence her.
I can see why Carlos wouldn’t want Judyth fingering him to the authorities over JFK’s murder, but it’s not clear what interest he would have in whether she continued her medical research.
Since Carlos is dead and no longer around to protect her, she says she only feels safe in Europe.
Speaking of puppies, I believe Judyth, like all earnest humans, deserves an audience for her story.
I thought I was through dealing with the ludicrous Judyth Baker in the endnote you have just read.
But lo and behold, after this book was already in early galleys, the outrageous Judyth came out with two volumes on the Kennedy assassination and her love affair with Oswald.
The True Story of the Accused Assassin of President John F Kennedy by His Lover , is clearly not written by her, though she is listed as the author.
Sometimes the ghostwriter forgets he is one, such as where he writes, “A strange and warm romance began to blossom between Lee Harvey Oswald and Judyth Vary Baker” , but then he goes back into the first person of Judyth telling her fairy tale.
Superimposed on what is just another garden-variety conspiracy book is Baker’s alleged romance with Oswald.
And if anyone even had the smallest doubt that Judyth is a gold-plated phony, all he or she has to do to remove that doubt is to read Baker’s book.
All sensible people already know that Baker’s story, on its face, was not only not believable, but also laughable.
However, she knew that if she wanted people to stop laughing at her she had to come up with some evidence to show that she knew Oswald, much less was his lover.
She makes her greatest effort in trying to show that she and Oswald worked at the Reily coffee company at the same time and had a close relationship with him at work and outside of work.
But nowhere does she come up with any evidence that she even worked at the coffee company.
She keeps showing document after document in her book, such as canceled checks and time cards , to prove that Oswald worked there.
The only documents from the Reily coffee company that she presents have Oswald’s name on them, not Baker’s.
The closest Baker comes to establishing that she worked at the Reily coffee company is a copy of a May 27,1963, check from Judyth to the A-1 Employment Agency for $17.44, representing a fee she paid the agency for getting her a job.
But since she never established that she worked at the Reily coffee company, this fee could have been for a job A-l got Judyth somewhere else.
I guess Judyth’s contention is that if she worked with Oswald, this meant, without any further proof or evidence, that she had an affair with him, and through him met and learned about all the central figures in the alleged conspiracy to murder Kennedy.
The report reads that “Tomlinson stated it appears to be the same” bullet he found on the stretcher and that Wright said it “looks like the slug” Tomlinson turned over to him.
Since the Airtel was written before the July 7, 1964, report, Aguilar concludes that the Airtel was the truthful report and that the July 7, 1964, report was “bogus” in that it claimed that Tomlinson and Wright thought the bullet they were shown was the same one they saw on the afternoon of the assassination, when actually, per the June 20 Airtel, Tomlinson and Wright told the FBI the opposite.
In an effort to explain why, if the FBI were up to no good, FBI agents would falsify what Tomlinson and Wright told them, but not what Johnsen and Rowley told them, Aguilar amusingly writes that the FBI authors of the July 7,1964, report probably thought that “Secret Service agents would have been more likely to read the FBI reports” than Tomlinson and Wright would.
That’s one of the most important things all conspiracy theorists look for, and then they go merrily on in their search for other apparent contradictions in the vast and inviting literature on the assassination.
Unless the July report is in error as to the name of the agent who showed Tomlinson the bullet, Odum, almost forty years after the fact, has simply forgotten.
Odum said that if he had shown anyone the bullet, he would have prepared an FBI report on it.
And, like the previous one, it fits the modus operandi of virtually all mainstream (as opposed to fringe) conspiracy theorists like Aguilar, Anthony Summers, Henry Hurt, John Newman, and others.
The moment they spot something contradictory or, in their mind, suspicious, they make “noises,” without making direct accusations, that the party or group involved is complicit in the conspiracy.
For instance, here, Aguilar does not expressly accuse the FBI of murdering Kennedy or knowingly covering up for those who did.
But certainly, if FBI agents are falsifying their official reports, Aguilar wants his readers to infer that they must be somehow involved.
And if it doesn’t go anywhere, then that means there is an innocent, not sinister, explanation for the discrepancy.
Instead, willy-nilly, most mainstream conspiracy theorists continue only to imply that this person, and this group, and that person, and that group (they never stop adding to their list as they scour the assassination library of books, articles, and documents) were involved somehow in the assassination, but not too frequently do they flat-out identify those persons or groups.
However, he adds, “What may have happened at the FBI’s Crime Lab after some bullet found at Parkland got there is another matter.
In his cross-examination of my witnesses and in his summation, my opposing counsel, Gerry Spence, strongly implied to the jury, without expressly charging, that either the CIA, the FBI, or some other group was behind the assassination of President Kennedy and had framed his client—“Lee,” as Mr Spence called him.
And he argued that ever since the assassination and frame-up in 1963 there had been a massive cover-up.
Because if he said the CIA murdered the president, or the FBI murdered the president, it would sound downright silly,” I thundered.
Walking over to Spence’s counsel table, I said, “He implied to you that there was some nebulous, mysterious, powerful group that murdered the president and framed Lee Harvey Oswald, but he never put this hat here on anyone’s head.
The purported March 3, 1964, document has McCone telling Rowley that “Oswald subject was trained by the agency, under cover of the office of Naval Intelligence, for Soviet assignments.
He stamped the document “Confidential,” the very lowest security classification, which, if the document were real, would virtually guarantee that it would soon see the light of day.
With everyone and their grandmother trying to prove that Oswald was a CIA agent, and the CIA publicly declaring he never was, if Oswald was a CIA agent, the CIA would obviously never put anything in writing saying that he was.
But if it was crazy enough to do so, the highest security classification, “Eyes Only,” would have been used.
If the forged March 3, 1964, document were genuine, McCone would have known on May 14, 1964, not only that he was committing perjury before the Warren Commission, but also that there was a document with his signature on it to prove it.
If we wanted to publish it, they either had to declassify it or fight us over the issue.
Author Gus Russo sent me assassination researcher Paul Hoch’s extensive study of the “sworn statement” in which Hoch discovered that, among many other irregularities, the supposed 1947 statement was on a post-1966 FBI letterhead.
Rubenstein and Alek Hidel, , but were subsequently released by the police.
The report is dated October 12, 1963, a Saturday, yet it says the day of the arrest, October 11, which would be Friday, was Thursday.
Oswald’s and Ruby’s ages were wrong on the report, Oswald’s listed as being twenty-two, when he was twenty-three at the time, Ruby’s being listed as thirty-nine, when he was fifty-two at the time.
Perry said that as a result of a tip in 1999, he spoke to one of the people who put the report together way back in 1966.
His and his partner’s plan was to send the original of the bogus report to Mark Lane and wait for Lane to call a press conference.
If Ruby was connected to Mark Lane the year before the assassination, and Lane was connected to Oswald in that he represented Oswald’s mother after the assassination, this could smell of conspiracy.
But the Jack Rubenstein who was one of the sponsors of the dinner turned out to be the vice president of the Textile Workers of America in Manhattan.
Jim Koepke, the author who has made such a charge, is a member of Mensa, the national high IQ_society, but he forgot to take his IQpills before he wrote his little book, Chasing Ghosts , in 2004.
Haldeman, Nixon’s chief of staff, to have Helms, then director of the CIA, block the FBI investigation of Watergate under the pretext that it might open up the “whole Bay of Pigs” matter, which would not do the country or the CIA any good.
Koepke maintains that Helms refused to do it, angrily telling Haldeman that Watergate had nothing to do with the Bay of Pigs.
Whether or not Helms agreed to try to block the FBI investigation of Watergate because of the alleged Bay of Pigs connection, by the very language of the proposition this would have nothing to do with the Kennedy assassination.
Haldeman would later deny that this was his interpretation, saying his coauthor, Joseph DiMona, wrote it, though DiMona told author Anthony Summers that these words were Haldeman’s, and Summers makes a strong case for the proposition that they were Haldeman’s.
DiMona said that the book went through several drafts, with Haldeman editing every page he, DiMona, wrote.
Also, in a 1989 interview of Haldeman by Summers, Haldeman not only didn’t disown the passage but also acknowledged that it was merely his, Haldeman’s, speculation.
If Nixon were referring to his belief that the CIA murdered Kennedy, it is inconceivable that he would only use modest language like “unfortunate” for the CIA, country, and foreign policy.
And if he were referring to Kennedy’s assassination while talking to Haldeman, it is even more inconceivable that he would say, “Don’t lie to them to the extent to say there is no involvement,” which would suggest his own complicity in Kennedy’s murder.
Whatever connection the Kennedy assassination may have had in Nixon’s mind with respect to the Bay of Pigs and Cuba, it would almost necessarily have to have been limited to his not wanting the information to get out that the CIA had tried to murder Castro (it was not known to the public at that time, the Church Committee being four years away), as it could support the argument, as many have made, that Castro killed Kennedy in retaliation.
The author goes on to say that Helms tried to “intimidate” him by telling him to “stay out of this matter,” and adds that when he got former director William Colby on the phone, Colby “was literally pleading with me to believe him” when he said the CIA was not involved in the assassination.
The author made sure he wrote his book after Helms and Colby had long since passed away.
Maybe that’s because while he was doing that, he wouldn’t be bothering them at their meetings with his special brand of drivel.
Again, the reader should not assume that I’m scoffing at all the conspiracy theorists in this case because I believe the very notion of a conspiracy to be per se absurd and far-fetched.
Perhaps ironically (I say “ironically” because there is much, much more of a belief in a conspiracy in the assassination of President Kennedy than in the murder of his brother, Robert, on June I had thought that Koepke’s Watergate theory of the assassination, as bad as it was, was at least his, but I later found that an earlier book by conspiracy theorist Monte Evans floated the same theory, among many others, and it’s possible that Koepke got his argument from this book, though there is no way for me to know.
In a small chapter near the end of his book Koepke got a little more daring with his fakery.
Probably relying on the known position of Washington Post columnists Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein that they wouldn’t reveal the identity of their “Deep Throat” informant in the Watergate case until after he died, Koepke tells his readers that he tracked down Deep Throat and had a long telephone conversation with him about Watergate and the Kennedy assassination after first agreeing to Deep Throat’s demand that he, the author, not publicly disclose his identity.
Koepke could rely on Woodward and Bernstein (even, being bold enough to tell the lie he did, challenge them at a later time if they identified the deceased Deep Throat as someone other than a member of the White House staff), but he didn’t count on Deep Throat himself (Mark Felt, the number-two man at the FBI during Watergate) coming out of the woodwork and identifying himself one year after Koepke’s book was published.
When I say “evidence” of a conspiracy, this is not the same as saying there was a conspiracy.
Proof, then, is the result or effect of evidence, the successful establishment of the fact by evidence.
I was brought into the investigation of RFK’s assassination several years after the event by others who were pursuing two separate, private lawsuits.
Although my involvement was limited to specific areas of inquiry, not the entire case, and hence I do not feel I have any kind of a “handle” on the case, I’ll just mention one of several serious problems, and in a very shorthand way.
In the official Los Angeles Police Department ballistics report on the case dated July 8, 1968, Officer De Wayne Wolfer of the Scientific Investigation Division stated that all eight rounds in Sirhan’s .22 caliber Iver Johnson revolver had been fired, and all eight had been accounted for.
In other words, the official position of the LAPD was that no bullets were found at the assassination scene (the very crowded pantry of the Ambassador Hotel), and other than a hole in the ceiling caused by the lost bullet, there were no bullet holes on any of the doors or walls of the pantry.
Yet there is witness evidence (including that from an FBI agent who arrived shortly after the assassination and later gave me a signed statement) and, more importantly, photographic evidence that two additional bullet holes were found at the assassination scene in the center divider post between the swinging doors of the pantry.
At the time of my involvement in the case, I said publicly, “There is no question about Sirhan’s guilt.
However, I have no way of knowing for sure whether or not more than one gun was fired at the assassination scene.
But I reiterated that in the absence of official contravening evidence, we were talking about too many bullets for Sirhan to have fired them all.
In one of the aforementioned lawsuits in September of 1975, seven firearm experts from around the country came to Los Angeles to test-fire Sirhan’s gun and reexamine the firearm evidence.
Under questioning by me, all seven testified they were unable to determine the number of bullets fired at the assassination scene.
However, all testified that they could find no evidence of a second gun, although they could not rule out the possibility of a second gun.
Five who were troubled recommended further scientific tests, which were never conducted.
I was right in the middle of a prosecution of another murder case for the Los Angeles County district attorney’s office, but recall getting a late-night call from my office to prepare the search warrant and later knocking on the door of a judge at his home in the middle of the night to ask him to sign it.
When I arrived at Sirhan’s car, I recall that FBI agents broke into it with a crowbar.
As alluded to in the main text, at the trial in London, the only issue for the jury to resolve was whether or not the prosecution had proved Oswald’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
It was not alleged in the indictment that Oswald was part of a conspiracy, and therefore, this was not an issue for the jury to decide.
Which is exactly what would have occurred if Oswald had been prosecuted in real life.
The United States government has never believed that Oswald was part of a conspiracy in the assassination, so it would never have alleged a conspiracy, and Oswald’s defense attorneys wouldn’t argue the opposite, that Oswald was a part of a conspiracy, because if they did, under the vicarious liability rule of conspiracy (which makes each conspirator criminally responsible for all crimes committed by his co-conspirators in the furtherance of the object of the conspiracy), they would be arguing Oswald’s guilt.
If Oswald was part of a conspiracy to kill Kennedy, he could have been at home sleeping at the time of the shooting in Dealey Plaza, and he’d still be guilty of Kennedy’s murder.
As discussed in the text, it was inferable from the evidence I presented to the jury that I believed Oswald acted alone in killing Kennedy.
And if the jury believed or suspected that others were involved, this would inevitably generate in their minds a number of unanswered questions about who these people were and the nature of their involvement.
These thoughts in turn could cause the jurors to conclude that they simply did not know the whole story, what really happened, hurting the credibility of my whole case against Oswald and raising a reasonable doubt of his guilt in their minds.
Salandria, one of the chief founders of the assassination research community (almost, though not completely, synonymous with the Warren Commission critic and conspiracy theorist community), is highly revered in the conspiracy community, the reverence almost achieving a spiritual level.
And, indeed, the Philadelphia lawyer is an intellectual and a purist who has remained true to the cause throughout the years, never seeking to profit from it and gladly remaining in the background, helping and serving as an inspiration for others.
His problem is that because of his fiercely antiestablishment views, he is completely paranoid.
Salandria was one of New Orleans district attorney Jim Garrison’s chief advisers during his prosecution of Clay Shaw for Kennedy’s murder, and when comedian Mort Sahl, who gave up valuable time and much money to go to New Orleans to help Garrison, told me that “Salandria didn’t trust me, he thought I was CIA,” from what I had read about Salandria, I wasn’t surprised.
However, New Times started reviewing even offbeat conspiracy books as far back as September 23, 1964, the day before the Warren Commission submitted its final report to President Johnson, when it reviewed Joachim Joesten’s book Oswald: Assassin or Fall Guy?, and taking an editorial posture as a critic of the Warren Commission.
The second, “A Philadelphia Lawyer Analyzes the Shots, Trajectories and Wounds,” was in the January 1965 edition of Liberation magazine.
Salandria’s third article, “A Philadelphia Lawyer Analyzes the President’s Back and Neck Wounds,” was published in Liberation the same month that Harold Feldman’s article on the grassy knoll witness appeared in Minority of One, March of 1965.
Salandria’s first article in Minority of One, “The Impossible Tasks of One Assassination Bullet,” was published in its March 1966 edition.
Surprisingly, well-organized annual conventions of conspiracy theorists did not start until 1991, when a music promoter’s group out of Austin, Texas, called South by Southwest, together with the Assassination Information Center in Dallas and the Texas Observer, sponsored the Assassination Symposium on John F Kennedy in Dallas.
And following release of the Oliver Stone movie JFK, the Third Decade series sponsored two conferences in Chicago, the first in 1992 and the second one in 1993, the latter being one of the biggest assassination conferences ever.
That same year, the Third Decade also sponsored a conference in Providence, Rhode Island.
The Coalition of Political Assassinations , headquartered in Washington, D.C., was formed in 1993 on the thirtieth anniversary of the assassination.
Fensterwald continued to head the group until his death in 1991, when Washington attorney Jim Lesar took over as president, a position he has held to this day.
In 2004 and 2005, the AARC held two conferences on the assassination in Washington, D.C., the 2005 one being particularly impressive in its lineup of prominent speakers.
John Judge, one of the founders of COPA and its current executive director, told me that COPA held national conferences in Washington, D.C., from 1994 through 1997 and “regional” conferences in Dallas from 1995 through 1997.
Since then it has continued to hold a yearly conference in Dallas but denominates it a regional conference even though attendees come from throughout the country.
COPA also sporadically holds regional conferences in Memphis and Los Angeles, with a primary focus on the respective assassinations of Martin Luther King and Robert F Kennedy.
Sponsored by a group called JFK Lancer (Lancer being the Secret Service code name for JFK) and called November in Dallas, the yearly conventions, like COPA’s, continue to this day.
Most of these conventions draw several hundred diehard conspiracy theorists from around the country for two to three days, with an attendance fee of $150 to $250.
Though the conferences also have a social aspect, with dinners and field trips to Dallas sites steeped in assassination lore, the fights among the critics over their opposing theories are often bitter, some becoming legendary in the conspiracy community.
With respect to the issue of the sincerity of those who believe the Warren Commission suppressed the truth from the American people, listen to Harold Weisberg, the most celebrated Warren Commission critic of all, who went into debt to self-publish several of his early books on the assassination: “I believe deeply that our society is not safe when a murdered President can be dishonored with a palpably inadequate and entirely unsatisfactory official investigation by the government that succeeded him,” a government that “never intended solving” his murder.
So Craig, though not a defense attorney in the strictest sense of the word (e.g., he couldn’t subpoena witnesses and put on a defense for Oswald), was representing Oswald’s interests before the Commission, the role Marguerite Oswald wanted Mark Lane to fill.
It should be noted that by February 25, the Commission had already taken the testimony of four witnesses without anyone representing Oswald’s interests, including the one who proved most devastating to his innocence, his wife Marina.
Before then, he was a stringer for Drew Pearson in Uruguay in 1948, where he was known for inaccurately reporting on United States embassy events there.
And as an executive for El Sol , a leftist daily in Quito, Ecuador, in 1953, he was considered to be, per a CIA report, “unreliable, dishonest and unsavory by Americans and Ecuadorans” alike.
Oswald to Love Field for her flight to Washington, D.C., to testify before the Warren Commission.
After she departed, the group had coffee at the airport restaurant with Forrest Sorrels, head of the Dallas Secret Service.
This was Penn Jones’s frequent modus operandi—make a mysterious-deaths allegation and give no source or citation of authority for it.
Jones offers no support for his allegation that Underhill was a CIA agent and doesn’t tell his readers from whom he obtained his information or the identity of Underhill’s friends.
The CIA says Underhill “served with the Military Intelligence Service from 8 July 1943 to May 1946 as an expert in photography, enemy weapons, and related technical specialties.
Though Israel doesn’t get around to saying it , she implies from the context that Umberger was the director at the time of Kilgallen’s death and that it was he who conducted her toxicology test.
In any event, the man in the pub (whom Israel doesn’t identify by name, nor does she even tell her readers whether she confirmed the man worked in the Medical Examiner’s Office during the period he claimed to) told Israel that Umberger had told him that Kilgallen had been murdered and that he was using the conclusion he reached as something to “hold over” the head of Dr.
James L Luke, who conducted the autopsy, both of whom certified her death.
Israel doesn’t bother to tell her readers what the evidence was that pointed to murder.
Though she mentions the possibility of other drugs in Kilgallen’s system, most notably Nembutal, nowhere does she say that Nembutal indicates murder, nor does she preclude the possibility that Kilgallen herself took the drug.
In view of Israel’s dreadful sloppiness and the implausibility of the whole story, I’ve already written much more than Israel’s story deserves.
Another prominent mysterious death that conspiracy theorists have talked about was that of Naval Lieutenant Commander William Bruce Pitzer.
Dennis David, a medical corpsman at Bethesda Naval Hospital, gave impetus to the mysterious-death rumor when he claimed that he, David, was present at the autopsy of Kennedy and he saw Pitzer film the autopsy.
Conspiracy theorists believe that the film of the autopsy that Pitzer allegedly took, which has never surfaced, would contradict the official autopsy findings, and one evidence of that is they haven’t been able to get a copy of the autopsy report, which concluded that Pitzer committed suicide.
And there are other serious problems with the story conspiracy theorists peddle on Pitzer.
But the HSCA’s list of those present at the autopsy does not include David , nor, since his job on November 22, 1963, was merely “chief of the day for the medical school,” would he have had any reason to be present.
Indeed, in an interview David gave to author David Lifton back on July 2, 1979, in which David went into considerable detail as to everything he saw that night (mostly, the arrival of the hearse and casket and the casket being brought to the morgue door), he didn’t even claim to have been inside the autopsy room, telling Lifton he had no firsthand knowledge of when the autopsy even commenced.
As if David’s credibility wasn’t already weak enough, he made it worse.
After indicating to David Lifton in 1979 that he was not present at the autopsy, and telling Harrison Livingstone in 1988 that he was, in 1997 he went back to his original story and conceded to ARRB investigators that he was not present at the autopsy, being in the administrative offices upstairs on the second floor of the building.
Indeed, it may have been this misconception by David that started his belief that Pitzer was murdered, and even after this misconception was rectified, he was too committed to get off the bandwagon.
No writer or author has sought to interview those present at the autopsy more than David Lifton, and Lifton’s book, Best Evidence, doesn’t even mention Pitzer. t John Stringer, referring to Pitzer, told me, “I knew him well.
Stringer said that Pitzer was the administrative assistant to one Captain Bird in the audiovisual department at Bethesda, and he was found dead “in the television studio” of the department.
This was consistent with the conclusion of John G Ball, the Montgomery County deputy medical examiner who conducted the autopsy on Pitzer on October 30, 1966, that Pitzer’s death was a suicide.
But Custer is clearly a person with credibility problems, so much so that even Law, a dyed-in-the-wool conspiracy theorist, was uneasy with Custer’s answers during the interview.
Custer actually thought that his experiences on the night of the autopsy were important enough to write a book and was in the process of trying to get one published when he died in July of 2000.
J_he Pitzer case is a perfect example of how some fraud or nut will always come forward to keep the conspiracy community fed in perpetuity.
Pitzer wasn’t even present in the autopsy room—one Dan Marvin, a former lieutenant colonel in United States Army Special Services, took up David’s baton in 1993 and tried to run with it.
Marvin claims that when he saw a reference to the Pitzer affair while watching Nigel Turner’s Men Who Killed Kennedy (see “Other Assassins” section for expose of Turner’s show) in November of 1993, he realized that the CIA had asked him to murder Pitzer in 1963.
Marvin alleges that as a captain in United States Special Forces in 1964, he attended a course conducted by the CIA in assassination techniques at the Special Warfare Center in Fort Bragg, North Carolina.
In other words, the CIA murdered Kennedy, and they’re bragging about it at coffee breaks for others to hear.
He says that one day in August of 1965 at Fort Bragg, his commanding officer instructed him to meet a CIA agent outside the headquarters building.
When he got outside he was joined by a fellow assassinationcourse colleague, David Vance, and the two of them approached the CIA man, who was standing under some pine trees.
Marvin said the CIA man, whom he did not know, took him aside and asked him, out of a clear blue sky, “if I would volunteer to kill a man, a United States citizen, a naval officer” who he soon was told was Pitzer.
Marvin said he declined, telling the CIA man, “I don’t do that sort of thing here in the States.
Though Marvin never expressly said it, he strongly implied to an author in later years that he conducted routine foreign assassinations for the CIA, saying he “had a reputation” and adding he told the CIA agent that he would have killed Pitzer if Pitzer were overseas.
Again, it’s nice to know that the CIA routinely conducted foreign assassinations, especially since the Church Committee, although confirming that the CIA did intend to carry out several foreign assassinations, was unable to come up with any evidence that the spy agency even committed one assassination.
I guess the committee didn’t know about Marvin, a student at a CIA course in assassination who, if we’re to believe his story, should have been teaching the course.
And when he couldn’t locate Vance, he assumed the CIA had killed Vance to silence him for having killed Pitzer.
Only a confirmed conspiracy theorist would believe such a story, and two such theorists, Robin Palmer and Allan Eaglesham, believed Marvin to the extent of working closely with him for ten years trying to confirm his story.
Unfortunately for Marvin, Vance eventually surfaced, said he never knew Marvin, never attended any course in assassination, and certainly was never approached by anyone to murder Pitzer.
That itself wouldn’t have ruined Marvin’s fantasy in their eyes, but Marvin’s conduct thereafter certainly did.
Marvin started to retreat on his story, became evasive, and began to make conflicting statements.
Worse yet, when they asked him to call and confront Vance with the two of them listening in, Marvin declined.
Perhaps most importantly, as Eaglesham said, “You have to have known him as Robin and I did to understand how much his behavior changed” after Vance surfaced.
Palmer and Eaglesham are no longer Marvin’s friends; they are angry at him for leading them on for so many years, and call him a liar.
To their credit, they have made a sincere effort to inform the conspiracy community of their findings.
His book has become big in the conspiracy community and is being publicly trumpeted by former Minnesota governor Jesse Ventura.
Per Armstrong, the CIA’s plan was to merge the identity of the Russian-speaking refugee with that of American-born Lee Harvey Oswald over a period of many years.
If the merging of identities was successful, the CIA could then place the native Russian-speaking young man, with Oswald’s American identity, in the Soviet Union as a spy.
The first project was approved on April 20, 1950, right in the midst of the cold war, by CIA Director Roscoe Hillenkoetter.
The means was to be hypnosis in conjunction with any other feasible aid, including neurosurgery and electroshock treatments, and some of the first subjects were twenty-five North Korean prisoners of war.
MKULTRA, approved by CIA Director Allen Dulles on April 14, 1953, with a budget of $300,000, was merely an offshoot of the original BLUEBIRD program, with the emphasis being on the use of biological and chemical agents, mostly psychedelic drugs such as LSD, to achieve the same end.
Most of the subjects experimented on were inmates of the federal drug hospital in Lexington, Kentucky, who volunteered for the program with the understanding they would get a reduction of their sentences.
However, under MKULTRA, LSD was apparently also administered to some subjects without their knowledge.
And apparently, and unbelievably, the CIA at least once administered the drug to one of its own people, with tragic consequences.
Grose writes that “on November 27,1953, seven months into MKULTRA, an American physician engaged in the project, Dr.
Per Grose, the CIA was of the opinion that the death of Olson was directly related to the LSD, although testimony from an LSD expert at one of my murder trials was that LSD leaves the body within twenty-four hours after ingestion.
But then again there’s the well-known phenomenon of “flashbacks,” which may occur much later.
Strangelove, presided over most of the CIA’s mind control programs, and after two decades of feckless and silly efforts, he and the CIA abandoned their search for the Manchurian candidate in June of 1972.
Although the CIA made an effort to destroy all of the documents that arose out of its mind control program, many of MKULTRA’s financial records survived and led to the exposure of the program in hearings before the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence in 1977.
Armstrong alleges that this Russian refugee successfully “defected” to the Soviet Union in 1959 and returned to the United States with a Russian wife in 1962.
A year and a half later this young man was set up as the “patsy” in an elaborate scheme engineered by career CIA officials to assassinate President John F Kennedy.
Armstrong says that “two days after the assassination of President Kennedy the Russian-speaking refugee, Harvey Oswald, was shot and killed by Dallas nightclub owner/CIA gunrunner, Jack Ruby.
Obviously, if Armstrong had a source for any of the things he charges, he would be only too eager to give it.
He obviously made up out of whole cloth what I have quoted to you, and with that wild premise he was off and running with his story.
It would have been nice to know just who this Russian refugee fellow was, and how the CIA recruited him.
Nor does he tell us why, if CIA conspirators got the Russian refugee to impersonate Lee Harvey Oswald, they wouldn’t give him the same, identical name, Lee Harvey Oswald.
Nor does he bother to present in his book one single piece of evidence that the CIA had anything to do with Kennedy’s murder.
Therefore, even if the CIA had kept the existence of both Oswalds secret from each other, if the real Lee Harvey Oswald, who had been recruited into the scheme and had his life directed thereafter by CIA handlers, were to tell what happened to him to any friend or anyone at his job (for instance, at the Des Moines zoo or in the Allstate Insurance Company Claims Department in Atlanta), this would set in motion information that would ultimately expose the CIA as Kennedy’s killers.
But he offers no credible evidence that Ruby had anything to do with the CIA, as a gunrunner or anything else.
Perhaps most important, Armstrong doesn’t deign to tell us why this incredibly elaborate and difficult scheme was necessary.
After all, both the real Oswald and the imposter Oswald were, per Armstrong, recruited by the same conspirators at the CIA and both were being “handled” by them.
By framing the real Lee Harvey Oswald (which, by the way, is what a great many conspiracy theorists believe the CIA did), whom they had no reason to believe would be more difficult to frame than the imposter Oswald, they would thereby eliminate the Second Oswald and all the enormous problems inherent in such a project, problems that could expose the CIA as being Kennedy’s murderer.
So before Armstrong even writes the first word of his long tribute to absurdity, the premise for his whole book is seen to be prodigiously ridiculous.
Armstrong proceeds to take his readers through the parallel lives of Lee Harvey Oswald and his imposter, Harvey Oswald, showing his readers that while one is in one city, the other one is somewhere else.
Although Armstrong has the Russian refugee Harvey Oswald impersonating Lee Harvey Oswald for several years, Armstrong claims that in the months leading up to the assassination—are you ready?—the CIA had Lee Harvey Oswald impersonating Harvey Oswald.
At the moment of the assassination, Harvey Oswald was in the second-floor lunchroom having lunch and Lee Harvey Oswald was on the sixth floor firing at Kennedy.
It’s Harvey Oswald who was arrested for Kennedy’s and Tippit’s murders, even though, per Armstrong, he killed neither and Lee Harvey Oswald killed both.
One of the two pillars of Armstrong’s theory is that there are many photographs of Oswald, and the Lee Harvey Oswald known to the world looks slightly different in many of them.
But of course pictures taken on the very same day, in fact by I remember Armstrong telling me about them in Tulsa, Oklahoma, years ago and shortly thereafter sending me a copy of his chronological poster, which I assume he put together with conspiracy theorist Jack White, who had included many of the photographs in his earlier videotape, The Many Faces of Lee Harvey Oswald.
I understand the current poster Armstrong and White are using has seventy-seven photos of Oswald in it, but the one Armstrong sent me back then, which I still have in my files, only has sixty photos, starting with Oswald in 1941 at the age of two, and the last six of Oswald on the day of the assassination after his arrest.
Since Oswald looked different in all six photos , I suggest to Armstrong that contrary to his theory, it appears the Dallas police arrested at least two imposter “Oswalds” for Kennedy’s murder.
And to compound Armstrong’s silliness, he includes photos of Oswald taken over a twenty-two-year period, from ages two to twenty-four.
So according to Armstrong, if there are two photos of you—let’s call them A and B—that are not identical, the real explanation is that one of the photos of you is really not of you at all, but of someone else who resembles you.
And although Armstrong doesn’t say this, he is starkly inconsistent when he doesn’t say that since there are many photos in his Oswald collection that differ from each other (some, he says, are composites of the right side of Lee’s face and the left side of Harvey’s), this automatically means there are many “Oswalds,” not just two, as he claims.
Another aspect of this one pillar is that just about everyone who met Lee Harvey Oswald described him as having the same kind of disposition—very serious, a strong sense of social justice, highly argumentative, passionate, obsessive in his anticapitalistic views, and so on.
But when Armstrong finds someone, anywhere, who describes a different aspect of Oswald, it’s a second person, not Oswald.
So if he never talked to one person in New Orleans, Palmer McBride, about his family, but spoke to one person in Japan about his family, again, we must be talking about two different people.
As can be seen, like nearly all conspiracy theorists, Armstrong misleads his readers to help prove his theory.
Let’s say you go through a period of liking country-western music; well, you better keep listening to Hank and Willie and Waylon 24-7 for the rest of your life, because if another witness happens to hear you enjoying rock and roll or easy listening, some John Armstrong might come into your life claiming either that you are an imposter or that someone with the same name as yours is impersonating you.
What he doesn’t even realize is that the argument he makes (Harvey Oswald acting differently than Lee Harvey Oswald) is an argument that disproves his own impersonation theory.
If CIA conspirators could pull off the most sophisticated frame-up in history and find someone who looked so much like Lee Harvey Oswald that no one knew he wasn’t the same person they had always known, surely the conspirators would know all about the real Oswald (my god, they “recruited” him, per Armstrong), and hence they would make triple sure that their imposter (whom they also recruited) acted as much like Lee Harvey Oswald as possible.
To elaborate further on this point, if we are to believe Armstrong, Harvey Oswald was out there for years doing his darnedest to impersonate Lee Oswald.
But Armstrong doesn’t explain why Harvey’s CIA handlers would have him do (or not do) obvious things that Lee was doing.
And you can’t even argue that, well, the CIA conspirators just goofed in not realizing that they had to have their impersonator not only look like Lee Oswald but also act like him.
That after they found someone who looked like him, no further effort at impersonation had to be made.
That finding, all by itself, proves either that there weren’t, as you maintain, two Oswalds, or that Harvey Oswald’s CIA handlers got him to learn to write exactly like Lee Oswald.
But if you say this, you’re necessarily saying they were conscious of the need to make every effort to help ensure that Harvey and Lee appeared to be the same.
Therefore, Harvey and Lee would not, as you say, have different personalities and, for instance, Lee wouldn’t be a driver if Harvey didn’t even have a driver’s license.
I mean, John, in the little game you’re playing, you can’t have it both ways.
What started Armstrong on his mad journey was an FBI interview of Palmer McBride on November 23, 1963, the day after the assassination.
McBride said he became friendly with Oswald when they both worked at Pfisterer Dental Laboratory in New Orleans.
The problem is that he is certain Oswald worked at Pfisterer from late 1957 to around May of 1958, not in 1956, when the evidence shows that Oswald worked there.
Ergo, Armstrong concluded, the “Oswald” at Pfisterer in New Orleans in 1957-1958 must have been a different Oswald from the one in Japan, ultimately concluding that the one in Japan was the real Lee Harvey Oswald and the one in New Orleans was the imposter, Harvey Oswald.
So Marguerite and Robert Oswald both place Lee Harvey Oswald at Pfisterer in 1956, not 1957-1958, when McBride was positive he was there.
Surely Marguerite and Robert Oswald are far more reliable witnesses on this issue than Palmer McBride.
Just as people frequently conflate words, they also conflate events, which has to have been what happened here.
Also, on August 2,1955, Leonid I Sedov, the chairman of a Soviet commission on interplanetary affairs, announced in Copenhagen that “in my opinion, it will be possible to launch an artificial Earth Satellite within the next two years.
And on January 30, 1956, right around the time Oswald started working at Pfisterer, the USSR Council of Ministers announced they had approved the launch of the satellite, designated “Object D,” in 1957.
Though these weren’t actual launchings, the news reaching America certainly suggested that the Soviets were making enormous progress in their space satellite program, which was something many Americans were aware of.
McBride, looking back several years later in 1963, must have conflated his memory of Russian progress in space with the Sputnik launching in 1957, an easy error in memory for the mind to make, and this is probably why he thinks Oswald started work at Pfisterer after Sputnik was launched in 1957.
On the resolution of this issue, we don’t need Marguerite Oswald’s testimony and Robert Oswald’s recollection to show that McBride made a simple error.
Although the original employment records way back in 1956 at Pfisterer are not available, partly because a fire destroyed or damaged many of them, we still know that McBride was wrong and Oswald went to work at Pfisterer in 1956 because Oswald’s 1956 United States Individual Income Tax Return, signed and filed by him on February 7, 1957, shows that he worked at Pfisterer in 1956, with wages of $612.00 and taxes withheld of $69.30.
Michaels (where Oswald worked very briefly as an office boy after leaving Tujague’s and before being employed at Pfisterer’s) with $5.00 withheld.
Of course, Armstrong has no evidence at all that the FBI destroyed Oswald’s original W-2 forms and fabricated a new 1956 one along with a 1956 tax return.
But by his naked assertion, he now necessarily brings the FBI into the picture as being part of the conspiracy to frame the Russian refugee for Kennedy’s murder.
Why the owners haven’t told this to anyone else, like the FBI or Armstrong himself, is not known.
Armstrong made a specialty of relying completely on what people told him decades later, and often ignoring what they said much closer to the time in question.
Armstrong goes from the ridiculous to the sublime in another one of his examples that he cites to support his two-Oswald argument.
Robert told the Warren Commission that Lee “was thirteen years old” in 1952 when he attended Stripling.
But in his book Robert makes no reference to Lee going to Stripling after the sixth grade, and in fact contradicts his Warren Commission testimony, which is perfectly understandable since he is reconstructing a chronology of events that happened years earlier.
He writes in his book that he enlisted in the Marines in July of 1952 and left home.
This throws into question whether Lee ever attended Stripling, and Marguerite Oswald, in her Warren Commission testimony, made no reference to Lee going to Stripling.
However, based on Robert Oswald’s Warren Commission testimony alone, one has to at least consider whether Lee did, in fact, attend Stripling if only for a short period of time during the 1951-1952 year, despite the fact that the Warren Commission volumes show no document affirming this, and a search of the cumulative record at the Fort Worth public schools by the Dallas Police Department did not reveal Stripling as one of the five schools he attended there.
Gannaway, Special Service Bureau, Dallas Police Department, dated January 28, 1964,l) Where Armstrong saw a better opening at Stripling for his two-Oswald theory was two years later, in 1954.
In 1996, more than thirty years after the event in question, the former assistant principal at Stripling, Frank Kudlaty, told Armstrong that on the Saturday after the assassination, the principal called and asked him to go to the school to give the FBI Oswald’s school records, which he said he did.
He said he “briefly” looked at the records, and told Armstrong, “I think he was in the ninth grade” at Stripling.
The first problem with the Kudlaty story is that Robert Oswald attended Stripling for one year, apparently the ninth grade (1 H 297, WCT Robert Edward Lee Oswald), so there could easily have been some confusion on the principal’s part as well as Kudlaty’s, though Armstrong says Kudlaty told him he found both Lee’s and Robert’s records at Stripling.
And then there’s the possibility that Kudlaty is like the hundreds upon hundreds of people in the Kennedy assassination saga who, for one reason or another, told a phony story.
One thing that immediately casts suspicion on Kudlaty’s story is that it seems almost inconceivable that Kudlaty did not do the normal thing and simply make a copy of Oswald’s school records to give to the FBI, or give the FBI the originals but make a copy to retain for the school’s files.
The completely improbable story that the junior high school did not have one single copy machine.
He adds a further improbability, asserting that the FBI, having taken the originals, never gave him a receipt for the records.
In any event, since the FBI had told Armstrong in 1994 that it had no records of Oswald from Stripling, he immediately, of course, became convinced that the FBI had destroyed the records.
Therefore, Armstrong is certain that the Oswald at Stripling in 1954 must have been Harvey Oswald, the Russian refugee impersonating Oswald, and that the FBI was definitely a co-conspirator with the CIA in framing “Oswald” using the double-Oswald device.
But if the FBI, with thousands of employees and millions of documents, can’t find Oswald’s school records from Stripling—very minimal if they existed at all, as Kudlaty thinks he only received grades for one six-week period—the FBI is definitely a part of the conspiracy to frame Oswald for Kennedy’s murder.
Naturally, since we know that conspiracy theorists manage to find numbers of witnesses to say anything that the theorists are seeking to prove, and we know their statements are erroneous, it’s not surprising that the indefatigable Armstrong found two former students who claim they went to school with Lee Harvey Oswald at Stripling in 1954, and that he lived right across the street from the school in a duplex at 2220 Thomas Place.
Indeed, for part of the time they attended the same school, P.S. 44, this time using the same name, Lee Harvey Oswald.
So apparently Armstrong believes that Robert Oswald very possibly also joined in the conspiracy to frame his “real” brother, or at a minimum, sat by and acquiesced to whatever was taking place.
Therefore, when Fort Worth property records revealed that from 1948 to 1954 one Rufie Cox occupied apartment A at the subject Thomas address, and there was no listing for anyone in apartment B, the other apartment in the duplex, that had to be a real blow to Armstrong’s pet theory , particularly when the Warren Commission, in a thorough effort, proved where Marguerite and her dwindling family lived throughout the 1948-1954 period, and none of the addresses was 2220 Thomas Place in Fort Worth.
In fact, 2220 Thomas Place doesn’t show up as a place where Marguerite and her family lived at any time.
One wonders if Armstrong’s whole investigation with respect to Stripling didn’t start with these 1964 and 1965 Fort Worth directories, with Armstrong working backward trying to force everything into his fairy tale.
And while we’re asking, let’s go back to the beginning of Armstrong’s book where he sets forth the original purpose of the impersonation—before it metamorphosed into a presidential assassination.
But this is, once again, too crazy for words available in the English language to describe.
Remarkably, Armstrong himself is very aware of this practice because he gives an example of it to support his cockamamy theory when it obviously only serves to refute it.
He tells the story of Konan Trofimovich Molodi, who was born in Moscow in 1922 and was the son of a Soviet science writer.
In 1929 he was sent to Berkeley, California, to live with his aunt, who he apparently believed was his mother.
In 1939 he returned to the Soviet Union, was given a commission in the Soviet navy, and began training in espionage against the British, probably because he could speak English.
Molodi-Lonsdale eventually journeyed to England, where he and four of his colleagues were ultimately arrested and convicted of espionage against the British government in March of 1961.
For instance, much of it is based on the premise that although Lee and Harvey look very much alike , there are sufficient differences, though slight, to prove that two different people are shown in the photographs.
Armstrong misleads his readers by telling them the Bronx Zoo photo (CE 282,16 H 802) is of a “small, thin, almost frail-looking boy,” and very different from the “tall, husky” boy shown in a photo taken a year earlier in Fort Worth.
But the Bronx photo shows Lee to be a perfectly normal, healthy young boy.
Moreover, there is no way to discern from the Bronx Zoo photo that the boy depicted is of a different height.
In other words, it’s a very poor impersonation, which contradicts Armstrong’s own theory throughout most of his book.
Indeed, it seems that Armstrong was so confused by his own theory that he couldn’t even come up with a title to his book that makes sense.
This suggests that the real Oswald, Lee, was framed for Kennedy’s murder, not some unknown Russian refugee who was merely using the name Oswald.
But according to Armstrong himself the real Lee is the one who murdered Kennedy.
There is another point that, all by itself, conclusively negates Armstrong’s entire theory.
Therefore, if we are to believe Armstrong, when Harvey’s body was disinterred on October 4, 1981 (because one of Armstrong’s predecessors, Michael Eddowes, had convinced a lot of people that it was not Lee Harvey Oswald in the coffin, but an imposter), there shouldn’t have been any scar from the mastoidectomy on the corpse since, per Armstrong, Lee had the mastoidectomy but Harvey was in the grave.
Unfortunately for Armstrong, the distinguished group of surgeons who examined the corpse not only identified it as the corpse of Lee Harvey Oswald from dental records, but also said that “the mastoid prominence of the left temporal bone revealed an irregularly ovoid 1.
And it’s not as if Armstrong was not aware of the exhumation and the doctors’ report.
Indeed, he mentions the exhumation, and the effort to identify the remains, even quoting from part of the medical report that Harvey Oswald’s remains were identified by comparison with Harvey Oswald’s dental records in the Marines.
There wasn’t room in his long book for such an insignificant detail as the mastoidectomy.
Armstrong’s gross and deliberate misrepresentation, by omission, is serious and inexcusable, but typical in the conspiracy community.
Since he failed to tell his readers of the mastoidectomy found on Oswald’s left ear when his body was disinterred and examined, one would think he wouldn’t have had the audacity to make any issue at all out of the presence or absence of the mastoidectomy.
The autopsy surgeon was not making an effort, as the exhumation doctors were, to identify the corpse.
In any event, this is all irrelevant since Armstrong contends that it was Harvey Oswald who was in the Fort Worth grave.
And the corpse in that same grave did have evidence of the mastoidectomy to his left ear, which Armstrong concedes Lee Oswald had in 1945, seven years before Armstrong’s game started.
With Armstrong’s theory, even if no evidence were offered to disprove it, it could be dismissed solely on the ground that it is “ridiculous” on its face.
I said earlier that I resent having to write just one word in refutation of his theory but felt I had no choice since it has become so popular in the conspiracy community.
I’ve already gone far beyond merely saying that Armstrong’s theory is ridiculous, and could actually write much more pointing out one absurdity after another, which I of course will not do.
Not content to try to convince people that there was an imposter impersonating Lee Harvey Oswald since he was a teen, the remarkable Armstrong asserts in his book that Marguerite Oswald, the short and stocky woman whom the rest of the world knows as Lee Harvey Oswald’s mother, was not really his mother, but also an imposter.
I say elsewhere in this book that within the world of insanity there’s an internal logic.
And if you enter Armstrong’s world of insanity—that a Russian refugee was impersonating Oswald—it makes perfect sense that, as he claims, the CIA would get someone who looks like Oswald to impersonate Oswald.
Armstrong doesn’t even say the imposter’s face looked anything like the real Marguerite, indeed, suggesting the opposite.
Why the CIA, trying to have someone impersonate Marguerite, would choose someone who looked so unlike Marguerite, even being, per Armstrong, much taller, Armstrong doesn’t say.
Neither does he explain to his readers why, when the imposter Marguerite appeared on television at the time of the assassination, the real Marguerite’s sons, Robert Oswald and John Pic, as well as the real Marguerite’s sister and brother-in-law , didn’t shriek to the world, “Hey, that’s not my mother , Marguerite.
We already knew that Armstrong threw out logic and reason long ago with respect to his fairy tale, but at least he had his insanity to fall back on.
The fairy tale loses even its “internal logic” insanity when he asserts that the CIA got someone to impersonate Marguerite who looked nothing like her.
Every word I wrote about this freaky book is one more word than Armstrong and his theory deserve.
Here’s a book that at worst doesn’t deserve First Amendment protections and at best is merely fun and games.
When someone of Brown’s stature in the conspiracy community tells his readers to go out and “get the book and set aside ... everything you previously read about what happened in Dealey Plaza on November 22, 1963” , he is doing nothing more than encouraging other Armstrongs to go off on similar delirious odysseys into the twilight zone.
What I will say that’s good about Harvey and Lee is that Armstrong did an enormous amount of good research on Lee Harvey Oswald’s background and life that Armstrong doesn’t show the readers of his book these two photos, but he does on pages 1 and 2 of the companion publication.
She is on the slender side, but the photo was taken when Marguerite was younger, when she married Edwin Ekdahl in 1945, more than ten years before the 1956 photo.
Moreover, the 1956 photo of Marguerite, sitting down, that elicited “That’s her.
That’s the woman I met” from McBride, doesn’t show Marguerite to be heavyset, only above average in weight.
Much more importantly, she looks like the Marguerite in the marriage photo, only eleven years older, not the imposter Armstrong claims she is.
Armstrong has another photo in the companion publication that he claims is of Marguerite with a group in 1957, a photo he also tells his readers depicts Marguerite as tall.
But only the upper half of her body and only portions of the bodies on her immediate left and right can be seen in the photo, so no clear opinion on height can be made.
Moreover, as opposed to the unquestioned authenticity of the marriage photo with Ekdahl, it cannot be assumed that this second photo is even of Marguerite, though there’s a resemblance.
What prevented his biography of Oswald from being more valuable is not only the fact that he contaminated it throughout by the fun and games he plays with the two Oswalds, but that he relied hardly at all on by far the best source for Oswald’s history from Minsk to Dealey Plaza, Marina Oswald’s story as told in Priscilla McMillan’s seminal book, Marina and Lee.
Though not a “sighting,” the next report of Oswald being in an unexpected place was also in Wisconsin on September 14, 1963, where the name “Lee Oswald, Dallas, Texas,” turned up on the guest book page for that date at the Fox and Hounds Restaurant in Huberton.
The signature was turned over to the FBI lab and an FBI handwriting expert determined it was not the signature of Oswald.
An Oswald sighting that conspiracy theorists feel supports Albert Guy Bogard’s story concerns a Dallas insurance agent.
H Lee” (Oswald’s alias at the rooming house where he lived, near Brand’s office), came to his office to purchase automobile liability insurance.
Because Mr Lee presently didn’t own a car, Brand couldn’t quote him a rate.
Further, if Brand wanted the authorities to believe his story, he didn’t know enough of the details of Oswald’s life to make it believable.
He claimed he saw Mr Lee’s “Texas driver’s license,” which we know Oswald never had, and believes the last name on the driver’s license was Lee.
This location is a block and a half west of the Texas Theater, where Oswald was arrested, and about eight blocks southwest from where Tippit was murdered.
Somewhere around 1:00m. on November 22, 1963, shortly before Office Tippit was murdered, the owner of the record shop and his assistant saw Tippit rush into the shop to use their phone.
He made a hurried call, and when he did not get an answer, he quickly left the shop, seemingly in a worried or upset state of mind, and drove away in his squad car at a fast clip in the general direction of Tenth and Patton, where he was murdered.
The first time the story was publicized was in a December 1982 article in Gallery magazine by Earl Golz, the Dallas Morning News reporter who in the 1970s and 1980s wrote enough pieces on the JFK assassination to fill a book.
In his haste, Tippit had to ask customers to step aside as he made his way toward the phone.
Stark and Cortinas recognized him from previous visits there, they said.
Cortinas estimated Tippit let the phone ring ‘maybe seven or eight times’ without saying a word, hung up, and walked out fast.
The fact that Stark and Cortinas had told Golz the same story, coupled with the further fact that neither had apparently tried to sell their story to anyone or were seeking publicity, gave an element of credibility to the story.
In addition, around the general time of the alleged record shop incident, Tippit, indeed, was not at his police radio.
At 1:03m., Dallas police dispatcher Murray Jackson attempted to get in touch with him.
Andrews told Greg Lowrey, a Tippit researcher, that around 1:00m. he was driving west on Tenth Street about eight blocks west of Tenth and Patton.
He claims that Tippit passed him on the left and then pulled in front of him, to Andrews’s right, forcing Andrews to stop.
Tippit, he said, rushed over to the driver’s side of his car, looked at the floor between the front seats , then, without saying a word, just as quickly left, jumped back into his squad car, turned it around, and drove away at a brisk speed eastbound on Tenth.
Not only doesn’t the story have the ring of truth to it, but Andrews told it to Lowrey in 1990 or 1991, more than thirty-five years after the assassination.
For starters, since the Kennedy assassination has proved to be the most publicized and controversial murder case in history, and Dallas, of all cities, has been at the vortex of that publicity and controversy, it defies all logic that neither Cortinas nor Stark picked up the phone and called the authorities, particularly during the Warren Commission period when the massive investigation was taking place and being covered daily by the Dallas newspapers.
That failure hurts Cortinas’s and Stark’s credibility far more than the fact that they never tried to sell their story helps it.
Drenas, who lives in Massachusetts, traveled to the AARC and made copies of the notes, which he published in his article.
These notes turned out to be devastating to the credibility of both Stark and Cortinas.
Stark told Golz that at 7:30 on the morning of the assassination, Oswald came into his store and bought a ticket to the Dick Clark show that evening at Dallas’s Memorial Auditorium.
Stark told author Dale Myers on September 8,1997, that Oswald was actually waiting outside Stark’s record shop for it to open when he, Stark, arrived.
Stark added that after Oswald bought the ticket to the Dick Clark show, he left on a bus.
Only one of the citizens of Oak Cliff who heard the tale (about Oswald buying a Dick Clark ticket) that originated with Stark bothered to call the authorities.
Then sometime would be likely to leave their patrol car without taking the time to notify their dispatcher, it would be in the hour after the assassination, when they would be much more inclined to leave the car to pursue, on foot, anyone who even remotely resembled the description of the presidential assassin sent out over the police radio.
Interestingly, five witnesses, all of whom knewTippit, told Ramparts magazine reporter Bill Turner in 1966 that for around ten minutes between 12:45 and 1:00m., shortly before the alleged record shop incident, they saw Tippit sitting in his squad car at the Gloco gas station at 1502 North Zangs in Oak Cliff watching cars coming over the Houston Street viaduct into Oak Cliff from downtown Dallas.
They said Tippit suddenly left the station and took off at a high rate of speed south on Lancaster, which would be the general direction in which he was killed, with the record shop being two miles to the southwest.
No one will ever know what caused Tippit to leave his observation post at the gas station and speed off down the road.
Police radio logs are silent as to any instruction to Tippit to do so, and all we have from Tippit is his checking in at 1:08m., the last anyone heard from him prior to his death, but there was no conversation with the dispatcher.
It is amusing that according to what Whitten heard, Oswald came back to the record shop on the morning of the assassination to buy a second ticket, presumably to the same Dick Clark show, and this time Tippit was in the store.
Maybe Tippit was also there to get one of these tickets, and Oswald had bought the last one.
In fact, maybe the murder of Tippit by Oswald had nothing at all to do with the Kennedy assassination—it was just a fight that got out of hand over tickets to the Dick Clark show that night.
Oswald, Marina, and their “kids” would come into his shop from time to time to buy records.
Of course, not only didn’t the Oswalds have two nickels to rub together, and with what little they had there is no evidence from anyone other than Stark that they spent it on records, but Oswald’s youngest daughter, Audrey Marina Rachel, was born on October 20, 1963, just one month before the assassination on November 22.
She lived at Ruth Paine’s house in Irving, about twenty miles from the Oak Cliff area of Dallas, during the entire period between the date of her birth and November 22.
Stark also told Golz that Jack Ruby used to come into his record shop all the time.
And he said Officer Tippit often came into the store to buy records for his children.
For his part, young Cortinas told Golz that in addition to seeing Tippit at Austin’s Barbeque (adding that he thought Tippit was having an affair with one of the waitresses there, a true story he could have picked up when it publicly surfaced for the first time in 1977 after the waitress admitted the affair to HSCA investigators), he would also see Tippit at Ship’s, a private club, and the Theatre Lounge strip joint, places where, he said, Tippit was either a security guard or a bouncer.
The only problem is that although one other person told Golz he had seen Tippit working at Ship’s, the weight of the evidence is that Tippit never worked at either Ship’s or the Theatre Lounge.
Though Golz was unable to track down people who owned or worked at these two clubs, he told Drenas he spoke to two close friends and fellow officers of Tippit’s who said Tippit never worked at either place.
Both officers, Bill Anglin and Morris Brumley, added that Tippit wouldn’t have been So in Stark’s original story , there is no mention of Tippit rushing in to make a call from the store and rushing out in a worried state shortly before he was murdered.
Stark, with his employee, Cortinas, may have embroidered the original story with the Tippit phone call story, as is so often the case with human beings.
Further, Tippit’s wife, Marie, told the FBI that other than his job with the Dallas Police Department, her husband only worked at Austin’s Barbeque on Friday and Saturday evenings, and at the Stevens Theater in the Stevens Park Shopping Center on Sunday afternoons.
This, of course, further erodes the credibility of Cortinas’s entire story.
Both Stark and Cortinas told Golz that Tippit, while on duty, used to come into the record shop from time to time to use their phone.
But this does not ring true since the shop was at the border of Dallas Police Districts 91 and 92, and Tippit’s Patrol District, 78, is about three miles, the way the crow flies, from the record shop at its closest point and a little over five miles by surface street.
District 83 was a little closer to the record shop, but still a good distance away, and 84 was equidistant from the shop with 78 . tThis gives rise to another issue.
Former Dallas sheriff Jim Bowles, who was with the Dallas Police Department for many years, during which time, among other assignments, he drove a patrol car and was a patrol commander, said it was “not uncommon at all” for a patrol officer to drive outside of his district.
His son, Matthew, told me that whenever he and his sisters and brothers would ask their father about the record shop incident, “he’d never want to talk about it.
We kind of joked that it was some kind of mystery that he didn’t want to go into any of the details about.
The only thing that he told me that I remember clearly is he said Officer Tippit was in the store shooting the bull with him and the owner of the store when they all heard over the radio that Kennedy was shot.
Matthew said his father told him that Tippit would often come by the store to shoot the bull.
But the fact is, Stark and Cortinas could hardly have any less credibility in the story they ended up telling.
Yet conspiracy authors have accepted it as if it were an established fact.
Warren Commission assistant counsel David Belin came up with a theory on where Oswald may have been headed.
Belin, in the draft of chapter 6 of the Warren Report, wrote that at the time of his arrest, Oswald had the bus transfer from the Marsalis bus in his shirt pocket.
At the time Tippit was shot, Oswald’s bus transfer, marked for 1:00m. in the downStreet, and other than Virginia Davis’s remark, no assassination researcher has ever found anyone on the block who had ever seen Tippit there before.
As far as Tippit making hurried phone calls while on duty unrelated to his work, that possibility was increased by the confirmation to HSCA investigators in 1977 by Mrs.
Johnnie Maxie Witherspoon that she had had a one-year affair with T ippit.
Her married name inl963hadbeen Thompson and she worked as a waitress at Austin’s Barbeque in Dallas, where Tippit also worked as a security guard.
Witherspoon told HSCA investigators that in late June or July of 1963 she quit her job at Austin’s, told Tippit her husband “had returned home,” and ended the affair, although author Dale Myers’s research from divorce documents filed by Mrs.
Thompson—a divorce was granted but the couple continued to live as common law man and wife until they eventually broke up for good—showed that the husband hadn’t returned home until September and her affair with Tippit had extended into that month.
Conspiracy theorists, always seeking to defend Oswald on the Kennedy and Tippit murders, suggest that maybe Thompson’s husband (who was living at the time with his wife in the 2500 block of South Tyler in Oak Cliff, about two and a half miles away from Tenth and Patton) killed Tippit.
Witherspoon told the HSCA that her former husband “probably did know about Tippit” or “at least suspected something,” she told author Henry Hurt in 1983 that her estranged husband actually followed Tippit and her around Oak Cliff at night during the months of their affair.
By walking to the transfer point Oswald could save the bus fare by using his transfer, a not unlikely course of action based on his living habits.
Instead of Oswald getting on a bus at Marsalis and Jefferson, “barely a block away was another bus which could have been boarded by Oswald at Jefferson and Ewing.
This particular bus, Route 55, traveled south on Ewing and eventually Lancaster Road.
Since the first Route 55 bus to arrive after 1:00m. at Jefferson and Ewing came at 1:40m., Oswald’s transfer would have been good for that bus,” which “would have taken him to a point on Lancaster Road where the first southbound Greyhound bus was scheduled to stop for passengers around 3:30m.
That Greyhound bus could be taken directly to Waco, Austin, and San Antonio, Texas, where connections could be made for Corpus Christi, Brownsville and Laredo, Texas, and Monterrey, Mexico.
One immediate problem with Wayne January’s story is that unless the incident happened in the hour or two before 8:00 m. , Oswald could not have been at the airport that morning.
The conspiracy theorists cite, as additional support for the necessary implication in January’s story that Oswald wasn’t at work on the morning of November 20, the statement of Mary Dowling, a waitress at the Dobbs House Restaurant located close to two blocks from where Oswald lived and where she said he frequently had breakfast between 7:00 and 7:30m.
Dowling said that Oswald had breakfast at her restaurant around 10:00m. on the Wednesday before the assassination, that he “got nasty” and complained to her about how his order of eggs had been cooked and that—are you ready?—Officer Tippit (who, Dowling claims, had his breakfast at the restaurant every morning at 10:00m.) was in the restaurant at the time and she noticed he “shot a glance at Oswald” because of Oswald’s behavior.
Moreover, the likelihood of Tippit driving every morning to a restaurant more than six miles outside his assigned patrol district, 78, for his coffee break or to have breakfast seems implausible on its face.
Further, although another waitress also said there was an incident with Oswald over the eggs (she said it was on Thursday, November 21), no one at the restaurant confirmed Dowling’s story that it took place around 10:00 on Wednesday morning and that Tippit was present.
Matthew Smith, the smiling Brit, decided to exploit the completely discredited Wayne January and see if, after twenty-eight years of lies by January, he could squeeze one more out of the story, even if it came from Smith himself.
On November 18, two days before the subject incident and four days before the assassination, an air force colonel came out to Redbird to sign ownership papers for the purchase of a Douglas DC-3 that January’s partner had sold to him over the phone a few days earlier.
The colonel was accompanied by a CIA pilot who had been in Castro’s air force but had eventually turned against him and had flown for the CIA in the Bay of Pigs invasion.
So friendly that three days later, the day before the assassination, the pilot confided to January that anti-Castro Cubans “are going to kill your president” for withdrawing air support during the Bay of Pigs.
The pilot, suggesting he had firsthand knowledge about all he was saying, responded, “Never mind.
I think I can safely say that I have finally found a lie that January didn’t tell.
But though Smith, in his 1992 book, quotes January’s words from his 1991 interview of January, he is completely mum on the CIA pilot’s assertions about anti-Castro Cubans planning to kill Kennedy.
In the book, Smith suggests that antiCastro Cuban exiles and CIA renegades working with them not only killed JFK and RFK but also eliminated their brother, Ted Kennedy, as a presidential candidate by killing Mary Jo Kopechne at Chappaquidick, knowing that Ted (who Smith informs us most likely wasn’t in the car when it went into the water) would never be able to run for president after the tragedy.
But just to make sure he never got any funny ideas, they had someone call Ted on the phone and tell him to accept what happened as a warning of what would befall him if he pursued his ambition to reach the presidency.
Smith should be embarrassed at telling such a tale, but my guess is that he is not.
And if, perchance, he never made up the CIA pilot story, then we can know that his late friend, Wayne January, did.
Redbird Airport played into another invented story about the assassination, this time by a fraud so pathetic that he is an insult to those who make their living by fraudulent means.
His name is William Robert “Tosh” Plumlee, aka William H “Buck” Pearson.
For some time Plumlee has been attempting to attract attention with his story, but on November 21,2004, he issued a “Personal Statement” saying that “anything in previous publications is subject to question and is or has not been reviewed, approved, or authorized, by me.
My purpose ... is to clarify previous errors of fact, which have been attributed to me.
The CIA had learned that there was going to be an attempt on President Kennedy’s life in front of the Hotel Adolphus in Dallas on November 22, and it was Plumlee’s and his copilot’s job to fly a team of people from Florida to Dallas to “abort” the assassination.
So if we’re to believe Tosh, when the CIA learns that Kennedy might be killed and the agency wants to prevent it, instead of using the Secret Service, the FBI, and local law enforcement to do so, the CIA flys in Johnny Roselli and some fellow mobsters, as well as “a couple of Cubans,” to stop the assassination, and this abort team is dropped off at Redbird Airport on the morning of the assassination right before the president is landing in Dallas at Love Field.
But we know, of course, that it was not, the route through Dealey Plaza being published in the Dallas newspaper as early as three days before the assassination.
ENDNOTES shooters might be located,” but didn’t spot any potential assassins.
He said he heard “4 or 5 shots,” and believed one was from a location near the underpass.
After the shooting he returned to Redbird and flew his dejected team of aborters (except Roselli, who never showed up) out of Redbird around 2:00m. that day.
The next day he told a reporter for the Dallas Times Herald, Robert Fenley, that he was “certain” Oswald had been to the office on a few occasions to get money orders for “$10 or $15,” and Hamblen signed a statement to that effect, saying he knew it was Oswald because the picture of Oswald in the paper was “the spit image” of the man seen in his office.
But when he was called to testify before the Warren Commission and asked if the man was Oswald, Hamblen said, “I wouldn’t say that it was Lee Oswald” and couldn’t identify Oswald from photos.
He also denied telling the reporter what he admitted signing his name to.
A complete search by officers of the Western Union for records of the telegram and money orders under Oswald’s name or any of his known aliases failed to uncover any such telegram or money order.
The Warren Commission, being generous to Hamblen, said it accepted this innocent assessment.
Semingsen; WR,333) Clifton Shasteen, the owner of a barbershop in Irving, told the FBI and the Warren Commission that he “knew” Oswald had had his hair cut in his store five or six times on Friday evenings or Saturday mornings during the months of October and November in 1963, three or four times by him and the other times by his other two barbers.
One of Shasteen’s other two barbers, Bert Elmo Glover, identified Oswald, saying he was thirty-four to thirty-five years old.
Of course, Ruth Paine, whom Shasteen said he saw around Irving, owned such a vehicle, but this fact had been reported in the news and Shasteen acknowledged learning that Oswald had stayed at the Paine residence and that he, Shasteen, had driven by the residence after the assassination.
Paine told the FBI she had never let Oswald take her car anywhere, and did not recall Oswald going for a haircut on a weekend in October or November.
On Friday evening, November 8, Oswald was accompanied to the barbershop, Shasteen said, by a fourteen-year-old boy, who came back to the shop alone three or four days before the assassination.
The topic of conversation in the shop was foreign aid and the boy “volunteered” to Shasteen that things wouldn’t be right in the world until there was only one leader for all people and the wealth was spread equally—boilerplate Marxist dogma.
I hope the reader now understands the extreme relevance of the barbershop story.
Although Ruth Paine said she knew of no boy about fourteen years old with whom Oswald was ever associated in Irving, she simply didn’t know what was going on.
Indeed, the fourteen-year-old, from his piggy-bank savings, may have even funded the whole project, paying Oswald to do the awful deed.
CE 3130, 26 H 796; Glover and Law: CE3130, 26 H 797) In a January 23, 1964, interview by Dallas police detective Bob K Carroll, Hubert Morrow, the manager of the Allright Parking Lot at the Southland Building on Commerce Street in downtown Dallas, said that “six or seven days” before the assassination, Lee Harvey Oswald applied for a job with him, asking how tall the building was and whether it had a good view of Dallas.
He said that the last he saw Oswald that day, Oswald was waiting to talk to his boss, Garnett Claud Hallmark.
Morrow never said why he never contacted the authorities with his information (the Dallas police contacted him when an informant told them that Morrow was telling his story to others), and the story he relates makes little sense.
Second Oswald conspiracy advocates point out that not only did Oswald himself list his height as being different at different times, but actual photos of Oswald show him to have different heights.
Of more relevance is the fact that the aforementioned measurements on October 24, 1956, and August 9, 1963, were by height charts, and the HSCA pointed out what has been known in law enforcement for years—these measurements are unreliable.
The HSCA said that “unless the subject photographed is standing with his back against the height chart at a correct distance from a properly positioned camera equipped with an appropriate lens, it is unreasonable to assume that the resulting picture is ever a precisely accurate indicator of both height and head size.
But since people don’t normally measure themselves, Oswald could be expected to tell people his height at various times based on documents he had seen showing his height as measured by a height chart.
To add further uncertainty to the measurements, the HSCA said that a 1971 study of 6,682 army personnel that measured their actual heights versus the heights these individuals reported for themselves showed a typical discrepancy of just over one inch.
Apart from any motivation of possible vanity, it is well known that people don’t always give the same height when asked at various times in their lives.
Conspiracy theorists who argue that Oswald gave different heights at different times are necessarily arguing out of both sides of their mouths.
If their position is that the difference in height means one is the real Oswald, the other an impersonator, they can only sound silly arguing that in one of the allegedly most sophisticated and complex impersonations ever, the impersonator gave a height two inches different from the height of the man he’s trying to impersonate to the world.
If anything, Oswald is usually described as being of average height, and photos of him make him look around five feet eight or five feet nine.
Nearly half of the documents available were originals, but since it is standard practice in the questioned documents profession not to make definitive conclusions about documents that are not the original, the panel members gave only tentative opinions for copies of documents.
The panel concluded that “as far as original documents are concerned, the conclusion is that the signatures and writing on them which purport to be Oswald’s are all in the handwriting of the same person.
There were some cases where, for whatever reason, an expert did not examine a particular document or, for whatever reason, had no opinion.
Also, there were, as would be expected, particularly in cases where the writing was very brief and limited, cases where one or two examiners would form one opinion, and the second or third another, such as with the November 8, 1963, letter to oilman H L Hunt purportedly written by Oswald.
One examiner, Joseph McNally, concluded it was a fake , another, David Purtell, had no opinion, and the third, Charles Scott, said it was “probably” Oswald’s signature.
Hidell, to a Fair Play for Cuba card, I could find only one other instance in the separate reports of each examiner where one of them said he believed a document was not signed, written, or printed by Oswald.
What I can’t figure out (I’m being facetious, of course) is why Oswald, before he left for Mexico City, didn’t get his friend Clay Shaw (who, according to Perry Russo [see main text and later endnote], had just recently conspired with Oswald and David Ferrie to murder Kennedy) to intercede on his behalf.
After all, the Cuban consulate in New Orleans There’s been a question as to the authenticity of the signature on document 63 , a photograph of the fingerprint card for Oswald on the day of the assassination.
Conspiracy theorists note that two of the HSCA’s handwriting experts, David Purtell and Charles Scott, did not authenticate Oswald’s purported signature on this document, simply not examining it.
The third one, Joseph McNally, implies he did not authenticate number 63 by the fact he did not list it as being one of the documents he authenticated as containing Oswald’s signature.
The main relevance of a signature on a fingerprint card is to help confirm that the fingerprints on the card belong to the party that law enforcement claims they belong to.
In a 1975 interview with the Los Angeles Times , one Ernesto Rodriguez, who claimed he was a former CIA contract agent in Mexico City, said that Oswald had told both the Soviets as well as the Cubans that he had information about a new CIA plan to kill Castro, and offered to give it to them in exchange for the Cuban visa.
Although Rodriguez’s story, in the abstract, might be worthy of belief, we know it is not true since none of the many Cuban and Russian officials who met Oswald and have spoken or testified about what took place have mentioned anything like this.
Following are CIA translations of verbatim transcripts from CIA wiretapped phone conversations at the Cuban consulate, and Russian embassy and consulate, from September 27 to October 3,1963 (excluding the October 1, 1963, phone conversation given in the main text), in Mexico City.
It should be noted that two of these conversations do not pertain to Oswald if for no other reason than the person seeking the visa is speaking in Spanish.
Though Oswald had a Spanish dictionary, and Nelson Delgado, a friend of his in the Marines, says he taught Oswald a little Spanish while they were stationed in Santa Ana , certainly Oswald was far more fluent in Russian than Spanish.
But even if he did speak Spanish, there would be no conceivable reason for him to call the Soviet embassy and speak to the staff in Spanish instead of in their native language, Russian.
In fact, in a September 28 conversation, Oswald asked the person to whom he was speaking at the Soviet embassy to speak to him, Oswald, in Russian.
Therefore, in any conversation where a male is calling the Soviet embassy and speaking in Spanish, we can know the man is not Oswald.
One of these conversations (October 3, 1963) is nonetheless included here because it is erroneously believed by some to pertain to Oswald.
Man calling says he needs to get a visa to go to , Man inside tells him to call 15 60 55 and ask for the Consul.
Man outside [man talking on phone outside the embassy] asks for the address.
Woman outside is Silvia Duran from the Cuban Consulate and explains the same thing to another man inside.
The latter asks her to leave his telephone and name so they can call him later.
Silvia then furnishes it to him as well as telephone 11 28 47 and she takes that opportunity to say something personal of her that she changed her address and has not been able to notify them so they could send her the bulletin and that now she give it to them.
Man inside asks her to call Kourkharenko to give him her change in address and the man asks for the name of the Counselor or Cultural Attache.
Silvia says that her name is Teresa Proenza and she can be called at 14 13 26.
Man inside says that the thing is that if his wife is now in Washington but is going to get right now the visa or the permit from the USSR to return to this country, she is going to get her visa in Washington but having his visa she could be notified at any place, here for example, or anywhere else, but they don’t have it right now.
Silvia says of course and that besides they cannot give him a letter because they don’t know if his visa will be granted.
Man inside says that they will only grant the visa according to the instructions.
Man inside says that besides he is not known and excused himself for the inconveniences.
Starts woman outside, from the Cuban Consulate, who says that there in her Consulate is an American that was there in the Soviet Embassy.
Northamerican takes phone and says in broken Russian ‘I was in your Embassy and spoke to your Consul.
The report also stated that if an “interested” CIA officer wanted any given tape preserved, this could be done.
However, there is no evidence that any CIA officer requested preservation of any Oswald tapes, nor, it would seem, was there anything on the tapes that would have alerted or alarmed the CIA into wanting to preserve the tapes.
Additionally, as indicated earlier, the man is speaking to the Soviets in Spanish, the man’s words don’t quite “sound” like those of Oswald, and the Russian official directs Oswald to a phone number that we know Oswald was already given during the October 1,1963, conversation set forth in the main text.
But the ARRB, in its final report , writes that “although CIA has transcripts of the calls believed to have been made by Oswald, the CIA has consistently maintained that it did not retain tapes from the period of Oswald’s visit as the station continually recycled the tapes after it transcribed any useful information.
According to the transcripts, only one of the calls, made to the Soviet Consulate, actually identifies a Lee Oswald as the caller.
A September 17,1998, memorandum from J Barry Harrelson, senior reviewer for the CIA, to Ms.
Laura Denk, ARRB’s executive director, further states, “Over the years, there have been a number of efforts to determine if any electronic surveillance audio tapes made during the period Oswald visited Mexico... still existed.
The Directorate of Operations has again made a thorough search of its records system as well as the index to retired records trying to locate any such tapes or documentation that would shed light on their disposition.
CIA headquarters sent instructions to its Mexico City station on November 22, 1963, to suspend its usual practice of erasing and reusing tapes.
Based on the evidence I presently have, I can only conclude that the CIA erased the Oswald tapes before the assassination.
Further, the reason Newman did not respond to my request is that he has no documentary evidence to support the categorical assertion he made in the Probe article.
The only possible CIA document I know of that Newman could be using to base his assertion on is really, upon scrutiny, no authority at all.
An FBI memo dated November 25,1963, from the deputy director of plans to J Edgar Hoover, refers to a CIA Teletype, 84515, dated November 23, 1963, and says that the CIA had transcripts of several phone calls made, pre596 ENDNOTES sumably by Oswald, in Mexico City during late September and early October of 1963.
The clear weight of the evidence is that Boris Tarasoff, the CIA staff officer in Mexico City who translated and transcribed the tapes, did so, and he did so on or around October 1,1963, long before the assassination.
Goodpasture was a close assistant to Win Scott, the head of the CIA station in Mexico City, and was very knowledgeable about everything taking place there.
Yet remarkably, seventeen years later Goodpasture told the ARRB that “I think there was” a “copy” made of that portion of the main tape of the CIA’s intercept of the Soviet embassy calls on October 1, 1963, that contained Oswald’s phone conversation with the embassy.
She then sounds almost delusional (she retired from the CIA in 1975 after thirty-one years, and although she still spoke well in 1995, she must have been up in years) when she added, “After the assassination, look in the records, there might be —there should be a reference to some FBI agent who hand-carried material to Laredo.
Somehow I have the image of the photo and tape in a small bag of the agent, and the agent trekking across mountain ranges and desert from Mexico City to far off Laredo.
And if, for whatever reason, the CIA did, it is also highly unlikely that it would have kept the tapes when it had already gone on record as not having them, risking their discovery and, hence, proof that the CIA had lied.
Contrary to the suggestion of an assassination researcher , Tilley said he never indicated to the researcher that he was alarmed that at one time the Hartman-Oswald tapes were at the archives and someone removed them and they are no longer there.
Conspiracy theorists have also relied on the statements of former Warren Commission counsel W David Slawson that the CIA retained one or more tapes of Oswald’s telephone calls to the Russian embassy.
Slawson visited the Mexico City CIA headquarters in April of 1964 with fellow assistant counsels William Coleman and Howard Willens.
When I called Slawson about this in February of 2000, he said he could not remember hearing any tapes of Oswald during his visit to Mexico City.
But he told me that while he was being shown something elsewhere at the headquarters, he believed, but was not sure, that his partner, Coleman, heard the tape of a call Oswald made to the Soviet embassy.
With respect to Slawson, in March 2006, the expert assassination researcher Gus Russo provided me with information I had been unaware of.
Russo was one of the two lead reporters for the Frontline documentary on Lee Harvey Oswald that was shown on PBS in November 1993.
He sent me the transcript of Anthony Summers’s September 11,1993, taped interview of Slawson for Frontline dealing with the Mexico City tapes issue.
Slawson’s statement to Summers was not used on the Frontline show and this is why I had been unaware of it.
Slawson told Summers, “I know that they had the tapes of the wiretaps with Oswald’s voice on them.
My recollection is that we listened to them, but I don’t think we listened to them all the way through.
Hardly the type of statement that one could take to the bank on the issue of whether Slawson heard Oswald’s voice on a CIA tape in Mexico City.
Rowell or his daughter [each wrote to him] dated August 24, 1990, December 4, 1992, and April 14, 1993) When I called Slawson back in March of2006 to discuss the tape issue, he essentially reiterated what he had told me in February of 2000, adding a few details.
At that point Slawson said he didn’t see any point in it, since he had the transcript and he could not authenticate that it was Oswald’s voice on the tape since he was not familiar with Oswald’s voice.
When I brought up to Slawson what he had told Summers and the Rowells about having listened to the tapes himself, he said, “You know, Vince, when I was saying these things, my memory was very vague.
Actually, to you and John Ely, which was after the early 1990s interview and letters.
And certainly, if the Mexico City station of the CIA had the Oswald tapes after the assassination, it would have forwarded them on to headquarters.
Also, as David Phillips indicated to me, there was nothing on the tapes, as evidenced by the transcripts, that would cause the CIA to feel they should be retained—that is, Oswald’s words fell into the 95 percent category of conversations that the CIA erased.
As far as Slawson’s “belief” that the CIA people told him in Mexico City that they had the Oswald tapes, no one can question the integrity of someone of Slawson’s well-earned stature, but his belief is most likely incorrect, and attributable simply to a failure of memory.
Jeremy Gunn, the former executive director of the ARRB, has articulated an interesting twist on the whole tape issue.
Gunn says, “A standard operation there was to impersonate Americans who were in phone contact with the Embassy.
Gunn said the purpose for the impersonation was to learn more about the embassy and its employees.
There were two other “photographic sites or bases” covering the Soviet embassy.
It did not directly face the gate of the embassy and was not installed until after Oswald’s Mexico City visit.
The second, from a home owned by the CIA that backed up to the rear of the embassy property, was trained on the courtyard where the employees would spend leisure time, including playing volleyball, behind the embassy.
It should also be borne in mind that the operators of the surveillance cameras were not CIA agents, for whom a certain degree of competence could be expected.
When asked to make a “wild guess” as to how many people entering the Russian and Cuban embassies in Mexico City were picked up by the cameras, Scelso said “at least half of the people, or even more,” meaning that a very high percentage weren’t picked up.
Even so, with the number of times we know Oswald visited one or the other embassy in Mexico City, the percentages would seem to dictate that a photo of him would be secured on at least one occasion, yet none were.
In this regard, Scelso noted that “many people entering and leaving these installations deliberately conceal their faces,” and he felt that Oswald, being a defector, would be the type of person who might do so.
When HSCA counsel asked Scelso how Oswald or anyone else could do this without knowing where the cameras were, he replied that Oswald would be “perfectly capable of approaching the Cuban or Soviet embassy that his face could not be photographed.
In other words, if this is the Soviet embassy and our vantage point is over here, he can walk under the window and walk straight across the street.
However, with all the confusion about the embassy photos, “the story” Agee heard may have been incorrect.
For her part, Bustos testified before the HSCA that “I don’t remember ever finding an Oswald photograph” at Washington headquarters, and denied telling Agee or Smith that she had.
Perhaps Lopez’s main reason for believing the CIA surveillance cameras captured a picture or pictures of Oswald is that Win Scott, the CIA’s Mexico City station chief, who died in 1971, left an unpublished manuscript behind titled “Foul Foe” about his entire intelligence career.
It was one thing for him to thereafter expose and denounce whatever CIA misconduct he saw or participated in, but to publish the identity of CIA agents, operatives, and informants he had encountered during his years with the CIA throughout Latin America, as he did in a twenty-two-page index to his book, is inexcusable.
The only thing that stands in the way of Scott’s story is common sense.
Not to do it and for it to be found out that he conceded this information could be the end of his career.
Second, even if we assume that the CIA, or rogue elements thereof, were involved, as nearly all conspiracy theorists believe, in the assassination, and they ordered Scott to remain silent, this too makes no sense.
Obviously, if they were involved in Kennedy’s murder, they’d want to show photographs of Oswald with the Cubans and Russians more than anyone in the world, since doing so would promote a theory that they would be pushing—that someone other than they were behind Kennedy’s murder.
Since Scott’s story on its face isn’t reasonable, it sounds to me like he was just puffing up a book he wanted to peddle.
The aforementioned Joseph Piccolo Jr., who was working out of the CIA station in Mexico City from 1957 to 1960 and 1965 to 1968, told the HSCA in 1978 that he didn’t know where or when, but someone in the CIA, he didn’t know who, had shown him two photographs of Oswald that the person said were taken in Mexico City, and he was “led to understand” they were of Oswald “entering or leaving” the Cuban embassy/consulate; one was a left profile of Oswald looking downward, the other of the back of Oswald’s head.
It should be noted that Goodpasture was working at the CIA station in Mexico City throughout this entire period, and if anyone would know about photographs it would be she since one of her jobs was to review all photographs taken by the CIA’s photographic surveillance of the Russian consulate and embassy.
She also reviewed photographs taken at the Cuban consulate and embassy when there was a question of the identity of someone who may have also gone to the Russian embassy.
Goodpasture said that Angleton did come to Scott’s funeral, but suggested it was not to retrieve anything from Scott’s safe at home.
She spoke very highly of Scott, describing him as a very competent, intelli604 ENDNOTES thing that doesn’t ring true at all, all one has to do is give them a little time, as I did with Lopez at the London trial, and they self-immolate.
Win Scott may have been a nice man but when he wrote his manuscript, he was full of, er, wind.
Also on October 10, Charlotte Bustos, at Langley headquarters, sent out another cable regarding Oswald, this one transmitted only to the CIA’s Mexico City station and, other than a physical description of Oswald in the opening paragraph, focused almost exclusively in its five paragraphs on Oswald’s defection to, and return from, Russia and his status as a United States citizen.
This is probably why there is no reference in the cable to Oswald’s activities in New Orleans, which the CIA had already learned about from FBI reports.
Thus, the statement in paragraph three of the cable that the latest information on Oswald that Langley had was in May 1962, though technically incorrect, was correct in the context of information relating to Oswald’s status as a citizen, which was the subject of the cable.
These words clearly show that the May 1962 reference only pertained to matters concerning Oswald’s citizenship status, and a reference to Oswald’s activities in New Orleans would have been out of place.
Tales of the Routing Slips,” Washington Post , April 24, 1995) 1055 no resemblance to Oswald in face or physique: Anti-conspiracy theorists have repeated the claim that “the CIA did not have any photographs of Oswald in the files they maintained on him, and did not know what he looked like” (Posner, gent, and honest man.
The November 16, 1959, Washington Post clipping contained a UPI photo of Oswald, with a one-paragraph story beneath it captioned “Rebuffed” about Soviet authorities rejecting Oswald’s bid for Soviet citizenship.
The November 26, 1959, Washington Evening Star clipping was an article by Priscilla Johnson (“ United States Defector to Reds Turned to Marx at 15”) with an AP photo of Oswald.
Perhaps the conclusive evidence that CIA employees were unaware that they had any photograph of Oswald in their files is that on October 4, 1963, CIA headquarters requested of the Office of Naval Intelligence two copies of the most recent photographs of Oswald so that an attempt could be made to verify his reported presence in Mexico City.
Pursuant to this request, ONI did get one photograph of Oswald taken at the approximate time of his Marine Corps induction.
It sent the requested copies of it to the CIA, but not until after the assassination.
First, there is an endemic incompetence among human beings at all levels in our society.
Viewed from this perspective, the two small newspaper photos of Oswald being overlooked and slipping through the cracks at the time of the incident is more understandable.
As noted in the text, she testified she asked for a “name trace” for Lee Oswald on October 9 after the Mexico City station cabled CIA headquarters that someone named “Lee Oswald” had been to the Russian embassy.
However, she came across in her HSCA testimony not only as having a dreadfully poor memory, but as not being particularly competent.
One would think she would know the numbers and nomenclature of these memos very well.
The second number is the more specific category and I believe 5 has something to do with politics. is just the title of the folder that is next in line.
With respect to the issue of whether Bustos, who was not the Mexico desk chief but an assistant, did not think that the October 9, 1963, cable from the Mexico City station was that important at the time, she did say the fact that Oswald was an American who had defected to the Soviet Union and was next seen at the Russian embassy in Mexico City raised the “possibility” he was working for the Soviets.
But the unmistakable inference from her testimony is that the Oswald incident in Mexico City was not treated with any sense of importance or urgency at CIA headquarters.
On August 10,1961, two American tourists, Rita Naman and Monica Kramer, were visiting Minsk.
Kramer and their Intourist guide to the left of it and the Palace of Culture and a statue of Joseph Stalin to the rear and left rear, respectively.
Standing to the right of the car are three men, none of them known by Naman or Kramer, and the man in the middle is Oswald.
These photos were stored at the CIA in the graphics section for the Minsk area.
After the assassination, the CIA found the photograph during a search of its graphics files for photographs possibly relevant to Oswald’s stay in Minsk.
In 1967, Contreras told a United States foreign service officer at the United States embassy in Mexico City that one evening in late September 1963, Oswald approached him and some other students following a roundtable discussion at the School of Philosophy.
Oswald told them he had come to the university looking for pro-Castro students who might help persuade the United States embassy to grant him a visa to Cuba, and that he was from California and was a member of a pro-Castro organization in New Orleans.
Contreras alleges he made an unsuccessful effort to help Oswald with the Office of the Cuban Consulate, but that officials there told him Oswald was suspected of being an American intelligence agent.
However, in 1978, Summers tracked Contreras down in Tampico, Mexico, where he was the editor of a local newspaper, El Mundo.
Contreras told Summers that the main reason he remembered the American who approached him and his friends, whom he identified as Oswald, was that the man spelled out his name, and “Harvey” and “Oswald” were familiar as names of characters in a popular cartoon in Mexico about rabbits.
As he had told the United States foreign service officer over a decade earlier, Contreras told Summers that Oswald said the Cuban consulate was refusing him a visa, and asked Contreras and his fellow students for their help, including accompanying him to Mexican authorities reported to the HSCA that Contreras was registered at the university in 1960, but not 1963.
However, the HSCA, in an unsourced footnote, said that the CIA had earlier “confirmed” that Contreras had, in fact, been a student there in 1963.
This may have been loose language since the CIA’s June 29, 1967, entry into its “Mexico City Chronology,” the likely source for the HSCA footnote, merely seems to be setting forth what Contreras told CIA agents.
There’s no suggestion that they confirmed that Contreras was at the university in 1963.
Contreras said, like Azcue, that the man looked over thirty years old (Oswald was three weeks shy of twenty-four at the time) and was at most five feet six inches tall; short enough for Contreras, who Summers reports to be five feet nine inches, to look down on.
Oswald said he was broke and asked if he could spend the night at the apartment of Contreras and his friends, and they let him stay one night.
Contreras also told Summers that that same night he and his friends contacted Azcue as well as a Cuban intelligence officer, who told them to break off contact with Oswald because they were suspicious he might be trying to infiltrate left-wing groups.
Lee Harvey Oswald ,, the television trial I was preparing my prosecution case for, also interviewed Contreras in Tampico.
Contreras told Redhead essentially the same story he told Summers, except, he said, he was certain the incident took place in 1959 or 1960 (when we know Oswald was in Russia), not 1963, and that Oswald had stayed at his place for two or three nights.
The amazing thing about the Contreras incident is that the United States authorities considered it to be of any significance at all.
Each of the two options that present themselves in the Contreras incident is benign.
If Contreras fabricated the incident, it of course has no significance.
But even if the incident took place the way he described, there is absolutely nothing from which any sinister inference can be drawn.
In this latter scenario, Oswald would simply be seeking to do what we know, from all the other evidence, he would be expected to do—ask for help in getting an in-transit visa to Cuba.
Oswald would be following Duran’s advice in approaching Contreras, who obviously fit the bill.
There are two other Mexico City allegations, indirectly related to the issue of imposture, that deserve only scant attention.
In October of 1964 Garro told Charles Thomas, a friend of hers who was an American foreign service officer at the United States embassy in Mexico City, that on September 2 or 3,1963, Oswald and two tall “beatnik looking” American companions had attended a “twist” party at the home of Ruben Duran Navarro, Silvia Duran’s brother-in-law.
The conspiracy theorists (most of whom feel Oswald wasn’t even in Mexico City, only his impersonator was) argue in self-contradiction that this proves Oswald had associates in Mexico City, and hence, the specter of a conspiracy arises once again.
Silvia Duran did confirm that there was a twist party that Garro attended at the home of her brother-in-law in the fall of 1963.
Garro claimed that Azcue was also at the party, but Azcue told the HSCA that he was never at any party with Oswald.
Garro told the CIA in 1964 that an American Communist by the name of June Cobb rented a room from her.
She also believed Cobb had been “planted” on her by Communists since her former husband—the poet Octavio Paz—was a Communist.
So Oswald is only in Mexico City for four days and already acquires a mistress.
This unlikely story was kept alive when an unidentified informant told the CIA in May of 1967 that Duran had told him that she had gone out with Oswald “several times” and “had sexual relations with him” during the four-day period, and—get this—that the Mexican authorities had beaten her until she admitted her affair with Oswald.
LIRING/3’s credibility suffers from his own admission that he called Duran at the home she shared with her husband, Horacio, and Duran asked him how he got her phone number.
By clear implication (counsel never expressly asked her), Duran denied to the HSCA that she had any affair with Oswald, that the Mexican authorities beat a false confession out of her, or beat her period.
However, she did confirm that the day after the assassination, the Mexican authorities placed her under arrest and she physically resisted them.
After grilling her, they let her go but returned the following Wednesday and held her in custody for two and a half days.
During both grillings they accused her of being a Communist (she denied it, saying she was a socialist) and of having sex with Oswald.
Young Rojas wrote to Robert Kennedy on December 31, 1963, claiming he “used to be a friend of Oswald” as well as “three more people” associated with The Mexican Federal Security Police arrested and interrogated Duran, a Mexican citizen, at the request of the Mexico City station of the CIA on November 23.
On January 10, 1964, the Mexico City station of the CIA interviewed Rojas.
To condense Rojas’s long story, he claimed that in the middle of August 1962 Oswald was introduced to him for the first time in front of a Guadalajara theater by a Cuban.
In the latter part of December 1962 the Cuban told Rojas to travel by bus from Guadalajara to the town of Cozumel on the island of Cozumel, just off the easternmost seaboard of Mexico, well over a thousand miles away but close to Cuba, which Rojas said he did.
There, Rojas met with two Cuban men, a Cuban woman, and Oswald, who had flown in from Jamaica, about the proposed Castro propaganda operation.
Rojas stayed in Cozumel, and in mid-February Oswald flew in again from Jamaica.
Together with the three Cubans (whose names Rojas said he had forgotten but had written in a notebook and given to Daniel Solis, a policeman relative of his in Cozumel who told the CIA, when they tracked him down, that he had no such notebook), Oswald and Albert discussed assassinating Kennedy.
Though Albert and the Cubans ended up being against it, Oswald said he had to go through with it to save his life, and that he was under orders to do so.
On March 5, 1964, Rojas, who admitted being desperately in need of money, and about to be given a lie detector test, decided to stop playing his game and signed a statement in Guadalajara that he had never known or met Oswald anywhere.
On February 3, 1966, Robert Kennedy called Lawson B Knott Jr., the administrator of the General Services Administration, which had jurisdiction over the National Archives at the time, and said he had talked “to Secretary [of Defense Robert] McNamara about getting rid” of the casket.
When Knott said he needed “clearance from the Attorney General” , Kennedy said, “I don’t think anybody will be upset about the fact that we disposed of it.
The format gives Kennedy’s name, followed by a colon and Kennedy’s words, then Knott’s name, followed by a colon and his words.
He added that since he was “unable to conceive” of any manner in which the casket could otherwise have an “evidentiary value” nor of “any reason why the national interest would require its preservation” and its “public display would be extremely offensive and contrary to public policy,” the casket should be destroyed.
On February 17, 1966, forty-two holes were drilled through the casket, three sandbags weighing eighty pounds each were placed inside the casket, the lid was locked into place, and the casket was bound with metal banding tape.
The casket was turned over to Department of Defense representatives early on the morning of February 18.
Two airdrop parachutes were used to break the shock of impact upon hitting the water.
What David Lifton doesn’t purport to know is the identity of the doctor or doctors who did the alteration to Kennedy’s body.
What he also doesn’t know is that the only alteration done was to someone else’s body.
A Texas Legend, told me and all the other readers of his book what happened.
Although he’s a little short on details, he says there was only one alterationist, and the alterations weren’t to Kennedy’s body but to a Kennedy look-alike.
The alterationist, per Estes, was James Melvin Liggett, a Dallas mortician who reportedly performed reconstruction surgery on the body of deceased actress Jayne Mansfield.
Estes said that Liggett himself confessed to him in 1971 that he was assigned two jobs in Kennedy’s assassination, the only inference from the context being that the assignment came before the assassination.
According to Liggett, on November 22, 1963, he was in charge of a funeral for a member of his wife’s family at Restland Cemetery in Dallas.
In the middle of the ceremony a cemetery aid whispered in Liggett’s ear, and a few minutes later Liggett and his aid left the ceremony in a hearse containing the corpse of the Kennedy look-alike whom Liggett had apparently already found, and who had been stored in the morgue at Restland.
When they got to Love Field, Liggett and the body got on a private plane headed for the nation’s capital.
At this point, everything was making a lot of sense to me, but then what followed was, well, hard to follow.
Estes writes that “I do not know all the details [which was a big disappointment to me] except I know there were two bodies [presumably the real JFK and his look-alike] at Bethesda and at least ten pictures were taken of each body.
The grand conspiracy theory of controlling the autopsy and making changes at Bethesda Naval Hospital was not necessary.
The autopsy report and photographs were immediately sent to the White House.
It’s nice to know, finally, what happened, and as you can see, Lifton was all wet with his theory.
Estes said Liggett told him that after he completed his work, he flew back to Dallas, packed his wife and children in a car, and left in a great hurry for Galveston, receiving a speeding ticket between Dallas and Austin.
Estes said that Liggett was not only a mortician but a “cold-blooded murderer.
In one of Nigel Turner’s episodes in his series The Men Who Killed Kennedy, called The Smoking Guns, shown on the History Channel in November of 2003, Liggett’s former wife, Lois, who had divorced Liggett, said she believes that her then husband was involved with JFK’s body in a cover-up of the assassination.
She added that two days after the assassination she was present when her husband and his brother Malcolm were in a Corpus Christi motel room.
She said “they had conversations that made one feel like I didn’t belong . . . , that they knew something I didn’t know,” the implication being that Malcolm was involved in the cover-up.
Turner then capped the segment by showing a photograph of Jack Ruby allegedly standing beside Malcolm and his wife, Suzanne.
Also, Malcolm was in California at the time he was supposed to be in Corpus Christi with his brother discussing their participation in covering up the conspiracy to assassinate Kennedy.
The outraged Malcolm filed a federal lawsuit against A & E Network, the company operating the History Channel, for its blatantly false story, and a settlement was reached in March of 2005.
Andy Purdy and another HSCA investigator did interview O’Connor at his home in Florida, but that was on August 25, 1977, and that was the long interview, not the 1978 telephone one, the documentation of which I had in my hand in London.
O’Connor, in his telephone conversation with me, told me the length of the interview conducted at his home, but he was talking about one date and I another.
But I have no explanation for how the rest of the discrepancy came about.
It’s a mystery to me, and may have involved something lost in the translation between the London Weekend staff—when I asked them to secure all prior interviews of Mrs.
Peck had been beaten about her face and head and left for dead on a burning bed inside her home.
Liggett was forty at the time and was described by police as an unemployed undertaker.
Peck’s life, arson and aggravated robbery being added to the attempted murder charge.
During the one-block ride back to the county jail on Houston Street with eleven other prisoners, Liggett somehow freed himself from his handcuffs and when the paddy wagon doors opened, he bolted and ran away on Houston Street in Dealey Plaza.
When a Dallas deputy sheriff commanded him to stop and he didn’t, the deputy shot him once in the back.
Of the thirty-two personnel present at the autopsy, nearly all of whom either testified before some official body or gave a statement or affidavit, the only two I could find who even came close to saying what Paul O’Connor did were the assistant autopsy photographer, Floyd Riebe, and an X-ray technician, Jerrol Custer.
But he quantified this by saying, “It was less than half a brain there” , quite a ways from O’Connor’s assertion that the brain was entirely missing.
But Riebe’s and Custer’s statements (neither of which goes as far as O’Connor’s does) were at odds with the recollections of everyone else present at the autopsy as well as with actual photographs of the brain.
Lab technician James Jenkins said, “The brain was taken” out of the president’s cranium by “Dr.
Posner does not cite any source for this, and Custer, as indicated, was never interviewed by the HSCA and did not tell Lifton this.
Posner doesn’t quote Jenkins as having told him this, and he doesn’t cite any other source or document.
But, as Posner writes, the colonel’s body may have arrived at Bethesda before the president’s body did.
A good example of how far off the recollections of people like Paul O’Connor are is that in 1991, author Harrison Livingstone met with O’Connor, James Jenkins, and Floyd Riebe in Dallas and showed them some autopsy photographs.
Each found different things in one or more of the photographs that convinced them the photographs were definitely not taken at the Bethesda Naval Hospital.
The photos must have been taken when the president’s body was somewhere else, most likely when it was being altered by Lifton’s alterationists before the autopsy.
In a transcribed interview conducted sometime between 2000 and 2005, laboratory technician James Jenkins said that “Paul said was in a body bag.
I don’t remember a body bag . . . but I wasn’t specifically involved in taking the body out of the casket.
My earliest memory of the body is a clear memory of it being on the table and wrapped in sheets.
However, Posner gives no citation for this quote and I have not run across Ruby having told the Warren Commission these precise words.
And Dallas police detective Barnard Clardy testified that during Ruby’s interrogation shortly after he killed Oswald, Ruby said, “If I had planned this I couldn’t have had my timing any better.
Dallas police reserve officer William J Newman, who was on duty in the basement that Sunday morning, told the Warren Commission on March 25,1964, that he heard someone yell, “Here he comes” or “Here they come” (presumably referring to Oswald and his police escort leaving the basement elevator), and he said that “immediately after” those words were “called out,” he “saw a man come down” the Main Street ramp.
He could not identify Ruby as the man because he didn’t “pay that much attention” to him and did not see the man shoot Oswald.
As in his testimony before the Warren Commission, Newman told Revill and Wallace that the time between when he saw the man and the shooting was less than a minute.
However, in two typewritten paragraphs on the next page, which strangely are called a “deposition,” and are followed by his signature, are the words “I recall someone going over the railing at the bottom of the Main Street ramp, but I have racked my brain and cannot recall whether it was before or after the shooting.
I do remember that the person had on a suit, but I do not know the color.
I don’t remember seeing a hat, but I can’t say whether he was wearing one or not.
If, indeed, Newman had seen a man walking down the Main Street ramp within a minute of the shooting, it would seem that he should have mentioned it in his deposition, particularly if the man was, as he says, running.
The fact that he did not, and mentioned this man for the first time a week later when he spoke to Lieutenants Revill and Wallace, and then three days later when he spoke to the FBI, and in March of 1964 when he testified before the Warren Commission, causes one to question his credibility on the matter.
Westphal of the Dallas Criminal Investigation section on December 6 and instead of telling Westphal his new, invented story, he proceeded to tell him only about seeing the man going over the railing, not mentioning the man coming down the ramp.
Apparently because of the verbal skirmish between the two, the next night Assistant Counsel Leon Hubert took over the questioning.
These reports seem to indicate that you saw a man coming down the ramp.
These records also seem to indicate that you saw a man climbing over a rail in the basement.
However, this supposed contradiction that was cleared up was not even explored by Griffin, in his questioning, the previous day.
In an April 2,1964, memorandum by Griffin to Warren Commission general counsel J Lee Rankin, Griffin finally set forth the basis for his problem with Newman.
I have only been in there, I think, twice,” whereupon Griffin called him a liar without explanation.
It is inconceivable to me that he could not have seen these cars . . . from where he was supposed to be standing.
I must confess that I could not find, in Newman’s testimony, a clear basis for Griffin’s statement to Rankin.
In almost illegible handwriting in the bottom left side of the Wallace-McCaghren report there are words written that seem to question the report.
One doesn’t know how much weight to give this short, handwritten notation.
The notation doesn’t even hazard a guess, unless it does in handwriting illegible to me.
Pierce’s car is the only police car known to have exited the Main Street ramp just prior to the shooting.
In fact, way back on December 9, 1963, when the FBI interviewed Butler, he indicated the same thing by saying he felt Dallas police chief Jesse Curry was too “level-headed” to have attempted to transfer Lee Harvey Oswald to the county jail with all the news media present and in the way it was handled.
Butler felt that Curry must have been pressured and ordered to do so, but he did not know by whom.
If Butler were a part of any conspiracy to silence Oswald, I think we can safely assume he would not be making statements like this that go, if they go in any direction, in the direction of a conspiracy.
But since the report contained what was supposedly told to the FBI agent, as opposed to the actual testimony of Hyman Rubenstein, I’ve opted to use Hyman’s version in the book.
Surprisingly, as part of a battery of psychological tests given to Jack Ruby prior to his trial, the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale showed his IQ^to be 109, certainly not high, but above average and in the “73rd percentile” (Psychological Test Report on Ruby from Dr.
One so-called casual acquaintance of Ruby’s came up with information that stood out for me because I’m unaware of anyone else giving similar information.
He said Ruby served as a bouncer in several Chicago clubs and often wore a hearing aid to avoid the World War II draft.
Because this information doesn’t turn up anywhere else, even from people who were more than acquaintances of Ruby’s, one wonders about its credibility.
Who better to have that number than Dallasite Ken Holmes, an assassination researcher who specializes in the historical, non-evidentiary details of the assassination saga.
In 1991, Holmes, who had one of Ruby’s Carousel cards with the phone number on it, called the local telephone company on a whim and asked if that number was still available.
However, from those who definitely would know, A former employee at the Carousel who said he was a “general handy man,” which included bartending and helping to book shows, told the FBI that during the three-month period he worked for Ruby in 1960, Ruby had instructed the bartenders and waitresses not to charge police officers for anything they got at the club.
Dallas police officer Joe Cody said, “When people from out of town would come in, he’d charge them $1.50 for a beer when he’d only pay 9 Vi cents.
This varies from all accounts, particularly those concerning the Carousel Club.
The only other story similar in nature came from Dallas radio station announcer Ken Dowe.
Dowe hardly knew Ruby, having met him briefly only once, but says he heard around the station that Ruby had procured girls, either from his club or other girls he knew, for record producers visiting Dallas.
In one of the deleted paragraphs Moore said that Ruby had frequently visited a place where he, Moore, worked, the Civello and Zamonte Italian Importing Company, which imported cheese from Italy, and Ruby was an “associate” of Civello’s and Zamonte’s.
There is no evidence to support this allegation, and Moore himself offered none.
However, it is not known if Dallas mobster Joe Civello, an acquaintance of Ruby’s, was the same Civello who co-owned the cheese company.
Joe Civello did own Civello’s Liquor Store, which also sold pastas, cheeses, and tomato products.
In any event, I can’t think of another example where the Commission did something like this.
He also said Ruby once threw an after-hours party at the club for fourteen Dallas vice officers.
But neither of these incidents were ever corroborated, and they both sound unlikely.
But Faulkner couldn’t vouch for the truthfulness of this since he said he never took Ruby up on his offer.
Inasmuch as the paragraphs contained nothing of importance, there probably is some completely innocent explanation for the deletion.
The only direct accusation that Ruby was involved in professional gambling in the Dallas area was from a highly questionable source.
On December 24,1963, one Jack Hardee Jr. told the FBI in Mobile, Alabama, that while spending some time in Dallas about a year earlier, he was advised by an individual he did not identify that in order to operate a numbers operation in Dallas it was necessary to get clearance from Jack Ruby.
Not only is there no evidence that Ruby was ever involved in the numbers business in Dallas, but Hardee gave his story’s already weak probability three self-inflicted wounds.
Tippit used to hang around the Carousel Club a lot and was very close to Ruby, and that Ruby ran a pimping operation for the girls at his club, keeping half of what they earned.
There is another similar charge against Ruby, this one involving narcotics, which, though almost assuredly not true, isn’t as transparently false on its face, particularly since it was made seven years before the assassination.
A Los Angeles prostitute named Eileen Curry was serving, with her boyfriend, James Breen, as an informant for the Federal Narcotics Bureau and the Los Angeles Police Department Vice Squad.
The two jumped bail on their own narcotics violations and fled to Dallas.
The FBI report on Curry’s contact with Law reads that Curry “believes James made connections with the narcotics ring through a former associate from Seagoville Prison [in Seagoville, Texas] where James served time.
She embellished on Ruby in such a way that if what she said had been known to her when she had spoken to Special Agent Law on March 18, 1956, it is quite likely she would have given Law this information back then.
On June 9, 1964, she told the Chicago FBI that when she and Breen had moved to Texas from Los Angeles in December of 1955, Breen actually took Ruby by their apartment to meet her.
A few days later, Breen told Curry that Ruby had taken him to a location where he showed Breen film of various Mexican and American border guards, as well as narcotics agents and “contacts” on the Mexican side of the border.
Breen was impressed with what he considered to be an extremely efficient narcotics traffic operation.
Shortly thereafter, per Curry, Breen left town for awhile, and while he was gone Ruby came by her apartment once or twice and tried to become intimate with her.
He also took her to his nightclub after closing time, and attempted to interest her in selling pornographic photographs, which he would provide, to her customers.
Indeed, in the vast assassination literature, I can’t think of any other item of information that is so substantially inconsistent with what we know, from all the evidence, about Oswald and Ruby—that Oswald was a highly disturbed misfit who killed Kennedy on his own, and Ruby was a small-time, perpetual loser who, again on his own, wanted to become someone important in life.
Arrayed against this statement by Curry is the fact that no evidence has ever surfaced that Ruby was ever involved in drug trafficking.
Indeed, the Dallas Police Department, Dallas DA’s office, Warren Commission , and HSCA—the latter two examining every single aspect of Ruby’s life and interviewing every known friend and acquaintance—not only did not come up with any evidence of drug trafficking by Ruby, but also concluded there was no evidence that Ruby, while in Chicago or Dallas, was involved in any criminal activity apart from the most minor of violations.
Under these circumstances, to accept Curry’s hearsay statement over the official record would not seem to be warranted.
And for good measure I guess we should also observe that in 1955-1956, we know Ruby was struggling very hard just to keep the doors of his clubs open, hardly likely if he were, like James Breen believed, running an “extremely efficient narcotics trafficking operation” in Mexico and Texas.
I guess one possibility is that Ruby, who we know was a big talker and liked people to believe he had mob connections, had somehow convinced Breen that he was the man to know in Dallas when it came to big-time crime.
Author Douglas Valentine makes an effort to connect Ruby with narcotics traffic, but comes up with absolutely nothing.
Laughably, one way he seeks to connect Ruby is to say that “the Ruby family had a long history in the illicit drug trade.
Actually, there are some in the conspiracy community who do believe Ruby was part of the conspiracy.
Among other phone calls Ruby made to shady characters during the pre-assassination period was one to Murray W “Dusty” Miller on November 8, 1963 (the same day that Ruby spoke to Barney Baker for the last time), at the Eden Roc Hotel in Miami.
He said he quickly terminated the conversation when he learned this “mutual friend” was Barney Baker, whom he considered to be a person of questionable character and with whom he did not wish to be involved in any dealings, adding that he was surprised Baker had given Ruby his phone number.
Several days later Ruby called a San Francisco gambler named Frank Goldstein, whom he had known from his Chicago youth.
Goldstein was surprised to hear from “Sparky,” and told him he couldn’t help him with union problems in Dallas because his connections were only in the news media field, not the entertainment world.
Before the upsurge in his phone calls in October and November, Ruby had also attempted to contact underworld figure Lenny Patrick, a hoodlum whom Ruby knew (“Everyone knows Lenny Patrick,” Ruby’s brother Hyman told the Warren Commission ) from his days on the streets of Chicago.
He was, unquestionably, a member of Chicago’s “Outfit” who had a long criminal history, starting with the robbing of a bank in 1933.
During most of his Chicago years thereafter he was involved in Syndicate gambling.
And when Patrick testified before the HSCA in 1978, he denied ever speaking on the phone with Ruby in 1963.
In fact, Patrick, after being asked by HSCA counsel if he wanted an attorney and responding, “No, I don’t see why I should have an attorney,” said that during his Chicago years he “never had anything to do with as far as any business or anything.
The examiner said he did not detect any deception by Ruby in this answer.
Although Lewis Me Willie had told the FBI back in 1964 that he invited Ruby to Havana because Ruby was a very close friend and he felt he could use the rest, and did not mention Tony Zoppi at all, nor that the purpose for the trip was to promote the Tropicana (CE 1697, 23 H 170, FBI interview of Lewis McWillie on June 11,1964), he admitted in his testimony before the HSCA in 1978 that the only purpose for the trip was to promote the famed night spot.
McWillie said that if Ruby had told him he wasn’t bringing Zoppi with him he would have told Ruby to stay in Dallas.
Conspiracy theorists, attempting to connect Ruby with mob boss Santo Trafficante, have raised the issue of just how many times Ruby went to Havana, the theorists maintaining that the real reason Ruby went to Havana was not pleasure and relaxation but to meet with Trafficante, although as set forth in the text, Trafficante was no longer in Havana when Ruby visited there in September of 1959.
The main basis for this conclusion is that in addition to the short trip to Cuba in early September that Ruby and McWillie each confirm, on March 31,1978, the Cuban government gave the HSCA two tourist cards bearing the name and signature Jack Ruby.
One indicated he entered Cuba on August 8, 1959, and left on September 11, the other that he reentered Cuba from Miami the very next day, September 12, and left the following day, September 13.
The HSCA had two handwriting experts compare the signatures on the two tourist cards with known Ruby exemplars.
One expert concluded that the signatures were Ruby’s, and the other agreed but qualified his conclusion because of the use of photographs of the cards, not the originals.
But that doesn’t answer the question of why the cards were still being kept in 1963 ,four years after Ruby supposedly filled them out, and before Ruby became a historical figure.
One thing we can be reasonably sure of—Ruby wouldn’t be going back to Cuba through any encouragement by McWillie.
Ruby has said many times he only went to Havana once (e.g., 5 H 205), McWillie said Ruby was there only once , and even Alice Nichols, Ruby’s girlfriend since 1949, said that Ruby had only gone to Cuba once around Labor Day in September of 1959.
He told her about the upcoming trip and wrote her from Havana on September 8,1959, telling her about how beautiful the Tropicana was and how carefree the Cuban people were.
But it did come up with good evidence that while Ruby was visiting McWillie in Havana, for some unexplained reason he took the short flight to Miami for one day.
A longtime friend of Ruby’s and McWillie’s, Meyer Panitz, was living in Miami at the time, and Panitz told the FBI that McWillie called him and told him their mutual friend, Ruby, was presently in Miami Beach, and Panitz said he visited Ruby there and “believes” Ruby was there for two or three days and that he visited Ruby twice.
HSCA chairman Louis Stokes never got around to asking McWillie the obvious question of whether Ruby, while he was visiting him in Cuba, left for Miami for a day or two, and to my knowledge no one else ever asked Ruby this question either.
But the INS records plus Panitz’s statement would seem to confirm that he did.
The committee, of course, had no evidence to prove that *The HSCA said that Ruby left Havana for good on September 13, 1959.
The HSCA did not say when it believed Ruby resumed his trip back to Dallas.
The reason may have simply been to visit Panitz, who, McWillie said, was a “good friend” of Ruby’s who used to live in Dallas.
The HSCA, in its several references to Meyer Panitz, never indicated that he had any connection to organized crime.
Though the HSCA, with its INS records, was on solid ground with respect to Ruby’s apparent one-day trip to Miami, it was not with respect to a trip it says Ruby probably took to Cuba on August 8, 1959.
The scenario is bad enough as it is, but what makes it worse is that the HSCA offers no evidence to support it.
I have come to expect silliness on the part of conspiracy theorists, but when I have to take my time dealing with silliness by the HSCA, it’s a bit much.
With a second-Ruby hypothesis we can eliminate having poor Jack enter and leave Cuba as if he couldn’t escape from a revolving door.
He attempted by telephone to get in touch with this person to “make a buck,” but nothing came of it.
On November 29, 1963, Las Vegas television commentator Gordon Kent said on TV that a confidential source had told him that Ruby had played golf at the Tropicana Golf Club the weekend of November 16 and 17, 1963, and Ruby had made out a credit card application at the Stardust Hotel, and “had a credit card” at the Riviera Hotel and Casino.
FBI agents spoke to the golf pro, caddy, and general manager at the golf club and none recalled seeing Ruby at the club, although the caddy said that someone from Texas had given him a card from the Carousel Club.
Additionally, the manager of the Riviera searched all credit and hotel registration records for the name Jack Ruby or Jack Rubenstein and said there was no record of these names at the hotel.
When McWillie, in Havana, got worried about the possibility of Castro’s regime taking over and wanted some protection, he contacted Jack in Dallas and asked him to go to Ray Brantley’s hardware store in Dallas, where McWillie used to buy hunting rifles, and get four little Cobra handguns for him, which Ruby did, although it isn’t clear from Ruby’s testimony before the Warren Commission whether it was he or Brantley who sent the guns to McWillie.
Note that McWillie is such a big mobster and is so tied in with major Mafia figures like Santo Trafficante—who is right close by at another casino in Havana—that he has to turn to his friend Jack Ruby in Dallas to get some handguns for him at a Dallas hardware store.
For whatever reason, McWillie was afraid to pick the guns up at the Havana post office, and never did.
McWillie denied that he asked Ruby to send him guns in Havana, claiming that when he was working the graveyard shift in early 1963 at theThunderbird Hotel in Las Vegas, he asked Ruby to send him a gun because he got frightened over a series of holdups in Las Vegas casinos.
It’s nice to know someone knows such things, even if he doesn’t take the space in his book to tell his readers how he came to such knowledge.
Remarkably, a Munich weekly, Deutsche National Zeiting und Soldaten Zeitung , even claimed that Lee Oswald and Jack Ruby worked together on the attempted murder of Major General Edwin Walker.
Remarkably, author Leo Sauvage, the American correspondent for the Paris newspaper Le Figaro , was convinced of just the opposite—that Henry Wade, in prosecuting Ruby, did everything possible to prevent the existence of a conspiracy from coming out.
Wade would be destroying “all that he had said and done” (about there being no evidence of a conspiracy) before Oswald was killed.
The Warren Commission made every effort to see if, through the known friends and acquaintances of Oswald’s and Ruby’s, there was any chance of a possible link between the two, but it found nothing.
One possible link the Commission looked into was Ruby’s association with Bertha Cheek, the sister of Earlene Roberts, who was the housekeeper where Oswald lived at 1026 North Beckley.
In response to an advertisement Ruby had run in the newspaper a few years earlier seeking to sell a half interest in the Carousel Club, she called him.
When she learned he wanted $12,500, she felt it was way too high and had no further contact with him until November of 1963.
In November she had been scouting around Dallas to invest in a nightclub.
This may have gotten back to Ruby because he called her and she went to the Carousel Club to meet with him sometime around November 18.
Ruby had an interior decorator with him, one Frank Boerder, and Ruby proposed that he and Mrs.
Cheek open a club at an undisclosed location he had found, Ruby putting up $1,000 and being responsible for operating the club, and Mrs.
Cheek wasn’t interested in Ruby’s proposal, not wanting to invest six times as much as he.
That was the extent of her association with Ruby and she did not know of Oswald prior to the assassination.
Ruth Paine’s residence in Irving, where Marina lived and Oswald visited, was at 2115 West Fifth Street.
Living at 2539 West Fifth in Irving was William F Simmons, a piano player in a musical combo that worked at Ruby’s Carousel Club from September 17 until November 21, 1963.
Simmons said his only relationship to Ruby was in his short employment at the club, that he had never seen Ruby in the neighborhood where he lived, and that he did not know Oswald and had never seen him in the Carousel Club.
You see, Killam ended up dying a truly unusual death a half year after the assassination, and conspiracy theorists believe, of course, that he was silenced by the conspirators who murdered the president.
So, the conspiracists say, Killam could have possibly put Ruby and Oswald together, and that’s why he was probably killed.
By the way, Carter told the FBI that he was “acquainted with” Killam and his wife, Wanda, and knew Wanda worked at the Carousel Club, but that he himself had never met Ruby or been to the club.
Around four o’clock in the morning on March 17, his mother recalls that her son received a phone call and left the house.
About a half hour later, two street sweepers heard a crash on a downtown street and saw a man staggering in front of a broken display window.
Although the coroner seemed to believe that the cause of death was accidental, there is some indication that the Pensacola police, after what must have been the shortest of reflections, concluded it was a suicide.
Roberts and Armstrong, JFK: The Dead Witnesses,10) Killam’s brother said that two days before Killam’s death, Killam told him, “I’m a dead man.
I’ve run as far as I’m going to run,” and had earlier complained to him that he was being constantly questioned by “agents” or “plotters,” though not specifying who these agents or plotters were, a possible implication being that Killam was a disturbed individual who was running from himself.
Conspiracy theorist Penn Jones Jr. writes that “according to Wanda Joyce Killam, her husband was constantly hounded by federal agents after the assassination.
He told FBI agent John R Brett that he had been to Ruby’s club about three times and considered Ruby a violent man, basing this on two incidents, one of which being when his wife, Wanda, fed some pizza to Ruby’s dog and Ruby became so enraged that his wife thought he might strike her.
The other incident involved his overhearing the Carousel bartender telling Ruby about some customers heckling the emcee and Ruby asking his bartender why he didn’t hit them in the head.
Killam said he did not know Ruby well, did not know Oswald, and knew of no connection between Ruby and Oswald.
There can be no question that Killam died a strange death, but there also can be no question that it had nothing to do with the Kennedy assassination.
There’s no evidence that he knew of any connection between Ruby and Oswald.
Moreover, though I agree with Killam’s brother that one doesn’t commit suicide by jumping through a plate glass window, murder of his brother by the alleged conspiracy conspiracists is even more far-fetched.
Far more importantly, it is too ridiculous to imagine that if they were determined to silence him, the method they would use would not be to shoot him dead on the spot, but push him through a plate glass window on a downtown Pensacola street, particularly when such a method might only cause injury, not death.
The coroner’s conclusion of an accidental death, though itself unlikely, seems the least improbable—at least as compared to the other alternatives of suicide or murder.
A few other claims of a Ruby-Oswald connection include one by a Dallas lawyer named Carroll Jarnagin, who came up with such a far-fetched story it’s a wonder the Texas State Bar didn’t conduct a hearing into his fitness to practice law.
It wasn’t so much his lie that on the evening of October 4, 1963, he was seated in a booth in the Carousel with a former Carousel stripper known as “Robin S Hood” and that he saw and heard Jack Ruby talking to Oswald in the next booth.
People lie or imagine things all the time, and if Jarnagin had left it at that he wouldn’t have stood out.
But shortly after the assassination, Jarnagin sent an eight-page typewritten letter to the FBI detailing, word for word, like a transcript, everything Ruby and Oswald said back and forth to each other in a very long conversation.
No rational person would believe this, particularly when Jarnagin admits he was drunk at the time, had an alcohol problem, and was considering joining Alcoholics Anonymous.
The gist of Ruby and Oswald’s conversation, per Jarnagin, concerned their decision to murder Governor Connally because Connally wasn’t allowing syndicated crime into Texas.
She does recall Ruby coming over to their booth and asking her to work at the Carousel again.
Ruth Paine herself testified to the resemblance , and among those Ruby-Oswald “sightings” that were from sincere people, Crafard’s similarity to Oswald probably caused the confusion.
Mary Lawrence, a waitress at the Lucas B & B Restaurant in Dallas, which was right next door to Jack Ruby’s Vegas Club, said that about 2:15 or 2:30 in the morning on the day of the assassination, she saw Ruby, whom she knew, having breakfast with a young man who, from television and photographs, looked “very similar” to Lee Harvey Oswald.
She said the cashier at the B & B, Bobby (last name unknown), agreed with her on this.
In all of the medical records on Oswald, there is no mention of his having such a scar.
Although there is no reference to this in the Warren Commission volumes, photos of Crafard in volume 17 appear to show a small scar above and to the right of his mouth.
Beverly Oliver, the “Babushka lady” of conspiracy legend, claimed in later years that Carousel stripper Jada introduced her to Ruby and Oswald at the Carousel Club.
However, Jada told the FBI she had never seen Oswald in the Carousel Club and had no knowledge of any connection between the two men.
What indicates that Crowe was not simply mistaken, but had made his story up, is that less than twenty minutes after Oswald was shot, which was two days after Crowe had first seen Oswald on TV and allegedly thought his face looked familiar, he called a news media friend of his, David Hoy, in Evansville, Indiana, and said nothing to Hoy about having possibly seen Oswald in the Carousel.
But when the local Dallas media saw DeMar shortly thereafter outside the Carousel Club, he came up with his story.
Hoy, in fact, said he was “shocked” to later hear DeMar had told the media in Dallas about Oswald possibly being in the club.
Additionally, Wally Weston, a master of ceremonies at the Carousel Club, pointed out that because of the spotlight shining in your face while on the stage— and it being relatively dark in the area where the patrons sit—it would be extremely difficult to recognize anyone in the audience, as DeMar claimed.
When Weston told Oswald, he, Weston, was an American and to please sit down, Oswald said, “Well, I still think you’re a Communist,” whereupon Weston said he jumped off the stage and slugged Oswald.
Ruby, per Weston, wrestled Oswald to the floor and then threw Oswald down the stairs.
Rackley, who said he saw Ruby and Oswald seated at a table together at the Carousel on the evening of November 8,1963.
The obviously phony storyteller gave no explanation why he would ask a waitress the identity of two men sitting at a table.
Rackley was very hazy on describing the interior of the Carousel Club or even where it was located.
Another witness, Harvey Wade, said he was at the Carousel Club on the evening of November 10, 1963, between 11:00m. and 1:00m.
The FBI located the source of the rumor, one William Huffman, who worked at a boat fueling dock in Key West.
Since Oswald never had money to pay for the fuel, he called a “Ruben” in Key West to come and pay for it, which Ruben did, in cash.
Huffman said that Ruben was five feet three inches tall, of heavy build, “pot-bellied,” and had brown hair.
Perhaps the most well-known and investigated allegation by someone claiming to have seen Oswald at the Carousel with Ruby was made by one Wilbyrn Waldon Litchfield II, a thirty-year-old who claimed to be a professional bowler.
He was also a professional con man who served hard time in the early 1950s for forging three checks in Fort Worth and eight in Dallas.
After he got out, he served another six months for writing “hot checks” in Virginia.
His military record included a special court martial, for which he served six months, and a dishonorable discharge.
As late as April of 1961 he was arrested on an armed robbery charge in Dallas, but no charges were filed.
According to Litchfield, one night within the first few weeks of November 1963 (he later told the Warren Commission it was the “middle of October”) he was in the Carousel Club and saw a man wearing a white sweater go into Ruby’s office with Ruby for fifteen to twenty minutes.
Litchfield said that when he later saw Oswald on TV on the day of the assassination, he told someone that he thought he had seen Oswald before.
Two days later he was playing poker with his friends when the news of Ruby shooting Oswald came on the television screen.
Upon further reflection he was certain that Oswald was the man in the sweater he had seen that night at the Carousel, although he said that man looked “real sloppy” in his uncreased pants, and “his hair wasn’t combed,” hardly the description of Oswald we would expect.
A week or so later he called Don Green, a Dallas police officer on the vice squad who was a friend of his and told him the story.
The Dallas Police Department gave Litchfield a polygraph test on December 2,1963.
Even though Litchfield failed the test, because his charges were so serious, Captain Will Fritz, head of the Homicide and Robbery Bureau, personally interviewed Litchfield the following day, December 3.
Fritz already knew Litchfield to be a “confidence man” because of past dealings with him.
After talking to Litchfield, Fritz concluded that Litchfield was “definitely lying about seeing Oswald and Ruby together,” Fritz telling the FBI he wouldn’t place credence in anything Litchfield said.
One thing that caused him to back down in his identification of Oswald, he said, was that one of the FBI agents had told him that furnishing false information to the authorities was a federal crime.
All three said he only mentioned knowing Ruby, not Oswald, one recalling Litchfield saying, “That’s the fellow that owns the nightclub.
One added he felt Litchfield was an honest person, but another said he would never place any faith in anything Litchfield said, saying that if any names were prominent in the newspapers, Litchfield would make a point of remarking he was familiar with that particular person.
Laughably, we learned from the third poker player, who described Litchfield as being “of poor character and definitely not a man to trust,” that Litchfield was up to his old tricks on the subject night.
He lost at poker that night and paid his debt with a check that bounced over the moon.
I cannot leave the subject of Ruby’s alleged association with Oswald without mentioning that within days after the assassination, a “Mrs.
The Dallas police actu636 ENDNOTES ally spent valuable time interviewing three witnesses, trying to confirm if the rumor was true, but of course were unable to do so.
Two other people, young women, believed Ruby to be homosexual, but how they arrived at this conclusion is somewhat dubious.
Both of them, one an exotic dancer at Ruby’s Carousel Club, claim Ruby used to call them on the phone and speak obscenely about sex with them, including describing his private parts to one and telling her in minute detail about the great pleasure she would have engaging in sexual intercourse with him.
Indeed, if there was one similarity among most, if not all, of the comments gathered by the FBI about Jack Ruby’s sexuality, it was that it always seemed to be either the person’s opinion without any hard facts to back it up, an opinion they had heard from others, or idle chatter or gossip without any attribution.
It is this fact that makes FBI special agent James Weir’s report on the remark by Edward H McBee stand out.
Unlike many reports that merely stated the feelings of others (such as former employee Jean Flynn, who stated that it was a general rumor among the employees that Ruby was sexually interested in both men and woman, and she assumed he was bisexual , as did another former employee, Jean Sims, who had heard the same rumors and made the same assumption ), McBee’s comments and his opinion that Ruby was possibly bisexual were based on an actual event he witnessed.
McBee worked for years as a waiter and bartender at various nightclubs in the Dallas area.
It seems that McBee and his roommate shared an apartment that became a frequent after-hours watering hole and party place for Dallas nightclub employees.
Their parties would often last until dawn, and one frequent guest was Ruby, usually accompanied by girls from his club.
McBee stated that Ruby rarely drank as he could not hold his liquor, but on one occasion he appeared to have been drinking when he showed up, and then continued to drink wine.
As McBee recalled it, when one of the girls started a gyrating and suggestive dance, Ruby was goaded into joining her and stripping down to his underwear.
While attempting to do the twist, he found himself down on all fours, his face just inches away from the gyrating dancer.
When she backed away, McBee recalls Ruby saying in a loud and excited voice, “Come on, man or woman.
After this incident, McBee said he concluded there was a strong possibility Ruby was bisexual.
A story about Ruby that may be true, but has only been told, as far as I know, by one witness, comes from an old friend of Ruby’s from his teenage Chicago days, Harry Goldbaum.
On a trip through Dallas in the summer of 1963, Goldbaum paid Jack a visit at the Carousel.
A female dog among the three was in heat and Goldbaum claims that Ruby told him he would show him something interesting, whereupon he proceeded to sexually excite one of the male dogs by masturbation.
Ruby stopped when Goldbaum objected, telling Ruby it was making him sick.
Though Ruby did take pride in his physical conditioning, in a story of questionable validity (since the teller had only worked for Ruby for ten days), dancer Penny Dollar said that Ruby was so very proud of his physical build that he would “frequently” come back to the girls’ dressing room with his shirt off, pat his chest, and ask the girls if they didn’t think he had a good physical build.
In the absence of any statement like this from any of the other girls who worked for Ruby over much longer periods, Penny Dollar’s statement has to be considered highly problematic.
This sounds like a highly improbable remark, and one wonders if it was fabricated the day after Ruby shot Oswald by an officer wanting to become part of an international story.
Of the five other people in the room , as far as I know, only Dyson has claimed to have heard the alleged remark.
In any event, even if Ruby made the remark, he obviously wouldn’t be referring to any plan of his to commit murder in the near future, but to the fact that he was a man about town, as he was, and that in due time Ellis would know all about him.
As Ruby said to the officers who subdued him immediately after he shot Oswald, “You guys all know me.
Bill Alexander, who prosecuted Ruby for killing Oswald, told me he had never heard of this alleged statement of Ruby’s before, and had not called Dyson or Ellis to the witness stand at Ruby’s trial (Telephone interview of Bill Alexander by author on November 23, 2004), virtually conclusive evidence that either the statement was never made or, if it was, no one who was gathering evidence against Ruby, and certainly looking for evidence of premeditation, took the statement in an incriminating way.
Six black people were positive that Ruby was in Houston on the afternoon of November 21.
When Williams saw Ruby on TV three days later, he was certain he was the man he saw in Houston.
Subsequently, five other black people living on or near Milam Street were located, all of whom identified Ruby from photographs as being the man they saw talking to Williams or the man they had personal contact with that afternoon.
Since the man, they said, had a twoto three-day-old beard, his hands were dirty, and he was wearing an army-type jacket with boots, he made a point to tell them he was “not a bum,” that he had money and a nice car parked around the corner.
He told one or more of them the same story about being an oil field worker and looking for a man in the pool hall.
One of the witnesses actually had a beer with “Ruby,” who pointed out to him a faint scar he had on his left cheek running from just under his left ear to within about one inch of his mouth.
The Secret Service conducted an investigation and concluded that Ruby was in Dallas on the afternoon of November 21, and that the Houston story was false.
Conspiracy author David Scheim says he is convinced that the man in Houston was in fact Ruby operating in “a carelessly presented disguise” as an oil worker and that, from the statements of the witnesses in the Secret Service report, he was there from about 2:30 to 7:15m.
He simply doesn’t discuss the 12:30 to 1:00m. issue, and also ignores the statements of Andrew Armstrong and Larry Crafard that they saw Ruby at the Carousel Club that afternoon.
And Ruby himself seemed to recall talking with Ryan probably in the early afternoon hours at the club.
However, the FBI interviewed Ryan on July 23, 1964, eight months after the alleged incident , whereas agents interviewed Ruby and Armstrong just two weeks afterward.
Not only doesn’t Scheim have the evidence on his side, but his whole premise is ludicrous.
It first requires the belief that Ruby was part of the conspiracy to murder Kennedy, a notion that even most of his fellow conspiracy theorists don’t subscribe to.
Nor does he say why, if there was such a purpose, Ruby would be spending his time, apparently for several hours, in a black area of Houston.
Since Thanksgiving is always on the fourth Thursday of the month, and Thanksgiving in 1963 was on November 28, six days after the assassination, if Campisi was referring to the previous Thursday, November 21, it’s rather odd he would remember that he saw Ruby at his restaurant seven days before Thanksgiving, instead of the night before the assassination, if that had been the case.
In Jim Garrison’s book On the Trail of the Assassins, he tries to bring Lawrence Meyers, Jean Aase, and Jack Ruby into the assassination conspiracy with David Ferrie.
He writes that in 1967 he asked New Orleans attorney G Wray Gill for his office’s 1962 and 1963 telephone records and to have his secretary indicate which calls she believed were made by David Ferrie, who had been a part-time investigator for Gill during this period.
Even 10 percent of a law office’s long-distance phone calls over two years would add up to hundreds of legitimate business calls by others in Gill’s office, as opposed to only Ferrie’s supposedly unauthorized ones.
In any event, Garrison said he found a phone call that was made on September 24,1963, from Gill’s office to Chicago phone number WH 4-4970.
Garrison, like Gill’s secretary, had no way of knowing that Ferrie made the call , and doesn’t know to whom the call was made.
But he was suspicious because he writes that September 24, 1963, was “the day before Lee Oswald left New Orleans,” and Garrison wondered whether Ferrie was reporting this fact to someone.
When Garrison believed he had struck gold was when this same Chicago number turned up in the Warren Commission volumes in the phone records of the Ero Manufacturing Company of Chicago, the employer of Lawrence Meyers, a friend of Ruby’s.
A call was made to this number on November 20 at 9:09m. from Kansas City using a credit card.
Though it has not been conclusively established, assassination researcher Peter Whitney is confident, and he is probably correct, that the call was made by Meyers to a young lady friend named Jean Aase , who accompanied him later that day to Dallas, where the two of them saw Ruby the following evening at the Carousel Club, and Meyers saw Ruby later again that night at the Cabana Motel, where Meyers and Aase were staying.
This was all that Garrison needed to connect Ferrie to Ruby, the guy who killed Oswald.
In addition to the fact that we don’t know that Ferrie made the New Orleans call to Chicago, Reitzes writes that “dialing WH 4-4970 connected one to the main desk of the apartment building at 20 East Delaware Street, the Chicago building where Aase lived in Room 1405 in 1963.
So even assuming it was Ferrie who made the call, the likelihood is only 1 out of 146, or worse, that he was calling Aase.
Moreover, not only does Aase (twenty-seven years old at the time and described by Meyers as a “rather dumb, but accommodating broad” and a “semiprofessional hooker”) say she never met or spoke to David Ferrie over the phone, but she says she met Meyers only a few weeks before going to Dallas with him.
This would be about a month and a half after the September 24 phone call from New Orleans to Chicago.
If this is true, she could not have been a conduit or intermediary for information from Ferrie to Meyers back on September 24.
But telephone records could not have said who made the call from Gill’s office.
Even the HSCA flatly declared that it “found” that Ferrie had made the call.
As stated in the main text, hearsay is inadmissible in a court proceeding unless one of the many hearsay “exceptions” applies, situations in which the out-of-court statement carries a likelihood of trustworthiness, such as a self-incriminating statement from a defendant, since people normally do not incriminate themselves falsely.
Another exception is a deathbed declaration since, again, people about to meet their maker aren’t as likely to lie.
Jack Ruby, in the three years since he shot and killed Oswald, slipped in and out of lucidity.
On December 16,1966, during one of his last lucid intervals, and less than two weeks before he died, he was interviewed on tape at his Parkland Hospital bedside.
Present were his attorney, Elmer Gertz, his brother Earl, and two of his sisters, Eva and Eileen.
The Uber tape recorder was concealed in a black attache case and the taping took place without the knowledge and consent of the authorities.
On tape, Ruby confirmed everything he had told the authorities earlier.
About the ramp incident, he said, “As I walked toward the ramp, I noticed the police squad car at the head of the ramp and an officer leaning over talking to him with his back to me.
However, in an internal FBI memorandum of February 7, 1964, to A1 Belmont, the assistant director in charge of investigative activities who supervised the entire FBI investigation of the assassination , Assistant DirectorAlex Rosen said that the November 25 date was a “typographical error which had been discovered by SA C Ray Hall of the Dallas Office while he was preparing to testify at Ruby’s bond hearing on January 20, 1964.
Ruby went on to say he tried to get in touch with someone he had read an article about who had “smuggled guns to Castro” and had been given a jail term for doing so.
When Ruby went on to start talking about the John Birch Society, Warren didn’t have Ruby return to the jeep story, but the implication from the context was that nothing came of his plans.
Ruby didn’t say whether he actually contacted the man, but the implication was that he did not.
The FBI in Houston concluded that the man Ruby had most probably tried to contact was Robert Ray McKeown, an American who was arrested on a charge of conspiracy to smuggle guns to Cuba.
He was convicted and on October 24,1958, given a sentence of sixty days and a $500 fine on one count and a two-year suspended sentence on another in a Houston federal court.
Indeed, there had been articles about McKeown’s gunrunning in the Houston Chronicle.
Ruby undoubtedly felt that if McKeown could get guns to Castro, he could also get jeeps.
When Castro visited Houston thereafter in April of 1959, McKeown met with him at the Houston airport and the Chronicle published a photograph of them in its April 28,1959, edition, quoting Castro as saying McKeown would be given a post in his administration if McKeown moved to Cuba.
When FBI agents contacted McKeown on January 24, 1964, he told them that about a week after Castro came to power on January 1,1959, he was working at his place, the J and M Drive-In near Houston, when a Harris County deputy sheriff told him that someone from Dallas was desperately trying to get in touch with him, but the name of the caller was unknown.
When McKeown said he’d have to be paid up front, he never heard from “Rubenstein” again.
About three weeks later, a man personally appeared at McKeown’s drive-in and said he had an option on a great number of jeeps in Shreveport, Louisiana.
He desired to sell them to Castro and needed a letter of introduction to Castro.
The man agreed to the terms but said he didn’t have the $5,000 on him, and McKeown never heard from the man again.
From photographs, McKeown felt “strongly” that the man was Jack Ruby, though the FBI never went back to Ruby with what McKeown said.
My assessment is that Ruby did try to contact McKeown, but whether Ruby actually met and talked to him about the jeep deal, as McKeown claims, is very debatable, although this would not be unlikely.
What is unlikely and almost assuredly not true (either because of McKeown’s faulty memory or because he simply fabricated the story, as he clearly appears to have the Oswald story) is that Ruby called him on the phone to help him get three people out of Cuba.
There’s no evidence, anywhere, that Ruby wanted to get anyone out of Cuba, nor that anyone in Las Vegas would supply Ruby with money to do so.
Moreover, even by McKeown’s own story, he doesn’t say that when he met Ruby a few weeks later, Ruby talked to him about getting anyone out of Cuba or made any reference to calling him on the phone earlier.
It is probable, however, that someone may have called McKeown for help to get people out of Cuba since, as the HSCA said, “McKeown’s close association with Castro prompted many people to ask him for assistance in affairs pertaining to Cuba and Castro.
Another nut case was one Blaney Mack Johnson, who said that when he knew Ruby in 1952 and 1953 in Miami, Ruby was a part owner of the Colonial Inn in Hallandale and was engaged in gunrunning to Cuba.
But there is no credible evidence of Ruby being in South Florida in the early 1950s, and the FBI determined that the Colonial Inn, a mob hangout, wasn’t open then, having been closed on February 12, 1948.
The FBI contacted three people who Johnson said could verify his story, and each said they had no idea what Johnson was talking about.
Visiting her brother and sister-in-law there, she says she met Ruby, who she said was from Chicago and had killed a couple of men there.
Dolores, Thompson’s daughter, saw the man her mother said was Jack Ruby, but said his last name was not Ruby and he had a “full head of dark brown hair,” whereas the real Jack Ruby was nearly bald.
The notion that Ruby was used by others to further their ends and that his real motive for killing Oswald never came out was voiced by Ruby in a slightly different but again irrational way to a reporter from Fort Worth television station KTVT during a “press conference” at his earlier trial in 1964, during which his lawyers did not call him to the witness stand to testify on his own behalf.
But he was free to talk to the Fort Worth television interviewer and say whatever he wanted to him.
It is well known in law enforcement that the validity of a polygraph examination is almost directly dependent on the competence of the operator.
Although he asked Ruby questions that undoubtedly served the same purpose, and we can know what Ruby’s responses would have been to these two questions, and they likewise would have shown no deception, Herndon’s beating around the bush with his questions and his apparent inability to ask the only two explicit ones that any sensible person would want to know the answer to, slightly throws into question his ability to do anything right with respect to the test.
Since the polygraph test is not considered scientifically conclusive and inasmuch as Herndon acknowledged that the test’s reliability depended on Ruby being mentally competent, and Dr.
Among other errors Herndon committed, standard practice is to have only the polygrapher and the person being tested in the room, whereas here, as many as ten people were sometimes in the room, several talking during the pretest period, causing inevitable distraction to Ruby.
Also, recommended practice is to ask only three relevant questions, because the more a person is tested, the less he tends to react when lying.
One panel member said that in twenty-seven years of practice he had never seen more than seventeen relevant questions asked.
Even if we were to assume the total invalidity of the polygraph test given to Ruby, his willingness—in fact, his insistence—that he be given one is strong circumstantial evidence of his innocent state of mind and the truthfulness about everything he said.
Lay people, including Ruby, for the most part believe that lie detector tests can detect lies.
It is a considerable stretch to believe that if Ruby were guilty of being involved in a conspiracy, he would insist on taking a polygraph test, supremely confident he could conceal his guilt and pass the test.
The panel found an “indication” that Ruby was lying in response to 3 other “relevant” questions out of the 55 asked during the test.
One person who did claim to know Ruby fairly well and believed him to be a criminal was one Harry Hall.
The problem is that the story Hall told the FBI from his Terminal Island penitentiary cell off Long Beach, California, didn’t sound believable.
Hunt, the richest man in Texas at the time, large sums of money on big football games, claiming that Ruby won “a large sum of money from Hunt,” which he and Ruby split.
So one of the wealthiest men in the country is a pal of Jack Ruby, who takes him for large sums of money gambling.
The other problem with Hall is that the HSCA tried to substantiate that he even knew Ruby by asking people who knew Ruby well if they had ever heard of Harry Hall.
Moreover, although he lists it with the Capone errands as support, on its face it is not.
Further, we know that Ruby did not meet with Trafficante in Cuba since the latter had left Cuba the previous month.
The only support for the contention that Ruby met Trafficante which Kantor cites is the British journalist, John Wilson Hudson, whose story is absurd on its face.
The shot grazed his forehead and was believed to have been fired by Vincent “The Chin” Gigante, a Vito Genovese enforcer at the time.
A doorman at Costello’s apartment identified Gigante as the gunman, but at Gigante’s trial for attempted murder, Costello testified he was unable to identify Gigante as the person who shot at him and Gigante was acquitted.
One reason for the decline of organized crime is the “Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act” , Title IX of the Organized Crime Control Act of 1970.
RICO was a sleeping giant that was rarely used until the early 1980s, and is credited with being instrumental in helping, since then, to severely weaken organized crime in America.
The statute, which provides for criminal punishment as well as civil remedies, and is not limited in its application to organized crime, has proved to be complex in its application and interpretation.
In very simplistic form, if a group, like a Mafia family, commits two or more criminal acts (e.g., murder, extortion, drug trafficking, loan sharking, etc.) constituting a “pattern of racketeering activity” that affects interstate or foreign commerce, it becomes a criminal “enterprise,” and if one receives income from, invests in, or participates in the enterprise, he is guilty under RICO not only for the individual criminal acts, but simply for being members of the criminal enterprise.
Today, mob defections and the ignoring of omerta have become almost routine.
Vitale testified he had participated in eleven mob murders, seven of which were on the orders of Massino.
He writes that the general term in Italy that used to describe not only the Sicilian Mafia but its companion groups, the Calabrian “Fibbia” and the Neopolitan “Camorra,” was Mala Vita.
A1 Capone’s incarceration on the eleven-year federal sentence for income tax evasion was not the first incarceration for him.
On his way back to the train depot from the theater, two Philly detectives recognized him and during a frisk discovered his shoulder holster with a loaded automatic.
Though he produced for them a permit to carry the gun in Chicago, the grinning detectives reminded Capone he was in Philadelphia, where the permit was no good.
He was arrested, convicted, and served ten months of a one-year sentence in Pennsylvania for carrying a concealed weapon, during which time his brother Ralph and Frank “The Enforcer” Nitti acted as his surrogates in running the Chicago mob.
The source for this high number was always thought to be Joseph Yalachi.
Author George De Stefano writes that “the Mafia gangster truly became a mythic figure in the late 1960’s with the publication of Mario Puzo’s novel The Godfather , and in the early 1970’s with the release of the first two Godfather films.
The Godfather, in both its literary and cinematic incarnations, sold the public the fiction of a vast, centralized, and enormously powerful criminal organization run by Sicilians and their American-born offspring.
These dark, dangerous men made offers that could not be refused, sent their enemies to sleep with the fishes, and loved their families enough to kill for them.
The only connection between Meyer Lansky and J Edgar Hoover that one could argue, albeit very weakly, induced Hoover to go easy on the mob is that reputedly, Lansky was instrumental in arranging to turn over to Hoover in 1939 Louis “Lepke” Buchalter, whom Hoover had called “the most dangerous criminal in America” because he was perhaps the nation’s leading drug trafficker at the time.
Lepke was not tied in to the mob as much as Lansky, but his operation was intertwined with mob business, and he was close enough to the mob to have Albert Anastasia, head of organized crime’s Murder, Inc., kill witnesses against him.
Though Lepke was a close friend of Lansky’s, Lepke was thought to be “kill crazy” and no one felt comfortable or safe dealing with him.
Finally, Lansky had an associate convince Lepke to turn himself in to Hoover under the pretext that a “deal” had been worked out with Hoover, which it had not.
The apprehension of Lepke, who surrendered to Hoover personally by getting out of one car on a Manhattan street and entering Hoover’s car (famed newspaper columnist and radio broadcaster Walter Winchell, a Hoover friend, was in the car with Hoover), was a major victory for Hoover that helped solidify his image as America’s number-one crime-buster.
One of the two principal facts that spawned the homosexual allegations against J Edgar Hoover is that Hoover, who at one time reportedly was linked romantically with Lela Rogers, mother of actress Ginger Rogers, never married.
But she chose an army officer who was stationed in Europe during the First World War over him.
The other, perhaps most important fact was that Hoover’s constant and virtually only companion, at evening dinners as well as on vacations, was his FBI colleague Clyde Tolson, Hoover’s closest friend and confidant for forty-two years.
All of this, indeed, would be, shall we say, “circumstantial evidence” that the relationship between Hoover and Tolson was something more than mere friendship.
Tolson, however, as associate director, was the number-two man at the FBI, a career man whose total devotion to the bureau was matched only by Hoover’s.
In fact, those who knew the two said that Hoover “couldn’t have done the things he did without Clyde,” that Tolson was “equal, but subordinate” to Hoover.
However, there are those who believed the estimates of Hoover’s estate, including his home, were very low.
Hoover’s only debt at the time of his death was a bill for $650 for two custom-made suits ordered a month before he died.
Crawford, a black who was an FBI agent himself, was Hoover’s chauffeur for thirty-seven years up to his retirement in 1972.
J Edgar Hoover was adept at excuses for not enforcing laws he apparently had little interest in.
Perhaps the most egregious example of this was his complete failure to investigate crimes against blacks by law enforcement in the South.
This was the main reason why Martin Luther King publicly asked for Hoover’s resignation.
Hoover would later say that he didn’t have jurisdiction over these crimes until the Civil Rights Act was passed in 1964.
Ever since the Reconstruction era in the South following the Civil War, federal authorities have been authorized to arrest, prosecute, and convict “whoever under color of law” violates the civil rights of another.
The law was passed in Congress in 1873 and to this very day (e.g., the prosecution of four LAPD officers in the Rodney King case) remains the main law, not the Civil Rights Act of 1964, under which the Department of Justice prosecutes law enforcement for brutality and misconduct toward blacks, other minorities, and everyday Americans.
A contributing factor toward Hoover’s nonaction against civil rights violations by law enforcement in the South was his racism.
Though never blatant, it manifested itself in several ways, one of which was that at the time RFK became attorney general, there wasn’t one single black FBI agent doing regular FBI work.
The only five in the entire bureau were employed doing personal work for Hoover.
RFK kept pressuring Hoover to employ black agents, to the point where FBI agents would mock Kennedy by saying, “Boys, if you don’t work with vigah, you’ll be replaced by a niggah,” in reference to all the black agents they could expect in the bureau if they didn’t expose the civil rights movement to Kennedy as being a Communist front.
That Robert F Kennedy told a reporter this suggests that as late as December of 1961, Hoover still wasn’t really aboard in fighting organized crime.
However, author Curt Gentry noted that the very next month Hoover at least “officially declared” war on organized crime.
The FBI, not denying Levine’s charges, responded only by saying that his 1,500 number was an “exaggeration,” which would seem to imply its concession that Levine’s number was at least fairly close to the mark.
In an investigation in 1955 by Senator Price Daniel and his judiciary subcommittee on narcotics traffic, the names of familiar mafiosi kept cropping up . 1157 mob’s Apalachin meeting: There is disagreement as to the number of mob leaders who attended the Apalachin summit.
Yalachi had been serving time on two drug trafficking convictions at a federal penitentiary in 1962.
He was sharing a cell with Vito Genovese, the head of the Mafia family Yalachi was a member of, who was serving time on his own narcotics conviction.
Valachi said that one night in their cell Genovese, who had been the best man at Valachi’s wedding years earlier, said to him, “You know, you buy a barrel of apples, and one of them is touched.
Valachi knew this was a Mafia kiss of death, resulting, Valachi said, from Genovese’s erroneous belief that he had informed on the mob to the Federal Bureau of Narcotics on another matter.
On June 22, 1962, Valachi, holding a two-foot piece of iron pipe, bludgeoned a co-inmate named John Joseph Saup to death, mistakenly believing that Saup was actually Joe Di Palermo , who was out to kill him.
When Valachi learned the United States attorney was going to seek the death penalty against him for the Saup murder, he decided to become an informant against the Mafia for a plea bargain that let him plead guilty to second-degree murder with a life sentence.
Joe Valachi would have to go some, however, to compete with his counterpart in the Sicilian Mafia, Tomasso Buscetta, who turned on his fellow mafiosi and became the chief prosecution witness against them.
In an interesting book on the Chicago mob, The Outfit: The Role ofiChicago’s Underworld in the Shaping of Modern America, author Gus Russo suggests that at least JFK’s father, Joe Kennedy, felt his son needed the mob to win the presidential election.
Russo says the Chicago mob was contacted for help in the 1960 presidential campaign by Joe, whose association with mob figures stemming from his bootlegging days in Boston during Prohibition has been well chronicled in several books , and whose passion to get his son elected president knew no boundaries.
Russo says sources told him that Joe Kennedy actually met with Chicago mob boss Sam Giancana in a judge’s chambers in Chicago to ask him to deliver the union vote in Cook County.
Even if these questionable sources for Russo’s information are to be believed, the quid pro quo (a hot line to the White House for Giancana, and JFK’s administration going easy on the Chicago mob) still does not begin to establish the agreement that conspiracy theorists allege was entered into—that in return for organized crime in America supporting Kennedy’s candidacy in a big way, JFK would not vigorously pursue the Mafia in America.
After all, there was much, much more to the American Mafia than the Chicago Outfit.
Indeed, there is no implication in Russo’s book that JFK had anything to do with the alleged agreement, the sense being, in fact, that this was something Joe Kennedy had done on his own and without authorization from his son.
Powerful politicians from around the country would be highly unlikely to fly to a mobster’s hotel room in Chicago to get marching orders on how to help Kennedy.
And I wouldn’t think too many Teamsters would be willing to defy their iron-willed boss, Jimmy Hoffa, someone who didn’t look kindly on dissenting members.
Hoffa and the Teamsters’ executive board, you see, had endorsed Nixon over Kennedy for president.
Hersh says Joe Kennedy had turned to Touhy, an old friend, to set up the meeting and Touhy had in turn asked Robert McDonnell, a mob attorney, for help.
Hersh says McDonnell told him that he gave Touhy the name of a local politician to set up arrangements for the meeting.
Cal Neva was owned in part by Chicago mobster Sam Giancana and Sinatra.
D’Amato would tell anyone who would listen that Joe Kennedy approached him to raise money among his mob associates for the West Virginia primary.
D’Amato says he agreed if Joe Kennedy would see to it that a 1956 federal deportation order against New Jersey mobster Joe Adonis was overturned in the event Jack Kennedy became president, which D’Amato says Joe Kennedy agreed to.
D’Amato claims he raised $50,000 from his mob friends and delivered it to local Democratic politicians in West Virginia, not, he says, as bribes, but to help them buy campaign supplies in their effort to support Kennedy’s efforts.
When D’Amato, after Jack Kennedy won, wanted Joe Kennedy to deliver on his agreement, D’Amato claims that Joe Kennedy said that Bobby Kennedy, now the attorney general, would not allow it.
One could expect D’Amato, if anything, to exaggerate his contribution to the West Virginia primary, and $50,000 is a rather piddling sum.
Roemer’s last clause was loose speaking on his part in that it implies he was aware of examples when the mob did go after a member or members of these categories of people.
But no one, including Roemer, has come up with any evidence that organized crime in America ever killed or attempted to kill a reporter, judge, FBI agent, or cop, much less a powerful public official.
In one of the more transparently worthless observations about whether or not Carlos Marcello made the subject remark, author Gerald Posner quotes one Hubie Badeaux, a former New Orleans police intelligence chief, as say656 ENDNOTES ing he was “personally acquainted” with Marcello.
Right off we already know that whatever Badeaux says is going to be lightweight, because based on who Marcello was and who Badeaux was, the personal acquaintanceship was most likely not that of a social friend or, obviously, as a member of Marcello’s mob family.
And we can also be reasonably confident that Badeaux never investigated Marcello because if he had, certainly Posner, who is trying to make a point, would have emphasized this fact.
That really only leaves one other option—that Badeaux “knew of” Marcello, possibly to the extent of even nodding to him in passing each other on the street.
If he were, I assume Posner would be sure to tell his readers precisely why he was.
But dees, dems , and dose are English, not Italian, and Marcello, per Becker, was speaking Italian, a language he was much more fluent in.
Badeaux adds that for Marcello to have said what was claimed he said “would have been a goddamn oration” for Marcello.
The reason you don’t know, Hubie, is that it couldn’t be more obvious that you are no authority, of any kind, on Marcello.
Sicily is a region of Italy and although Sicilians speak a distinctive dialect, they still speak essentially Italian.
Marcello, speaking Italian, allegedly uttered a well-known Sicilian expression.
John Davis, author of a book that imputes guilt in the Kennedy assassination to Carlos Marcello, offers up a flake to his readers as one of his supports for his charge.
One Eugene R Dela Parra, an ex-marine on a 70 percent nervous-breakdown disability who worked as a racetrack groom and part-time waiter at Traegle’s Bar in New Orleans, which Davis says was “backed” by Vincent Marcello, Carlos’s brother, told the FBI on November 28, 1963, that one day in March of 1963 he overheard a conversation at the bar between Traegle and two friends, one a horse trainer, the other someone referred to as the “Professor,” in which they were all looking at an advertisement in a detective magazine for a foreign-made rifle that sold for $12.98.
The well-known cost of Oswald’s Carcano without a telescopic sight and shipping charges was $12.78.
Apparently, if we’re to believe Dela Parra, he was not just overhearing a conversation.
He looked over their shoulders and down on precisely what they were looking at, even picking up—though the parties to the conversation never mentioned it—the cost of the rifle.
Dela Parra says he heard Traegle say, “This would be a nice rifle to buy to get the President.
There is a price on the President’s head, and other members of the Kennedy family.
Davis, who writes loosely throughout his relatively well-received book, frequently without citing any source for what he says, does say that on February 23, 1967, Dela Parra was interviewed by the FBI in Newark, New Jersey, and he came up with something new he hadn’t mentioned before.
Dela Parra said that after the remark was made, Ben Traegle came up to him in the backroom.
He repeated the remark (Dela Parra didn’t have to eavesdrop and look over anyone’s shoulder anymore) and then, laughing, added that they were “only paying $1,000” for the hit.
Not only doesn’t he ridicule the Dela Parra nonsense (indeed, he chastises the FBI for disbelieving Dela Parra’s tale), but adds his own rubbish to the brew.
Davis writes that David Ferrie listed himself in the New Orleans telephone directory as “Dr.
Since, Davis claims, David Ferrie frequented Marcello-backed bars in New Orleans and was known to lecture people in a professional manner, “one wonders whether the ‘Professor’ in Traegle’s bar” was David Ferrie.
One of the BRILAB bugs that the FBI placed picked up a conversation between Carlos Marcello and his mob friend Santo Trafficante in Marcello’s New Orleans office on September 16,1979.
In the twenty-seven-page transcript of the conversation there is only one very brief and passing reference to the Kennedy assassination.
It’s in the middle of another subject, Marcello telling Trafficante, without any response from the latter, that some person had told him, “Carlos, he said, I guess they gonna nail us for this shit, just like that.
The FBI concluded that nothing of any evidentiary value could be inferred from this Kennedy reference.
When the person asked Marcello how he would respond to the HSCA’s suspicions about him, Marcello allegedly told the man to shut up, and that they should go outside and talk, which the two did.
However, conspiracy theorists have accused Carlos Marcello so many times of being behind Kennedy’s murder that he allegedly blurted out in 1989 that he was.
Marcello, seventy-nine at the time, was serving time on a conspiracy to commit bribery conviction at the Federal Correctional Institution in Texarkana, Texas.
In February of 1989, his mental condition had worsened to the point where he would wander around the FCI halls and forget where his cell was located.
When he started having dizzy spells, he was placed in the Wadley Regional Medical Center in Texarkana.
On February 28,1989, FCI guards James Cates and Vincent Brown were asked to work overtime and go to the hospital to guard Marcello, which was not their regular assignment.
Cates says (corroborated by Brown) that Marcello climbed out of his bed and told the two of them, “I want to thank you boys for coming by.
They got the impression he thought they were his bodyguards in New Orleans.
Cates and Brown and a nurse then got Marcello back in bed and secured his restraints after a brief struggle with him.
Stringfellow had been Marcello’s doctor for five years at Texarkana, had never heard Marcello make any such remark, and said he was “surprised” to hear Cates’s and Brown’s story.
And none of the many other guards or nurses who attended to Marcello (because of his steadily deteriorating condition he was eventually transferred to the Federal Medical Center in Rochester, Minnesota) during his increasing senility ever reported hearing anything close to what Cates and Brown claimed they heard.
If there were one tiny speck of credible evidence that Marcello had Oswald kill Kennedy, that would be one thing.
If Marcello said these words, they probably reflected a desire on his part that Kennedy die , coupled with the thought of his being behind Kennedy’s murder being implanted indelibly in his subconscious mind by so many accusers.
It is noteworthy that even the conspiracy community that trumpets Marcello’s involvement in the assassination has virtually ignored the report from Cates and Brown, since Marcello was senile or delirious when he made the alleged statement.
When the FBI interviewed Marcello at the Federal Medical Center in Rochester, Minnesota, in September of 1989, he denied making the statements attributed to him by Cates and Brown and said he had no information on the killing of John F Kennedy.
When he was told that someone allegedly overheard him say in December of 1985 that he had had John Kennedy killed and that his only regret was that he did not kill Kennedy himself, Marcello said this was “crazy talk,” and that he had never made such a statement.
Unless Marcello was feigning senility, it was clear that at this point in time he was indeed suffering from it.
Yet when other agents interviewed him shortly thereafter that day, he said he had nothing against Robert Kennedy and did not have any information to indicate he was responsible for his deportation.
In the same interview, he was asked if he was familiar with certain names.
He said the name David Ferrie was familiar to him but could not recall who he was.
When told that Murret had worked as a bookie for his sports wire service, he apparently recalled running such a service but said he had many people working for him and could not recall all of them.
He said he did not know anyone named Edward Becker and denied telling anyone what Becker said he said.
Most notably, Marcello said he never had an attorney named Gil Wray , only one Mike Maroon, who had come to Guatemala to help him.
When Marcello was informed that Gil Wray was the attorney who defended him in his 1963 prosecution for falsifying government documents, he said he did not recall any such prosecution.
He worked for Sam outa his place downtown, you know, Saia’s restaurant, the Felix Oyster Bar or something like dat.
I’m putting this in an endnote because its credibility is so weak it’s not worthy of the main text.
One is that wherever Oswald worked, there were witnesses to his employment.
Here, all of Oswald’s time in New Orleans has been accounted for by several sources, including documentation and work records (see the many citations in the Oswald biography in the book), and there is no meaningful period when Oswald could have been working for his uncle.
Even if there were, there is no evidence, from anyone, to confirm Oswald’s having done so.
Davis’s excuse for Marcello’s remarks about Oswald not being on tape is nothing short of laughable.
Let’s assume that for whatever reason, Hauser never had his tape recorder present when Marcello made the alleged remarks.
There are many other reasons why I don’t believe Hauser on this matter.
Dutz Murret seemed to be quite concerned about the welfare of his nephew Lee and desired that he lead a straight and narrow life.
For instance, he told Lee he had better show up in court on the Bringuier altercation, and to thereafter go out and get a job and support his family.
Dutz was also appalled at his nephew’s affinity for Fidel Castro, indicating his displeasure to Lee by asking him if he was part of any “Commie” group, to which Lee, cowed, said he was not.
It should be noted that even if, for the sake of argument, Marcello had made the subject remarks, they certainly don’t add up, in any way, to what conspiracy theorists want us to believe—that Oswald killed Kennedy for Marcello.
By the way, even Davis doesn’t apparently think too much of Hauser’s credibility.
There are other examples of Frank Ragano taking vast liberties with the truth in his book Mob Lawyer.
On June 8,1959, six months after Fidel Castro took power in Cuba, he announced that all undesirable aliens would be rounded up for deportation.
Trafficante, who had stayed in Havana trying to salvage what he could of the wealth generated from his gambling interests, fell under that rubric and was arrested without any specific charges lodged against him.
He was detained at the Trescornia Immigration Station in Havana, a large old home being used as a temporary detention center.
Describing his visiting Trafficante there, Ragano writes, “The house was encircled by a chain-link fence about five feet high, but no guards were in sight and the front gate was unlocked.
In fact, he has sometimes shown remarkable compassion against some of his most deadly enemies, such as Rolando Cubela, whose sentence of death for conspiracy to murder Castro was reduced by Castro to life imprisonment.
Although Trafficante had done business with Castro’s predecessor, Fulgencio Batista, and Castro could assume that Trafficante had supported Batista financially, that still would have been no reason for Castro to kill Trafficante as opposed to incarcerating him if he decided on any punitive measures at all.
In My Story , Judith Exner’s tell-all book in 1977, she never said or even hinted that there was any relationship between John F Kennedy and Sam Giancana.
Earlier, in her testimony before the Church Committee in 1975, she said she never told Kennedy about any of her mob friends.
But in a long cover story by writer Kitty Kelley in the February 29,1988, edition of People magazine, she changed her story and came up with the extremely improbable tale that she was Kennedy’s link with the mob, and she told Kelley that at Kennedy’s insistence, she actually set up about ten meetings between Kennedy and Giancana, one of which, she believes, was at the White House.
Also, before and after Kennedy became president, she served as a “courier” for Kennedy, delivering envelopes to Giancana and mobster Johnny Roselli.
In other words, the two mobsters apparently had no way of communicating with each other, so Kennedy had to get Exner to deliver an envelope from one to the other.
In The Dark Side of Camelot , Seymour Hersh writes that Martin Underwood, a former political operative for Chicago mayor Richard Daley who worked as a presidential advance man for LBJ, told him “in a 1977 interview” that on one train trip from Washington to Chicago he followed Exner and watched her hand a satchel in Chicago to Sam Giancana.
Hersh seems to suggest that he believes Underwood even though the story is not believable.
She had terminal cancer and she says she wanted to clear her conscience.
And the report goes on to quote former assistant FBI director Courtney Evans, who headed the Special Investigative Division, that those conducting the investigation “sure didn’t come to me.
But it’s remarkable that the HSCA Report would use Evans to support a position that the committee, for whatever reason, was pushing.
Because when Evans testified before the HSCA he couldn’t have been clearer that under the facts of this case, it would not have been FBI policy for the Special Investigative Division to investigate organized crime.
In this situation the primary criminal statute involved was the killing of a federal officer.
The jurisdiction of this type of crime was in the General Investigative Division.
Senator Carl Curtis of Nebraska wanted to know about organized crime in his area.
Though the conspiracy theorists think nothing of accusing the CIA of being behind the assassination , they become upset when the CIA does the perfectly normal thing to defend itself in any lawful way it can from the charge.
For instance, in conspiracy theorist James DiEugenio’s book Destiny Betrayed , he is sufficiently irritated to fill nearly three pages of his book with an April 1, 1967, dispatch from CIA headquarters to “Chiefs, Certain Stations and Bases” to counter the charges of the Warren Commission critics.
Apparently, DiEugenio believed the CIA, even if innocent, should just lie down and play dead when being accused of murdering Kennedy.
In the April 1 dispatch, CIA headquarters said that “conspiracy theorists have frequently thrown suspicion on our organization , for example, by falsely alleging that Lee Harvey Oswald worked for us.
Also, to “employ propaganda assets to answer and refute the attacks of the critics.
The CIA budget remains classified to this day Steven Aftergood, a senior research analyst at the Federation of American Scientists in Washington, D.C., said that as a result of a Freedom of Information Act request of his, in 2005 a federal court ordered the CIA to disclose the CIA budget for 1963.
Aftergood said he was unable to confirm any CIA budget other than the one for 1963.
In fact, in a May 4, 2005, letter to Aftergood from CIA counsel Janice Galli McLeod, in which she complied with the court order to furnish Aftergood with the CIA budget figure for 1963, she curiously attached a copy of the aforementioned “Cost Reduction Program” (which Aftergood said he already had), which contained the 1963 appropriation of $550 million as well as the appropriations for 1964, 1965, and 1966, and did not suggest in her letter that any of the figures were incorrect.
All CIA agents take an oath of secrecy, and this oath can collide with the imperatives of law.
One of the most famous examples was the testimony of the director of central intelligence, Richard Helms, on February 7, 1973, before a congressional committee that the CIA had not given funds to the opponents of Salvador Allende Gossens, the Marxist president of Chile, in an attempt to oust Allende from power in the 1970 national election.
Although technically the CIA had not given money directly to the candidates but to groups behind them (about $8 million had been funneled through the CIA to antiAllende groups), this was a distinction without substance, and although there was no passion in official Washington to charge Helms with perjury, some in the Department of Justice wanted to.
But since Helms, if he lied, which he surely did, was not lying to protect himself but the CIA and our national interests, most everyone wanted the matter to go away.
Finally, with Helms never having been formally charged with perjury, a plea bargain was worked out wherein if he pled nolo contendere (“I will not contest it”—not a plea of guilty but the legal equivalent) to two misdemeanor counts of failing to testify “fully and completely” to Congress, he would be fined $2,000 and given a two-year prison term, which would be suspended.
There’s no way to know what would have happened if he had simply refused to answer.
The CIA is not the only federal agency that has gotten in bed with the mob when it was to its benefit.
It is well documented and acknowledged that during the Second World War, United States naval intelligence officers solicited and received the assistance of Lucky Luciano, Meyer Lansky, and others to aid them with intelligence and informants in the Allied invasion of Sicily in July of 1943 through the mobsters’ ties with the Sicilian mob.
Ironically, it was Dewey, as a special prosecutor in the biggest case of his career, who convicted Luciano and fifteen of his associates on the vice charges in 1936, a few of the prostitutes themselves testifying against Luciano.
Sciacca, no defender of Luciano, whom he accuses of multiple murders, writes a powerful indictment of the prostitution conviction in his book.
He concludes, as Luciano would always maintain (and the most notorious madam of the era, Polly Adler, supported), that Luciano had absolutely nothing to do with The Sicilian Mafia was also rewarded.
ENDNOTES prostitution, and that the main witnesses who testified against him did so “because of favors promised or because of threats by Dewey’s staff,” several witnesses later signing statements recanting their trial testimony.
He goes on to say that “most Mafia and legal scholars who have reviewed the trial record agree that Luciano as the family boss profited from the prostitution racket; yet, in retrospect, they suspect there is a strong possibility that he may have been framed by compliant witnesses with false accusations.
The conviction of Luciano vaulted Dewey to national prominence and he was elected DA in Manhattan in 1937, where he continued his assault on organized crime.
Shortly after Luciano arrived back in Italy, the Sicilian-born mobster obtained a Cuban passport and in late September of 1946 headed for Havana, where his brethren, primarily Meyer Lansky, had established a gambling empire years earlier under the friendly protection of Cuban leader Fulgencio Batista, who was now in exile but continued to wield enormous influence on the island’s affairs.
Frank Costello, Vito Genovese, Albert Anastasia, Meyer Lansky, Carlos Marcello, Santo Trafficante Sr., Joe Adonis, Joe Profaci, Thomas Lucchese, and Tony Accardo, among many others, along with their lawyers, advisers, and special guests, including Frank Sinatra, who came to Havana to sing in honor of Luciano.
The meeting was so big that the Hotel Nacional was closed to the public.
Matters like new or confirmed spheres of influence, launching a drug trade, and opening up Las Vegas, starting with the Hotel Flamingo.
Luciano, who had presided over the Havana summit, naturally thought he was back, big-time.
When everyone left the city to go back home, Luciano, of course, stayed, and moved into the exclusive Miramar neighborhood, just a few blocks from the private mansion of Cuba’s then president, Grau San Martin.
Harry Anslinger, the United States commissioner of narcotics at the time, writes that Luciano quickly became close to Cuban officials through the lavish use of expensive gifts.
The Isle of Pines, south of Cuba, was to become the Monte Carlo of the Western Hemisphere.
Anslinger had the American ambassador to Cuba demand that the Cuban government deport Luciano, but it refused to do so.
Eventually, the United States government formally announced an embargo of medical supplies to Cuba.
Since the United States was virtually its only supplier of medical narcotics at the time, the Cuban government was forced to capitulate, and in March of 1947, Luciano, once again, was sent back to Italy, where he lived until his death in Naples in 1962.
Throughout Luciano’s exile in Italy, American mafiosi paid homage to him by visiting him, and Meyer Lansky, Frank Costello, and Vito Genovese sent him money on a regular basis from their mob earnings in the states.
If he is correct, as I am inclined to believe, it is possible that Sinatra made two trips to Havana, once during the convention to sing for a Luciano tribute, and two months later when he came with the Fischetti brothers.
His staff and friends . . . were drug smugglers or involved in drug smuggling’ the DEA and CIA reported that leading Contra commanders were major traffickers.
The Times managed to obtain a copy of this secret history, though the history still remains classified, and has published excerpts of it.
In 1940, when the Roosevelt administration learned that Axis agents had established a “string of espionage bases from Mexico City southward to the Strait of Magellan,” the president issued a directive giving the FBI jurisdiction over the gathering of intelligence in Central and South America.
The bureau set up a precursor to the CIA in the Special Intelligence Service to coordinate this gathering of intelligence south of the border not just for the FBI, but also for the State Department and other governmental agencies.
The FBI even set up an SIS school to train agents for assignment in Central and South America, which included a comprehensive course in conversational Spanish and Portuguese.
In undercover operations identical to those conducted later by the CIA, one FBI agent, for example, went to South America as a soap salesman for an American company, which had no idea he was an FBI agent.
Another opened a stockbrokerage business in Argentina, from which his reports to the FBI were even more important than those to his clients.
Another went to South America under the guise of being an American reporter.
At one point in 1944, when five SIS informants were being detained by Argentine police and it was feared that they might disclose the identities of SIS agents there, Hoover ordered the agents out of Buenos Aires.
The National Security Act of 1947, creating the CIA, statutorily removed the SIS from jurisdiction over the gathering of foreign intelligence.
Additionally, 7,064 enemy aliens in the United States were moved from strategic areas, or deported.
Thus, the Domestic Contact Service of the CIA, which openly gathered intelligence on foreign countries from American citizens returning home after traveling abroad, was deemed to be perfectly lawful.
But Hersh and others alleged that the CIA had gone far beyond this and, for instance, had spied on and kept dossiers on American dissidents, and opened and intercepted personal mail of American citizens to and from the Soviet Union.
By the time the mail intercept operation ended in 1973, it had spread to San Francisco, Hawaii, and New Orleans for brief periods.
When asked for an explanation on why only two Oswald-related letters were flagged, the CIA pointed out, as indicated earlier, that it only opened up a very small percentage of letters to copy and analyze.
Its goal was to collect information on dissident Americans overseas from CIA stations in foreign countries.
That always remained its primary focus, but the Rockefeller Commission found that, perhaps inevitably, the CIA eventually began spying on and accumulating files on New Left activists, campus radicals, and black nationalists in this country, most of whom were involved in the anti-Vietnam War movement.
By the time Operation CHAOS closed down in 1974, the CIA had compiled files on 7,200 Americans.
Investigation revealed there had been ample warning that the Japanese were up to something, reams of information picked up here and there that should have alerted Army and Navy commanders in the Pacific that we were in danger.
But for the most part this intelligence, gathered by military informants, had lain unused because there was no single, central organization equipped to analyze it and see to its speedy dispatch to those concerned.
If it was Pearl Harbor, the United States government took quite a while to establish the OSS, in December of 1942, in response to it, one entire year having elapsed.
On January 23,1946, President Truman created an agency responsible for foreign intelligence in the interim until the establishment of the CIA, in July of 1947.
The CIG had a staff of only around eighty “officers and clerks on loan from the War and State Departments.
Many say that the CIG was simply renamed the CIA when the CIA was created under the National Security Act of 1947 as a fully staffed and funded, independent agency.
Souers was succeeded after four and a half months by General Hoyt Yandenberg, who served for almost a year and then was succeeded by Roscoe Hillenkoetter.
In fact, in an early 1961 CIA covert project code-named ZR/RIFLE, the brainchild of CIA Deputy Director for Plans Richard Bissell, and headed by William Harvey, the chief of Task Force W , “Executive Action” capability, a CIA euphemism for the standing capability to assassinate foreign leaders, was set up.
Harvey testified before the Church Committee, however, that Executive Action covered a “wide spectrum of actions” to “eliminate the effectiveness” of foreign leaders, with assassination as the “most extreme” action in the spectrum.
His cryptic handwritten notes of meetings held on January 25 and 26,1961, with Joseph Scheider, chief of the Technical Services Division of the CIA at the time, contain phrases like “last resort beyond last resort and a confession of weakness,” “the magic button,” and “never mention word assassination,” which Harvey acknowledged to the committee all referred to the assassination capability.
Bundy believed that neither of these conditions had been fulfilled, and said further that he did not brief President Kennedy on the Executive Action project.
Though the word assassinate was not used, only that QJ/WIN was to undertake a mission that “might involve a large element of personal risk” {Alleged Assassination Plots,43; CIA Cable, November 2,1960), there can be no question from the timing of the visit to Leopoldville, and the history of what was transpiring leading up to the visit, that he was sent there to kill Lumumba.
The support for the proposition that “removal” meant assassination is extensive.
Bronson Tweedy, the CIA’s chief of the Africa Division, testified before the Church Committee that shortly before the Dulles cable, Deputy Director for Plans Richard Bissell spoke to him about the feasibility of assassinating Lumumba.
Whether these “other assignments” could include assassination is not known, but he was described as someone who, if “his case officer ordered him to carry out ... he will dutifully undertake appropriate action for its execution without pangs of conscience.
Scheider was under the clear impression that President Eisenhower had ordered the CIA to assassinate Lumumba.
In a later appearance, however, he acknowledged that Mulroney “had been asked to plan and prepare for” the assassination of Lumumba.
Of all the federal agencies, the FBI conducted the principal investigation into the assassination, the Secret Service being a distant second.
However, the CIA conducted its own investigation in foreign areas touching on the assassination.
At least at the beginning, at least technically, it was John Scelso (CIA pseudonym of John Whitten), a CIA veteran who at the time was the chief of WH3, which ran clandestine operations for the Western Hemisphere.
Richard Helms, the deputy director of the CIA, gave Scelso the assignment and made it clear that everything pertaining to the investigation should go through him.
But the legendary James Angleton, the CIA’s chief of counterintelligence, ignored Helms’s directive and conducted whatever investigation he deemed appropriate on his own, dealing directly with J Edgar Hoover, with whom he had “enormously influential” ties, and former CIA director Allen Dulles, a member of the Warren Commission.
Scelso said he had a staff of around thirty agents and thirty clerical workers assigned to the investigation.
After sifting out the relevant from a great amount of “bizarre fabrications,” and passing on allegations, with his unit’s evaluation, to the FBI and Warren Commission, he submitted a report to Helms stating that Oswald killed Kennedy and acted alone.
When Helms, sometime around early January of 1964, called a meeting in his office with Scelso and Angleton to discuss Scelso’s report, Angleton proceeded to savage it for its many purported inadequacies, and Helms thereupon removed Scelso from the case and formally turned over the continuing CIA investigation of the assassination to Angleton and his counterintelligence staff.
Though no member of the HSCA has changed his position on the CIA’s cooperation with the committee, G Robert Blakey, the former general counsel for the committee, has.
It apparently started with a provocative article in the April 12—18, 2001, edition of the Miami New Times titled “Revelation 19.63” and written by Washington Post reporter Jefferson Morley.
But as we will see, from his article alone, one could conclude that Morley himself doesn’t have too much confidence there is any meaningful “revelation” in his article.
This inference was in part confirmed when I later wrote and spoke to Morley.
Because of their open opposition to Castro, they were forced to go underground or flee to Miami.
In mid-1961, the CIA station in Miami began working with the DRE to send anti-Castro students to universities throughout Latin America.
The Miami CIA station also trained certain DRE members in clandestine operations in the hope that they would be infiltrated into Cuba in teams.
In 1978, the CIA had called Joannides out of retirement to handle the HSCA’s requests for CIA documents.
Very upset, Blakey, for Frontline's fortieth anniversary special on the assassination in 2003, sent to PBS an “Addendum” to his appearance on the November 16,1993, Frontline special on the case.
In his article, Morley, clearly a very fair-minded and responsible writer, tries to build a case against Joannides as perhaps being involved in the assassination.
Morley secured statements from former CIA operations officers that if Joannides were the DRE contact officer, he almost for certain would have completed reports on the DRE on a monthly or at least quarterly basis.
An internal CIA report dated August 29, 1962, said, “Although the CIA conducts joint activities with the DRE and puts up all of the money for such operations, the DRE is not fully responsive to CIA direction.
But when I spoke to Morley later, he seemed to be on more solid footing on this matter than in his article.
He said that Joannides’s predecessor, CIA agent Ross Crozier, filed a threeor four-page summary report to JM/WAVE, the CIA station in Miami, each month from September 1960 to November 1962 on his relationship with the DRE, the report including such things as how the budget given the group by the CIA was being spent.
Morley believes they do exist and the CIA is stonewalling for some reason that’s not good.
But Morley, who tells his readers that “the Joannides’ story doesn’t prove the existence of an assassination conspiracy,” is obviously proceeding under the assumption that the CIA may be hiding something, and the thing it is hiding, just as obviously, is Joannides’s knowledge of the DRE having Kennedy killed, or being complicit with the agency in the assassination.
However, if the Joannides conspiracy theorists (Morley and his inevitable band of followers) actually think that the only reason why the CIA is resisting the release of documents pertaining to Joannides is because the agency must have something to hide, they clearly haven’t learned from years and years of experience by people like Lesar, who have found that the CIA had nothing to hide in thousands of previous documents the agency initially refused to release voluntarily but ultimately did release under court order.
The CIA specializes in always acting guilty, even when it is not, and always being, from a public relations standpoint, its own worst enemy.
Apart from the fact that after close to forty-five years of investigation, not one speck of credible evidence has ever emerged showing that anyone other than Oswald was involved in the assassination, the gaping hole in the above allegation by Morley of Joannides and DRE involvement in Kennedy’s murder is that, whether Morley realizes it or not, even he, the chief proponent of such a possibility, apparently doesn’t truly believe it himself.
We used to have a cup of coffee at Howard Johnsons ... three times a week to once every two weeks”), he never even remotely hints that they were involved in the assassination.
Indeed, the main person he wants to talk about is Joannides, the DRE only having, for the most part, a supporting role in his stage production.
The bottom line is that Morley seems to accept unquestioningly every word the former DRE members told him, and relies on them to prove his case against Joannides.
If one reads Morley’s article literally , one can only conclude that Joannides, not the DRE with whom he dealt, may have been involved in the assassination.
What seems to have eluded Morley is that if he exonerates the DRE, which he does by default in his writing, he thereby also exonerates Joannides.
But unwitting is synonymous with innocent, since one cannot be guilty of any serious crime unless they have “mens reaf a guilty and reprehensible state of mind, t And Morley hasn’t yet spelled out for our edification how Joannides or anyone else used the DRE, without its knowledge, to get Oswald to murder Kennedy.
We know that *He does let someone else make the accusation in just one sentence—Fabian Escalante, the retired head of the Department of State Security under Castro. tAt one point Morley goes so far as to write, “In October 1964 the Warren Commission issued its final report, concluding that Oswald ‘alone and unaided’ had killed Kennedy.
In a later, unpublished and undated article titled “The Perfect Man for the Job,” he writes, “As debate . . . and investigation of the Kennedy assassination would grow over the years, George Joannides’ role in the events of 1963 would remain invisible,” and that Joannides was “at the heart of the Kennedy assassination cover-up.” tin a February 9, 2005, letter to me, Morley rejected the notion that the DRE hated Kennedy as much as Castro, only saying that “the DRE vehemently opposed Kennedy’s Cuba policy,” something of course that a great number of Cuban exiles also did.
Morley writes that when Jose Antonio Lanuza, the coordinator of the DRE’s North American chapters, heard the stories on November 22, 1963, that linked Oswald to the shooting, he “remembered delegate Carlos Bringuier’s reports from New Orleans and went to DRE headquarters to check his files.
There he found Bringuier’s letter about the confrontations with Oswald, along with tapes of the WDSU radio debate.
The call was to Joannides, who told the DRE representative not to do anything or contact anyone else for at least an hour so he could contact Washington headquarters for instructions.
Most of the paper’s contents consisted of Carlos Bringuier’s recitation of his contact with Oswald in New Orleans.
This is why the more one reads of Morley’s story, the more illogical it becomes.
For example, if it turns out that Joannides wrote little, if anything, about the DRE’s connection to Oswald, it may very well be because he was unaware of it.
Being in Miami, not New Orleans where Oswald had his contact with the exiled group, he would have been far less likely to know about the insignificant event in New Orleans at the time it happened.
Indeed, although one DRE leader told Morley that his group told Joannides about the Oswald-Bringuier street incident and radio debate, two other leaders indicated they had not, Lanuza only recalling telling Joannides after the assassination, when it quickly became common knowledge anyway.
But not only did the DRE think nothing of not following CIA’s orders, but the radio debate— in New Orleans at that, mind you—wouldn’t even qualify as falling within the instruction.
However, in a February 27, 2005, telephone conversation with me, Morley said that since he wrote the article, he has “recently” learned from a “source whose identity I am not free to disclose” that Joannides visited New Orleans in the “spring or summer” of 1963.
Morley doesn’t know what brought Joannides to New Orleans or whether it was before or after the Oswald-Bringuier incident.
But if after, and if he met with Bringuier, he most likely would have learned of it from Bringuier.
Morley has met with Bringuier, but said he has not yet nailed down whether Bringuier met Joannides in New Orleans.
Finally, the Joannides conspiracy devotees are led to believe that being a handler of the DRE was Joannides’s job in Miami.
So the notion that the entirely insignificant incident that happened in New Orleans would be something Joannides would automatically know about and be on top of is unrealistic.
A further indication that Joannides’s DRE job was a small part of his CIA responsibilities is that while the Miami CIA branch had a yearly budget of $2. million (CIA Fitness Report on Joannides, June 4, 1964,2), the monthly sum the CIA paid the DRE, though it fluctuated, seemed to be about $25,000.
Certainly he can’t mean that since Joannides was exercising control over the group he could order them to kill Kennedy for him.
In any event, whatever modicum of control he exercised, we know it wasn’t for long.
Shackley said the group had “failed to create anything in the past 18 months.
In the ultimate denigration, he treats them like the youth they actually were—students who had left school in Havana to flee Castro—by saying, “We would prefer to maintain on the payroll 15 or 20 AMSPELLS provided they were fully matriculated at a junior college or college in the JM/WAVE area.
In their after school hours, we would encourage this group to continue a radio and mailing propaganda effort targeted toward fellow students” in Cuba.
There seems to be nothing to the Joannides-DRE story, and I’m confused that someone like Morley feels there is possible merit to it.
I’m also confused by Blakey’s statement in his addendum to Frontline that “outrageously, the Agency did not tell. . . our Committee that it had financial and other connections with the DRE, a group that Oswald had direct dealings with,” Blakey suggesting this all came out with Morley’s article years later.
But it is too well known to cite that the CIA was funding virtually the entire anti-Castro effort by the exiled groups and making direct monetary payments to them.
But documents furnished by the CIA to the HSCA are overflowing with the extent and nature of that connection.
Hence, with absolutely nothing to go on, this fine writer who reports for one of the world’s premier newspapers, the Washington Post, is, in effect, saying that either the CIA murdered Kennedy or it covered up for those who did.
Morley hasn’t written what I have just said, and won’t say it in conversation, but the words he writes necessarily mean this.
In any event, although I believe that if there had been a conspiracy to kill Kennedy the most likely conspirators would have been anti-Castro Cuban exiles, the Morley story, as presently set forth, proves nothing to me.
And if there is anyone who actually believes that if and when Joannides’s assumed reports on the DRE see the light of day they will show that the DRE, either on its own or at Joannides’s direction, had Kennedy murdered, I have a bridge I’d like to sell them, the Brooklyn Bridge, and I’m offering a special discount to anyone who pays by certified check.
However, if the CIA records on the DRE that the HSCA received were those turned over by Joannides, this isn’t accurate.
To the point, arguably, of perversity, the silly spooks at Langley—like the pathological liar who lies even when it would be to his benefit to tell the truth—will fight Morley and his lawyer every inch of the way, thereby helping them, every inch of the way, to convince everyone that it has something to hide—Joannides’s and perhaps its own complicity in the assassination.
But as I’ve said before in the book and these endnotes, it’s all just sublime silliness.
Joannides and the CIA conspired with Oswald to kill Kennedy as much as you and I did.
Before we leave the Joannides affair, we should discuss its real origin, which is none other than a tired and hoary allegation from conspiracy theorist extraordinaire Gaeton Fonzi, the former HSCA investigator whose main claim to fame in the conspiracy constellation is his charge that an anti-Castro militant named Antonio Yeciana Blanch had dealings for many years with a CIA agent named Maurice Bishop, and on one occasion he saw Bishop with Oswald in Dallas.
As set forth in the main text, Fonzi was positive Bishop was CIA agent David Atlee Phillips, and even after Yeciana saw Phillips in Washington, D.C., and told Fonzi he was not Bishop, the incredible Fonzi refused to give up his belief.
Since Fonzi actually went on to write a book, The Last Investigation , making this foundationless allegation , Phillips has been the main “rogue” CIA agent the conspiracy community has claimed was behind the assassination.
So whenever Phillips’s name comes up, everyone around him, and even those who weren’t but could have been, are brought into the conspiracy net—thus, George Joannides, who may or may not have even known or met Phillips.
They both, apparently at different times, were associated with the DRE, and that is enough to make Joannides a part of a conspiracy to murder Kennedy or cover it up.
I mean, no one is really claiming that a completely obscure CIA agent named George Joannides decided, on his own, to murder Kennedy or cover up the deed for those who did.
Someone had to bring him into the preexisting conspiracy, and that person was the real villain and mastermind , David Atlee Phillips.
Arbenz, duly elected president in 1951, had been one of the heroes of an uprising against Guatemalan dictator General Jorge Ubico in 1944.
When Arbenz took over some of the unused land of the Boston-based United Fruit Company in Guatemala and gave hints of being susceptible to Moscow’s influence, the CIA intervened.
Normally, an accused person has a pretty good idea of who is behind an attack on him, and in a letter to me from Phillips in 1986 (seven years before Fonzi even published his book) when I was working with him in preparation for the London trial, Phillips wrote, “Lopez, Hardway, and the young people in Blakey’s House staff were the ones who tried desperately to find evidence that CIA was involved in the assassination.
So the Joannides story really owes its parentage to Fonzi and his accused, David Phillips.
When I contacted Morley to send me what documentation he had connecting Phillips to the DRE and Joannides, he did his best, for which I thanked him, but in his undated letter to me (the envelope is postmarked February 9, 2005; hereafter referred to as his letter to me of February 9, 2005), he never really came up with anything that, upon scrutiny, stands up that well, at least insofar as sinister implications are concerned.
Hunt is one of the “rogue” CIA agents frequently connected, with Phillips, to the assassination by conspiracy theorists.
The question was only if he knew of the DRE, not whether he was aware of any association Phillips had with it.
ENDNOTES what time period Hunt was talking about, nor do we know just what he was referring to by the broad and imprecise term ran.
He could have easily meant that the output of the DRE, essentially intended by the CIA to be used as an anti-Castro propaganda organization, fell under Phillip’s overall jurisdiction as the head of covert operations at the Mexico City station.
In Morley’s letter to me of February 9, 2005, he says he asked Hunt what date he was referring to when he said Phillips ran the DRE, and Hunt said it was the pre-Bay of Pigs period, the Bay of Pigs incident being in April of 1961.
This makes sense because in 1960-1962 Phillips was in the covert section at the Mexico City station and was responsible for the anti-Castro propaganda effort against Castro.
Crozier said he left his assignment in Miami as the CIA’s handler for the DRE in November of 1962.
And in Phillips’s book, though no specific date is given, it is easily inferable from the context that he was reassigned from his job as head of covert operations (which would have caused him to work with Crozier on anti-Castro propaganda efforts) to head up the Cuba section at the Mexico City station sometime in November of 1962.
As we’ve seen, no one Morley’s lawyer, Jim Lesar, has come up with a document that could be troubling if all the i’s are dotted, which hasn’t been done, and if the most sinister implications are drawn, which there seems no basis for doing.
A CIA document dated the day of the assassination and released by the CIA in 1997 under the JFK Act reads, “Henry J Sloman arriving next 22 Nov order meet wife AMHALF-2.
WAVE expecting priority message, concerning maritime exmtratton of headquarters asset, in exit pouch which presumably will arrive next 22 Nov.
Indeed, whomever he recommended, they were not among the DRE leaders in Miami.
It is impossible to know what this message is all about, but the date of the document, November 22, 1963, has taken on increased importance among conspiracy theorists who believe Sloman is a CIA hit man named Anthony Sforza, and Choaden is Phillips.
All of this, by itself, would seem to establish the name Choaden as a CIA alias for Phillips, particularly since the document dealt with the problem that “Choaden’s” cover as a CIA agent in Havana had become known to some, and Phillips was stationed in Havana in 1959.
He responded in his February 9,2005, letter, “Yes, one of them acknowledged visiting Phillips’ office on Humboldt Street in Havana.
But in a telephone conversation with Morley on February 27, 2005, and pursuant to my persistent questions, he finally made at least some meaningful claims to support the Phillips-DRE connection.
And I didn’t get the sense that he was just pulling things out of his hat because he was trapped, rather more of the sense that he merely neglected to mention them in his articles and letter to me.
I believe Morley when he says he was told the following by various sources, including DRE leaders, a good part or all of which may be true.
The nucleus of the DRE was formed in Havana, not Miami, and the Catholic student group there that first organized itself to protest Anastas Mikoyan’s (deputy chairman of the USSR Council of Ministers) visit to Havana in February of 1960 dubbed themselves, in Havana, the Cuban Student Directorate.
They formed their group totally independent of him, the two main founding members being Alberto Muller Quintana (who ended up spending twenty years in a Castro prison) and Juan Manuel Salvat.
It was Chilo Borja, Salvat’s close friend in the student group, who went to Phillips’s office, and Phillips helped Borja and Salvat escape, and once they reached Miami, he arranged for the CIA to start funding their group as an anti-Castro ally of the CIA in September of 1960, a support that continued up until 1966, per Morley.
Morley acknowledges that other than arranging for the original funding, it did not appear that Phillips had any direct contact with the DRE in Miami, though he assumes, sensibly, that Phillips never lost interest in the group, and Crozier, in Miami, admits to coordinating his handling of the group’s propaganda effort with Phillips in Mexico City.
One big weakness in Morley’s scenario is that he only got a statement from one DRE member, Borja, that he ever met Phillips, and then on only one occasion in Phillips’s Havana office.
As indicated, Morley’s lawyer, Jim Lesar, is convinced that Phillips, among others, was behind the assassination.
He cites the Havana relationship Phillips had with the future DRE people, and the fact that Phillips was in Mexico City the same time Oswald was.
And that the second newsman to promote the story, Alonzo Hudkins, was also a friend of Phillips’s.
Indeed, when I asked Morley if Phillips even knew Joannides, he responded in his February 9,2005, letter, “Great question, Vincent.
When I first asked Blakey this question in 2003, he said, “I don’t know.
And he further acknowledges that “there is no evidence to link Joannides to Oswald.
The most likely explanation would seem to be that Joannides’ knowledge was innocent and that when Oswald killed Kennedy whatever his knowledge of Oswald’s actions in August 1963 was, hidden lest it be misunderstood.
In a follow-up telephone conversation with Morley on March 4, 2005, what became even more evident was the ambiguity and ambivalence of Morley’s state of mind with respect to the Joannides affair.
Morley is not a conspiracy theorist, and he is not about to knowingly state something that the evidence does not support.
When I told him that a portion of the conspiracy community is aware of his work on the matter and drawing the conclusion that Joannides and those around him at the CIA had a hand in the assassination, he immediately distanced himself from this conclusion, saying he didn’t mean to convey this in his article, and was not willing to say the CIA may have been involved in the assassination.
The FBI, another federal intelligence agency, not only knew but also talked to Oswald about his activities in New Orleans.
Morley had no good answer for this, except to say that if this was true, it would show “negligence” on the CIA’s part in dealing with Oswald, Morley presumably meaning that the CIA should have taken some affirmative steps to prevent the assassination.
I said that if his negligence theory was correct, this may be why the agency doesn’t want to give him the documents he wants—it’s covering up its negligence.
But I added that actually it was the FBI (not the CIA, whose charter only authorizes it to gather foreign intelligence), if anyone, that should have kept closer tabs on Oswald right up to the president’s visit to Dallas, and thereby possibly prevented the assassination.
That’s one side of Jefferson Morley’s view of his Joannides story—he’s not willing to say, in the last analysis, that it really goes anywhere as far as the events of November 22, 1963, are concerned.
But here’s the other side, making Morley’s position somewhat of a puzzle to me from the first time I read his Miami New Times article.
There is no evidence that Joannides was involved with the DRE or anyone else in the murder of Kennedy.
And there is no evidence that Phillips was involved with Joannides, the DRE, or anyone else in the murder of Kennedy.
Since there is no evidence of any of these things, there is no reason to believe that this whole Joannides story should be given another thought on the issue of its relevance to the Kennedy assassination.
The HSCA requested that the CIA reveal where these earlier documents pertaining to Oswald had been disseminated internally, which would indicate what section or sections of the CIA had been interested in Oswald.
The CIA advised the HSCA that because document dissemination records of relatively low national security significance (all of Oswald’s documents were only “confidential” or unclassified) were retained for only five years, none of the dissemination records for documents pertaining to Oswald for the years 1959 to 1963 were still in existence.
McCone subsequently told an interviewer from the CIA’s Office of Legislative Counsel that what he had said about Bishop was an error and the HSCA should be so advised.
However, a retired CIA “employee” told the same CIA interviewer that he had seen a man at the CIA whom someone, perhaps a secretary, had pointed out to him as being Maurice Bishop.
He did not know the man personally and did not know his organizational connection to the CIA and could not pick him out from photographs shown him.
He had traveled to Haiti as early as 1956 because of his interest in a possible geological project funded by American and Haitian interests.
Dorothe Matlack, assistant director of the Office of Intelligence of the Army, told the HSCA that when Clemard Joseph Charles, the president of a Haitian bank through whom de Mohrenschildt intended to negotiate his Haitian contracts, came to Washington, D.C., in 1963, an army intelligence officer asked her to meet with Charles because of his relationship to Haiti’s president, Duvalier, and Haiti’s strategic position vis-a-vis Castro’s Cuba.
She said she was dismayed that de Mohrenschildt and his wife, Jeanne, accompanied Charles to the meeting, at which Charles urged Matlack to get the United States to invade Haiti and overthrow Duvalier.
But the very next day, Walter Jenkins, LBJ’s administrative assistant, wrote de Mohrenschildt saying LBJ was scheduled to be out of town when de Mohrenschildt came to Washington.
The kooks who have tried, without a shred of evidence, to implicate the CIA in Kennedy’s murder include some from the most unexpected quarters.
For good measure, Underwood also told Palamara that Scott said the FBI and Mafia also knew.
The following year, when Jeanne de Mohrenschildt was interviewed by conspiracy theorist Jim Marrs, she was singing a different tune.
He knew absolutely nothing about the assassination,” she still said she did not believe her husband committed suicide but had been “eliminated before he got to that committee,” not explaining why anyone would want to kill her husband if, as she said, he knew nothing about the assassination.
Jeanne added that her husband was dead and couldn’t talk, and “that’s why I am doing all the talking while I can.
Casasin was working in Paris at the time as the chief of Branch 6, the section of the Soviet Russia Division of the CIA’s station in Paris whose primary work was amassing information in support of the SR Division, whose mission was espionage within the Soviet Union.
The memo was sent by Casasin to Walter Haltigan, the chief of the SR Division.
The conversation, he believes, took place in July of 1962, which is when Oswald returned to the states, adding that the reference in the memo to its taking place in the summer of 1960 was definitely an error since he was on leave from his work and traveling through Europe with his family that summer.
He said the only information he had on Oswald at the time of the conversation in Paris was based on details he had seen in information from the State Department.
Casasin said his suggestion was just a “lead” that was never followed up, which he said was not unusual, and he did not prepare any memo at the time of the informal discussion, saying it would not have been customary to do so.
The CIA also interviewed Haltigan and several other members of the SR Division’s clandestine operations section, and none of them knew of any contact by the CIA with Oswald at any time.
Additionally, anyone in the area of those plants was of interest to the agency, though he did not believe Oswald worked in any of these plants.
Inas694 ENDNOTES much as the CIA, in his mind, should have debriefed Oswald, he probably speculated without any evidence that the agency in fact did —thus, Casasin’s “operational interest” in Oswald.
In the book Conspiracy in Camelot, author Jerry Kroth writes that “Newman found a document showing ‘Andy Anderson’ had debriefed Oswald for the CIA, a fact denied then and now by former directors including Richard Helms as recently as 1993.
In any event, even if such a document existed, it would apparently only concern a debriefing of Oswald by the CIA, presumably after his return to the states from the Soviet Union.
However, it is unlikely such a debriefing ever took place since Oswald did not fit comfortably into the type of Americans, mostly business people, who traveled abroad and were debriefed by the CIA’s Domestic Contact Service upon their return, to elicit anything they had learned about a foreign country that might be helpful to this nation’s interests.
As indicated in the main text, the Domestic Contact Service was nonclandestine, so therefore it did not deal with internal investigations relating to national security.
Anything that did would be the jurisdiction of the FBI, not the CIA, whose statutory job is to investigate on foreign soil matters pertaining to United States security.
And in a deposition before the Church Committee in 1975, James Angleton, the CIA’s counterintelligence chief, said he had no knowledge that Oswald was ever debriefed by the CIA, and assumed that if he hadn’t been, it was because such a debriefing of an American defector on American soil would be the job of the FBI, who, we know, did debrief Oswald in 1962 in Fort Worth.
The CIA sting operation against Hensen was conducted in July of 1963 in Mexico City, not on American soil, and hence the CIA did have jurisdiction over such an investigation.
Since many conspiracy theorists suspect FBI Director J Edgar Hoover of being behind the assassination, any association by him with someone outside the FBI made that person suspect too.
Bush later became director of the CIA, the ARRB determined that he had no connection with the CIA back in 1963.
There was a George Bush in the CIA in 1963, but he was a junior analyst and has repeatedly denied being the George Bush referred to in the Hoover memo.
The date of this earlier Corpus Christi Times article is given in a Warren Commission volume as October 2,1959, but is almost surely a typographical error or a misstatement.
In a case of multiple hearsay, Walter Jenkins, a special assistant to President Johnson, told the FBI that a friend of his told him that an FBI agent formerly assigned to the New Orleans office of the FBI told him that Oswald had been an FBI informant.
The agent had been transferred from the New Orleans office to the Dallas office because of some difficulty he had with a woman in the French Quarter.
The FBI found the names of three agents who had been transferred directly to Dallas from their New Orleans office but only one fit the description.
One of the allegations that the FBI attempted to frame Oswald (which could go in the direction of its having been involved in Kennedy’s murder, or a cover-up for someone else) was made, by of all people, former Speaker of the House Thomas P “Tip” O’Neill in his book, Man of the House.
O’Neill writes that over dinner with presidential assistant Kenny O’Donnell in 1968, he was surprised to hear O’Donnell say he was sure he had heard two shots that came from behind the fence on the grassy knoll.
I told the FBI what I had heard, but they said it couldn’t have happened that way and that I must have been imagining things.
So I testified the way they wanted me to,” that the shots came from the right rear.
I would have told the truth,” whereupon O’Donnell allegedly said, “Tip, you have to understand.
For starters, the likelihood that O’Donnell would tell O’Neill, in effect, that he really didn’t care that the true killer of Kennedy, whom he loved and was extremely close to, was brought to justice is too absurd for words.
But that’s not the equivalent of what O’Neill has O’Donnell allegedly saying, that the FBI wanted him to lie in his testimony.
If O’Donnell had been the only witness, and if you believe the FBI was out to frame Oswald, then you could argue that the FBI would have achieved something.
And let’s not forget that if one believed that O’Neill got the story straight, then one also has to believe that O’Donnell committed the crime of perjury and did not hesitate to announce his crime to third parties.
Actually, the allegation that the FBI influenced O’Donnell to change his story was first made in 1975, when a CIA “liaison man” told it to investigators for the Rockefeller Commission.
William Sullivan was killed while hunting deer near his home in Sugar Hill, New Hampshire, on November 9,1977.
He was shot accidentally by another deer hunter, a twenty-year-old named Robert Daniels.
Local authorities investigated, and no charges were brought against Daniels.
One of the most bizarre tales in conspiracy assassination literature, and one that conspiracy theorists have treated very seriously, even being the subject of one of the largest books ever written on the assassination, touches on the same theme as Mark North’s Act of Treason but is a much weaker rendition than North’s allegation.
It deals with the story of one Richard Case Nagell (aka Joseph Kramer, Joe Krane, Robert C Nolan) as set forth in The Man Who Knew Too Much by Dick Russell.
Nagell (a decorated army captain during the Korean War) alleges that as a double agent assigned by the CIA to penetrate Soviet intelligence, he learned that the Soviets became aware before American authorities did of Oswald and former CIA employees plotting to kill Kennedy.
Indeed, he claims that because the Soviets believed that suspicion for Kennedy’s death would be focused on them because of Oswald’s defection, they ordered him to meet with Oswald in Mexico City and try to persuade him not to do it.
Apparently Nagell knew more about Oswald’s schedule than Oswald did, since we know Oswald was on his way to Mexico City, not Washington, D.C., in late September, with hopes to get to Havana.
It would have been rather difficult for Oswald to kill Kennedy anywhere in the United States, even the very tip of the Florida Keys, from Havana.
There is no evidence other than Nagell’s word that Nagell ever met Oswald.
On the other hand, there is a piece of circumstantial evidence that goes in the direction of his writing such a letter.
Of course, the above only helps support Nagell’s claim that he wrote the letter, not that he had any basis for what he said in the letter.
After all, if we know from the evidence that Nagell was nearly psychotic , a foundationless letter to the authorities saying that the president might be killed could have been one manifestation of his sickness.
The legend that has formed around Nagell is that he began to suspect he was in over his head and was being set up, so to establish an alibi for himself he decided to commit a bank robbery in El Paso and get caught so he would be in custody at the time Kennedy was killed.
This apparently apocryphal story originated in an article by William Turner in the January 1968 edition of Ramparts magazine and has been accepted, without question, by many in the conspiracy community.
But since Garrison has little credibility, it is hard to be sure whether Nagell told him this fable or whether Garrison was simply parroting Turner, a former FBI agent who was assisting Garrison in his investigation of Clay Shaw.
And in an October 26,1975, interview by author Russell, Nagell said, “There was a reason for having myself arrested in the manner I did, which I thought would turn into a misdemeanor.
It wasn’t because of the Kennedy assassination, in that sense, but for a reason I’ve never disclosed to anybody in the United States.
Other than Nagell’s alleged letter to Hoover that said the assassination was going to take place in late September of 1963 in Washington, D.C., the principal source for the foreknowledge story—the El Paso police officer who arrested Nagell, Jim Bundren—is lacking in credibility.
Bundren told Russell in a May 11, 1990, interview that at one of Nagell’s pretrial hearings on the bank robbery charge, Nagell told him, “Well, I’m glad you caught me.
That Nagell did try to escape completely refutes the alleged purpose he had for what he did in the bank.
Nagell was charged with attempted bank robbery, and because his conduct was so bizarre, the judge sent him to the United States Medical Center for Federal Prisoners in Springfield, Missouri, for a psychiatric evaluation to determine if he was mentally competent to stand trial.
Nagell refused to submit to the requisite tests, but he was found competent to stand trial.
Nagell was the sole survivor of a military plane crash in 1954 in which he sustained severe head injuries, and his lawyers argued at his trial that he was temporarily insane when he fired the two shots in the El Paso bank, but he was convicted by a federal jury on May 6,1964, and sentenced to ten years.
His conviction was overturned on appeal in 1966, and he was retried and convicted again.
But on April 3,1968, the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, finding no specific intent to rob in Nagell’s conduct, and “strong evidence of insanity at the time,” concluded that “the evidence introduced by the government is not sufficient to sustain the conviction,” and ordered Nagell’s immediate release from custody.
In April and May of 1962, he had checked himself into the psychiatric ward of the VA hospital in Westwood, California, and in December of 1962, around the time, apparently, when he says the CIA was having him infiltrate the KGB, and the KGB wanted him to talk Oswald out of killing Kennedy, or failing this, to kill Oswald, he had checked himself into the Bay Pines YA hospital in St.
The clinical social worker’s report reads, in part, “Patient feels his intentions were to go to California, but came to Florida instead.
The only problem is that when Russell first interviewed Bundren on October 21, 1975, fifteen years earlier, Bundren never said one word about what Nagell supposedly told him, the very, very important utterance that has bothered him “ever since” 1963.
In fact, as late as September of 1963, just before the El Paso incident, he unsuccessfully sought psychiatric care at the YA hospital in Los Angeles yet again.
But as conspiracy researcher Scott Van Wynsberghe notes, “It seems Russell saw nothing unusual in the fact that he was now explaining to his supposed source the source’s own story—which the source then continued to modify.
Russell would argue that he was only clarifying Nagell’s tale, but a journalist should know that, after a point, the incomprehensibility of a story is the story.
On January 3, 1967, Nagell got off a letter to United States Senator Richard Russell in which he talked about Oswald coming under his scrutiny in 1962 and 1963.
He continued that Oswald was part of a conspiracy to murder Kennedy that had nothing to do with a foreign government.
But Nagell remained, and remains, a fixture in the conspiracy firmament.
If there was anyone who had a wilder imagination about the assassination than Richard Nagell, it was New Orleans DA Jim Garrison, whose looney, conspiratorial theories knew no boundaries.
He met with Nagell on a park bench in Central Park, hoping Nagell would help break the case wide open for him.
But, for Garrison, Nagell answered very few questions and was deliberately evasive, except to say, without providing any supporting evidence, that Guy Banister, Clay Shaw, and David Ferrie were behind the assassination and had manipulated Oswald.
Nagell also refused to discuss the CIA (the conspiratorial devil behind the assassination in Garrison’s eyes) or any other federal agency except that he claimed he was ignored by the FBI when he tried to warn them of Kennedy’s assassination.
When one is a crackpot even in the eyes of someone as screwy and erratic as Jim Garrison, it’s time for that person to go home.
The ARRB learned that Nagell died in his Los Angeles apartment on November 1,1995.
That the United States was an ally of General Fulgencio Batista, whose acts of tyranny during his two reigns as Cuban president cannot be questioned, is clear.
He was a guest of honor in the White House Though Nagell made no positive impression on Garrison, the reverse was not true.
A month later (June 5, 1968), Nagell surfaced at the American consulate in Zurich, Switzerland, claiming he was on a secret United States government mission in Geneva.
After that fiasco in the GDR you worms did your best to screw, blue and tattoo me.
In a September 2, 1969, memorandum to the director of the CIA’s Office of Special Investigations, a CIA agent who had read Nagell’s East Village statement writes, “While Nagell may be something of a crackpot, the item does appear to contain somewhat of an implied threat.
But this could simply have been what Nagell told the interviewer , assuming the document is even authentic.
There is also an undated photo of Batista (it could have been after he returned to power in 1952 after living in splendid exile in Miami for several years) walking with military personnel in front of cadets at attention at West Point.
During Batista’s long struggle against Castro’s forces, his army used arms mostly furnished by the United States.
And when the curtain was about to come down on him in 1958 as Castro’s rebels continued their inexorable move toward Havana, the United States ambassador to Cuba met with Batista on the evening of December 17, urging him to leave the island and implying that after a year in Spain, he could return to the United States.
Indeed, eight days before this meeting, American multimillionaire William Pawley, a close friend of President Eisenhower’s, with contacts among the most powerful and influential men in America, served as a secret emissary of the United States government and met with Batista, exhorting him to leave the island to avoid bloodshed in an inevitable defeat.
Because Batista would not yield to United States wishes, this country eventually abandoned him.
His other allies, the American Mafia, who had done all they could to help Batista stop the Castro takeover of their paradise, remained loyal to him for all he had done for them, and negotiated asylum for Batista in the Dominican Republic, where they had ties to Rafael Trujillo’s government.
However, in the old British common law there was a crime called misprision of a felony, which was committed when one, knowing of the commission of a felony, failed to report it to the authorities.
Hoover certainly knew the difference between a wiretap and the use of hidden microphones (referred to as bugging, eavesdropping, or electronic surveillance), and if what he said was true, he would have been able to furnish many of such writings, signed by RFK, as documentation to support what he said.
But he only came up with one letter for Gross that had been signed by RFK, dated August 17, 1961, and it didn’t help Hoover at all.
Why Hoover would tell Gross this was an “example” in support of his assertion that RFK had approved all FBI “wiretaps” is curious.
So Hoover furnished no documentation that RFK had ever authorized wiretaps in non-national security cases.
In fact, in view of RFK’s later declaration that he had no knowledge that the bureau conducted bugging operations, RFK apparently didn’t recall signing the August 17, 1961, letter, which most likely appeared to be a routine, relatively unimportant document.
With respect to bugging, or electronic surveillance, Hoover’s letter to Gross also said that RFK not only had approved of FBI buggings but also “listened to the results of microphone surveillances” and spoke of the FBI getting “better equipment” to do it.
In a December 11, 1966, statement he released in response to Hoover’s charges, RFK said that “it may seem ‘inconceivable’ to Mr Hoover that I was not aware of the ‘bugging’ practices of the FBI during my term as Attorney General, but it is nonetheless true.
But still, no one came up with an authorizing signature of RFK, nor any other evidence of RFK authorizing FBI wiretaps in non-national security cases.
Indeed, Evans’s letter to RFK said that “individual requests in . . . national security cases for wiretap authorization were sent to you by the FBI for approval.
Actually, the “arrangement,” a letter dated May 21,1940, was An internal FBI memorandum in 1966 indirectly confirms RFK’s position.
When Cartha DeLoach, the number-three man in the FBI behind Hoover and Clyde Tolson, sent a request to Assistant Director William Sullivan asking just “what authority” the FBI had for these “black bag” operations, Sullivan memoed back to DeLoach that “we do not obtain authorization for ‘black bag’ jobs from outside the Bureau.
Such a technique involves trespass and is clearly illegal; therefore, it would be impossible to obtain any legal sanction for it.
He became an accomplished writer thereafter and wrote in one of his books that there was even “an intense three-week course” at the bureau, euphemistically referred to as the “Sound School,” where the practice of wiretapping and bugging was taught.
Wiretapping not only didn’t require a break-in, but was much easier, he said, than bugging, the latter requiring “some skill in carpentry, plastering, and matching paint,” the bug or microphone usually being installed in walls.
Hoover was so powerful that he could openly have friends whom other prominent government officials would scurry from, perhaps the most prominent of whom was Lewis Rosenstiel, the president of Schenley Industries and a strong anti-Communist ally of the director’s.
It wasn’t that Rosenstiel was a criminal, it’s just that one of his close friends happened to be Meyer Lansky, one of the very top organized-crime figures in America.
As Hank Messick, a Lansky biographer, wrote in the April 5, 1971, edition of the Nation, “The overriding puzzle to During the years RFK was attorney general there was no federal law on bugging.
However, the United States Supreme Court had held that evidence obtained by the use of a bug through illegal entry onto the premises was not admissible in a legal proceeding.
If there was no such illegal entry or trespass, the electronic bugging was not deemed to be a violation of the Federal Communications Act or a defendant’s constitutional right of privacy under the Fourth Amendment, and the evidence was admissible.
One of the many women with whom JFK had a sexual liaison, Mary Pinchot Meyer, would become a part of the conspiracy lore of the assassination because of two things.
One, she was murdered a month short of a year after JFK’s death, and two, the CIA’s supersleuth, James Jesus Angleton, made it a point to come into possession of Mary’s diary the day after she died.
Suspicions of conspiracy in the assassination have been born from much less than that, but it appears there was a lot less here than meets the eye.
Unlike perhaps all the other women with whom JFK had a sexual tryst during his brief Oval Office years, Mary Meyer came from JFK’s world of wealth and privilege.
In fact, the attractive and bright woman had first come to JFK’s attention at a dance his senior year at Choate in 1935, when her date, who believed her to be the prettiest girl at the dance, recalled JFK continuing to cut in on him on the dance floor.
Mary eventually married Cord Meyer, a World War II hero and high-ranking CIA official whose closest friend at the agency was Angleton, a fellow Yale graduate, but their marriage foundered and they divorced in 1958, though Cord continued to love Mary deeply.
Mary, with her well-bred background and social graces, was part of Washington’s social scene for years, even being close to Jackie and being on Jackie’s A-list for small parties at the White House.
In the early afternoon of October 12, 1964, while taking her daily walk, Meyer, forty-three at the time, was shot twice, once in the head, by an unknown assailant on the towpath of the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal near Georgetown.
A bloody tree, drag marks in the gravel, and screams from Mary that were heard by a witness caused the police to conclude that a struggle between Mary and her killer preceded the fatal shooting.
Meyer’s funeral a few days later had many powerful and influential people in the church’s pews, including the likes of the CIA’s Angleton, Richard Helms, who would soon head the CIA, JFK aides Arthur Schlesinger and McGeorge Bundy, Washington Post publisher Katherine Graham, and Ben Bradlee, who was on the fast track to becoming managing editor of the Post and was married to Antoinette , Mary’s sister.
Mary’s intimate relationship with JFK is believed to have started in January of 1962 and continued through August of 1963.
This has been confirmed by White House gate logs of the Secret Service recording her frequent evening visits to the White House, all but one of which when Jackie was known to be out of town, and by her sister Tony and others.
Not everyone knew about her close relationship with JFK at the time; Tony, for example, found out later.
Knowing of Mary’s affair with JFK and that she kept a diary, on the day after Mary’s murder Anne called the Bradlees and Angleton, telling them it was of some urgency that they find Mary’s diary before the police did, to ensure that Mary’s private life not become public.
When the Bradlees went to Mary’s brick house in Georgetown the next morning to look for the diary, they found Angleton already there.
But it was the Bradlees who found it, in the converted garage studio behind the house, where Mary painted.
About ten of the fifty pages included references to her love affair with JFK, and they turned it over to Angleton for safekeeping.
Angleton would later say that he read the diary and allowed “M” and “F” (not identified) to read it, as well as Mary’s eldest son, Quentin.
According to Tony Bradlee and Anne Truitt, Tony burned the diary “in the presence” of Anne.
Two mechanics, Henry Wiggins and William Branch, were in the vicinity at the time of the two shots.
Wiggins looked over the canal wall and saw a black man in a light tan zippered jacket standing over Meyer’s body.
The man then put a dark object into his pocket and walked away into the bushes separating the canal from the river.
When the police responded shortly thereafter to Wiggins’s telephone call, they eventually found a twenty-five-year-old black laborer, Ray Crump, in the vicinity.
Crump was soaking wet, one of his hands was bleeding, his pants were torn, and his fly was open.
He said he had been fishing, had fallen asleep, and he and his fishing pole fell in the river.
When Wiggins identified Crump as the man he had seen standing over the woman’s body, Crump was arrested for Meyer’s murder.
Later that day the police recovered a light tan zippered jacket in the river around three hundred yards from where Meyer’s body was found.
Crump, an alcoholic who suffered from severe headaches and blackouts, was prosecuted for Meyer’s murder the following year.
Wiggins explained that the reason he was off may have been because he was looking down from a height at the time he saw the man.
Crump didn’t testify in his defense, and the jury of ten blacks and two whites found him not guilty.
But as far as the Washington Police Department is concerned, they had the right guy in Crump and therefore the Meyer murder case is closed.
Not so with the conspiracy community, which continues to include Meyer in Crump later told an officer, however, that he had accidentally fallen in the river while walking away from his fishing spot.
He also told conflicting stories as to the cut on his hand, telling one officer he had cut the hand on some rocks in the process of trying to get his fishing pole out of the water, and another officer he had cut the hand on a fishhook.
ENDNOTES its lists of mysterious and suspicious deaths of people whom the alleged conspirators have silenced.
None, however, have come up with any evidence to support this, nor have conspiracy theorists bothered to speculate precisely what poor Mary Meyer could have possibly known about JFK’s killers that required she be silenced.
In the year following the trial, Crump, per Meyer’s biographer, was in and out of trouble with the law.
In 1969 he was charged with assault with a deadly weapon , but the disposition of the case is unknown, the old records having been destroyed.
In 1971, he committed arson by dousing a tract house with gasoline and setting it aflame while his new wife and her children were inside.
While on probation he assaulted a police officer and was arrested again on an ADW charge for pointing a gun at his wife, causing her to jump out a window and sustain serious injuries.
Between 1972 and 1977, he was charged with assault with a knife, grand larceny, another arson, and several charges of destroying property.
In January of 1978 he set a fire in the entryway of the building where a girlfriend of his lived, after threatening to kill her.
Before his conviction he was charged with raping the seventeen-year-old daughter of a friend, but the case was never prosecuted.
In 1983 he torched a neighbor’s car and served two and a half years in prison.
It was the Levinson matter that started the FBI’s tapping of King’s phone.
Jack Puterbaugh was not a member of the Secret Service, but a political advance man for the Democratic National Committee who was on loan as part of the White House advance team for the president’s Dallas trip.
He arrived in Dallas with Special Agent Winston Lawson on November 13 and was present and a part of the main discussions about whether the president would speak at the Trade Mart or the Women’s Building, and what the motorcade route would be.
Conspiracy theorist Penn Jones Jr. found Puterbaugh to be a suspicious character, mostly because he wasn’t a member of the Secret Service, and suggests that it was Puterbaugh who set up the assassination.
When Walt Brown wrote in his publication, JFK /Deep Politics Quarterly, that “current research” put Puterbaugh as one of the motorcade planners, he said he received an “angry” letter from Puterbaugh saying that this was nonsense and he had nothing to do with the planning of the route.
Brown goes on to write ominously, “Of note, Puterbaugh came to JFK’s White House from Minnesota, along with Orville Freeman, Secretary of Agriculture.
Maybe Puterbaugh also,” Brown says, the implication being that, just possibly, Puterbaugh was somehow a part of a conspiracy to murder Kennedy.
A rumor that has circulated throughout the years in the conspiracy community is that a Secret Service agent was killed during the assassination.
In his scribbled notes on the assassination, Scripps Howard reporter Seth Kantor wrote that while at Parkland Hospital following the president’s death, he overheard a nurse ask a Western Union man “about a report that a Secret Service Agent had been killed out on the street.
In 2005, Vincent Palamara put out a revised edition of his book with page numbers and changed the title to Survivor’s Guilt: The Secret Service and the Failure to Protect the President.
The HSCA never established why Kennedy canceled his trip to Chicago, but most probably the reason was the need for him to remain in Washington with his closest advisers to deal with the extremely dramatic and very consequential assassination of the South Vietnamese president, Ngo Dinh Diem, and his brother earlier in the day.
The HSCA said it “was unable to document the existence of the alleged assassination team.
In 1964, Bolden was prosecuted and convicted of conspiring to sell official information in a counterfeiting case and was sentenced to six years in prison.
The Secret Service learned of Vallee’s existence on October 30, just a few days before Kennedy’s scheduled visit.
When agents discovered that he was in possession of several weapons and had requested time off from his job on November 2, the date of the president’s visit, they had the Chicago police surveil Vallee.
After a brief interrogation at the station during which he told the police the country was in “serious trouble” if Goldwater didn’t defeat Kennedy, he accompanied them back to his apartment.
Although author Lamar Waldron points out that “Vallee was either in custody, or under surveillance and about to be arrested before the trip cancellation” at 9:15m.
Chicago time, the pos712 ENDNOTES sible thought of unknown associates of Yallee’s still at large could have contributed to the White House decision to cancel the trip.
Revilo Oliver, a member of the John Birch Society, wrote two articles on the assassination in the February and March 1964 editions of the Bircher magazine American Opinion , but his main charge was in the first article.
Without a stitch of evidence to support his preposterous charge, he alleged that President Kennedy was actually a valuable agent of the Soviet government who couldn’t keep pace with the Communists’ timetable for taking over America—that is, he wasn’t doing his job of subverting America fast enough, so he had to be removed.
By Oswald, who Oliver said was trained by the Russians as a terrorist and was readmitted into this country with the cooperation of the Communist-dominated United States State Department.
After Oswald was captured, he was about to confess to the Communist conspiracy being behind the assassination so the Soviets (not the mob, as virtually all other conspiracy theorists believe) had Ruby silence him.
Wives are normally closer to their husbands than anyone else, and thereby know how they feel about other people.
If Khrushchev were an enemy of Kennedy’s to the point of preferring to kill him rather than work out a peace between their respective nations, Kennedy never picked up on it and his advisers never communicated any such thing to him if the words of Jackie Kennedy are any indication.
She thanked him “for sending Anastas Mikoyan as your representative to my husband’s funeral.
You and he were adversaries, but you were also allies in your determination not to let the world be blown up.
I am sending you this letter because I am deeply mindful of the importance of the relations that existed between you and my husband, and also because you and Mrs.
He also wanted to end four-power control of Berlin and thought he could do this by signing a treaty with East Germany that would give the Soviets control over access routes to West Berlin.
In early August 1961, Kennedy answered Khrushchev’s threat “with a call for 217,000 more men in uniform.
With the Soviet determination to eliminate West Berlin and the United States commitment to preserve it, the prospect of a third world war was greater than ever.
The crisis intensified with the August 1961 construction of a wall that prevented eastern European refugees from entering West Berlin.
The crisis ended in late 1961 when Khrushchev decided not to sign the agreement with East Germany as he had promised he would. tKennedy adviser Kenneth P O’Donnell, who was at the summit, wrote that “Kennedy could not take his eyes off Khrushchev” when they first met.
After shaking the Russian leader’s hands, he “stepped back and looked Khrushchev over from head to feet” for what seemed like an inappropriately long period of time, to the point where Khrushchev began to get uncomfortable.
To colleagues shocked by his candor, he spoke of the “grave perversions of party principles by Stalin” and Stalin’s “glaring violations of revolutionary legality,” referring to the tortures and many murders committed under Stalin’s direction.
Khrushchev deserves credit for having the courage to be the first Soviet leader to speak out publicly against the crimes and tyranny of Stalin, particularly just three years after Stalin’s death, when Stalin’s “cult of personality” was still all-pervasive in the Soviet Union.
What Khrushchev did not mention was his complicitous role in Stalin’s crimes, being one of Stalin’s chief enforcers.
Indeed, between 1929 and 1938, Stalin’s most homicidal years, when Stalin purged his party with many murders, and when even vaguely suspected dissidents were routinely tortured and murdered, Khrushchev prospered under the brutal dictator.
But long before Gorbachev, Khrushchev, the Russian premier who came from peasant stock, was the first Russian leader to end murder and torture as a normal instrument of policy, and to ease, even if just a little, the repressive regime Russians had accepted as a way of life since 1917.
Though the CIA’s interrogation of Yuriy Nosenko greatly overshadowed the FBI’s and went on for 1,277 days, about three and a half years, the FBI was the first agency to interview him (though he was in CIA custody at the time) because of the FBI’s investigation into the assassination of President Kennedy.
Two mathematicians for the National Security Agency , Bernon F Mitchell and William H Martin, defected to the Soviet Union in 1959 and 1960, respectively.
What is quite interesting is that the CIA has acknowledged that at the time of Yuriy Nosenko’s defection in 1964, it also promised to pay him “$50,000 for previous cooperation,” meaning that the heavy-drinking Nosenko was a CIA mole in Russia for some time prior to his defection.
The CIA hasn’t said except to say it also promised him an additional $10,000 “for his identification in 1962 of a particular espionage agent,” believed to be William John Vassall, a clerk in the British Admiralty who was a KGB agent, and who was arrested, tried, and convicted on espionage charges that same year.
Ashley, CIA Spy Master,268) When he defected in 1964, Nosenko would also “out” Boris Belitsky, a correspondent for Radio Moscow who the CIA thought was working for it.
Belitsky had passed a polygraph test in 1961, but was actually a double agent under KGB control who was being managed by Nosenko himself.
The CIA knew it had been had when Nosenko revealed the names of the two CIA agents, Harry Young and George Goldberg, who were Belitsky’s CIA case officers and who were presently in Geneva pressing Belitsky for information while he was reporting back to Nosenko.
The HSCA knew that the Warren Commission was aware of Yuriy Nosenko and did not call Nosenko as a witness or mention him in its report.
The HSCA also had an independent polygraph expert, the president of Scientific Lie Detection Inc., examine three polygraph tests the CIA had given Nosenko on the information he was furnishing.
The HSCA’s polygraph expert concluded that the second test was the most valid and reliable of the three, but the HSCA expert agreed with the original CIA examiner that Nosenko was lying in that test.
He also believed Nosenko lied on the first test, but couldn’t manage, in a sloppy report, to say whether he felt Nosenko lied on the third test.
Oswald’s job, as a radar specialist in MACS-1, was to utilize radar to direct Marine squadron pilots, by radio contact with them from the ground, in the landing of their aircraft at Atsugi.
The radar operators would additionally be assigned a particular sector on the horizon to plot the movement of all incoming foreign aircraft.
When Oswald defected to the Soviet Union and appeared at the American embassy in Moscow on October 31, 1959, he told Richard E Snyder, the second secretary at the embassy, that he had already volunteered to unnamed Soviet officials that if he became a Soviet citizen he would make known to them such information concerning the United States Marine Corps and his specialty therein, that of a radar operator, as he possessed.
Six months later, on May 1, 1960 , Gary Powers, a former United States Air Force pilot and now a CIA pilot flying a U-2 sixty-eight thousand feet above the earth, was shot down over Russia near the city of Sverdlovsk.
Just one is that if the theorists are going to use Oswald’s words to Snyder as the predicate for their theory, they After being interrogated by the KGB for sixty-one days at Moscow’s Lubyanka Prison, Powers was prosecuted and convicted of espionage.
He was expecting the death penalty, but the thirty-one-year-old Powers was sentenced to ten years of confinement—three years in a Soviet prison and seven years in a labor camp.
On February 9,1962, after spending one year, nine months, and ten days behind bars, he was freed in a highly publicized exchange on a bridge in Germany for Soviet spy Colonel Rudolph Abel in the first such spy exchange of the cold war.
The whole affair brought international humiliation to the United States, not because of the spy mission itself, which both sides in the cold war were routinely conducting, in one way or another, against each other, but from being caught in a public lie to the Russians with the world as an audience. tPowers himself entertained this possibility.
One was that Oswald, who he felt might have learned of the height at which the U-2 flew while he was a radar operator at Atsugi, gave this information to the Soviets.
Though, as indicated, Nosenko’s bona fides have been pretty well accepted, most observers, including the HSCA, have never felt it plausible that, as Nosenko claimed, the KGB never bothered to interview a United States defector like Oswald simply because it found him uninteresting, an opinion it apparently reached without even talking to him.
Other than undoubtedly seeing the black, sleek, unusuallooking plane in the sky above Atsugi, as everyone else who lived there probably did from time to time, Oswald was never in a position to know anything about the operation of the spy plane.
We know of Oswald’s grand visions and we also know how he confided to Marina, even to the extent of admitting he tried to murder Major General Edwin Walker.
If Oswald would admit attempting to murder Walker, we can reasonably assume he would have boasted grandly to Marina of having had a hand in the shooting down of the U-2, an international incident, and if he had, surely Marina would have remembered this.
Kennedy’s concern for the poor, particularly as it related to the rich in our society, was a subject he referred to often in his speeches.
Contrary to the assertions of Mr Khrushchev, it can accept differences of ideology, politics and economics.
On November 20,1962, Kennedy, by the stroke of a pen, had taken a small but significant step to combat racism in America.
He signed an executive order on that date prohibiting racial and religious discrimination in housing that was built or purchased with federal aid.
That order called for the admission of two clearly qualified young Alabama residents who happened to have been born Negro.
I hope that every American, regardless of where he lives, will stop and examine his conscience about this and other related incidents.
It was founded on the principle that all men are created equal, and that the rights of every man are diminished when the rights of one man are threatened.
Today we are committed to a worldwide struggle to promote and protect the rights of all who wish to be free.
And when Americans are sent to Vietnam or West Berlin, we do not ask for whites only.
It ought to be possible, therefore, for American students of any color to attend any public institution they select without having to be backed up by troops.
It ought to be possible for American consumers of any color to receive equal service in places of public accommodation, such as hotels and restaurants and theaters and retail stores, without being forced to resort to demonstrations in the street, and it ought to be possible for American citizens of any color to register to vote in a free election without interference or fear of reprisal.
In short, every American ought to have the right to be treated as he would wish to be treated, as one would wish his children to be treated.
The Negro baby born in America today, regardless of the section of the nation in which he is born, has about one-half as much chance of completing high school as a white baby born in the same place on the same day; one-third as much chance of completing college; one-third as much chance of becoming a professional man; twice as much chance of becoming unemployed; about one-seventh as much chance of earning $10,000 a year; and a life expectancy which is 7 years shorter.
Difficulties over segregation and discrimination exist in every city, in every state of the Union, producing in many cities a rising tide of discontent that threatens the public safety.
In a time of domestic crisis men of good will and generosity should be able to unite regardless of party or politics.
It is better to settle these matters in the courts than on the streets, and new laws are needed at every level, but law alone cannot make men see right.
One hundred years of delay have passed since President Lincoln freed the slaves, yet their heirs, their grandsons, are not fully freed.
And this nation, for all its hopes and all its boasts, will not be fully free until all its citizens are free.
The events in Birmingham and elsewhere have increased the cries for equality that no city or State or legislative body can prudently choose to ignore.
The fires of frustration and discord are burning in every city, North and South, where legal remedies are not at hand.
Redress is sought in the streets, in demonstrations, parades, and protests which create tensions and threaten violence and threaten lives.
It is time to act in the Congress, in your State and local legislative bodies and, above all, in all of our daily lives.
A great change is at hand, and our task, our obligation, is to make that revolution, that change, peaceful and constructive for all.
The federal judiciary has upheld that proposition in the conduct of its affairs, including the employment of federal personnel, the use of federal facilities, and the sale of federally financed housing.
But there are other necessary measures which only the Congress can provide, and they must be provided at this session.
The old code of equity law under which we live commands for every wrong a remedy, but in too many communities, in too many parts of the country, wrongs are inflicted on Negro citizens and there are no remedies in law.
I am, therefore, asking the Congress to enact legislation giving all Americans the right to be served in facilities which are open to the public—hotels, restaurants, theaters, retail stores, and similar establishments.
Its denial is an arbitrary indignity that no American in 1963 should have to endure, but many do.
I have recently met with scores of business leaders urging them to take voluntary action to end this discrimination.
And in the last two weeks over 75 cities have seen progress made in desegregating these kinds of facilities.
But many are unwilling to act alone, and for this reason, nationwide legislation is needed if we are to move this problem from the streets to the courts.
I am also asking the Congress to authorize the federal government to participate more fully in lawsuits designed to end segregation in public education.
We have succeeded in persuading many districts to desegregate voluntarily.
Today a Negro is attending a statesupported institution in every one of our 50 States, but the pace is very slow.
Too many Negro children entering segregated grade schools at the time of the Supreme Court’s decision nine years ago will enter segregated high schools this fall, having suffered a loss which can never be restored.
The lack of an adequate education denies the Negro a chance to get a decent job.
The orderly implementation of the Supreme Court decision, therefore, cannot be left solely to those who may not have the economic resources to carry the legal action or who may be subject to harassment.
Other features will also be requested, including greater protection for the right to vote.
It must be solved in the homes of every American in every community across our country.
In this respect I want to pay tribute to those citizens, North and South, who have been working in their communities to make life better for all.
They are acting not out of a sense of legal duty but out of a sense of human decency.
Like our soldiers and sailors in all parts of the world they are meeting freedom’s challenge on the firing line and I salute them for their honor and their courage.
It has become one country because all of us and all the people who came here had an equal chance to develop their talents.
We cannot say to 10 percent of the population that you can’t have that right; that your children cannot have the chance to develop whatever talents they have; that the only way that they are going to get their rights is to go into the streets and demonstrate.
Therefore, I am asking for your help in making it easier for us to move ahead and to provide the kind of equality of treatment which we would want ourselves; to give a chance for every child to be educated to the limit of his talent.
As I have said before, not every child has an equal talent or an equal ability or an equal motivation.
But they should have the equal right to develop their talent and their ability and their motivation to make something of themselves.
We have a right to expect that the Negro community will be responsible, will uphold the law.
But they have the right to expect that the law will be fair, that the Constitution will be color blind, as Justice Harlan said at the turn of the century.
This is a matter which concerns this country and what it stands for, and in meeting it I ask the support of all our citizens.
Tour hours after the speech, just after midnight on June 12, Medgar W Evers, a black thirty-seven-year-old field secretary of the Mississippi NAACP, pulled into the driveway of his Jackson, Mississippi, home.
As he left his car and walked toward his house he was shot in the back by a gunman firing a high-powered rifle with a newly attached telescopic sight who was hiding in a honeysuckle thicket in a nearby vacant lot.
After bleeding profusely in the driveway in front of his wife and three small children, Evers was rushed to a nearby hospital where he died less than an hour later.
After two hung juries, and the persistence of Evers’s widow, Myrlie, who convinced prosecutors to reopen the case, Beckwith was finally convicted of Evers’s murder on February 4,1994, more than thirty years after he killed Evers, by a jury of eight blacks and four whites.
Although there could hardly be any question that the blacks had a friend in Kennedy and he wanted full equality for them in our national life, a somewhat bizarre development ensued from the Kennedy administration’s civil rights bill four months later, one that caused the nation’s black leadership to condemn the administration.
Once the bill reached the House, a subcommittee of the House Judiciary Committee strengthened the bill by adding provisions.
For instance, the draft of the administration’s bill limited protection for blacks against discriminatory voting practices to federal elections.
Indeed, southern conservatives were in favor of the stronger subcommittee draft, believing it would be easier to defeat when it reached a vote in the House and Senate.
Although the measure, if passed, would be the broadest civil rights bill ever made into law, black leaders and civil rights advocates condemned the Kennedy administration for being behind the softening of the subcommittee draft.
The sense was that JFK was making an attempt to compete with his presidential opponent Barry Goldwater for the vote in the South of Dixiecrats, racist southern Democrats who in later years would change their registration to Republican.
Milteer now, after the assassination, wanted to lead Somersett to believe that he was part of the group that was behind it.
He said he was connected to a group Somersett had never heard of, the International Underground, an organization, he said, of American patriots, and this group had infiltrated Oswald’s pro-Castro group in New Orleans.
Those who infiltrated the group, he said, had “put money into the right hands” to get Oswald to kill Kennedy for them, the patriots.
Boling, Grand Dragon of the Association of the Klan in South Carolina) at the Wade Hampton Hotel and later at a roadside restaurant near Columbia, he also told them about his group being behind the assassination.
Somersett was of the opinion that the four Klansmen had never met Milteer before and met with him because he had asked for the meeting.
So here we have Milteer confessing to being part of the conspiracy to murder Kennedy not only to his friend Somersett, but also to four virtual strangers.
Somersett didn’t say whether or not he heard Milteer confess to the waiter at the restaurant.
Of course, he wouldn’t have to worry if he confessed to the world, since there can’t be any adverse consequences if no one believes you.
In other words, though the patriots were behind Kennedy’s murder, this would be a good opportunity to blame the Jews, whom the patriots wanted to eliminate.
Somersett got the impression that the Klansmen wanted to end their meeting and get away from Milteer as quickly as they could.
The letter has never been authenticated as being in Ruby’s handwriting.
In a later book Walt Brown writes that the “conglomerates” (whom he describes as “the CIA,” “the corporations,” “big oil”) were behind Kennedy’s assassination.
He says they told Johnson “that it would be in his interests ... to accede to the concerns of the conglomerates.
About the only member of the Dallas law enforcement hierarchy at the time of the assassination who would later come to believe that there may have been a conspiracy in the Kennedy assassination was the late chief of police Jesse Curry, and he too suggested Castro.
But since he didn’t have any evidence to point to, basically only having a hunch, his view has no significance.
UPI reporter Dan Carmichael wrote on February 7, 1977, that “thirteen years ago, Curry gave little credence to any suggestion of a conspiracy.
He quotes Curry as saying, “I don’t accept the idea that Oswald acted alone.
But in a UPI article of February 9, 1977, Carmichael quotes Curry as saying, “I just don’t know.
I wouldn’t be at all surprised if he told his people ‘do what you can to get Kennedy’ because of United States attempts to kill Castro.
Fortunately, no other Dallas law enforcement official I know of has chosen to embarrass himself as Curry, a good man, did.
In a September 1969 interview at his Texas ranch with CBS’s Walter Cronkite, LBJ sounded a little more rational.
This comment from the interview was not included in the aired segment back then, but Cronkite reported it on his CBS news program on the evening of April 15,1975.
However, the HSCA statement that it found no specific evidence that Castro knew of CIA sponsorship of plots to kill him prior to the death of President Kennedy is essentially wrong.
After all, Castro knew Kennedy wouldn’t send the Boston Philharmonic or the Des Moines Chamber of Commerce after him.
As for Johnny Roselli, he was killed, per the Mafia figure, simply because he didn’t clear his Church Committee testimony with his Mafia associates.
He said Mafia leaders had been angry with Roselli since 1971, when he testified before a Los Angeles federal grand jury investigating underworld ownership of the Frontier Hotel in Las Vegas.
Three members of the Mafia went to prison as a result of that investigation, and although Roselli’s testimony was sealed, the mob suspected that he had provided damning information to the United States attorney’s office.
One of the most famous CIA plots against Castro was uncovered by him after the assassination.
A former student leader who attained the rank of major in Castro’s guerrilla army in the late 1950s, Cubela went on to become a high official in Castro’s Ministry of the Interior.
Code-named AMLASH by the CIA, Cubela, whose job it was to organize an internal coup against Castro, was in touch with the CIA from March of 1961 until June of 1965, and proposed doing an “inside job” on Castro when Cubela met with a CIA officer in Porto Allegre, Brazil, over two years later, on September 7, 1963.
He was arrested by Castro’s counterintelligence agents in February of 1966 and prosecuted and convicted of plotting the overthrow of Castro.
He was released by Castro after thirteen years and allowed to leave Cuba.
Although the Church Committee concluded that AMLASH envisioned Although the CIA has never said who AMLASH was, everyone else said that he was Cubela.
For instance, Richard Helms, the CIA’s deputy director for plans at that time, told the Church Committee that the AMLASH operation was only a plot to overthrow, not assassinate, Castro.
The CIA case officer who was Cubela’s contact at the CIA also testified the operation did not have Castro’s murder as one of its goals.
Although FitzGerald originally balked, telling AMLASH that the United States would have “no part of an attempt on Castro’s life,” on November 22, 1963, the day of the assassination, AMLASH’s CIA case officer met with AMLASH in Paris and told him the CIA would provide him with explosives and rifles and showed him a poison pen, suggesting he could use the commercial poison Black Leaf-40 in it.
The case officer doesn’t recall whether AMLASH took the pen, but recalls his being dissatisfied with the device.
As the case officer and AMLASH broke up their meeting, they were told of the president’s death.
The CIA delivered a cache of arms to AMLASH in Cuba in March of 1964 and again in June of 1964, but when AMLASH insisted on a silencer for an FAL rifle and made it clear he thought Castro’s assassination was a necessary “first step” to democratize Cuba, the CIA balked.
But the second case officer, the one who replaced the first one, testified that when he took over the AMLASH project he recalled being briefed by the first case officer that Cubela’s belief was that the project involved Castro’s assassination.
The agency proceeded to pass AML ASH off to “B-l,” the leader of an anti-Castro group, and broke off all relations with him in June of 1965.
In his 2003 memoir, A Look over My Shoulder, Helms says that at the October Paris meeting with FitzGerald, AMLASH requested a weapon, not to kill Castro, but to put up a fight with anyone who attempted to seize and arrest him in the event the plot to overthrow Castro was discovered.
Morris’s brother Jack was the business manager of the Young Communist League.
The two brothers, particularly Morris, were so highly valuable to the FBI in furnishing it with top-secret Soviet information during the cold war that in 1987 President Reagan awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom to Morris Childs and to his deceased brother Jack posthumously.
The Soviets were equally taken with the two brothers, particularly Morris.
The Soviets so trusted and esteemed him that on his seventy-fifth birthday, Brezhnev hosted a banquet at the Kremlin in his honor.
Barron says that “the voluminous secrets Morris stole from the Kremlin for more than two decades, enabled the United States to read the minds of the men who ran the Soviet Union, to anticipate their actions, and to exploit their problems, most spectacularly their problems with China.
It was like playing poker, knowing which cards everyone else at the table held.
Contrary to what has been written—that Hoover sent Jack Childs to Cuba to find out what Castro had meant in a November 27, 1963, speech in Havana when he said Oswald had made a “provocative statement” when he visited the Cuban embassy in Mexico City —Childs was in Havana on a mission for his other employer, the Kremlin, and it was during his meeting with Castro on this matter that Castro brought up the Kennedy assassination.
Though the evidence is clear that Oswald made no threat to kill Kennedy, as we have seen, the informant, Jack Childs, was indeed a very reliable source, and I believe he merely passed on to the FBI what Castro told him in Havana about the threat.
It was Castro who most likely was repeating information about the threat that he had received from his employees at the Cuban embassy, who in turn were merely passing on what an eventually discredited witness, Gilberto Alvarado Ugarte, said he heard Oswald say outside the Cuban embassy.
Unbelievably, out of all these fabricated statements and nothingness, a reportedly well-credentialed German filmmaker, one Wilfried Huismann, directed a one-hour documentary, titled Rendezvous mit dem Tod , that was shown for the first time in Berlin on January 4, 2006.
The entire thrust of Huismann’s documentary is that Castro’s Cuban intelligence people used Oswald to kill Kennedy once he made the offer at the Cuban consulate to kill Kennedy, and the person who paid Oswald to do so was the black man with the reddish hair, who is identified in the program as a top Cuban G-2 agent in Mexico named Cesar Morales Mesa.
Huismann isn’t troubled by the fact that the basis for the alleged offer was Oswald’s supposedly saying, “I’m going to kill Kennedy for this” as he headed out of the Cuban consulate office after his request for an in-transit visa to Cuba was turned down, and that the only two people who we know were in the office at the time, Silvia Duran and Eusebio Azcue, have said they never heard Oswald say any such thing.
Huismann is also not troubled by the fact that Oswald would have had no reason to say he was going to kill Kennedy “for this,” that is, for being turned down by the Cuban consulate for his in-transit visa.
And he sees nothing preposterous about the discussion to murder the president of the United States and the payment to Oswald taking place right outside the Cuban embassy, when Cuban intelligence had to know that the lenses of CIA cameras were focused on that area.
Nor does he apparently feel that Alvarado’s claim to have actually seen (and apparently diligently counted out) precisely $6,500 in American bills being paid to Oswald is preposterous on its face.
In addition, Huismann isn’t concerned by the fact that Alvarado said he saw this alleged payoff to Oswald on September 18,1963, when we know Oswald wasn’t even in Mexico City, being present and accounted for in New Orleans.
But Silvia Duran and Eusebio Azcue have never indicated they told Oswald this.
Moreover, Oswald already knew, before he left for Mexico, that travel by United States citizens to Cuba was prohibited.
This is the precise reason why he sought to get there through the backdoor, by an in-transit visa. tClose to four and a half decades after the event in question, Huismann found another person named Antonio , allegedly a Cuban G-2 agent responsible for the security of the Cuban embassy in Mexico City, who claims he saw Oswald meet twice with the “black man with red hair” (whom he identified as a fellow G-2 agent) in the embassy parking garage.
It contains, among other things, a photo of the Cuban agent who met with Oswald.
Nothing was going to stand in his way in his attempt to push his ridiculous story on as many unsuspecting people as he could.
Most of Huismann’s other nuts have already told their stories and have been forgotten but for Huismann’s attempted resurrection of them.
But again, that someone would handle a payoff to kill Kennedy right in front of the CIA cameras outside the Cuban embassy is too ludicrous for words.
Of course, Huismann doesn’t tell his audience that in addition to this event occurring at a time when Gutierrez would have no reason to remember Oswald, he said he only saw “Oswald’s” face for a “split second,” seeing his back during the rest of the event.
In Huismann’s story, naturally, a narrator tells his audience there is no question that the man Gutierrez says he saw was Oswald.
Elena Garro de Paz was the former wife of famed Mexican poet Octavio Paz, and a distinguished writer herself.
Her problem, discussed in an endnote to “The Second Oswald” section, is that she was batty, and her story about Oswald attending a “Twist” party with two American companions at the home of Silvia Duran’s brother-in-law while he was in Mexico City has been completely discredited by people who were at the party.
This posed no problem for Huismann, who simply didn’t tell his audience this.
He rounded up Garro’s daughter, who has the same name as her mother, and who told Huismann she too was at the party, and proceeds to tell, on screen, the same wholly implausible story her mother had told.
Identity of the Cuban officers who were sent to plot the murder of President Kennedy.
Identity of the black man with reddish hair and a scar on his cheek who turned up at the Cuban Embassy.
Nonetheless, Huismann presents Ramirez to his audience as a perfectly credible witness.
Huismann’s narrator also tells his audience about a “secret dossier for ‘Johnson’s Eyes Only,’ never before disclosed, until now.
The man who compiled it, LBJ’s confidant [also, LBJ’s chief advance man who handled one advance assignment for JFK, to Houston, Texas, on November 21, 1963] Martin Underwood, gave us the report under the condition that we make it public only after his death.
The ARRB’s final report says that while Seymour Hersh was writing his 1997 book, The Dark Side of Camelot, probably long before Underwood was thinking of dying, Underwood gave his handwritten notes, with this information about Escalante on them, to a researcher for Hersh.
The researcher turned the notes over to the ARRB at some time before it submitted its final report on September 30,1998.
When the ARRB first asked Underwood about the notes (which included an allegation that Scott told him the CIA “blew it” in Dallas on November 22,1963, the implication being that the CIA may have been involved in Kennedy’s assassination), Underwood claimed he had no memory of having written them.
He then claimed that yes, the notes were his, but he had written them not in 1966, when he spoke to Ramirez told Huismann’s TV audience that Cuban G-2 “wanted to eliminate” Kennedy.
Coming right after Ramirez’s statement that the Cuban G-2 wanted to kill Kennedy, the word availability suggests availability for murder.
Nikolai answers, “It’s a telegram to the head of Cuban secret service Ramiro Valdes.
Cuban secret service requested to take up surveillance of this individual.
If so, why didn’t it try to recruit Oswald while he was in Russia?), but there is a serious question about whether such a telegram existed.
When Huismann asked Fabian Escalante, the former head of the Cuban State Security Department , about the telegram, Escalante said the telegram was “completely false.
Instead, the ARRB said, “The notes state that Underwood sought Scott’s assistance in staging a big welcome for President Johnson” when LBJ came to Mexico City.
It was obvious to the ARRB that Underwood had no credibility, so it asked him to testify under oath to his allegations, but he declined on the grounds of health problems.
F de Sales Meyers, “One Step Ahead of‘Earthquake’ and a President,” Sun Magazine , July 22,1979, 7) Huismann, naturally, gives his audience none of this background.
Russo told me that in 1993, he met Underwood through a mutual acquaintance, Robert White, a well-known JFK memorabilia collector, and Russo ended up having “dozens of lunches” with Underwood in the Baltimore area.
Russo writes that Underwood told him that in the 1968 meeting with Scott in Mexico City, “Scott told him that a known Cuban assassin had been in Mexico City when Oswald was there and that he had mysteriously slipped through Mexican customs on November 22.
Although Scott had no proof of the Cuban’s role in Dallas, he believed it.
However, much to my disappointment, Marty said he never intended for that to be made public—he was an obsessively private man.
He asked me to not use the material until after his death, and I reluctantly agreed.
Marty called me and told me that if they persisted he would have to lie to them and say I had completely misunderstood him.
In 1997,1 was working for Sy Hersh and ABC on the adaptation of his book, The Dark Side of Camelot.
Russo says that when Underwood met with Hersh and himself for lunch, the only matter discussed was the Exner story, and contrary to the ARRB’s report, Fabian Escalante was never discussed or mentioned.
In order to convince the Board that I had been mistaken about the date of the notes, he suggested that I was confused with a trip Marty took to Mexico in 1966.
Marty even gave them a copy of his notes of that 1966 trip, which, of course, had no mention of the assassination.
For some reason, the Board not mention these inconsistencies in its final report, which completely confused the 1966 trip with the 1968 trip, exactly what Underwood hoped it would do.
I say “face” because for supposed fear of retaliation, the man’s face is bathed in shadows on the screen.
And his name, Oscar Marino, is not his real name (Telephone interview of Gus Russo by author on January 15, 2006), though Huismann isn’t kind enough to tell his audience this.
That itself would be bad enough, but Marino has absolutely nothing to say.
Since we know that Oswald never made the threat to kill Kennedy that Alvarado claims (but later retracted) he made, we thereby know at this point that everything Marino says thereafter has to be a fabrication.
Whether or not it was Castro’s decision is a question I cannot and will not answer.
Just as Marino could tell Huismann with “complete certainty” that Kennedy’s death was a G-2 agency operation, I can tell Huismann with even more “complete certainty” that even though Marino, in effect, confessed to complicity with other G-2 members in Kennedy’s murder, he actually knows that he has absolutely nothing to fear.
Marino certainly would realize that if Cuban G-2 and Castro were vindictive enough and powerful enough to wipe out the president of the United States in the United States, they would be vindictive and powerful enough to wipe out non-entities like himself in Mexico for squealing on them.
If Huismann could find the supposedly ailing Marino, surely they could.
But Marino knows he doesn’t have to worry a whit since he knows his story is fabricated nonsense that only nonsensical conspiracy theorists would have any interest in, not very serious people like Castro and his G-2.
If he continued to yap these insanities in public, Castro would probably commit him to a mental institution or put him away for a spell.
And even though there is no statute of limitation for murder in the United States, Marino also knows he doesn’t have to worry about FBI agents knocking on Huismann’s door to obtain Marino’s identity and whereabouts (by court order if necessary) so they could arrest him and extradite him back to the United States for prosecution for Kennedy’s murder.
Because Marino, I, and virtually all other sensible people know that no one in authority would take him seriously.
The authorities, including Castro, only deal harshly with real people telling real stories, not humbugs like Marino.
With respect to the two American public servants who should be ashamed for making such a fool out of themselves in Huismann’s documentary, although Huismann would apparently want his viewers to believe that these two Americans first made their allegations in his film, both made them years ago.
As I said in the main text, when FBI Director J Edgar Hoover learned that the United States ambassador to Cuba, Thomas Mann, actually believed Alvarado’s allegation, wanted the FBI to investigate his claim, and wanted to get personally involved in investigating Kennedy’s murder, Hoover realized he had a “pseudo-investigator” on his hands so he sent Keenan down to Mexico City to satisfy Mann’s request for an investigation and to concurrently shut the ludicrous Mann up.
Keenan arrived in Mexico City on November 27 and he, the CIA station chief Win Scott, and the legal attache at the United States embassy, FBI agent Clark Anderson, met with Mann on November 28.
Keenan also testified that he never got an opportunity to question Alvarado, the CIA denying his requests.
In any event, after Alvarado recanted his allegation, on November 30 Mann “advised that it was no longer necessary” for Keenan to stay in Mexico City, and he returned to Washington, D.C., on December 1.
Although Keenan testified before the Church Committee that his investigation was to be “wide open” and he could conduct “as much investigation as I thought This, of course, isn’t surprising, since the CIA, dating from the National Security Act of 1947, is the lead federal agency in the gathering of foreign intelligence.
The FBI still has an international presence, however, with its legal attache offices in United States embassies and consulates around the world.
However, Porter said, in rare instances involving loss of American lives overseas, and with the agreement of the host country, FBI agents are sent to that country to conduct a limited investigation coordinated by the Legat office there.
Furthermore, although he was in Mexico City for several days, nowhere in his testimony did he indicate he made any effort to do anything other than interview Alvarado.
If Keenan was trying to fool the Church Committee as to his role in Mexico City, he failed.
Sullivan would later admit that he had used a “poor choice of words,” though he denied he sent Keenan to Mexico specifically to placate Mann and disprove Alvarado.
But since the CIA had jurisdiction over the investigation in Mexico, and Keenan himself, in his testimony, admitted that he was sent to Mexico City “to cover ourselves, to pacify the ambassador,” it is difficult to see what further role for Keenan in Mexico would have been contemplated by Sullivan and Hoover.
It is confusing, I realize, because it appears to be an internal memo from Sullivan to Belmont.
But although Keenan is locked into his own testimony, as well as other evidence and common sense, for some reason he tried to break loose from reality in a 1993 statement he gave on Frontline when he said, “Looking back, I feel a certain amount of shame.
He was sent to Mexico City because Mann was requesting an FBI investigation of the Alvarado allegation.
He also said that when the CIA turned Alvarado over to the Mexican authorities, that “precluded me” from ever being able to interrogate Alvarado.
By Keenan’s severe indictment of the FBI, the viewer is left with the impression that Hoover sent Keenan to Mexico City to investigate all aspects of the case as they pertained to Mexico City, and suddenly, Hoover, apparently changing his mind and wanting to cover up the facts of the assassination—which, per Huismann, was perpetrated by Cuban intelligence— aborted Keenan’s work and ordered him home.
But as we have seen, Keenan’s own FBI report from Mexico City on November 28, and his report on December 3, 1963, just two days after he returned to Washington, D.C., from Mexico City, clearly refutes the position he is now taking.
Assassination researcher and lawyer Jim Lesar told me he was surprised by Keenan’s statements on Huismann’s film.
He knows Keenan, having represented him in a FOIA lawsuit back in 1994.
In fact, it was Keenan who sent Lesar a copy of the transcript of the Berlin documentary.
He’s never indicated before that he was sent to Mexico City to coordinate the Mexico City end of the assassination investigation, and I’m not sure he meant to suggest by his words what the documentary suggests he meant.
Keenan’s story in Huismann’s documentary is valueless, and he was most probably used by Huismann to convince the viewer, by the mere fact he was a former FBI agent, of the theme of Huismann’s film—that Cuba had Kennedy murdered, something that Keenan and his statements have nothing to do with.
The second American public figure Huismann uses to peddle his empty story is none other than former secretary of state Alexander Haig.
I already knew that Haig was given to making ludicrous statements about the assassination.
If such a statement came from a private person, one wouldn’t have to be concerned.
I personally find it scary that someone so high up and powerful in our government would be capable of making such an irrational observation.
When he accuses President Kennedy and his brother of ordering the murder of a foreign head of state, that is something else.
In a long endnote to the section of this book captioned “Cover-Up by the CIA and FBI in the Warren Commission’s Investigation of the Assassination,” I discuss in a fair amount of depth the fact that no one has been able to penetrate the mystery of whether JFK and RFK gave their consent to the CIA plots to kill Castro, much less having ordered them.
No public figure whom I know of has publicly declared that either or both of the Kennedy brothers ordered an attempt on Castro’s life.
If Haig had bothered to read his own words on this issue in his book, he would have seen that he was in no position to make such a reckless charge.
The secret war was not an important factor in my own official As indicated, this would be an improbability since the CIA, starting with the National Security Act of 1947, is the lead federal agency gathering foreign intelligence.
However, the Act doesn’t expressly forbid other federal agencies from gathering foreign intelligence, and many, such as the National Security Agency and the Department of Defense, do.
And as John Fox, an FBI historian pointed out, although he doesn’t believe Hoover sent Keenan to Mexico City for anything other than a limited purpose, Hoover could have sent Keenan down there for a more expansive mission, as Keenan now seems to be suggesting.
This is so, Fox said, not only because any investigation in Mexico City could be viewed as a “follow-up on a domestic investigation” of the president’s murder, but, more importantly, because President Johnson had assigned the FBI the lead role in investigating the assassination, and “that itself,” Fox said, would give Hoover all the authority he needed to conduct a more comprehensive investigation in Mexico City.
Elsewhere, he speaks of his “ignorance of the existence of the assassination plots,” and that the “secret of this deadly enterprise was so closely held that not even John A McCone,” director of central intelligence from 1962 to 1965, knew about them.
If he had any evidence to support his charge, that would be one thing, but he has nothing at all.
His book, Inner Circle , is full of source citations, yet when he makes this terribly serious allegation, he gives no source for the simple reason that he has none.
Since we know, even from his own words, that he would never have been privy to such orders, he should have at least informed his readers (and the Berlin documentary audience) who told him this obvious hearsay.
Most likely, Haig heard some loose talk or speculation that the Kennedys ordered Castro’s murder, and willy-nilly irresponsibly passed it on as fact in his book and in Huismann’s documentary.
So what we have here with Huismann’s Rendezvous with Death is a very trite rendezvous with a foundationless base , old witnesses whose stories have already been discredited, a star witness without a name or face and nothing to say other than to make a naked declaration, and two former American public servants, tossed in for cachet purposes, who made fools of themselves.
In defense of Russo, he pointed out to me that he felt the Cubans in the documentary had credibility because they had to be pressured to participate in the program, so they weren’t seeking notoriety.
Prior to Antulio Ramirez’s testimony before the HSCA, Chief Counsel G Robert Blakey had asked the CIA to check into Ramirez’s background and give his committee its comments on his allegations.
As far as corroboration of most of the code names Ramirez used, this too seems to be an overly generous observation.
In fact, the only one of the six the CIA was sure of was Ramiro Valdes Menendez, the head of Cuban G-2.
Another CIA source caused a flap in December of 1963 alleging that a pro-Castro Cuban-American epileptic named Gilberto Policarpo Lopez, who came to the United States on a United States passport in July of 1960 in order to avoid the Cuban military draft, had engaged in some “suspicious” travel across the Texas border into Mexico on November 23, arriving in Mexico City on November 25 and flying back to Cuba on the evening of November 27, the only passenger on the Cubana Airlines flight.
Conspiracy hearts and minds went aflutter upon recalling that when Oswald applied to Vincent T Lee, national president of the FPCC, for a charter for a New Orleans chapter, Lee wrote Oswald on May 29, 1963, suggesting Oswald get in touch with the Tampa chapter, which Vincent Lee had personally organized.
The committee also said it could find “no evidence” that Oswald ever contacted the Tampa chapter of the FPCC or had ever met Lopez.
The HSCA also confirmed that it was the Cuban government that initially made the overtures to the United States for a reconciliation.
For the most part, JFK did not originally respond favorably, but on September 20, 1963, he authorized William Attwood to meet with Carlos Lechuga, Cuba’s ambassador to the United Nations, to explore the possibility of detente with Cuba.
Attwood replied that the United Nations was a more appropriate talking place.
The wheels of diplomacy continued right up to the date of the assassination.
I left it to Attwood how much of this he would convey in the initial message to Vallejo ... with the proviso that it must be clear at all times that we not supplicants in this matter and that the initiative for exploratory conversations was coming from the Cubans.
Summers doesn’t say what his “source” told him Attwood said to Vallejo, or Vallejo’s response.
However, Wesley Liebeler did go on to testify later that although he believed, from his interviewing of Sylvia Odio, that she honestly believed “that Oswald was there,” from what he had learned about her “ ‘psychological and other problems’ that she was having at the time” he would not regard her as a reliable witness on this question.
There is no hard evidence of Castro having been a member of any Communist group before he showed his Communist stripes after the revolution.
Lucille Connell told the HSCA that she had not had any intention of reporting the incident to the FBI, and that her contact with the FBI came about in a circuitous way.
The HSCA staff memorandum interview of Connell reads, “Connell says that she was speaking on the telephone with a friend of hers who was a secretary in a law office when Oswald was shot.
Later that day Connell says she happened to be speaking with another friend, a Miss Marcella Insua, the daughter of the man who ran the Cuban Relief Committee, and she mentioned to Insua what her friend said about Ruby being in her law office.
Miss Insua happened to have a class of American children to whom she was teaching Spanish.
In class, she got into a discussion of the Kennedy assassination and mentioned that she knew someone who knew someone who had some dealings with Ruby.
It also happened that in Miss Insua’s class was the son of FBI agent Hosty, who immediately went home and told his father about the Ruby connection.
Pious X parochial grade school in Dallas, none took Spanish, and the above incident never happened.
Hosty was one of several FBI agents who interviewed Odio, but he said he never interviewed Connell.
As to the Ruby reference, the HSCA confirmed that Ruby had been a client of attorney Graham Koch’s at the law firm of Connell’s friend.
Koch, who described Ruby as “a character out of Ring Lardner,” said he had represented Ruby on a problem Ruby had with the IRS over “back taxes,” but said he had no recollection of having handled a power-of-attorney agreement for Ruby, though he added it was “possible” he did since it was just a matter of filling out a form.
Koch said his firm’s “activity cards” showed the last contact with Ruby was on March 13, 1963, but Connell’s friend, Mrs.
Sanford Pick, told the HSCA that she had seen Ruby in the law firm office once in early 1963 and once about a week before the assassination.
But this is a canceling machine impression, which only shows that this form was received at the main post office in New Orleans at 11:00m. on September 25, 1963.
As it turns out, although there is no evidence that Loran Hall, Lawrence Howard, and William Seymour were ever at Sylvia Odio’s door, apparently all three of them, plus a Cuban refugee named Celio Sergio Castro Alba, most of whom had met in 1961 while part of the anti-Castro movement in Florida, were in Dallas in September or October of 1963.
Seymour told the FBI that sometime in late September of 1963, Hall and Howard had gone to Los Angeles and brought a trailer of supplies, including arms, to Dallas en route to Miami for the anti-Castro effort.
But he said, without explanation, that the two left the supplies in Dallas.
He said that in mid-October, he and Hall drove back to Dallas from Miami to pick up the supplies.
He believes that it was because of their physical appearance that they were stopped and questioned by the Dallas Police Department on October 17, 1963.
He was released, but Hall was charged with drug possession, though he said that after a day or so he and Hall left Dallas for Florida with a trailer of supplies.
The arms in the trailer were thereafter confiscated by United States Customs officials in Key West.
During his few days in Dallas, Seymour said that Howard was never with him and Hall.
He said that about the middle of September 1963 he left Los Angeles in his 1956 Oldsmobile, pulling a small trailer of supplies for the It had to be after October 10, because, as indicated in the main text, Seymour was working in Florida through October 10, 1963.
He said he did not recall any contacts by his group in Dallas with anyone to solicit assistance.
While in Dallas, he did visit Kiki Ferror, whom he apparently knew from Florida, at Ferror’s apartment (Seymour said Kiki was the brother of Rolando Ferror, a former Cuban senator during the Batista regime), and believes that Howard and Wahito waited in the car.
He is almost certain that the apartment was located on Magellan Circle or a street with a similar name.
Ferror introduced him to a Cuban woman living in a lower apartment, but he and his group did not solicit this woman for any kind of assistance.
He confirms, without explanation, that he left the trailer in Dallas, and that the three of them then drove to Miami.
He confirmed Seymour’s story about later going to Dallas with Seymour to pick up the trailer, and said he was able to leave Dallas after his arrest because the drug charge against him had been dropped.
While with Seymour in Dallas, he again visited Kiki, without Seymour, and said neither he nor Seymour contacted anyone for assistance in Dallas.
CD 1553,4, September 19, 1964; Wahito is Alba’s nickname: CD 1553,7, September 23, 1964) Howard confirmed to the FBI his being a part of the anti-Castro movement in Florida.
In August of 1963 he had returned to Los Angeles to visit his family, and the following month Hall, whom he had met in Florida as part of the anti-Castro effort, contacted him to leave Los Angeles to help him transport supplies for the rebel movement.
Hall was accompanied by Alba, who had also come from Florida to Los Angeles.
The three left for Dallas in Hall’s car, pulling a “luggage carrier” with medical supplies for the movement.
Howard said Hall told him he intended to pick up additional supplies and funds in Dallas and contact a man who was going to furnish a boat for the Cuban invasion attempt.
Howard said that during his stays in Dallas he recalls no contacts with Odio or any other Cuban woman to solicit funds for the movement.
He said the three left for Miami around September 30, leaving the medical supplies, again without explanation, behind in Dallas.
He said he never heard Hall mention the name Sylvia Odio in his presence.
However, Connell told the HSCA that she did not recall ever telling the FBI this.
Martino was a low-level mobster and friend of Florida Mafia chieftain Santo Trafficante.
Martino was incarcerated by Castro until 1962, at which time Martino returned to the states and aligned himself with the anti-Castro movement, claiming to be a CIA contract agent.
In their book, Martino and Weyl allege that there was an anti-Castro Cuban conspiracy behind Oswald’s assassination of the president, but when the FBI interviewed Martino and Weyl, they were uncooperative, and it became clear they had no evidence to support the allegation, merely passing on secondhand hearsay.
Warren Commission assistant counsel W David Slawson, upon reading the FBI reports, was so unimpressed with Martino’s allegation that he recommended, in an April 24, 1964, memorandum to J Lee Rankin, that the Commission not even bother to call Martino as a witness.
In 1975, Martino, again claiming he had personal knowledge of the assassination, told Fred Claasen, a Texas businessman, that “the anti-Castro people put Oswald together.
But I guess he did it for anti-Castro Cuban exiles, who must have somehow “owned” Ruby.
He contacted Newsday reporter John Cummings and told him he not only had personal knowledge of who was behind the assassination (which he had assured Cummings of years earlier) but was personally involved, not in pulling the trigger but in “facilitating things,” and asked Cummings not to write about it until after he died.
He told Cummings that he had met Oswald several weeks before the assassination in Miami.
He said an FBI agent named Connors asked him to come to a boat docked in Key Biscayne, and introduced him to Oswald.
If Martino was close to death, his dementia would be in his failure to realize the obvious—that his lie would easily be revealed by Oswald’s presence in Dallas during the subject period.
And if he wasn’t lying and actually believed what he told Cummings, this would be an even stronger indicator of dementia.
Cummings told Summers he felt Martino was being sincere in what he told him (yet, in contravention of this, he apparently never wrote a story about Martino’s mea culpa to Kennedy’s murder—a very strange thing for a reporter), and that someone told him that Connors was in FBI counterintelligence.
In 1994, he found one named James J O’Connor, who told him that Martino’s name rang a bell, but he had never met Lee Harvey Oswald.
It turns out that O’Connor had met Martino, and that telling phony stories about Oswald were nothing new to Martino.
After being requested several times by the Miami FBI to reveal his source, on May 11, 1964, he finally did so, saying the source was Oscar Ortiz, someone he said he met when he, Martino, was in Cuba’s Principe Prison in 1959-1960.
He said Ortiz had escaped and in October of 1962 showed up unexpectedly at Martino’s house in Miami Beach.
Martino was unable to tell FBI agents how they could find Ortiz and an independent effort on their own turned up no one with that name.
But anyone who has read an Einspruch interview or deposition on the Odio matter is struck by his lack of clear memory of precisely what Odio told him about this whole affair.
When Warren Commission counsel Wesley Liebeler asked Odio, “Did you tell Dr.
Moreover, in Einspruch’s testimony before the HSCA, not only didn’t he mention this , but he suggested the exact opposite.
Einspruch, though still making the point that he believed Odio to be a “truthful” person who had not made up her story, expressed some skepticism about whether Odio’s identification of Oswald was correct.
I can imagine many perfectly normal people, in the same circumstances, saying the same thing.
It isn’t completely clear whether Odio, when she said, “Cuban exiles,” was referring to the two Cuban exiles who had come to her door with the American, or the Cuban exile community.
Though Sylvia Odio’s credibility (in not wavering from her basic story, though she has been interviewed many times) is good, it is not perfect—that is, if we believe her priest accurately recalled what she told him.
It seems that the good reverend wasn’t really cut out for a life of celibacy.
Though as uninhibited by his robes as today’s homosexual pedophiles among the Catholic clergy, McChann had eyes for women, adult women.
He reportedly had several sexual liaisons with female members of his flock, including the fetching Sylvia.
Burton Einspruch, told Warren Commission counsel Burt Griffin in the April 13, 1964, interview that he “did not believe affair with Father McChann was as serious as [Warren Commission investigators] had been led to believe by Mrs.
McChann reported back that Sylvia had told him that in addition to the man introduced to her as Leon, one of the Cuban men called himself Leopoldo and the second Cuban man she identified as Eugenio Cisneros.
She said she had never seen any of the three men before, yet to her priest she said she knew the second Cuban, and his name was Eugenio Cisneros.
She said when the men came to her door, she asked them if they had been sent to her by “Eugenio” (the designated “war” name of Rogelio Cisneros [CE 2896, 26 H 349]), to which they said no.
Odio, who admitted to the Commission that she was actively “involved in this movement” to “do something” to free her “father and mother in prison” in Cuba, said that she had called Eugenio in Miami concerning the purchase of arms for the movement.
Further, that Eugenio had come to Dallas in June of 1963 to meet with her and other members of the anti-Castro community, which Cisneros confirmed to the Secret Service.
CE 2896, 26 H 349) But saying she knew Eugenio from the anti-Castro movement and telling her priest that he was one of the two Cubans at her door are two very different things.
No one knows better than a trial lawyer, like myself, how things can get hopelessly garbled, sometimes beyond recognition, when one party tells a third party what a second party told him.
But the La Fontaines apparently don’t realize that the “noble reason” they give for Odio making up her story is perhaps the best reason why she would not have invented her story, and that she was telling the truth.
Certainly, our government’s belief that Oswald was associated with the anti-Castro group JURE would not instill in it any desire to go after Castro because of the assassination.
But there is absolutely no evidence to support this theory, and even if we were to accept it, since Odio wanted to liberate Cuba and free her parents, if, as indicated earlier, she were to fabricate a story, she would have put pro -Castro Cubans, not JURE or any other anti-Castro ones, at her door to hopefully lead the United States to believe Castro was involved in the assassination, causing the United States to invade Cuba and remove Castro from power.
But the main citation it gives for this does not clearly support its assertion.
This is not synonymous with her saying that he left New Orleans by bus.
But the authors don’t say how her making up this very elaborate lie about Oswald coming to her door as a stranger would shield her from the alleged fact that she had earlier been in Oswald’s presence at anti-Castro meetings.
Anderson left the man off at a point where he could catch a connecting bus to the depot.
One serious problem with Rogers’s and Anderson’s statements is that Rogers said Oswald was carrying two suitcases, and the bus driver also said the passenger he picked up had two suitcases.
We certainly know there has never been any evidence that Oswald had any Fair Play for Cuba organization in Dallas.
Note also that Walthers said the group at 3128 Harlendale was only “possibly connected” with Oswald’s group.
The address was the residence of Jorge Salazar, an anti-Castro Cuban exile.
An FBI informant told the FBI three days after the assassination that Rodriguez was violently anti-Kennedy, but Rodriguez, who confirmed the meetings at the house on Harlendale, told the FBI he was actually an admirer of Kennedy, being convinced he was a friend of the exiles and a foe of Castro and Communism, and his group had even placed flowers at the assassination site.
Moreover, two other FBI informants who knew Rodriguez said there was no evidence he had ever been antiKennedy.
Ellsworth said he was “able to ascertain that it was actually lookalike” who was at the house.
First, though we know many people resemble others, some closely, the idea of a stranger being a dead ringer and identical twin to another is very, very far out.
Why Hosty would say Ellsworth told him this if he didn’t is hard to figure out.
However, Russell determined the man’s identity—John Thomas Masen—and when he confronted Ellsworth with Masen’s name, Ellsworth implicitly acknowledged Masen was the man.
Russell interviewed Masen in 1976 at his workplace as a gunsmith in Dallas and saw there was a “resemblance” to Oswald.
Masen acknowledged attending a few Minutemen meetings and to having met General Walker.
Former President Nixon, in his book Six Crises , acknowledges the key role he played in instituting the plot to overthrow Castro, which came to be known as the Cuba Project.
Nixon said he verified that CIA Director Allen Dulles had briefed Kennedy (since he was a presidential candidate) on the operation, and felt that Kennedy was going even beyond the expected “hard-hitting” nature of a campaign by advocating a policy he already knew was in existence but which his opponent, Nixon, could not talk about.
And on November 18,1960, President Kennedy was advised by Dulles and Bissell of the CIA operation to overthrow Castro.
Between November 18, 1960, and April 17,1961, D-day for the Bay of Pigs invasion, there were seven meetings with Kennedy where invasion plans were discussed.
Though the invasion of Cuba and overthrow of Castro was primarily a CIA-sponsored project, the American military was also involved, and beyond the fact that the Joint Chiefs of Staff signed off on the invasion plans.
And one of the two people directly in charge of the invasion planning was Marine Corps Colonel Jack Hawkins, a battle-scarred veteran of the Second World War and Korean War who was on temporary assignment to the CIA for the invasion project.
Indeed, starting in May of 1960, United States military instructors, along with CIA contract agents who were paramilitary soldiers of fortune like William “Rip” Robertson and Grayston “Gray” Lynch, trained the exile invasion force at their main training camp and six other smaller camps in the mountains of Guatemala.
The report of a committee commissioned by President Kennedy to ascertain why the Bay of Pigs invasion failed throws both Haynes Johnson’s and Peter Wyden’s versions into question.
In all, a total of 13 combat sorties were flown on D-day, in the course of which four B-26’s were lost to enemy T-33 action.
It should be noted that conflicting reports about what occurred during the Bay of Pigs invasion are almost the norm, and the problem with the report by the committee is that the committee was unable to get the testimony of any of the brigade leaders, since they were all in Castro’s custody.
Further, the testimony the committee did get wasn’t that supportive of the conclusion it reached.
Later on, there were some more tanks coming in, so we called again for air support.
However, on April 14, 1961, the day the brigade force embarked from Puerto Cabezas, Nicaragua, for the Bay of Pigs , “Frank,” the American leader of the camp, gave the brigade leaders a slightly more ambiguous promise on the issue of air support and cover during the actual invasion.
Frank was a colonel in the American army, per CIA Director Allen Dulles.
It is not known whether the denial contained the assertion that “Bender” wasn’t even at Camp Trax at the time the statements were made.
Though information like this cannot be ignored, it cannot trump the overriding sense—yes, knowledge—on the part of the exile leaders that the American government itself was behind the invasion.
Indeed, it has been written and confirmed many times that, as author Haynes Johnson wrote, during the actual invasion, “in a deserted house at abandoned airfield of Opa-Locka outside Miami, the leaders of the Cuban Revolutionary Council [those present were Miro Cardona, Manuel Ray, Tony Varona, Antonio Maceo, Justo Carrillo, and Carlos Hevia] were being held under guard until they could be flown to Cuba to establish their provisional government” once the invasion succeeded.
On April 19, when it became clear that the brigade’s small beachhead could no longer hold out against Castro’s forces, Cardona requested a conference with Kennedy at the White House, and presidential assistant Arthur Schlesinger Jr. recommended to President Kennedy that he see the Cubans.
Felix Rodriguez, one of the exile troops in training at Camp Trax in the Guatemalan mountains, where most of Brigade 2506 was being trained, and who later went on to become a CIA agent, had a slightly different perspective.
What is particularly troubling is that a December 8,1960, CIA Special National Intelligence Estimate foresaw no development “likely to bring about a critical shift of popular opinion away from Castro,” yet this estimate, along with a similar assessment made on March 10, 1961, just five weeks before the Bay of Pigs invasion, was never furnished to the president.
What is remarkable is that Kennedy himself, even after the Bay of Pigs, truly never completely came to believe in the unlikelihood of an internal insurrection by the people against Castro.
Although it is well written, it makes incredible assumptions, the authors untroubled by the lack of support for these assumptions in the record.
One of Waldron’s favorite assertions is that his book furnishes his readers with something important that has never appeared elsewhere.
Since Waldron indicates elsewhere in his book that he had read Russo’s book, Waldron starts out on page 2 of his book with either an intentional misrepresentation or a rather serious oversight.
Though the aforementioned plan was, by its very title, a “contingency plan,” Waldron leaves the word “contingency” out of the express title of the plan (i.e., “State-Defense Contingency Plan for a Coup in Cuba”) and presents it as if the invasion was definitely going to take place, in December of 1963 he says.
Waldron, as he does so many times in the book, cites no basis or authority for this assertion.
Waldron then, like virtually all conspiracy theorists, proceeds to start talking in absurdities.
The one new element that Waldron brings to the issue, one he guards virtually to the point of deception, is the fact that he had several interviews with Enrique Ruiz-Williams, a Bay of Pigs veteran and leader who worked very closely with RFK in the anti-Castro effort.
And Ruiz-Williams told Waldron that he, presumably working under RFK’s instructions, had enlisted someone close to Castro who was one of the heroes of the Cuban Revolution to kill Castro, supposedly on December 1, 1963, at which time the United States invasion would begin.
Almost throughout his book, Waldron talks about the coup leader, and in one way or another, the coup leader, not just by his role, but because of his identity, assumes considerable importance.
One begins to wonder if this is so because Ruiz-Williams identified the coup leader to Waldron but no one else, and this is Waldron’s main claim to fame.
But it would seem that the coup leader’s role would be more important than his identity, and if we make that assumption, then Waldron may lose his claim to fame.
It seems a little hard to believe that Cubela met with a CIA officer in Paris on the morning of the assassination to discuss what device the CIA would furnish him to kill Castro, when nine days later, on December 1, the CIA had someone else close to Castro who was scheduled to kill him.
Waldron says that he cannot identify the coup leader for security reasons.
In any event, Waldron insists that this C-Day, December 1, 1963, coup leader was not Cubela.
So AMLASH, whom the HSCA and Church Committee wrote a great deal about and investigated thoroughly, was, per Waldron, really no one of importance.
Unbeknownst to the HSCA and the Church Committee (and perhaps many in the CIA itself) was something far bigger—what a former anti-Castro leader told Waldron, who had no visible bona fides, in a private conversation many years later.
In other words, Bolton told the Church Committee attorney a little lie, per Waldron.
One big problem Waldron has with the document that announced the beginning of AMWORLD is that its very language seems to controvert Waldron’s claim that Ruiz-Williams was at the heart of his C-Day.
Waldron gets around this by saying that Ruiz762 ENDNOTES Williams, who fought alongside Artime at the Bay of Pigs, told him that “Artime was under me,” along with three other exile leaders and Cuban-American troops training at Fort Benning, Georgia.
But Waldron offers no evidence other than RuizWilliams’s alleged word to him on this.
If the reader hasn’t figured it out by now, all of this is much to-do about nothing, which would be a much more apt title for Waldron’s book.
It is common knowledge that the CIA had multiple plans to overthrow or assassinate Castro.
Listening to Waldron, one might believe that all the other well-known attempts on Castro’s life or to overthrow him were subsumed by his C-Day.
Waldron knows he has to show the so what , and that’s what he tries to do in the other half of his book.
In this other half, the one that was supposed to provide substance and justify all the words he writes about C-Day and the coup leader, Waldron makes one ludicrous assumption after another, never bothering to present a lick of evidence to support any of the assumptions.
He says that the Mafia—whom he accuses of being behind the assassination—“bought their way into the coup plan” by paying exile leader Tony Varona $200,000.
He presents a CIA memo (one can’t be sure it’s legitimate since it looks like no United States intelligence memo I’ve ever seen;g., there is no indication who authored it or to whom it was sent, not even a date , and is only seven lines) that says a confidential informant said that “four underworld In one place in his book, Waldron finds himself in a situation that speaks loudly against the theme of his book.
Nor is he troubled by the fact that he has no evidence the mob even knew there was any “plan” to buy into.
He simply boldly declares that “Johnny Roselli’s Chicago mafia family” paid the money, and it was a “bribe” to Varona to buy into C-Day, though there is nothing in the memo to indicate this.
But okay, let’s assume that Yarona told the mob about C-Day even though, per Waldron, he himself was not a part of the C-Day project at that time.
In fact, as we’ve seen, JFK just found out about it shortly before he was killed.
For the life of me, I was unable to find this out from Waldron’s book, though he tries, here and there, to explain it.
One gets the definite sense from Waldron’s book that the United States government, RFK, and the CIA were much more interested in protecting the secrecy of the attempt on Castro’s life on December 1 than they were in bringing JFK’s killers to justice.
According to Waldron, the authorities were so desperate to keep a lid on C-Day that they even exerted tremendous pressure on the Chicago and Tampa press not to report the planned assassinations on Kennedy in those two cities, even though the press, Waldron says, knew of threats on Kennedy’s life in these cities.
The United States government succeeded, Waldron tells his readers, the press remaining quiet.
Waldron even informs us how the three mobsters planned the assassination.
Certain agents of the operation would be kept compartmentalized from other aspects, so a leak in one part wouldn’t jeopardize the other parts.
And apparently no editor of Waldron’s book was about to tell Waldron that his book was supposed to be nonfiction, not fiction, so he would have to have a source for all of this other than his own silly mind.
Waldron claims in his book that Marcello, Trafficante, and Roselli conspired to murder Kennedy not only in Dallas , but also, as indicated, in Chicago and Tampa.
This, per Waldron, aborted the scheduled attempt on Kennedy’s life in Chicago.
Bolden recalled that two of the four men had Hispanic names— “Gonzales and Rodriguez”—and Waldron infers that Bolden remembers their names because these were probably the two who were detained.
To make things worse, even the existence of the alleged four men is seriously in doubt.
As indicated in a previous endnote, the HSCA could find no evidence to support Bolden’s story.
Again, he claims, without offering any evidence to support his position, that Marcello, Trafficante, and Roselli were determined to kill Kennedy in Tampa.
Unbelievably, he offers, as support (which it is not, actually going in the opposite direction), a small article in the Tampa Tribune on November 23, 1963, the day after the assassination, that three people had threatened to kill Kennedy when he came to Tampa, including a young man of twenty who said he would use a gun, and if he couldn’t get any closer, he’d find another way.
With nothing else to go on, incredibly, Waldron felt that this was enough to prove the mob intended to kill Kennedy in Tampa, though he presents no evidence connecting the mob with any of the three men.
The author is apparently too out of it to know that if, indeed, organized crime had hired one or more of the three men to kill Kennedy, the men would not be drawing attention to themselves by openly threatening to kill Kennedy.
Laughably, Waldron also quotes an anonymous Florida law enforcement source who told him that JFK learned of the threats on his life in Tampa and was very frightened.
But Waldron says that Roselli, Marcello, and Trafficante still had plans to get JFK in Dallas, and he said they did.
He doesn’t know who actually killed JFK for the mob in Dallas, but said possibilities were Johnny Roselli and Charles Nicoletti.
Oswald was innocent and just a patsy, Waldron totally ignoring the mountain of evidence against Oswald.
Consistent with the rest of Waldron’s book, he presents no evidence that Yallee and Lopez were being set up by the mob or that the mob even knew of their existence.
It is Waldron’s additional fantasy that not only was Jack Ruby a part of the plot to kill Kennedy, but so was Jimmy Hoffa.
Ruby, who figuratively had trouble tying his own shoelaces, is depicted by Waldron as an important figure, referring to his “helping Trafficante, Hoffa and Roselli” and also being part of the CIA-Mafia plots to kill Castro in 1959.
Waldron’s book is one of the longest ever written on the assassination and, with an index and many citations, gives the outward appearance of being a scholarly work.
So to expose, as I believe I have, the ridiculous nature of a book like this demonstrates, more than with the average conspiracy book, the absolutely utter and total bankruptcy of the conspiracy movement in this country.
Guevara told Goodwin that the revolution to Communism in Cuba was irreversible and Cuba was now out of the United States sphere of influence, and that too was irreversible.
Goodwin wrote that Guevara said Cuba “didn’t want an understanding with the U.S., because they know that was impossible.
Right after the ill-fated Bay of Pigs invasion, CIA Director Allen Dulles, in the old spy tradition of “walking back the cat,” assigned the CIA’s inspector general, Lyman Kirkpatrick, to do a “complete review” of the operation to see why it had ended in disaster.
Though no names were mentioned in Kirkpatrick’s report, the senior CIA officials who had been involved in the debacle were outraged, and tremulous, about the report.
Dulles’s successor, John McCone, who received the report, ordered Kirkpatrick to give him the names of the twenty people to whom the report was sent.
Most of the copies were retrieved and destroyed, and only a few copies were locked away in McCone’s office.
In one curious conclusion, he says that “the intelligence on the Castro regime and on the internal opposition thereto was essentially accurate,” but then fails to say why, if this was so, and in light of what happened, he never recommended that the invasion be aborted.
Esterline told Bissell, “We can’t tell you in good faith that we can give you any reasonable expectaThe report could have added that such an uprising made no sense, since Castro, despite his shift toward Communism, was still very popular with the Cuban masses, who much preferred the revolutionary to his corrupt predecessor, Batista.
Actually, the uprising predictions came mostly from overly optimistic Cuban exiles who convinced the CIA that thousands of Cubans would turn on Castro once the brigade landed.
But Bissell ignored their advice and talked them out of their resignations.
As indicated in the main text, there was another investigation of the Bay of Pigs disaster, this one ordered by President Kennedy on April 22, 1961, just three days after the seventy-two hours of swamp warfare ended.
Kennedy appointed General Maxwell Taylor to chair a committee consisting of Taylor, the president’s brother RFK, Allen Dulles, and Admiral Arleigh Burke.
The committee’s mandate was to conduct a reevaluation of “our practices ... in the areas of military and paramilitary, guerrilla, and anti-guerilla activity which fall short of outright war,” with special emphasis on what went wrong at the Bay of Pigs.
Nevertheless, the committee should have been able to reach some commonsense conclusions as to why the invasion had failed.
I’m unaware of any author of the various books on the Bay of Pigs, or any of the leaders of the brigade force, suggesting that the main reason they were defeated was because they didn’t have enough ammunition.
Although everyone agrees that ammunition was in short supply and a contributing factor to the defeat, only the committee concluded it was the main reason for the defeat.
And then there was the little matter that Castro’s forces greatly outnumbered the small brigade force.
The CIA’s intelligence about the area was so bad that even Ernest and Mary Hemingway, upon hearing of the Bay of Pigs invasion over the news at their home in Idaho, were “appalled by the choice of the landing site.
To show how far out of it the committee was (or at least those who wrote the report), the report actually says that “the short life of the beachhead was not sufficient to trigger an immediate popular reaction,” implying that a longer beachhead may have triggered an uprising.
But there is no evidence that the people of Cuba, or any substantial percentage thereof, wanted to overthrow Castro in 1961.
His sources were some of the several thousand rebels trained by the CIA who, for whatever reason, were left behind in their camps, at least a hundred of whom, including officers and airman, had been brought back to Miami weeks before the invasion and given fifty dollars a week to stay with friends or at motels until further notice.
They claimed that rebel leaders had actually “sounded urgent warnings against an invasion attempt” until there had been a “softening-up campaign of sabotage” on the island, but they were overruled by their CIA leaders, who proceeded with far too much haste in launching the invasion.
In that regard, they said that the People’s Revolutionary Movement, which operated the most effective underground network inside Cuba, received no financial support and very little equipment.
Also, the rebels were insistent on a strategy of small multiple landings instead of the single thrust the CIA decided on.
No matter how great the advisor’s previous reputation in the Pentagon, the State Department or in the White House itself, his opinions should no longer be accepted at face value.
In a Church Committee interview of presidential assistant Richard Goodwin on May 27, 1975, he is quoted as saying it was “etched on his memory” that “ McNamara got up to leave during a discussion of how to get rid of Castro and said, ‘The only way to take care of Castro to kill him.
They wanted an outright invasion of Cuba by U S. forces (Bamford, Body of Secrets, 82), not anti-Castro Cuban exiles.
And they happened to have an ally in the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Lyman Lemnitzer, a favorite of the Far Right.
What resulted was one of the most nefarious proposed courses of action ever considered by the American government.
It may have been the apparently offhanded remark by President Eisenhower at a meeting in the Oval Office on January 3, 1961, which Lemnitzer attended, in which Ike spoke of “perhaps manufacturing something” that would justify our invading Cuba.
It wasn’t an order or even a request by Eisenhower, and the minutes of the meeting don’t indicate it was even discussed or considered.
The terror campaign could be pointed at Cuban refugees seeking haven in the United States.
We could sink a boatload of Cubans en route to Florida, real or simulated.
It is not crystal clear whether the Joint Chiefs were willing to sacrifice the lives of American sailors since there is no further discussion after this.
However, although this is unlikely, there is some circumstantial evidence that they may indeed have contemplated this.
In other words, when they wanted to indicate that a ship to be destroyed would have no humans on it, they did so.
Though Operations Northwoods, per se, was dead, Lemnitzer did not give up on an invasion of Cuba, and even the notion of a pretext for a war with Cuba would see another day.
Shortly thereafter, when the rabidly right-wing Lemnitzer’s term as chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff expired, Kennedy did not reappoint him.
And remarkably, as late as May 1, 1963, with General Taylor now being chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, a Top Secret report to the Joint Chiefs of Staff on May 1, 1963, was again toying with using a pretext to go to war with Cuba.
One is to restrict United States action to attempts to isolate Cuba politically and economically from the rest of the American nations while awaiting the opportunity to capitalize on a spontaneous revolt or to respond to a direct provocation.
In a very long January 31, 1963, letter to Fidel Castro, Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev writes, “If North American imperialism had unleashed the invasion , no protest of ours, no three-shift, three-week or even three-month demonstration would have stopped them.
For the most part, the crisis was over, but important remaining issues kept tensions elevated, if not nearly as high.
Actually, Kennedy’s no-invasion pledge was only conditional, and no formal agreement resolving the Cuban missile crisis was ever signed.
Khrushchev was to remove the “offensive” Soviet weapons “under appropriate United Nations observation and supervision; and undertake, with suitable safeguards, to halt the further introduction of such weapons systems into Cuba,” Kennedy said in his October 27, 1962, letter to Khrushchev.
Kennedy said his no-invasion pledge was predicated “upon the establishment of adequate arrangements through the United Nations to ensure the carrying out and continuation” of the Soviet “commitments” to remove its weapons.
Later, he also refused to allow the Soviets to remove forty-two IL-28 jet bombers from Cuba until his conditions were met.
It should be noted that while Castro got none of his demands, the United States was willing to end the crisis without being guaranteed the on-site inspection it once demanded.
However, because it did not get this no-invasion pledge precondition, Kennedy’s no-invasion pledge was no longer in effect.
As late as May of 1963, the Soviet military still had a presence in Cuba.
The United States Senate Preparedness Subcommittee reported that at least 17,500 Russians, including 5,000 combat troops, were still in Cuba.
It noted, however, that United States intelligence agencies unanimously believed that all strategic Soviet missiles and bombers with sufficient range to reach this country had been withdrawn.
One illustration of the bitterness against Kennedy among many in the Cuban exile community over Kennedy’s pledge not to invade Cuba was heard in a tape recording of a meeting of anti-Castro Cubans In his statement to the American people at his press conference the previous evening, Kennedy set forth one method of verification : “The evidence to date indicates that all known offensive missile sites in Cuba have been dismantled.
The missiles and their associated equipment have been loaded on Soviet ships.
One Nestor Castellanos, vehemently criticizing Kennedy for the United States government’s policy of “non-interference,” said, “We’re waiting for Kennedy the 22nd, buddy.
The HSCA said it “uncovered no evidence that linked Castellanos to the assassination,” adding that “upon listening to the tape, it is apparent that the statements by Castellanos—‘we’re waiting for Kennedy’ and ‘we’re going to see him ... to give him the works’—which comes just after Castellanos relates an unsuccessful effort to have a parade or march in downtown Dallas to promote the cause of the anti-Castro Cubans, is only a proposal to demonstrate against President Kennedy during his trip to Dallas.
Despite all the bad blood and vociferous tirades against Kennedy by many in the exile community, only one allegation has ever surfaced that someone, among the exiles, spoke of a plot to eliminate Kennedy, and that one was highly ambiguous and based on multiple hearsay.
On November 26, 1963, an unnamed Secret Service informant advised the Chicago office of the Secret Service that he had heard that on the day before the assassination, one Thomas Mosley, while negotiating the sale of machine guns in Chicago to Homer Echevarria for use by the latter’s anti-Castro group (30th of November Movement) in a contemplated invasion of Cuba, was reportedly told by Echevarria, “We have plenty of money.
Although the Secret Service conducted several surveillances of Mosley and Echevarria thereafter, and learned that they were both bus drivers for the Chicago Transit Authority and Echevarria had come to this country from Cuba in 1960, the Service discontinued its investigation when President Johnson created the Warren Commission and gave the FBI primary investigation of the assassination.
More importantly, no evidence has ever emerged connecting Echevarria with Oswald or with the assassination in any way.
Though these were fleabite operations that caused negligible harm (ten thousand sacks of sugar were lost in the last raid when the exiles’ TNT tore a thirteen-foot hole in the Russian boat’s hull), the Soviets, naturally, immediately complained to the United States that any United States support or “encouragement of such actions” violated the spirit of the missile crisis settlement.
Accordingly, Kennedy authorized a statement that the United States would “take every step necessary” to stop raids against Cuba launched from the United States.
Indeed, United States Coast Guard planes flew daily patrols over the Florida Keys and the many islets of the Bahamas looking for boats of armed anti-Castro exiles moving toward Cuba to do Castro harm.
And in Miami, where once their main concern was Castro’s spies, Cuban exiles had to elude the restraining clutches of United States federal agencies.
All of this meant that Mongoose had lost much of its force and virility.
Mongoose was still alive, however, with the emphasis being stepped-up covert operations designed to encourage dissident groups inside Cuba to rise up against Castro.
It was also hoped that by the United States embargo against Cuba, economic conditions inside the country would worsen and foment discontent with Castro’s regime by the masses.
The Luces purchased ship-to-shore radios for DRE boat crews and paid its leaders money for exclusive stories, money that was used to finance small raids, including air strikes, to damage Cuban installations and industrial complexes such as oil refineries, power plants, and sugar mills.
But see 10 HSCA 83, where Luce said the private help ended after the Cuban missile crisis.
Fernandez told her that Oswald apparently came into a little money and went to Mexico City, then went to Dallas.
The interesting point here is that on the night of the assassination the authorities and the media did not know that Oswald had gone to Mexico City.
In 1975, Senator Richard Schweiker of the Church Committee sent a staff investigator in search of Fernandez but no such individual was ever found.
In 1978, the HSCA investigated the matter and again looked for Fernandez.
He was never found, of course, because we didn’t know that Luce had concocted the name,” the implication being that Mrs.
Luce had told him this, or he had found this out in some other way, although there’s nothing in the record to indicate precisely how he reached this conclusion.
It would be unusual for someone of Luce’s stature and reputation to simply make up a name and a story like this.
In any event, the HSCA located in Miami three anti-Castro Cubans who were among the leaders of the DRE in 1963, including one of the founders, Juan Manuel Salvat Roque.
None apparently knew of any member named Julio Fernandez, and their records showed that the only member of their group in New Orleans who had any contact with Oswald was Carlos Bringuier, their delegate there who had the street confrontation with Oswald in August of 1963.
HSCA investigators contacted Bringuier, who told them he knew of no Julio Fernandez in his group.
Luce’s help to the DRE, he said that no member of his New Orleans chapter had ever had any contact with her.
The HSCA closed the investigation by saying that it was unable to substantiate Mrs.
Luce by HSCA staff members on December 13, 1978; Glazer’s raw notes of interview with Mrs.
By October of 1963, Artime had established a three-hundred-man force at four guerilla training camps and bases, two in Costa Rica and two in Nicaragua, where the Nicaraguan president, Anastasio Somoza, was a benefactor.
Artime would later say that both President Kennedy and his brother RFK were responsible for his establishing the bases.
During the year of Artime’s operation, his group conducted four major operations against Castro, two of which were infiltration missions, one a shelling of a cargo ship, and a fourth an unsuccessful attempt on Castro’s life.
Artime said his anti-Castro operations finally ended “when Bobby Kennedy separated from the Johnson administration,” which would be September of 1964.
You were not necessarily volunteering information ,” Dodd said, the possible implication of his words being that the CIA was withholding information from the Warren Commission.
In 1975, Richard Bissell, one of the key architects of the plan, told the Church Committee (which was triggered by the Rockefeller Commission) that he assumed President Kennedy knew because he believed CIA Director Allen Dulles would have told Kennedy in a “circumlocutious” conversation using “rather general terms” about the plot.
However, Bissell acknowledged that Dulles never told him he had told Kennedy, and as we’ve seen, the evidence is not clear whether Dulles himself knew.
And when pressed by SenOne of the curiosities about the plots to kill Castro is that they are almost always solely associated with the Kennedy administration.
But in a Church Committee interview on September 14, 1975, William Harvey suggested that the idea may have originated with the Eisenhower White House.
At the time, Vice President Richard Nixon was the White House contact for CIA-Cuban operations.
There is stronger evidence, however, that paternity for the plot started at the CIA, not in the Eisenhower White House.
And in August of 1960, Richard Bissell, the CIA’s deputy director for plans who choreographed the Bay of Pigs invasion, initiated a CIA-Mafia plot to murder Castro.
Though it is not certain, then, that the plot to kill Castro originated in the Eisenhower White House, it has been established that on March 17, 1960, President Eisenhower authorized a covert CIA plan to organize, train, and equip anti-Castro Cuban exiles as a guerrilla force to invade and overthrow Castro.
Houston testified before the Church Committee that the operation was described to the attorney general as an assassination attempt.
Not only do mobsters think nothing of committing murder, but they hated Castro as much or more than the CIA did.
After all, Castro had booted them out of Havana when he took over, and Havana was a center of mob gambling operations rivaling Las Vegas that reportedly netted the mob in excess of $100 million a year.
So for the mob, getting rid of Castro and returning to its beloved Havana were coterminous.
Indeed, RFK himself confirmed this type of reality, and the association between the CIA and organized crime, years earlier.
Adam Walinsky, an assistant to RFK when the latter was a United States senator, said that in 1967 RFK had told him he first learned of the CIA’s ties with the mob while working as chief counsel for the Senate Rackets Committee in the late 1950s.
Walinsky said RFK told him he went back and checked and “sure enough it was true.
They had made a deal with this guy.” tin what has to be considered one of the most ridiculous stories ever told regarding this issue, one so bad it really is unworthy of any discussion, former CIA officer Samuel Halpern claims that all of the above is apparently wrong.
Max Holland writes that Halpern said that in 1962 RFK decided the Mafia could be useful in Mongoose operations and ordered the CIA to assign a case officer to meet with Mafia figures.
In the first place, the only use the CIA would have for the mob would be to kill Castro.
Secondly, by 1962, the CIA was already in league with the mob to kill Castro, dating back to August of 1960, way before RFK was even attorney general, so it is flat-out wrong to say that it was RFK who was behind the CIA’s efforts to kill Castro.
Moreover, the great weight of the evidence is that RFK did not want the CIA to be involved with organized crime, so Halpern’s allegation stands out like a sore thumb.
Additionally, just for the sake of argument, if RFK did order the CIA to enlist the help of the Mafia, to believe that he and his secretary would call some lowly case officer on the phone and tell the case officer the name and address of Mafia people and where the case officer could meet with them, is absurd beyond belief.
The bottom line on Halpern’s story is that the CIA was against working with the mob to get rid of Castro, but RFK ordered it to do so against its will.
Why Max Holland would publish such unbelievable drivel from Halpern is unknown.
If Halpern could tell and actually believe a fairy tale like this, he has problems.
Indeed, what he said could even be construed to mean that he simply didn’t want the CIA to deal with organized crime behind his back, that is, without his knowing about it.
Mankiewicz believes that RFK was referring to the fact that when he learned about the CIA’s plot to kill Castro, he told the CIA he was opposed to it, period, and never to engage in any operation like that in the future without his approval.
Miami Herald, March 3, 1967) A memorandum confirming the oral briefing of RFK by Edwards and Houston was sent to RFK on May 14, 1962.
The three-page memorandum to Kennedy was written by Edwards, and presumably reduced to writing what Edwards and Houston had told Kennedy during their meeting on May 7.
The memo states that “in August 1960 the undersigned was approached by Mr Richard Bissell... to explore the possibility of mounting this sensitive operation against Fidel Castro” with the help of organized crime.
Maheu contacted Los Angeles mobster Johnny Roselli, who in turn enlisted Chicago mobster Sam Giancana, and “toward the end of September” Roselli, Giancana, and Maheu met at the Fontainebleau Hotel in Miami Beach to discuss the operation.
The source of the story was Washington insider Edward P Morgan, a former FBI agent and well-connected Washington attorney.
Pearson in turn told LBJ personally on January 16, almost two months before the article came out.
Giancana arranged for Roselli and Maheu to meet a “courier” (Florida mobster Santo Trafficante [4 HSCA 139; Alleged Assassination Plots,77]) with Cuban contacts, who eventually contacted a “principal” in Cuba to carry out the operation against Castro.
But after the failure of the Bay of Pigs invasion in April of 1961, the project was terminated.
This person’s name was not published by the Church Committee or HSCA but he has been identified as James P O’Connell, who occupied the position at the time.
It was decided at the meeting that the best way to kill Castro was by putting a poison pill in his food.
Later in September in Miami, The plan to kill Castro by poison originally involved using a cigar.
Strangelove” in the Technical Services staff at the CIA, to come up with a poison to eliminate Castro.
There is no record that there was any attempt to pass the cigars on to Castro , and the medium of cigars soon gave way to other means.
Later CIA plots to kill Castro included having a United States emissary, negotiating the return of the captured exiles at the Bay of Pigs, give Castro a gift of a poisoned diving suit, as well as placing an exploding seashell on the ocean floor where Castro went skin diving, both of which plans were discarded.
Per the former support chief and a 1967 report by the inspector general of the CIA on the Castro plot, it was Trafficante’s job to recruit the Cubans to carry out the job and to see that the poison pills were transmitted to them.
One person he recruited was Manuel Antonio deVarona, a former president of the Cuban Senate who was now one of the leaders of the FRD (Frente Revolucionario Democratico, or Democratic Revolutionary Front), a prominent anti-Castro exile group in the United States.
The CIA actually furnished Trafficante with the poison pills and he reportedly passed them on to his Cuban contacts.
There is no evidence that the mob, or those acting at its behest, made any actual, overt attempt on Castro’s life as a result of its collusion with the CIA to kill Castro.
The mob struck out, either willingly (many suspect it never was really serious about such a plot, only leading the CIA to believe it was) or because of what it perceived to be a mission impossible.
As to the former possibility, Roselli told his mob friend Jimmy “The Weasel” Fratiano, “This whole thing has been a scam.
All these fucking wild schemes the CIA dreamed up never got further than Santo.
Because Roselli himself testified before the Church Committee about his deep involvement in receiving poison pills and guns from the CIA in April of 1962, after the Bay of Pigs debacle, and arranging for them to get into the hands of a team of assassins sent to Cuba who Roselli said had agreed to kill Castro.
To his credit, the CIA agrees Roselli never took a dime for his efforts, but Roselli may simply have been reviving the scam on the CIA that his predecessor, Trafficante, had perpetrated.
But a CIA Inspector General’s Report, responding to the Pearson allegations, said, “We do not know their identities nor what may have happened to them.
Roselli was convicted on May 23,1968, for violating the Alien Registration Act and served six months.
The sentence was served concurrently with a sentence from a conviction on December 2, 1968, for violating United States interstate gambling laws by participating in a scheme to cheat at cards at the Friars Club in Beverly Hills.
Deportation hearings were later initiated against him, and were pending at the time of his death in July of 1976.
J Edgar Hoover’s memorandum to his staff on May 10, 1962 (four days before Edwards’s memo to RFK), about a meeting he had with RFK in Hoover’s office the previous day, leaves no doubt that from the May 7 RFK-Edwards-Houston meeting alone, there was no ambiguity about what the CIA told Robert Kennedy.
Hoover wrote that “the Attorney General told me he wanted to advise me of a situation in the Giancana case which had considerably disturbed him.
He stated a few days ago he had been advised by CIA that in connection with Giancana, CIA had hired Robert A Maheu, a private detective in Washington, D.C., to approach Giancana with a proposition of paying $150,000 to hire some gunmen to go into Cuba to kill Castro.
I expressed astonishment at this in view of the bad reputation of Maheu and Or perhaps he felt he could demand such assistance.
A 1967 internal FBI document reads, “It appears Roselli is using his prior connections with CIA to his best advantage.
In May, 1966, when Bureau Agents endeavored to interview him he immediately flew to Washington and informed his former CIA intermediary.
Roselli would have had good reason to believe that his involvement with the CIA in the attempt to kill Castro might get him all types of favors.
Former FBI agent Robert Maheu was involved in the bugging of a Las Vegas hotel room carried out by one Arthur Balletti on October 31,1960.
Balletti was arrested by Las Vegas police and a subsequent investigation uncovered Maheu’s involvement.
Since the electronic bugging fell under a federal wiretap statute, there was FBI jurisdiction and the bureau took over the case.
Maheu told the FBI that he instituted the surveillance on behalf of CIA efforts to obtain Cuban intelligence.
The FBI discovered that Sam Giancana was involved in the case and later learned of Roselli’s involvement too.
Hoover said the Criminal Division of the Department of Justice wanted the CIA to “specifically advise whether it would or would not object to the initiation of a criminal prosecution” on the case against Balletti, Maheu, and a third party.
This plan was merely a revival of the first plot and was going on at the very moment they were talking to him.
Bissell, Helms , and William Harvey, a senior CIA officer who was involved in the plot, all testified before the Church Committee that they did not tell McCone about the assassination plot, and McCone himself testified before the committee that he was unaware of it.
Though to this day no clear and unambiguous evidence has emerged that JFK (or RFK) approved of either of the two CIA-mob plots or any of the various other CIA plots to kill Castro, at least one reporter has said that JFK (and hence, automatically RFK) knew of the CIA’s desire for presidential authorization to kill him.
The only difference (which Edwards and Houston may have curiously rationalized as warranting their not telling RFK) in the two plots is that the second one apparently did not involve the major mob figures Sam Giancana and Santo Trafficante.
But per the testimony of William Harvey and his assistant, the support chief , as well as that of Johnny Roselli, as noted earlier, Roselli was ostensibly deeply involved in this second plot to kill Castro.
Indeed, Harvey delivered poison pills to Roselli in Miami on April 21, 1962 (a little over two weeks before Edwards and Houston briefed RFK on the first CIA-mob plot), and “sometime in May” 1962, Roselli told Harvey that working through the same Cuban here in the states who was involved in the first CIA-mob plot to kill Castro, the poison pills (along with requested guns) had arrived in Cuba.
And on June 21, Roselli told Harvey that a three-man Cuban team of assailants had been sent to Cuba to kill Castro.
The Cuban team had decided to try and kill not only Castro but his brother Raul, as well as Castro’s chief revolutionary partner, Che Guevara.
Nothing panned out in Cuba, the Cubans claiming the “conditions” there were not right, and Harvey terminated the operation once and for all in mid-February 1963.
Szulc writes, “Kennedy leaned back in his chair, smiled, and said that he had been testing me because he was under great pressure from advisors in the Intelligence community ... to have Castro killed, but that he himself violently opposed it on the grounds that for moral reasons the United States should never be a party to political assassinations.
As it turns out, Tad Szulc was not the only person JFK was sounding out on the advisability of assassinating Castro.
Senator George Smathers, one of JFK’s closest friends whom he had reveled with on the Riviera and in Havana during JFK’s days in the Senate, told the Church Committee that in a conversation he had with Kennedy as they walked together on the White House lawn in March of 1961, Kennedy “asked me what reaction I thought there would be throughout South America were Fidel Castro to be assassinated.
In 1981, President Reagan, by Executive Order 12333 , tightened the ban, dropping the word political and adding that nobody “acting on behalf of” the United States, such as a contract killer, could assassinate anyone.
So when we go to the source of one alleged statement that RFK signed off on the attempt to murder Castro, we get a denial that any such statement was ever made.
I’m aware of only two public officials who have said or implied that RFK was behind or expressly approved of an attempt on Castro’s life.
Califano’s allegation is at odds with all other known recollections about the matter and seems further improbable because he was way down the totem pole of power and influence at the time and unlikely to be in Kennedy’s presence if Kennedy were to make such a consequential remark.
In addition to Helms’s remarks challenging the accuracy of the memorandum, the above background provides further cause to question it, particularly since there’s no corroborative evidence that RFK managed the attempts on Castro’s life.
ENDNOTES The further unlikelihood is that RFK would make such a statement in the presence of several people.
And Califano is first known to have made this serious claim in 1998, thirty-five years after the fact.
The other public official is former secretary of state Alexander Haig, the only one I’ve ever heard flat-out accuse RFK of being behind attempts on Castro’s life.
In fact, Haig worked under Califano and admits to never having attended any RFK meetings at all.
Haig is almost certainly passing on rank hearsay and it would seem his assertion is entitled to no weight.
To my knowledge, only one document has ever surfaced that, arguably, goes in the direction of RFK having knowledge of, and perhaps even urging, the assassination of Castro.
It was released by the ARRB in 1997 and discovered at the archives thereafter by Larry Haupanen, a professor at Lewis and Clark State College.
Those who believe that the Kennedy brothers were behind the attempts on Castro’s life view it as a “smoking gun,” but when we look closely at the document we see that, by itself, it could never carry the day for that proposition.
The four-page document refers to a meeting in the Oval Office attended by RFK, JFK , McGeorge Bundy, General Maxwell Taylor, CIA Director John McCone, General Lyman Lemnitzer, and Roswell Gilpatric.
Ninety percent of Lansdale’s memorandum deals with a discussion of the “Guidelines for Operation Mongoose,” which Taylor had prepared two days earlier and passed out to those attending the meeting.
Mongoose, of course, did not deal with the murder of Castro, but was expressly an effort to overthrow Castro by aiding and abetting an internal revolution by the Cuban people.
I commented that this was a conversation Ed Murrow had had with Mary Hemingway, that we had similar reports from other sources, and that this was worth assessing firmly and pursuing vigorously.
If there are grounds for action, CIA had some invaluable assets which might well be committed for such an effort.
Though we can never know for sure what Lansdale meant by his words, a good inference is that he was referring to the assassination of Castro.
It is not easy to draw a strong alternative inference, although one could say that killing Castro would do more than merely fraction the regime.
I think most would agree it would probably end the regime for all intents and purposes.
Indeed, if Lansdale was talking about murdering Castro, why would he draw the comparison to Hungary.
The uprising in October of 1956 by the poor and working class of Hungary did not involve the killing of the existing Hungarian premier.
Moreover, as we know, the Hungarian revolution did not succeed in its effort to bring about a Soviet withdrawal from the country.
The Hungarian allusion by Lansdale, if anything, goes away from the inference of assassination, unless Lansdale was reading from a different history book than I In any event, we know that Lansdale, despite the clear and unambiguous object of Mongoose only to overthrow Castro, not kill him (see section on the Odio incident and anti-Castro Cuban exiles in the main text), managed to list the “liquidation of leaders” among the several “implementing activities” of Mongoose in an August 13, 1962, letter to the CIA’s William Harvey, for which he got a verbal slap on the wrist.
The issue to be resolved here, however, is not what was on Lansdale’s mind, but RFK’s mind, and to answer that question we have to realize that it was Lansdale’s words in the subject paragraph, more than RFK’s, that seemed to suggest assassination.
Moreover, we don’t even know what RFK’s precise words were, since the subject paragraph was written by Lansdale after the fact, though we can assume he took some contemporaneous notes.
But assuming he got it exactly right when he says RFK spoke of Castro’s heavy drinking “and the opportunities offered by the shrine to Hemingway,” those words don’t automatically conjure up assassination.
Opportunities is such a broad, generic term, the type one could use, without thinking, to in effect say, “Let’s see if there is anything we can do to exploit the relationship between Hemingway and Castro,” which doesn’t necessarily mean murder.
I mean, to say it does is to say that RFK was thinking in terms of asking Mary Hemingway to put poison in a drink of Castro’s, that is, ask her to commit murder, and in the process, most likely be discovered and put to death.
No matter how many “CIA assets” there were whom Lansdale talked about, it would almost necessarily have to be Mary Hemingway, not they, who put the poison in the drink at Hemingway’s shrine.
He came to soak in the atmosphere of the fabled home and to assure the widow that Cuba would take good care of it and its contents.
It should be added that no CIA document has ever surfaced in which the use of Mary Hemingway to kill Castro was discussed.
There is no way that this one document can begin to answer the question of whether JFK or RFK authorized the attempts on Castro’s life.
Although speculation has gone on for years about whether President Kennedy and his brother RFK approved of the CIA’s plots to kill Castro, as indicated, no one has yet come up with any direct evidence that they did.
It in large part depends on just how “autonomous” the CIA really is in its covert actions.
Although the report was never officially released, the Village Voice somehow obtained a copy of it and printed substantial portions of it in its February 16 and 23, 1976, editions.
But Dulles went on to say, when asked by McCloy if he himself would tell the president, “I would tell the President of the United States anything, yes.
In fact, in all the voluminous writing on the assassination, it may be the only slight hint that at least one member of the Warren Commission had the state of mind of covering up part of the truth in the assassination.
Marina Oswald was the first witness to testify before the Warren Commission.
Before her scheduled testimony on February 3, 1964, her lawyer had been negotiating with Life magazine to sell her story (handwritten in Russian by Marina, a copy of which had already been given to the Commission), and in correspondence with the Warren Commission, he said he didn’t want the Commission to publish or in any way release her testimony before he sold the rights to her story, obviously feeling he would get less for it if the public had already heard it.
He said, however, that he wouldn’t expect the Commission to withhold release of her testimony beyond February 15, and the Commission was agreeable to this.
Where the problem arose is when Commissioner McCloy said that, really, there was “nothing spectacular” in what Marina had said.
The first time the public learned about this was in an article in the Washington Post on November 22, 1974, which referred to the information being in Harold Weisberg’s book, Whitewash IV, which was being published that day.
Weisberg had lost a Freedom of Information Act lawsuit trying to get the transcript of the Warren Commission’s January 27, 1964, executive session, but very shortly thereafter, the National Archives declassified the transcript and on June 14, 1974, the archivist, James B Rhoads, sent Weisberg a copy of what he was seeking.
According to James Martin, Marina’s manager at the time who was working with her lawyer, John Thorne, to sell Marina’s story, Levine wanted to be the author of Marina’s story for a book.
By this time, no one in the American government was giving any serious thought to the Soviets being involved in the assassination, and this may have made it easier for Dulles to say what he did.
Nevertheless, it is still quite disturbing that Dulles’s reflexive response, undoubtedly conditioned by his many years at the CIA, was to try to prevent Marina from saying what she ostensibly wanted, whether Dulles thought Levine was talking her into it or not.
After Dulles’s remark, Senator Russell said, “That [Marina saying Oswald was a Soviet agent] will blow the lid if she testified to that,” and Warren terminated the discussion by saying, “All right” and going on to other matters.
Since, as indicated, neither the Warren Commission nor, as far as we know, anyone else in the United States government’s hierarchy thought Russia was involved in the assassination, Russell certainly could not be referring to blowing the lid off any true story that it was.
His utterance appears to be simply an ill-chosen spontaneous response by someone who, in his involvement in both this case and the Cuban missile crisis, spoke with a surprising lack of knowledge, clarity, and common sense.
Given what we know, it is certainly highly unlikely that President Kennedy ordered a reluctant CIA to try to murder Castro.
Dating back to the early years of the Eisenhower administration, the CIA has been required to submit any proposed covert action to an informal National Security Council group known to very few Americans and answering only to the president.
When I checked in 2000, I learned that the group was still in existence, but once again, under a new name, the Policy Coordination Committee.
The original group consisted of the president’s assistant for national security affairs, the undersecretary of state for political affairs, the deputy secretary of defense, and the director of the Central Intelligence Agency.
It was later expanded to include the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
As indicated in the main text, in the latter part of 1961, Special Group was instituted, consisting of all the Special Group members plus Attorney General Robert Kennedy and General Maxwell Taylor, specifically to oversee the CIA’s Operation Mongoose, the United States government’s plan to overthrow Castro.
In February of 1962 Richard Helms took over Bissell’s job as CIA deputy director for plans.
He told the Church Committee that when he became Bissell’s successor, the plot activities to kill Castro were presented to him as an ongoing project previously authorized, and he admits to authorizing the assassination of Castro on his watch, though he did not know that CIA official William Harvey had given poison pills to gangster Johnny Roselli in Miami in April of 1962.
Helms told the Church Committee that although he had no knowledge that President Kennedy directly ordered Castro’s death, “I believe it was the policy at the time to get rid of Castro, and if killing him was one of the things that was to be done in this connection, that was within what was expected.
On January 19, 1962, a meeting of CIA and Kennedy administration officials involved in the Mongoose project was held in Robert Kennedy’s office.
George McManus, Richard Helms’s executive assistant, took notes of the meeting.
Dating back to June 13, 1961, a report to President Kennedy by a committee headed by General Maxwell Taylor (the committee was formed by JFK on April 22, 1961, following the Bay of Pigs invasion, to reevaluate United States efforts to overthrow Castro) read in part, “We have been struck with the general feeling that there can be no long-term living with Castro as a neighbor.
In other words, the CIA may have thought it did not have to go to the Special Group to get approval of its plot to kill Castro because it already had it, and Helms testified he had “no knowledge that a Castro assassination was ever authorized” by the group.
Returning to the central question of whether JFK and his brother either ordered or gave their approval to the Castro death plots, since we know the issue of Castro’s assassination had reached President Kennedy (see the Tad Szulc interview of JFK and the JFK-Senator Smathers conversation discussed earlier), arguably President Kennedy was trying to have it both ways—not authorizing assassination, yet not doing anything to ensure it didn’t happen either—unless he thought that without his express approval, no attempted assassination would ever take place.
When Thomas Beckett was proving to be an annoyance, as Castro, the King said who will rid me of this man.
It’s the practice of “plausible deniability,” particularly by One wonders how the desire to remove Castro from power was so great that some in our nation’s leadership may have even thought that murdering him was permissible.
Undoubtedly, the fact that we were in the midst of the cold war and feared the spread of Communism played a big part.
But what may have pushed these leaders over the top was the fact that Castro’s Cuba was the first and only Communist nation in the Western Hemisphere, and it was on our back steps, just ninety miles away.
And as the Church Committee pointed out in its discussion of the doctrine of plausible deniability, “Any theory which, as a matter of doctrine, places elected officials on the periphery of the decision-making process is an invitation to error, an abdication of responsibility, and a perversion of democratic government.
The doctrine is the antithesis of accountability” . tThere is yet another wrinkle to the whole issue, this one going in the opposite direction of keeping things from the president to afford him presidential deniability.
This one suggests that the president, at least President Eisenhower, was protecting certain people below him.
Author John Ranelagh, after quoting the above, observes, “The difference between Eisenhower and some of his successors was that for him plausible denial was a presidential prerogative and he was not prepared—as he said—to let others carry the burden.
It should be noted that as of 1991 (and hence, not applicable to the issue herein discussed with respect to JFK’s knowledge and approval of the plot to kill Castro), “plausible deniability” by a president may no longer be possible, at least with covert actions that he authorized.
As we have seen, the evidence is ambiguous and contradictory as to whether President Kennedy authorized and approved of the CIA attempts to assassinate Cuban premier Fidel Castro, and the resolution of this issue is beyond the scope of this book.
However, since everyone agrees that what JFK knew, RFK knew, and vice versa, there is one piece of evidence that, if true, would arguably be incompatible with the notion of JFK’s having approved the plan to kill Castro.
During the same period of time that Roselli, Giancana, and Trafficante were working with the CIA to kill Castro, RFK, in his war against organized crime, was trying to put them behind bars, a seeming unlikelihood if the plots to kill Castro had JFK’s imprimatur.
In fact, Roselli, Giancana, and Trafficante were on RFK’s original list of forty mobsters he told his organized-crime section at the Department of Justice to go after.
And there is no evidence their names were ever removed from the list, which ended up expanding to include the names of twenty-three hundred underworld figures.
The Church Committee found that although there was some CIA investigation of a possible Cuban connection in the assassination, for the most part the investigation was “passive,” responding to leads or requests from outside the agency, as opposed to making an affirmative effort to collect information.
But I am unable to understand, at least from what he goes on to say, how anything would have changed.
I told him that the HSCA prefaced these words by saying that “Burt Griffin... told the committee” and then indented his words, which signified a quote.
He felt that if the Commission had known about the plots to kill Castro it wouldn’t have made any difference in the way it handled the investigation,” the clear implication being that Griffin, though disavowing the words attributed to him by the HSCA, still felt it would have made a difference.
I was about to ask him expressly if, despite his disavowal, he still believed it would have made a difference, and most importantly, if so, how, when he had to leave home with his wife to go to some engagement.
When the judge got back to me on January 5, he gave me a phone number I had previously asked him for, and brought up several matters unrelated to what we had talked about.
Because he didn’t bring the matter up himself, I felt it would be indelicate of me to bring it up and continue cross-examining him on it.
I felt more confident, as a result of my having spoken to him a few days earlier, that the Warren Commission’s knowledge of the plots probably wouldn’t have had any effect on its investigation.
He was killed the following day by the Bolivian military against the expressed wishes of the CIA, which wanted to bleed him white through interrogation.
Throughout 1957 and much of 1958, Castro’s forces had been headquartered in the Sierra Maestra mountains in the southeastern region of Cuba.
Surrounded by the mostly indifferent troops of dictator Fulgencio Batista’s army, whose will to fight was not strong, and with the sea at their back, the highly loyal and passionate rebels, less than five hundred in number, conducted very effective thrusts and incursions into Batista-held territory throughout Oriente province.
Finally, in September of 1958, the rebel forces swept down from the mountains and began their inexorable and successful march—with pitched battles along the way against the tanks, artillery, and far greater numbers of men in Batista’s army—toward Havana.
He had started out as the doctor to the rebels’ wounded, but quickly emerged as its most respected combatant.
The other column was led by Camilo Cienfuegos, who died after Castro had swept to power when his plane, returning to Havana after he aborted an insurrection in the province of Camagiiey, was lost at sea on October 28, 1959.
But Guevara, almost from the beginning, was the one special star of the revolution, beyond reproach and admired unconditionally by his fellow warriors.
Indeed, a CIA psychiatric study of Fidel Castro in 1961 said that Cienfuegos was given the honor by Castro of being the first to arrive in the Cuban capital, on January 3, 1959, two days after Batista had fled.
Guevara arrived the following day, but it wasn’t until January 7 that Castro and Guevara, who had left Havana to meet Fidel at Matangas, entered Havana by tank to the delirious cheers of thousands of Cubans.
Cienfuegos’s disappearance at sea has remained a mystery throughout the years and there has been speculation, without any substantive evidence, that Castro was behind it.
Major Huber Matos on October 19,1959, and First Lieutenant Manuel Artime on October 29, the day after Cienfuegos’s disappearance at sea.
Artime organized the Movimiento de Recuperacion Revolucionaria, the “Movement for the Recovery of the Revolution,” or MRR, the first underground movement against Castro’s new regime.
If there is any credence to this, it would go in the direction of Cienfuegos, like Matos and Artime, becoming disenchanted with Castro because of the Communistic direction in which Castro’s government was going.
To this very day, Castro, eschewing the cult of personality of, say, Mao or Stalin or Saddam Hussein, has far more billboards and paintings of Guevara on display in Cuba than he does of himself.
And in Cuba’s two main museums commemorating the revolution, in Havana and Santiago de Cuba, Guevara is featured over all other members of the revolution, including Castro.
Basically, he ran the Cuban economy, since his main interest had always been in the redistribution of wealth, and it was he who had promoted the establishment of trade for goods between the Soviet Union and Cuba that sustained the Cuban economy for years, until the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991.
But Guevara quickly became restless, as governance and its inevitable concomitant (even in a dictatorship) bureaucracy were not congenial to the revolutionary blood coursing through him.
But for Guevara, Cuba was merely a laboratory whose experience could be used to combat the exploitation of the masses wherever it existed, hoping to first spread Marxism throughout Africa and South America.
His whereabouts became the subject of international speculation, but the consensus and circumstantial evidence in 1967 was that he was somewhere in South America training guerrillas in revolutionary warfare.
All Castro would tell the inquiring media was that Guevara was pursuing “revolutionary tasks” somewhere in the world.
On October 3, 1965, after six months of rumor and speculation by the Cuban people as to what had happened to Guevara, Castro read the letter to five thousand Cubans assembled in Havana’s Chaplin Theater.
After some prefatory lines of reminiscence about when he and Fidel first met, Guevara wrote, “I feel that I have fulfilled the part of my duty that tied me to the Cuban revolution . . . and I say goodbye to you, to the comrades, to your people, who now are mine.
Cover-Up by the CIA and FBI in the Warren Commission’s Investi£ and children.
Albida, dressed in black in the front row, sobbed quietly as Castro read her husband’s words.
There he was leading a malnourished and poorly armed band of fewer than twenty Cuban, Bolivian, and Peruvian Communist guerrillas to foment a revolution among the peasant majority against the government of Air Force General Rene Barrientos Ortuno.
Barrientos had assumed power in November of 1964 after a military coup and aligned himself with wealthy landowners in exploiting the campesinos and rural poor.
On August 1,1967, the CIA dispatched two agents with a background in guerrilla warfare, Eduardo and Cuban-born Felix I Rodriguez, to Bolivia to work closely with the Bolivian army in coordinating intelligence and establishing a communications network in the effort to capture Guevara.
He had gone there to study medical care among the poor during the CIA-backed attempt by Guatemalan rebels to overthrow the leftist Guatemalan president Jacobo Arbenz Guzman.
Guevara had tried to organize Arbenz supporters in a “last-ditch resistance” to the successful coup.
On October 8, 1967, near the small Bolivian mountain village of La Higuera, Guevara was injured by gunfire from Bolivian soldiers and captured.
His clothing torn and tattered, his hair matted and filthy, and blood oozing from his bandaged right leg, he was executed the following day in a La Higuera schoolhouse on the orders of Barrientos.
The only known picture taken of Guevara in custody on the day he died showed him standing next to his main CIA pursuer, Rodriguez.
Rodriguez had been fighting to overthrow Castro for years, was a member of the Bay of Pigs invasion force , and had infiltrated Cuba before the invasion.
Castro’s speech to the enormous throng that night, the transcript of which I have read, was as great a tribute to one human being by another as I have ever seen, a tribute that Castro would repeat in print and orally many times through the years.
Castro described Guevara over and over again as being someone of extraordinary— he must have used this adjective fifteen times if he used it once—courage, ability, vision, intelligence, sensitivity, selflessness, compassion, and moral character, whose life was dedicated to the cause of the poor and the oppressed.
Guevara was a man he clearly had grown to idolized In Guevara’s posthumously published “Bolivian Diary,” he laments about not The most common charge made against Guevara concerns his authorizing and in some instances participating in executions without, shall we say, due process.
Though Guevara agonized over the justification of capital punishment, he ultimately accepted what was, as Raul Castro said in his diaries, the “standing guerrilla practice” of executing traitors, informers, and particularly cruel enemy officers.
But there were other executions Guevara approved, after hesitation, such as that of a fellow guerrilla, a young man named Echevarria, who began engaging in banditry and pillage in areas taken by the guerrilla forces.
There are conflicting reports over whether Guevara, after the successful uprising, enjoyed organizing the firing squads ordered by Castro of Batista’s main henchmen , or whether he took every execution hard and pardoned as many condemned men as he could. tAlthough there was an undeniable closeness and deep affection between the two men, much has also been written about their differences, one of the main problems being Guevara’s growing disenchantment with the Soviet Union’s delays in economic assistance to Cuba and several broken promises.
Also, because he was closer ideologically to Mao’s China (a more muscular, confrontational posture in bringing about a Marxist revolution than that of the Soviet Union), he began to be perceived as favoring China in the Sino-Soviet split that was raging at the time, whereas Castro was drifting closer to the Soviets.
En route back to Cuba from a speech in Algiers in July of 1963, Guevara stopped in Paris and met with famous Cuban journalist Carlos Franqui, who had been living in exile in Europe.
He speculates that some of the peasants probably were put off by his group’s unkempt beards and torn clothes.
But his intent was pure, “to help the poor,” as one Bolivian said, and this willingness to risk his life to do so has made him the international icon he has become—his likeness appearing on T-shirts, coffee cups, and even boutique clothing throughout the civilized world.
But nowhere is he more revered than in the dusty little village he put on the map, La Higuera, where peasants say that if you whisper Che Guevara’s name to the sky or light a candle to his memory, you will find your lost goat or cow.
After the Bolivian army executed Guevara, they put his body on top of a concrete washbasin for public display in the laundry room of the Our Lady of Malta hospital in the nearby town of Vallegrande.
They later buried him and a dozen of his fellow guerrillas in a mass grave near the town’s airstrip.
An Argentine-Cuban team of forensic pathologists discovered his remains in 1997 and returned them to Cuba, where his wife and family lived, for reburial.
The period of alleged house arrest was thought to be in late November of 1963, and the basis for the arrest was alleged to be Guevara’s possible involvement in an anti-Castro plot.
Castro may have had the prescience to theorize why, although if his theory is correct, it didn’t work out for the Bolivians.
In his television address to the nation on October 15, 1967, Castro said the Bolivian leaders had a “fear of Che even after his death” and “removed Che’s remains so the area could not become a shrine now or at some time in the future.
That, he said, was what he believed to be “the real reason” why Guevara’s remains were moved away to Vallegrande.
The New Orleans DA’s office, pursuant to a warrant, searched Shaw’s elegant French Quarter carriage house at 1313 Dauphine Street on the evening of March 1, 1967, the day he was arrested, after Shaw had been released on $10,000 bond.
Among a great number of items seized were three pieces of rope, one chain, five whips, two pieces of leather, one black hood and cape, one black gown, and one black net hat.
Though these items had no relevance to the case, Garrison promptly released the list to the media the next day, obviously hoping that images of sadomasochistic homosexuality would attach themselves to Shaw in the public mind and prospective jury pool.
Shaw’s friends called foul, saying that similar items could be found in the homes of many Mardi Gras revelers.
Shaw, in his diary that night, wrote that these items were merely “residue” from previous Mardi Gras costumes, and several people confirmed that Shaw had, in fact, used many of them for the annual celebration over the years.
Shaw also noted in his journal that the searching party had left behind Greek and Japanese outfits that would not conjure up the image the DA was seeking.
We all know by now that J Edgar Hoover, for years, kept files on the private lives of many prominent, law-abiding citizens.
Among other things, if Shaw were conservative, he most likely would have voted for Nixon over Kennedy.
Additionally, there is no credible evidence that Shaw was a friend of Ferrie’s or even knew him.
We can assume he never made that call because we know Garrison’s office never called him to the stand at Shaw’s trial.
Apart from David Ferrie’s grotesque and pathetic physical appearance, the one thing that those who met him agree on was his considerable intellect.
The Washington Post’s George Lardner Jr., who interviewed Ferrie the night before he died, described Ferrie as “intelligent” and “well versed” on a “broad range of subjects,” saying that Ferrie, who was fluent in several languages and self-trained in psychology and medicine, “showed the assimilation of many of the 3,000 books he had scattered through” his apartment.
Lardner said that while Ferrie considered the preoccupation by authors and writers with the Kennedy assassination “ghoulish,” his rooms showed he was also preoccupied with the subject.
It is part of conspiracy lore that David Ferrie flew several firebomb raids over Castro’s Cuba for the Cuban exiles and helped Cuban refugees escape from Castro’s Cuba until federal agents confiscated his plane in 1961.
But none of this was ever confirmed, and Ferrie, being the teller of tall tales that he was, was almost certainly the sole source for these stories.
We know that one such story he told was untrue, therefore casting further doubt on all the others.
Shortly after the Bay of Pigs invasion in April of 1961, Ferrie spoke to the New Orleans chapter of the Military Orders of World Wars.
Before being asked to leave the podium when his denunciation of Kennedy for not providing air support for the invading brigade became so harsh it was offensive to the audience, Ferrie said that he was one of the pilots in the invasion.
At Clay Shaw’s trial, Jim Garrison never issued a subpoena for any witness who could help him prove CIA complicity in the assassination, nor did he issue a subpoena duces tecum (a subpoena for documents) to help establish his claim.
However, on May 10, 1967, at ENDNOTES the time of the grand jury hearings before the trial, Garrison did attempt to serve Richard Helms, director of the CIA, with a subpoena duces tecum to provide a “true photograph,” rather than the one, he said, of the “burly Cuban” taken in front of the Cuban (Garrison probably meant Russian) embassy in Mexico City in October 1963.
He unwittingly revealed how much the Helms subpoena had only been a publicity stunt by not even referring to it in either of his two books on the case, Heritage of Stone and On the Trail of the Assassins.
Braniff sent the certificate, along with a check payable to Dulles for $239.80 for travel expenses, to the United States government in Washington, D.C., requesting Dulles’s attendance as an out-of-state witness before the Orleans Parish grand jury on March 28 and 29, 1968.
However, the government pointed out that if Garrison wanted to compel Dulles to become a witness, “jurisdiction under the Uniform Witness Act” for this would rest “in the District of Columbia Court of General Sessions.
But I have been unable to find any evidence of this and Garrison never mentioned it in his two books on the case.
Also, it is highly unlikely that if he did, Houston, in his letter to the judge, would only have referred to the subpoena duces tecum and not the subpoena for Helms’s testimony.
Garrison’s office—and you will never find this in any pro-conspiracy book—dropped the matter and never sought to have a proper court compel Dulles’s testimony.
Garrison had to know that the federal government would not voluntarily allow Dulles to come to New Orleans to be exploited by Garrison as a high-visibility publicity stunt.
Garrison also had to know that if, indeed, the CIA was behind the assassination, Dulles wouldn’t likely have any knowledge of it since he ceased being CIA director on November 29,1961, almost two years before the assassination, and was in retirement on November 22, 1963.
Garrison called several Warren Commission witnesses, including one of the autopsy surgeons, and showed the jury the Zapruder film , ostensibly indicating a shot from Kennedy’s right front.
Easily one of the biggest frauds in the conspiracy movement who has espoused the Shaw-Ferrie-Oswald troika being involved with the CIA in the assassination is one Robert D Morrow, an electrical engineer by trade from Baltimore who in the early 1960s was involved with anti-Castro Cuban exile groups.
From 1960 to 1963 Morrow ran an operation in Baltimore to counterfeit, he says, $50 million in phony pesos to dump on the Cuban economy to disrupt it.
Morrow claims the operation was sponsored by the CIA through his friend, Cuban exile leader Mario Garcia Kohly, who he said was the American leader of the Cuban underground.
On October 1, 1963, Morrow and Kohly were arrested by the federal government on counterfeiting charges and served short jail sentences.
It’s very strange indeed that the CIA would have allowed Morrow to be arrested because, Morrow claims, on July 1, 1963, just a few months earlier, a CIA executive officer, Tracy Barnes, had asked him to purchase and modify four Mannlicher-Carcano rifles, which, he found out later, were used by several “hit squads” to assassinate Kennedy.
He said he delivered the rifles to David Ferrie in New Orleans and later learned they were for Ferrie’s, Clay Shaw’s, and Carlos Marcello’s use in the assassination.
Morrow believes that Ferrie and his associates set up Lee Harvey Oswald as “the patsy” for the assassination.
In 1975, Morrow, being the patriotic citizen he was, contacted the Church Committee, which was investigating American intelligence agencies, particularly with respect to the assassination of President Kennedy.
In his interview by a Church Committee investigator on June 26, 1975, and in his letter to the investigator on July 23, 1975, he didn’t say one single solitary word about this absolutely fascinating story of his.
He did say it was his “opinion” that elements of the CIA may have been behind Kennedy’s assassination, but nothing at all about having firsthand knowledge of a CIA executive having him purchase the weapons that killed Kennedy.
Morrow offered to testify before the Church Committee in 1975, but since it was obvious he had nothing to say, the committee denied his request.
Tippit, Clay Shaw, and David Ferrie in the assassination and that he had purchased the weapons to kill Kennedy.
He also told them of his close association with Kohly in the anti-Castro movement.
Also, tantalizingly, he said he had a film of a man who was a “dead ringer” for Oswald training at a paramilitary camp in New Orleans.
Playboy , through the writer of the series, James McKinley, decided to check Morrow out.
He had no documents or photos linking Tippit, Oswald, Ruby, Ferrie, Shaw and himself—or any combination thereof.
Though Morrow claims... to have participated in adventures with Ferrie, he was unable to describe the man accurately.
In addition to Morrow’s wildly imaginative reconstruction of events leading up to the assassination, a deathbed tape of Kohly, which we heard, has the Cuban saying that Castro had Kennedy killed, in direct contradiction of Morrow’s claim that his men had done it.
No credible evidence has ever emerged that Lee Harvey Oswald or David Ferrie was associated in any way with the CIA or any other United States intelligence agency.
In a September 28, 1967, memo responding to written questions submitted by the Justice Department on September 18, 1967, the CIA reported back that Shaw had contact with a Domestic Contact Service representative in New Orleans seven times in 1949, twice in 1950, five times in 1951, nine times in 1952, once in 1953, twice in 1954, twice in 1955, and twice in 1956.
For the period 1948-1956, Shaw “submitted to the New Orleans office of the Domestic Contact Service information which was incorporated in eight reports.
One dealt with an East German directory of firms engaged in such trade.
Another concerned the establishment of a Czechoslovakian Trade Exhibit.
And we know that the CIA knowingly withheld from the Warren Commission information that it had plotted to kill Castro.
But with respect to the integrity of the aforementioned September 28, 1967, memo, I’m not sure there is any evidence that the CIA has affirmatively lied to other United States federal agencies.
Former CIA agent Victor Marchetti has become a favorite of the conspiracy crowd ever since his April 1975 interview in True magazine in which he spoke of the morning staff meetings he attended as an executive assistant to the deputy director, in the office of Richard Helms, the director of the CIA at the time.
I know they didn’t like Garrison because there were a lot of snotty remarks passed about him.
And one of the people who attended the morning staff meetings told him, “Well, Shaw, a long time ago, had been a contact of the Agency.
And unfortunately for the conspiracy theorists, none of this was in the passages deleted by the agency.
All of the areas of deletion are indicated in Marchetti’s book, and from the context none could possibly have dealt with the above matters.
Established on January 26, 1956, in Bern, Switzerland (within months, the company moved its corporate domicile to Basel), Permindex was essentially a paper corporation with plans to Jim Garrison’s Prosecution of Clay Shaw and Oliver Stone’s Movie JFK build a thirteen-floor building in Basel, in which the exhibition would be housed, and an adjacent fifteen-story hotel.
The project never got off the ground because of a lack of funding and press attacks on the dubious background of Giorgio Mandel-Mantello, who, per the Italian daily II Messaggero, was the founder of CMC, his son Heinrich being the managing director.
Though allegations ranging from money laundering to being involved in assassination attempts on French president Charles de Gaulle have been made against Permindex, it is noteworthy that neither the corporation nor its chief executives were ever convicted of any crime, or even prosecuted.
The following day, March 5, the same story, minus the CIA allegation, appeared in Rome’s more conservative newspapers, Corriere della Sera and II Messaggero.
Though the conspiracy community would have given anything to prove that Permindex-WTC was a CIA front, Paese Sera never offered its readers any evidence to support its naked charge, and no one else has ever produced evidence to support this allegation.t However, Paese Serai s accusation was immediately picked It is not known when Shaw ceased to be a member of the WTC board, but it would be no later than 1964, when the WTC closed its operations in Rome.
As late as December 1, 1962, Shaw told “Who’s Who in the South and Southeast” that he was still a member of the WTC board, which doesn’t sound as if Shaw was trying to conceal his association with a group that he felt was up to no good.
It should be parenthetically noted that as a measure of Paese Sera' s credibility, in a later article of the paper, it claimed that Shaw had organized Kennedy’s trip to Dallas.
Though much has been written about the Paese Sera allegation, Shaw’s only reported response to it was during an interview of him in Penthouse magazine in 1969.
The idea was to have one place where buyers coming into the Common Market area would find all the Common Market countries represented in one center.
I investigated it and found that the head of it was a man named Imre Nagy, who had been the last non-communist premier of Hungary.
Some of the other people involved were Italian senators, journalists, lawyers, and other responsible people.
Then they ran into difficulties, but they finally got the center opened.
It turned out to be either badly planned or badly organized and it closed very shortly, and that was the last I ever heard of it.
In his memoir, A Look over My Shoulder, former CIA director Richard Helms writes that “the Agency had no contact with or interest in Centrale Mondiale Commerciale,” adding that Paese Sera , just six years earlier, was responsible for another were sent in to quell the rebellion.
This is confusing here, since Imre Nagy could not have met with Shaw in 1959 or 1960, having been executed in 1958.
Since Imre Nagy was a much more famous name than Ferenc Nagy, Shaw may have merely forgotten the true first name of the man he was told headed the company.
Further, Shaw’s description of the man as the “last non-communist premier of Hungary” is a description of Ferenc, not Imre Nagy, and we know from other sources that Ferenc, not Imre Nagy, was connected, by way of Permindex, to the World Trade Center in Rome.
The story, like Shaw’s story, was immediately picked up by other news organizations, including Pravda, TASS, and Le Monde in Paris, and the French foreign minister finally had to address the matter, telling the National Assembly in Paris that there was no truth to the story.
It is not known whether Garrison somehow became privy to the Paese Sera piece when it was first published.
But even if he had heard of it immediately (when it was published on March 4, 1967), he had already charged Shaw on March 1 for Kennedy’s murder.
Also, though Garrison seemed to believe the CIA was behind the assassination, he subpoenaed no CIA agents for the trial, never brought up the name CIA during the trial, and did not argue in his summation that the CIA was behind the assassination.
So the phrase “epicenter of Garrison’s prosecution” might not be appropriate.
Additionally, even if there were no available evidence to prove it, we can assume that with the fertility of Garrison’s imagination and all the alleged CIA contacts with David Ferrie, Garrison would have eventually come to the conclusion of CIA complicity in the assassination without the clearly unsupported allegation by a small foreign paper that the WTC was a CIA front.
But the fact is that as early as late November of 1966, several months before the Paese Sera article was printed, Garrison told a journalist friend in New Orleans, David Chandler, that “the CIA did it,” referring to the assassination.
But this seems unlikely since the Paese Sera allegation appeared in the New Orleans States-Item on April 25,1967, long before the trial.
The “now interested” language goes in the direction of supporting Holland’s premise in that at least in Billings’s opinion, Garrison started thinking of a CIA-Shaw connection because of the Paese Sera allegation.
Several questions about the import of the above-mentioned language have arisen, none of which the CIA has answered satisfactorily in FOIA requests from many people, including myself.
In a September 18,1998, letter to Laura Denk, executive director of the ARRB, J Barry Harrelson of the CIA, who was handling requests from the ARRB for CIA documents, said QKENCHANT “was the name of an Agency project used to provide security approvals non-Agency personnel and facilities.
I found the April 7, 2003, response to me from the agency’s information and privacy coordinator, which comprised three documents, to be unhelpful.
One document said QKENCHANT was a “project for obtaining clearance, that is, Provisional Court Security Approvals... in connection with the acquisition of. . .” with the words that followed being redacted.
I also received a copy of the September 18, 1998, letter from Harrelson to Denk which said that Shaw had received “an initial ‘five agency’ clearance on 23 March 1949 and Agency records indicate the QKENCHANT project did not begin until sometime in 1952.
In the letter to me, the CIA coordinator said the agency felt it was satisfying my request and there would be no further response from it.
I wrote the CIA on April 15,2003, saying it had not adequately answered my request, pointing out, for instance, that a document which reads “in all probability he was not cleared by that program, at least initially,” would not satisfy anyone since it does not clearly answer the question of whether Shaw was or was not cleared for the QKENCHANT project.
I knew, of course, that the investigation and trial of Shaw in New Orleans had demonstrated to all sensible people that Shaw had as much to do with Kennedy’s death as the man in the moon, but I pointed out to Goss that notwithstanding Shaw’s innocence, it would not look good for Goss personally as well as the CIA to not furnish the requested information because some people would conclude that the CIA had something to hide.
Goss had Scott Koch, the CIA’s information and privacy coordinator (the same section of the CIA to whom I made my original request), respond to my November 29, 2004, letter.
Koch’s February 14, 2005, response said, in effect, that his office, not that of the CIA director, handled such requests as mine and that “another review is unlikely to result in the release of more information.
We understand that you are a recognized author, but the FOIA prevents us from treating one requester different from another.
So the CIA refuses to release any further information on the matter, short of being forced to by litigation under FOIA, which I’m not about to do since the litigation frequently goes on for many years, taking it beyond the publication date of this book.
The CIA’s response to my request is compatible with the culture of the CIA to be its own worst enemy, and even when it is innocent, to act as guilty as it possibly can.
I was able, however, to get a small item of information here and there from the CIA throughout the years.
For instance, I learned from its public relations section that the CIA moved its headquarters from Washington, D.C., to Langley, Virginia, in 1961.
And oh yes, the CIA did once confirm for me the death of one of its former agents.
Assuming that Shaw also received, like Sullivan, a QKENCHANT clearance, which we don’t know to be a fact, the likelihood is that it would have also been on an unwitting basis.
No one has pursued Shaw’s connection to the CIA in the courts as much as Jim Lesar, and Lesar doesn’t even give a thought to Shaw doing clandestine work for the CIA in the gathering of intelligence.
Jim Garrison’s most serious attack on the establishment, and the one that got him in the most trouble by far, occurred his first year in office, 1962.
He started using money from a DA “Fines and Fees Fund” to pay his assistants to conduct investigations of commercial vice in the Bourbon and Canal Street districts of New Orleans.
The problem was that the money from the fund was only supposed to be used to “defray expenses” of the DA’s office, not to conduct investigations.
Further, disbursements out of the fund had to be approved by a judge of the State Criminal District Court.
When Garrison took office, one of the judges refused to approve a disbursement from the fund for furnishings for Garrison’s office.
When the judge went on vacation, Garrison obtained the approval of another judge by allegedly misrepresenting that the first judge had withdrawn his objection.
Because of this, all eight judges of the Criminal District Court adopted a rule on October 5, 1962, that no further disbursements from the fund would be approved without the concurrence of at least five of the eight judges.
And on October 26, 1962, the judges ruled that they would not approve disbursements from the fund to pay for the vice investigations, expressing doubt as to the legality under the state constitution of using money from such a fund for investigation purposes.
For this outburst, Garrison was prosecuted and convicted by a judge from another parish of “criminal defamation” of the judges, fined $1,000, and sentenced to four months in jail.
Garrison appealed and the Louisiana State Supreme Court affirmed the conviction.
But in 1964, the United States Supreme Court reversed the conviction, holding that the Louisiana statute (La.
Sullivan (376 United States 254), mere lack of reasonableness will not suffice.
Jim Garrison’s adversaries in the anti-conspiracy community have questioned his sexual orientation and have sought to corroborate the allegation of his having fondled a thirteen-year-old boy in June of 1969 at the New Orleans Athletic Club, but neither has any conceivable relevance to this case and neither has ever been confirmed.
Author Patricia Lambert, in researching the issue, interviewed the boy (a young man at the time Lambert interviewed him) and his older brother.
The incident supposedly took place in a very dark slumber room at the Athletic Club.
Supposedly Garrison approached the father of the two boys in the pool area and suggested that the father, his two sons, and Garrison go up to the room for a nap, all eventually lying in separate beds in the completely dark room.
Garrison, in a bed next to the young boy, allegedly twice left his bed or reached over and lifted the blanket off the teen and “fondled” him, presumably on his private parts.
What militates against its being factual is that not only did this incident allegedly occur just three months after the enormously publicized Clay Shaw trial that made Garrison a national, even an international figure, a time when he was living in a fish bowl and had a great number of enemies who would have loved to destroy him, but also no other allegation of a similar nature has ever been leveled at him that I know of.
And Garrison, a married man with five children, had always had known heterosexual relationships, even after his divorce from his wife.
Much more important than that, even if Garrison did have such secret propensities, it stretches all credulity to believe that he would act them out in the very same room as the boy’s father and older brother.
The victim’s explanation for this—that Garrison looked like he was “on drugs,” an observation that neither the older brother nor the father are known to have made—cannot overcome the nonbelievability of what Garrison allegedly did.
Lambert learned that the New Orleans grand jury wanted to take testimony on the matter but the boy and his family declined to testify out of fear of retaliation by someone as powerful as Garrison.
But as a Life ENDNOTES as the Mafia chieftain of New Orleans), and although he didn’t help himself when he told NBC that Marcello was a “respectable businessman” (Rogers, “Persecution of Clay Shaw,”56), the fact remains that there is no credible evidence that Garrison ever took any money from or was in any way beholden to or connected with organized crime.
His getting a $5,000 line of credit in 1967 at the Sands Hotel in Las Vegas, a hotel allegedly owned at the time, at least in part, by organized crime, is meaningless since such lines of credit to non-organized crime figures are common.
And the casino manager, Mario Marino, a former employee of Marcello’s, “comping” Garrison’s hotel bill during his stay at the Sands couldn’t possibly be less significant.
Las Vegas picks up hotel bills for people much less important than the district attorney of New Orleans.
Garrison said that he felt it was customary for casinos to pick up the hotel tabs of public officials.
And in 1987, many years after Garrison’s tenure as district attorney, a “colleague” of mob author David Scheim, asking that Scheim not reveal his name, claims he saw Garrison having lunch at a New Orleans restaurant with two of Carlos Marcello’s brothers, Sammy and Joe Jr.
But even assuming for the sake of argument that this allegation is true (which it probably is—indeed, twenty years earlier, Garrison admitted to a reporter from Life magazine that he knew Sammy Marcello [Smith, “Carlos Marcello,”94]), it has to be looked at in the proper context.
Things are just different “down yonder in New Orleans,” from people drinking their coffee with beignets rather than doughnuts, to its being the heart of the only state in the Union that operates under the old Napoleonic code.
Raffish and fun-loving, New Orleans is an interesting blend of Old World sophistication and parochialism.
A relatively big city, it has a small-town atmosphere where members of the “in” crowd, from correct as well as incorrect society, often have innocuously incestuous relationships with each other that take place out in the open without (as opposed to most other cities) raising the eyebrows of its notoriously laissez-faire, tolerant citizenry.
During the Clay Shaw trial, Judge Edward Haggerty Jr., who presided over the trial, used to stop by for a few drinks almost every night at the Rowntowner Motor Inn, a well-known watering hole in New Orleans for men of various and divergent ethical stripes.
The establishment was owned by Frank Occhipinti, a big real estate developer in New Orleans who was a business partner on some of his acquisitions with Carlos Marcello.
Not only does this sound unbelievable, but when one makes such a sensational charge, it’s incumbent upon him to cite at least one source, which Chandler failed to do.
John Volz, who worked in the DA’s office at the time, told me, “I don’t know where Chandler got those figures.
Aaron Kohn, who came from Chicago in 1953 to head the New Orleans Metropolitan Crime Commission, recalled in the Life article that he was astonished at this.
In Chicago, people were generally on one side of the fence or the other—honest or crooked.
In 1965, Garrison purchased for $65,000 a handsome, two-story home in New Orleans that had been originally built by Occhipinti.
Garrison bought the home from a lawyer, Peter Casano, who was a partner in a law firm with Frank Occhipinti’s brothers.
Garrison’s attackers talk of Vic Carona, an alleged bagman for Carlos Marcello, having died in Garrison’s home in June of 1969 after suffering a heart attack.
Nor do the attackers mention that Carona was attending a political meeting at Garrison’s home that many people undoubtedly attended, and there is no evidence that Garrison even knew Carona personally.
John Volz is, to this day, a highly respected New Orleans public figure.
As noted in the main text, he was an assistant district attorney under Garrison between 1963 and 1968, heading up the narcotics section.
After a year as an agent for the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs, the predecessor to today’s Drug Enforcement Administration, he returned to the DA’s office as Garrison’s chief assistant district attorney between 1974 and 1978, after which he became the United States attorney in New Orleans for thirteen years.
Further, that “there has never been any evidence that Garrison was ever on the take or that there was any fixing of cases in return for political or monetary support.
Many others have made the same charge, suggesting that this is further evidence that Garrison was tied in with Marcello and organized crime in New Orleans.
But not only did Garrison say that in his years as district attorney he never came upon “any evidence that [Marcello] was the Mafia kingpin the Justice Department” said he was, but the critics fail to take into account that he never pursued the Ferrie-Marcello link because he never believed that organized crime had anything to do with the assassination.
But Sheridan doesn’t name these clubs or offer any citation to support his allegation.
The only official document I came across suggesting an association between Garrison and a known mobster is a 1967 CIA Inspector General’s Report.
This was around the same time that Roselli (a major Mafia figure who was part of the CIA-mob plot to kill Castro), through his lawyer, Morgan, was believed to have given syndicated columnists Drew Pearson and Jack Anderson the scoop that Robert F Kennedy “may” have authorized an assassination plot on Castro, and Castro had RFK’s brother, the president, killed in retaliation.
The report goes on to say that “the Roselli-Garrison contact in Las Vegas in March is particularly disturbing.
It lends substance to reports that Castro had something to do with the Kennedy assassination in retaliation for United States attempts on Castro’s life.
We do not know that Castro actually tried to retaliate, but we do know that there were such plots against Castro.
The source of this information was Roselli’s CIA handler, James O’Connell.
There’s no indication precisely when and where the contact took place , at whose instance the contact was made, or what was discussed during the contact.
And it is therefore unlikely that he would have taken a chance on destroying his relationship with the CIA by doing anything to harm the agency (such as telling Garrison about the CIA-mob plots to kill Castro), since the CIA could be a big help to Roselli in the future.
It’s even possible that Garrison, putting together his case against Shaw, took a chance and asked Roselli if there was anything he knew that could help him.
This inference of a benign contact is bolstered by the fact that any other contact would have been out of character for Garrison since there’s no evidence he was a mob-controlled politician or had anything to do with organized crime.
There were two highly questionable federal prosecutions of Garrison involving alleged contact by him with small-time organized crime.
In 1971, he was charged with receiving bribes to permit illegal pinball gambling in his parish.
The government’s case at the 1973 trial was built around Pershing Gervais, once a key investigator on Garrison’s staff, and two taperecorded conversations between Gervais and Garrison at Garrison’s home.
Gervais said he was the middleman between the pinball operators and Garrison, and claimed that the payoffs to Garrison ranged from $3,600 to $4,400 every two months, out of which he admitted skimming between $700 and $1,400 off the top.
Gervais said he started working with the feds against Garrison in 1969.
Garrison, who fired his own lawyers (one of whom was from the Boston law firm of famed defense attorney F Lee Bailey, a friend of Garrison’s) midway through the trial and took over his own defense, claimed he loaned Gervais $5,000 in Gervais’s time of need when Gervais left the DA’s office in 1967, and Gervais was merely paying him the money back in increments.
The government recorded Gervais, who was wearing a wire, giving Garrison marked money, some of it later recovered from Garrison’s home pursuant to a search warrant.
In a recording of a conversation during one such payment, on February 25, 1971, at Garrison’s home (while IRS agents were outside with monitoring equipment), there is a very vague implication that it was payoff money.
He was thereafter prosecuted by the federal government, in 1974, for income tax evasion— failing to pay taxes on the alleged payoff money he received.
I got to know Bill Turner, a straight-arrow guy, when I worked briefly with him in 1975 in Los Angeles on the reinvestigation into the assassination of Robert F Kennedy.
Long before the identity of “Deep Throat” surfaced in 2005, Bill was very confident he knew who he was, someone he had worked under in the FBI’s Seattle office in the 1950s.
Herb Caen reported in his inimitable column in the San Francisco Chronicle way back on February 13,1978, “Ex-FBIer Bill Turner is certain that Watergate’s ‘Deep Throat’ was former Asst.
But Stone simply could not resist inserting other lines in his movie to make his viewers believe maybe the mob was involved.
Then he has the actress portraying Beverly Oliver, a totally discredited figure who most likely fabricated her entire story (see discussion in main text), say on film that she knew Jack Ruby, Ruby “was with the mob,” and Oswald was Ruby’s friend when Ruby introduced her to him at his club.
Within two months of the movie, an NBC poll reported that 51 percent of the American people believed Oliver Stone’s version of what happened.
It is not completely clear just who founded the center, which was originally located in Dallas’s West End, but Larry Howard and J Gary Shaw were listed as codirectors and Larry Ray Harris was in charge of research.
The center was believed to be funded primarily by the late Washington, D.C., attorney Bernard Fensterwald Jr., founder of the Assassination Archives and Research Center in the nation’s capital.
Jim Garrison originally suggested that Braden (the name Brading was using at the time of the assassination) was a part of the conspiracy.
Braden , an ex-con on parole with a very long rap sheet (mostly involving one form of theft or another), was in Dallas on November 22, 1963, arriving from out of town the previous night, and stayed at the Cabana Hotel.
There has never been any evidence that Braden met Ruby that night or had ever had any association with him, though both may have known Joe Dolan, a gambler and hoodlum who definitely had known Ruby since 1957, and was seen once in Braden’s presence in Phoenix in 1951.
Braden was a crude oil producer headquartered in Beverly Hills, California, who had come to town on oil business with the approval of his parole officer in Los Angeles, and with the further approval to go to Houston on oil business on November 25.
Finding the third-floor pay telephone out of order, he returned to the ground floor, and upon leaving the Dal-Tex Building was confronted by officers who asked him for his identification.
When he presented his credit card to the officer, the officer said he’d have to take him in for interrogation.
Garrison, of course, smelled a rat in Braden’s story and had his investigators pursue the matter.
When you can be cleared of conspiracy in the Kennedy assassination by the likes of Jim Garrison, you must be clean.
Edgar Eugene Bradley should also not be confused with Leslie Norman Bradley, who, according to a March 3, 1967, secret CIA memorandum (declassified and released in 1992 under the JFK Act), was a “solider of fortune and freelance pilot who was arrested by the Cuban G-2 in Havana on 24 May 1960,” and was imprisoned on the Isle of Pines.
Leslie Norman Bradley, by Alan M Warfield, Special Assistant to the Deputy Director for Support, December 29, 1967) In 1959, Bradley was arrested in Havana for involvement in Nicaraguan revIn Legacy of Doubt, author Peter Noyes alleges that Braden had mob connections, and suggests his possible involvement in the assassination.
But if he was, the mob, or whomever he was in league with, never paid him too well.
On February 10, 1964, just a few months after the assassination, Braden was arrested at a San Fernando Valley market in Los Angeles for shoplifting twenty-five dollars’ worth of groceries.
Predictably, Garrison blamed others—not the lack of any credible evidence against Shaw—for his defeat in the courtroom, asserting that “federal officials sought to suppress the truth.
Two other attempted extraditions by Garrison didn’t even deal directly with his prosecution of Shaw.
One was his pursuit of Gordon Novel, manager of a New Orleans bar and adventurer with alleged CIA connections who is a favorite of many in the conspiracy community.
In 1961, there was a burglary of a munitions bunker owned by the Schlumberger Well Surveying Company and located at a blimp air base in the town of Houma, Louisiana, located around forty miles southwest of New Orleans.
Right in the middle of Garrison’s Shaw investigation in 1967, Novel volunteered to Garrison’s office the details of the burglary, the ostensible purpose of which was to secure weapons for the antiCastro effort.
Novel was subpoenaed by Garrison to testify on March 16, 1967, before the Orleans Parish grand jury on the Houma matter, which he did, but before March 22, when he was scheduled for his second appearance, he left the jurisdiction.
It has concealed the true facts, to be blunt about it, to protect the individuals involved in the assassination of John Kennedy” . tGarrison claimed that two women who later moved into Novel’s apartment found a hidden, undated letter from Novel to a “Mr Weiss,” in which he says he feared that Garrison’s investigation might expose his ties to the Double-Chek Corporation in Miami, an alleged CIA front that reportedly recruited pilots and saboteurs for the Bay of Pigs invasion.
On April 2, 1967, local authorities in Ohio arrested Novel on a New Orleans warrant stemming from the burglary charge, and in his April 3 bail hearing in Columbus he told the court, “I used to do work for Garrison.
Volz said that even if Garrison had said this to Novel, he “had a sense of humor and often spoke tongue-in-cheek.
Or Novel could have been referring to Seymour Weiss, an executive at Standard Fruit, the owner of the Roosevelt Hotel in New Orleans, and a leader of the anti-Communist movement in New Orleans that Novel was a part of.
In late June, Novel filed a $10 million defamation action in Columbus, Ohio, against Garrison and $1 million against each of the fifty members of Truth and Consequences, a New Orleans civic group of wealthy Garrison supporters who were helping to finance his investigation.
To the claim by Novel, an electronics expert who had a reputation of being good at bugging and antibugging devices, that Garrison asked him to see if his office was being bugged by the feds, Volz said, “Jim’s office was definitely bugged.
Volz confirmed to me that Garrison lost interest in Novel and decided not to pursue his extradition.
He said the burglary case against Novel was dismissed by his office in late July of 1967.
The CIA, in response to a Justice Department inquiry on September 18, 1967, said, “Novel. . . has stated he is or was a CIA agent.
And in 1967, Novel’s Columbus, Ohio, attorney, Jerry Weiner, said, “It’s utterly ridiculous.
One of Clay Shaw’s attorneys, Salvatore Panzeca, and William Gurvich, the former investigator for Garrison who was now helping the defense team, flew to Columbus, Ohio, to interview Novel in May of 1967.
The other extradition case involved Sergio Arcacha Smith, who participated in the Houma burglary with Novel.
Unlike Novel, there is little question that Arcacha, though not a CIA agent, worked closely with the CIA in the preparation for the Bay of Pigs invasion, since Arcacha headed the Cuban Revolutionary Council in New Orleans and the CIA coordinated the entire invasion effort.
Arcacha had been a captain in Batista’s army and was a military attache under his father, a general, at the Cuban embassy in Paris.
An educated and highly intelligent man, he was, above all, a Cuban patriot who wanted to return to his Castro-free homeland.
On March 31, 1967, Garrison filed conspiracy-to-commit-burglary charges against Arcacha for the Houma burglary and sought his extradition from Dallas, where he was then living.
I learned from a former Dallas law enforcement source who is familiar with the situation and whom I consider very reliable, but who wants to remain anonymous, that Garrison’s extradition request for Arcacha reached the desk of Captain Will Fritz of the Dallas Police Department.
Fritz personally interviewed Arcacha, who told him, as Novel maintained, that the Houma burglary was really not a burglary at all.
Arcacha said that someone at the Schlumberger corporation gave a key to the burglars or left the door to the munitions bunker unlocked so the anti-Castro “burglars” could get the munitions they needed for the planned Bay of Pigs invasion.
One very strong piece of circumstantial evidence that they were is that the Schlumberger corporation never reported the “burglary” to the authorities , a virtually automatic occurrence if the burglary were legitimate.
It’s perhaps because the Schlumberger company, headquartered in Houston, did not report the incident to the Houma Police Department that the date of the “burglary” has never been established, although most writers say it occurred sometime in early 1961.
However, Novel, and Garrison, say the burglary took place around three months after the Bay of Pigs invasion, which would put the bunker incident in mid-July of 1961.
For its part, the CIA said it had “no knowledge of utilization of commercial storage facilities of the Schlumberger interests or any other commercial firm.
And another CIA document says that “the Office of Security advised on 27 April 1967 that questioning of four employees of the Office of Logistics has shown that the only arms bunker in the New Orleans area used by CIA was the Belle Chasse Ammunition Depot, a deactivated Navy installation eight miles from New Orleans.
Although the United States was for all intents and purposes at war with Cuba in that the government was making every effort to overthrow Castro, it was a “secret” war.
Connally followed Fritz’s recommendation, his office giving another reason (the extradition request was not substantiated by the proper documents) for Texas’s refusal to extradite Arcacha.
But interstate extradition is only mandatory under Article IV, Section 2, Clause 2 of the federal Constitution when the person has been charged with a crime in the requesting state.
Omaha police arrested her on a material witness warrant and she was freed on a one-thousand-dollar bond pending a hearing on April 25.
On April 10, 1967, New Orleans judge Bernard Bagert signed a certificate of attendance asking Nebraska to compel the return of Moffett to New Orleans to appear before the grand jury on April 18—20.
The Case of Jim Garrison, Moffett denied being at Ferrie’s apartment, saying she never even met Ferrie until 1965, two years after the assassination.
He immediately abandoned the effort when Moffett let it be known she was not at Feme’s apartment.
Indeed, it was the defense, not Garrison and his prosecution staff, who in the end wanted Moffett to testify.
And Moffett was amenable to returning to New Orleans to testify for the defense at Shaw’s trial that she was not at Ferrie’s apartment.
But she obviously didn’t want to be drawn into the horror story unfolding in New Orleans by becoming another victim of Garrison’s prosecutorial madness.
So just before opening statements in the trial on February 6, 1969, the defense requested a court order granting her immunity from prosecution so she would feel safe returning to New Orleans to refute the testimony of Perry Russo.
The prosecutor, James Alcock, however, strenuously objected, saying the court never had the authority to give Moffett immunity.
Finally, Alcock made a statement that apparently didn’t satisfy Judge Edward Haggerty because of the implicit threat it contained.
It was obvious to Judge Haggerty that he could not count on the DA’s office to not find some reason to arrest Moffett, irrespective of any order he might issue, which could only protect her from alleged past wrongs, not future ones, and he avoided the whole issue by not granting the defense’s motion for a protective order of immunity.
Garrison charged Layton Martens, a friend of David Feme’s, with perjury for denying before the Shaw grand jury that he knew Gordon Novel.
Garrison charged Walter Sheridan, the former FBI agent and RFK aide who had put together the June 19,1967, NBC special, and Richard Townley, a reporter for the local NBC affiliate, WDSU-TY in New Orleans, who assisted Sheridan on the NBC show, with “public bribery” for offering Perry Russo employment and residence in California (and to pay for his legal expenses if Garrison came after him) if he cooperated with NBC and acknowledged on the television special that he had fabricated his story about Shaw, Ferrie, and Oswald conspiring to murder Kennedy.
Russo never appeared on the show, and at a June 20, 1967, press conference in Garrison’s office, Russo accused Sheridan and Townley of everything contained in the later, July 7 charges against them.
Sheridan and Townley may, indeed, have done this in an effort to stop the prosecution of an innocent man, Shaw, for Kennedy’s murder.
Sheridan as much as admitted that at least some kind of offer to Russo had most likely been made when he told the national NBC audience on June 19, 1967, “In my conversations with Perry Russo, he has stated that his testimony against Clay Shaw may be a combination of truth, fantasy, and lies.
He says he wishes he had never gotten into this, but now he feels he has no choice but to go through with it.
Without exception, the pro-Garrison books by conspiracy theorists depict Sheridan as someone who was determined to undermine Garrison’s investigation by any sordid means available to him, and they connect him, by innuendo, with the United States intelligence community’s effort to cover up the assassination, which these theorists believe United States intelligence was behind.
It certainly is true that Sheridan was out to hurt Garrison’s investigation, but the reason, obviously, is that he knew, as virtually all reasonable people did, that Garrison’s investigation and prosecution of Clay Shaw completely lacked merit.
According to Strate, on June 12,1967, he, a friend, Edward Baldwin, Judge Malcolm O’Hara, and Walter Sheridan met in the cocktail lounge of the Bourbon-Orleans Hotel in the French Quarter.
He filed perjury charges against Kerry Thornley, who was with Oswald in the Marines, when Thornley denied in front of the Shaw grand jury that he had been with Oswald in New Orleans in the summer of 1963.
Barbara Reid, a reputed voodoo practitioner, had told Garrison she had spotted Thornley with Oswald at that time at the Bourbon House, a restaurant in the French Quarter.
Milton Brener, Gurvich’s attorney, said, “At the time in Louisiana, twenty dollars was the point at which a theft became a felony, which would have entitled any defendant to a jury trial.
John the Baptist, was a savvy criminal who thought he knew his constitutional rights.
As New Orleans’s premier burglar, he had visited without invitation some of the finest houses in New Orleans to ply his trade.
When he invoked his Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination before the Strate to get Strate’s friend Pershing Gervais, a top investigator for Garrison, to get Perry Russo to change his story.
Unbelievably, per Strate, Sheridan also offered to use his influence to get Strate’s conviction reversed and get him a new trial.
Strate told Sheridan he didn’t want any money and didn’t need Sheridan’s help on the Chicago case.
He said he reported this matter to Gervais, Gervais said it was a bribery attempt, and he should report it to Garrison, which Strate said he did.
What makes Strate’s story even more unbelievable is that he strongly suggests that the meeting was set up by Judge O’Hara, the implication being that O’Hara may have had full knowledge of the bribery attempt that was going to take place.
If that’s not enough, Strate’s story would require our believing that not only didn’t RFK want to know if Garrison knew who the murderers of his brother were, but was willing to commit the federal crime of bribery to stop Garrison.
Although Garrison did bring unsuccessful bribery charges against Sheridan and Richard Townley for trying to bribe Russo directly, Garrison did not add an extra count of Sheridan’s alleged bribe of Strate, most likely because he simply didn’t believe Strate.
And absent a grant of immunity he would have been safe relying on his Fifth Amendment rights anywhere else in the country.
But again, unbelievably, Garrison got a judge to hold Cancler in contempt of court and to sentence him to six months in jail and pay a fine of five hundred dollars, or serve a year in jail.
In conversations with two prosecutors who were in Garrison’s office at the time of the Shaw case and a former Garrison prosecutor who wrote a book about the case, I learned that of all the criminal complaints Garrison filed and the grand jury indictments he secured against his real or perceived enemies and adversaries in the Shaw case, remarkably, the only one he pursued all the way to trial was the Dean Andrews case.
With the exception of the Shaw perjury case, which was dismissed by the court, Garrison either dismissed all the other charges or let the charges die through lack of timely prosecution.
One, undoubtedly, was to set an example and thereby intimidate any prospective opponent into compliance with Garrison’s wishes.
Also, he believed the charges would help confirm his bigger charge that he was fighting a mammoth conspiracy designed to thwart and sabotage his investigation.
A worried Gurvich went to prosecutor James Alcock seeking his intercession.
But such a law would be so bizarre that I couldn’t imagine it existing even in Louisiana, a very charming but quirky state in many ways.
The conclu834 ENDNOTES sive proof that no such law existed in Louisiana at the time (or if it did, it was invariably ignored since it would be unconstitutional on its face) is that Dean Andrews was convicted of three counts of perjury in August of 1967, yet testified for the defense at Shaw’s trial in 1969.
Although the testimony of nearly every witness at Clay Shaw’s murder trial is available in transcript form from the National Archives, the testimony of two of the main witnesses, Charles Spiesel and Vernon Bundy, is not.
Neither the archives nor apparently anyone else has come up with these transcripts.
After Shaw’s lawyer, Irvin Dymond, completed his cross-examination, and Charles Spiesel, to the DA’s relief, finally left the witness stand a thoroughly discredited figure, Dymond, wanting to gild the lily, did something quite unexpected under the circumstances, something that created the opportunity, at least potentially, of pumping oxygen into a dying man.
He asked the judge, Edward Haggerty, to direct Spiesel to take the court and jury to the brownstone building in the French Quarter where he claimed he heard, during a party, conspiracy talk to kill Kennedy.
Over the DA’s objection, Haggerty agreed to it, and everyone involved in the trial, including attorneys, jurors, bailiffs, Shaw, and the judge, accompanied by reporters, photographers, and TV cameramen, proceeded to the corner of Dauphine and Esplanade in the French Quarter, the vicinity where, Spiesel had testified, the apartment was.
Others were hanging out secondand third-story windows to see what was going on in the streets below.
Traffic had been terrible that day in New Orleans because it was the first day of the Mardi-Gras celebration.
Resuming the witness stand after lunch, he testified that of the two apartments, the second one was either the one in which the party took place or similar to it.
But Dymond, Kirkwood writes, proceeded to point out several differences between the sketch Spiesel had made of the apartment before his search, as well as the description he had given of it in his testimony, and the actual building he had taken the judge and jury to.
Perhaps the only two witnesses Garrison’s office called to the witness stand whose credibility the defense wasn’t able to hurt on cross-examination was a husband and wife team, Mr and Mrs.
Mr Tadin called the DA’s office on the morning of February 27, 1969, the second-to-last day of testimony, with their story and the two were called to the stand later in the day.
According to the Tadins, their deaf, sixteen-year-old son took flying lessons from David Ferrie.
They claimed that one day in the summer of 1964 they were at the Lakefront Airport in New Orleans when they saw Ferrie and Shaw emerge from a hangar.
When Mr Tadin allegedly asked Ferrie if he had a new student, Ferrie replied, “No, he’s a friend of mine.
Mr Tadin said he recognized Shaw because he had seen him riding around Bourbon Street in his car several times.
But the Tadins were obviously either lying or simply mistaken in their identification of Shaw.
Since the Tadins were last-minute witnesses, Shaw’s defense had no opportunity to check their story out or prepare an effective cross-examination.
However, when Shaw’s attorney, Irvin Dymond, asked Mr Tadin to describe the car he saw Shaw driving around in, although he had the make right (a Thunderbird, as had been reported in the media coverage of the trial, which Tadin said he had been following), he said it was “light cream or white” in color.
And when Dymond asked Tadin why he had waited to the end of the trial to come forward with his story that allegedly happened five years earlier, his answer—that Dymond’s opening statement, in which he said that Shaw didn’t know Ferrie, caused him to want to set the record straight—was very unpersuasive.
Not only was Dymond’s opening statement on February 6, three weeks earlier, but more important, Tadin conceded that he followed the preliminary hearing back in March of 1967 and knew way back then that a contested issue was whether Shaw knew Ferrie.
Certainly the Tadins coming forward so very late in the game has to be viewed as highly suspicious.
Tadin at Clay Shaw’s trial, February 27, 1969,10) In 1964, Clay Shaw was not a suspect in the Kennedy assassination and was not a controversial New Orleans figure in any way.
In an obvious slip, Tadin was talking as if he had seen Shaw with Ferrie at some time after he became a suspect in the assassination.
The trial judge, Edward Haggerty, told a reporter after the trial that one of the jurors had told him the jury did not believe the Tadins, although Haggerty apparently did.
Perry Russo was the only witness Jim Garrison presented at the trial who claimed to have seen Clay Shaw at David Ferrie’s apartment.
Perhaps the most egregious example of Jim Garrison’s misconduct concerned Perry Russo, the star witness who “had never heard of Oswald” before the assassination, but around whom Garrison virtually built his entire prosecution of Clay Shaw.
Russo was a staunch Republican, having supported Nixon and Goldwater, and reportedly was joyous when he learned of Kennedy’s assassination.
On the evening of February 22, 1967, the day Ferrie was found dead in his apartment, and it was all over the news, including Garrison’s characterization of Ferrie as being one of history’s most important individuals, Russo says he wrote a short letter to Garrison, which he mailed the next day.
March 16, 1967,278) At Shaw’s preliminary hearing, his lawyer asked Russo how, if he had witnessed the conspiracy to murder Kennedy, he could possibly think that the information he had “might not” be important to Garrison.
Russo told the State-Times reporter, Bill Bankston, that he became acquainted with Ferrie through a friend who was a member of the Civil Air Patrol in New Orleans at a time when Ferrie headed the group.
He said he had several contacts with Ferrie, who he described as “screwy but sharp in a brainy way,” in the summer and early fall of 1963 when he was living in New Orleans, and had only known Ferrie for around eighteen months at the time Ferrie made the statement, a statement, Russo said, he did not take seriously.
Russo made no mention of Oswald or Clay Shaw or Clay Bertrand to Bankston, or to being privy to any conspiracy to murder Kennedy.
He told Kemp he was aware, from the news, that Garrison suspected Ferrie of being involved in the assassination.
Russo said that Ferrie had “a roommate, but he was just sterile as regards to politics.
Russo added that Ferrie had “three Spanishspeaking friends” with him at his home when Russo visited Ferrie one time.
And certainly no mention of being present at Ferrie’s home when Ferrie, Oswald, and Shaw allegedly conspired to murder Kennedy.
Later that same day, February 24, Russo also gave an interview to a Baton Rouge ENDNOTES television reporter named Carrick and at least one other reporter whose name he could not recall, probably the Baton Rouge representative of station WDSU in New Orleans.
At Clay Shaw’s trial, Shaw’s lawyer, Irvin Dymond, adding them up, asked Russo, “So that then would be a total of three in addition to Mr Bankston.
But seeing the Baton Rouge article, Garrison, with just cause, dispatched one of his assistants, Andrew “Moo Moo” Sciambra, to Baton Rouge to interview Russo at Russo’s home, which he did the next day, February 25.
Sciambra wrote a detailed 3,500word memorandum to Garrison on February 27,1967, about his three-hour interview with Russo.
Among other things, Sciambra’s memo said Russo told him that Ferrie was a homosexual who was “in love” with a young man named A1 Landry (and when Russo and others, at Landry’s mother’s request, tried to discourage Landry from seeing Ferrie, Ferrie told Russo that either he or one of his friends would kill Russo for this), and that he saw Ferrie several times in the company of a few Cubans dressed in green fatigues who, Ferrie said, were jungle fighters who would help him liberate South America.
But the heart of the Sciambra memorandum deals with Russo telling him that in the summer of 1963, Ferrie started talking about how easy it would be to assassinate a president, and that he could plan the whole thing himself.
Ferrie himself admitted to FBI agents when they interviewed him on November 27, 1963, that he probably had said that Kennedy “ought to be shot” because of failing to provide air cover during the Bay of Pigs invasion, t But Russo, like so At Clay Shaw’s trial, Shaw’s attorney, Irvin Dymond, asked the prosecution to produce the alleged letter, but they were unable to do so.
Lead trial prosecutor James Alcock told Judge Edward Haggerty Jr., “We have not been able to locate it, your honor.
A large picture of Ferrie was also on the front page and he was identified by the DA’s office as a member of the plot who was scheduled to be the pilot of the “getaway” plane.
Yet Russo conveniently waited until Ferrie died, and was thereby unable to refute his nonsense, before he came forward with his story. iBut he also told FBI agents Ernest Wall Jr. and Theodore Viater in their interview of him on November 27 that he had also been accused of being “a worshiper of President Kennedy” because he was a “liberal” who strongly believed in President Kennedy’s civil rights program.
There’s no credible evidence that there was anything more to Russo’s story than what he had told Bankston and Kemp.
However, before Garrison, Sciambra, and the New Orleans DA’s office got through with Russo, his small kernel of truth had blossomed wildly into a huge cornfield of conspiracy involving Ferrie, Oswald, and Clay Shaw.
I couldn’t get off,” said Russo, who acknowledged receiving psychiatric “treatment” for “maybe two years or a year and a half” between 1959 and 1961.
When Sciambra showed Russo some pictures, he identified one of the photos as being of Clay Shaw, claiming to have seen Shaw in Ferrie’s presence, once inside a compact car at Ferrie’s service station and another time at the Nashville Street Wharf when Kennedy spoke there.
But Russo didn’t know enough about Shaw to tell a good lie, claiming to Sciambra that Shaw had on “dark pants that day which fit very tightly and the kind of pants that a lot of queers in the French Quarter wear.
Shaw had on a corduroy type jacket which was black with white stripes” and he wasn’t looking at JFK at all.
Instead, he made it obvious, Russo told Sciambra, that he was looking at all the young boys in the crowd, including staring at the crotch of one he struck up a conversation with.
If he had been, I would have noticed it,” adding he had never seen Shaw wear tight pants, and that Shaw always dressed “on the conservative side” and that day was no exception.
He co-ran the station with his friend A1 Beauboeuf (Statement of Herbert R Wagner Jr. to the New Orleans DA’s office, December 6, 1967,2). tAt Shaw’s preliminary hearing on March 14,1967, Russo apparently forgot his story.
Prior to showing Russo the photo of Oswald, Sciambra writes in his memo that “ said that Ferrie introduced him to someone he called his roommate.
Later in the interview, Sciambra writes, Russo, who couldn’t remember the name of Ferrie’s roommate off the bat, said that “the name Leon really rings a bell,” adding that if he were placed under hypnosis, which he was willing to do, he might be able to have total recall on things like names, places, and dates.
Per Sciambra’s memo, Russo described “Leon,” Ferrie’s roommate, as someone with “dirty blonde hair and a husky beard,” later calling it a “bushy” beard.
At Shaw’s preliminary hearing, Russo’s version of how he identified Oswald as Ferrie’s roommate differed substantially from Sciambra’s version as set forth in his February 27 memorandum.
Russo testified that he was unable to identify Oswald for Sciambra until “a member of the district attorney’s staff” (Detective Charles Jonau) who was with Sciambra “sat with me for six hours” painting whiskers on a photo of Oswald.
Russo answered, “No,” but had no satisfactory answer for his change of testimony.
Ruth Paine said, “When I came to New Orleans, about September 20th [right around the exact period—“middle of September” of 1963—that Russo would later testify he saw Oswald at Feme’s apartment with Shaw] he was clean-shaven then, and I never saw him with a beard.
Sciambra should have realized, from the description of a bushy beard and the extreme dirtiness of Ferrie’s roommate, that the roommate could not possibly have been Oswald, and that Russo must have been telling a fairy tale.
Sciambra should therefore have discontinued his interest in Russo at this point.
The June 19, 1967, NBC special on Garrison’s investigation of Shaw reported that Ferrie’s dirty, beatnik roommate had been determined, by witnesses, to be Lewallen.
Anderson’s observation, made after he saw Oswald only twice (when Oswald placed the order and when he picked it up) and then briefly, cannot be given the same weight as Alba’s, who knew Oswald well, and saw him for much longer periods over a few months.
In any event, what Mellen doesn’t tell her readers is that Anderson saw Oswald for the first time on June 3, 1963.
June 3 was a Monday, a workday for Oswald at the Reily coffee company, which was a few blocks away on the same street where Anderson’s shop was.
Oswald’s job at the Reily company, as we know, was greasing heavy equipment.
If Anderson’s recollection was correct, with the job Oswald had it would seem natural for his clothing to be dirty when he appeared at Anderson’s shop, probably during the noon lunch break, although Alba said he never saw Oswald dirty.
And Martens, who had known Ferrie for five years, said, “I never heard David Ferrie mention Lee Harvey Oswald.
In any event, we know that Oswald wasn’t the person who shared an apartment with Ferrie in September of 1963 because we know that during the whole summer of 1963 up through the third week in September, Oswald was living with his wife and daughter, June, on Magazine Street in New Orleans.
But even if we assume that everything Russo told Bankston, Kemp, and two other reporters on February 24, and Sciambra on February 25, was true, in these first five interviews that Russo, Garrison’s star witness, gave, he said nothing about ever seeing Ferrie, Shaw, and Oswald together, nothing about seeing Shaw in Ferrie’s apartment, much less ever hearing Ferrie, Shaw, and Oswald plot the murder of John F Kennedy.
Russo had too much potential for Garrison to let him go, even though from these first five interviews of Russo, the bell had already been rung on the fact that he had absolutely nothing of any value to say about any alleged conspiracy to murder Kennedy.
The same day of Sciambra’s memo, February 27, Sciambra interrogated Russo under sodium pentothal at Mercy Hospital in New Orleans.
Contrary to what is popularly believed, sodium pentothal does not compel the subject to tell the truth.
Rather, it decreases inhibitions in the subject, making him more likely to express repressed information.
Within the psychiatric community, there is substantial disagreement over the merits and reliability of what is termed narcoanalysis , and this is why virtually all states, including Louisiana, disallow the admissibility of sodium pentothal-induced statements unless both the prosecution and the defense agree on it.
This is why the statements Russo made while under sodium Before Russo calmed down and gave his questioner, Sciambra, what Sciambra wanted to hear, the introduction of sodium pentothal into his system by injection into his right arm caused a decidedly adverse physiological response.
In a transcribed interview with William and Leonard Gurvich on January 29,1971, he said, “My head started spinning round and round . . . and I started getting violent and upset,” causing the doctors to physically restrain him.
Sounds like a perfectly reasonable prologue to Russo’s helping Garrison break the crime of the century.
He said he saw Oswald at Ferrie’s apartment, per the memo, “sitting on a chair with his leg up cleaning a rifle.
The fact, as indicated earlier, that Oswald never had a bushy beard and was always very clean and neat, not scruffy and dirty like Russo said, was just something that Russo, and Sciambra, were going to have to live with.
Because that is the first story Russo gave, and though he could add incriminating details to the story, if he were going to have any credibility he could not contradict what he had already said.
He added (again, in this game, unless you simply forgot what you previously said, you can add but not contradict) that he saw the man he identified as Clay Shaw, not just twice, as he told Sciambra two days earlier, but one other time at Ferrie’s apartment on Louisiana Avenue Parkway sometime between September 20 and 25,1963.
Sciambra says he then asked Russo if he knew Clay Bertrand, and Russo said he did, and he was a queer.
Russo said Ferrie had introduced him to Bertrand while he was at Ferrie’s apartment on Louisiana Avenue Parkway.
So we see that it was Sciambra, not David Ferrie, who first mentioned the name Bertrand to Russo.
In Sciambra’s interview of Russo on February 25, Russo never even mentioned meeting any gray-haired older man at Ferrie’s apartment, much less introducing him as Clay Bertrand.
After all, Russo was a friend, of sorts, to Ferrie, and Russo was entitled to know all about such things.
Following the sodium pentothal examination, Russo had dinner that night with Garrison, Sciambra, a few other members of the DA’s staff, and Life magazine reporter Richard Billings at the Royal Orleans Hotel.
He had no other witness to connect Shaw, in any way, to the Kennedy assassination.
Even if Russo had been an excellent witness, unless there was a fear that Shaw would flee the jurisdiction, as was not the case here, no prosecutor I’ve ever known would have arrested Shaw at that point for the most serious murder in American history.
He would have taken the matter to the grand jury, and by subpoenaing witnesses and putting his investigators to work, attempt to corroborate Russo’s statement and build a prosecutable case against Shaw.
But instead, just two days later, in the early evening of March 1, 1967, Garrison had Shaw placed under arrest for conspiring with Oswald and Ferrie to murder Kennedy.
On March 1, after having dinner with Russo at the Royal Orleans, Sciambra and fellow prosecutor A1 Oser took Russo to the office of Orleans Parish coroner Nicholas Chetta, where Dr.
Esmond A Fatter, a New Orleans physician and hypnotist, hypnotized and questioned Russo in the presence of a stenographer.
Russo, himself a self-styled hypnotist, once hypnotized a friend before the friend had sex with his girlfriend.
The only new detail that emerged from the hypnosis session was that Oswald and Shaw actively participated with Ferrie in the assassination discussion.
This time Russo said the discussion in Ferrie’s home took place on September 16, 1963.
Russo said there was a beer-drinking party at Ferrie’s apartment that evening, and four Cubans, two Americans, and Russo’s girlfriend, Sandra Moffett, were also there, but were in “the kitchen” at the time the plot was discussed.
But before the next hypnotic session on March 12, Garrison had Russo take a polygraph test defendant’s staff, and was the chief prosecuting attorney at the Shaw conspiracy trial, testified that the only witness against Shaw at the time of his arrest was Russo.
Garrison did not rebut this testimony, even when this court confronted him with it.
On February 28, the day before the first hypnotic session, the DA’s office, for identification purposes, had Russo, posing as an insurance salesman from Mutual of Omaha, knock on Shaw’s door.
Russo told his DA handlers that Shaw, who came to the door, was the man he had seen at the wharf and in Ferrie’s car and home.
When Fatter asked Russo the leading question, “Is Clay Bertrand the same person you went to sell insurance to yesterday}” Russo did not say yes or no.
So the heavy-handed Fatter proceeded to tell Russo, “You will see the face of a white-haired man.
The test, on March 8, was administered by Roy Jacob, a polygraph expert for the Jefferson Parish sheriff’s office.
With his answer of “yes” to the two questions of whether he knew Clay Shaw and Lee Harvey Oswald, the polygraph operator said that Russo’s test reflected “deception” on his part.
Fatter put Russo under his hypnotic spell again, but this time Fatter did not utilize the imaginary television screen as a technique.
And when you get to the bottom of that staircase .. . you will be very deeply asleep,” he told Russo.
Now look up the hall, Perry, and about fifty feet up the hall I’d like for you to walk in front of that door.
You needn’t worry about it because we’re all here and we’re all going to take good care of you.
During the March 12 session, Russo said he went to Ferrie’s apartment on the day in question with Sandra Moffett and his friend Lefty (Niles “Lefty” Peterson), and he repeated that allegation at Shaw’s preliminary hearing on March 15.
At Shaw’s trial, Russo, having learned that both Peterson and Moffett had denied, in the June 19,1967, NBC special on Garrison, being at any party at Ferrie’s when Shaw and Oswald were in attendance, no longer included them as being at the party.
Russo then added a detail that had already been hypothesized and very well publicized by the conspiracy theorists, and hence, Russo would most likely have heard it in the media many times.
Ferrie assured Bertrand he would handle everything, including flying all the assassins out of the country.
It had been reported in the New Orleans newspapers a week before the second hypnotic session that Clay Shaw was at the San Francisco World Trade Center on the day of the assassination, so Russo added another nice little touch to his fairy tale.
Ferrie, he said, told his co-conspirators that they’d have to “establish alibis” for themselves by being seen “in public” on the day of the assassination.
Bertrand said he would “go to the coast on business” that day, per Russo.
Clay Shaw knew that he could only be seen in public in San Francisco, twenty-five hundred miles away.
Wherever he’d be in New Orleans, even in the middle of Bourbon Street, he apparently believed he’d be invisible to others and hence have no alibi.
If a conspirator, say Shaw, needed to establish an alibi, the very best way to have done so would have been to stay right at his desk at the Trade Mart in New Orleans, where everyone knew him, not go to a distant city where he was largely unknown 11 think we can see that if the upcoming preliminary hearing had not locked Russo into his story, it was just a matter of time before Fatter and Garrison’s people had Russo place Shaw at the sixth-floor window elbowing Oswald out of the way to make room for him to shoot Kennedy.
It was all pure nonsense, of course, but no matter, the fringe conspiracy theorists were willing to buy any allegation of conspiracy, no matter how absurd, no matter how obviously fabricated.
As Saturday Evening Post reporter James Phelan told Mark Lane in New Orleans, “You gag at the smallest gnat in the Warren Report, The Garrison devotees have apparently never been troubled by the question of why Shaw and Ferrie would select Oswald, of all people, as their hit man (in view of the fact that these very same devotees strongly believe Oswald was such a dreadful shot) or patsy when they had no way of knowing that the president would even come back to New Orleans, where Oswald lived at the time.
On September 11, 1963 (several days before Russo claims he heard Shaw say he would “go to the coast on business” to establish an alibi), she said Shaw received another letter from the First National Bank in Portland thanking him for having “accepted our invitation” to speak on international relations in Portland on November 25.
After spending a few days in Los Angeles, he arrived in San Francisco by train on November 21, did not speak on November 22 because of the assassination, and left San Francisco for Portland on November 23, speaking at the Rotary Club in Portland on November 26.
On March 14, two days after Russo’s last session with Fatter, Shaw’s preliminary hearing commenced, and Russo was the main witness testifying against him.
I never said I wanted to see President Kennedy killed,” Russo answered.
However, he added that Oswald and Shaw did protest his presence in the room.
Russo testified he never said one word during the entire conspiracy session, frequently going to the window in the room of the apartment where the plot took place to see if Lefty Peterson had returned to drive him home.
But defense lawyers know that since the magistrate at a preliminary hearing usually finds there is sufficient evidence to require the defendant to go to trial, they normally treat it like a discovery proceeding to learn what the prosecutor’s case is, and don’t even present a defense, as Shaw’s lawyers didn’t.
With several witnesses like Perry Russo and Vernon Bundy testifying against Shaw, and no witnesses being offered to rebut them, the holding over of Shaw for trial is not significant.
As one of the judges on the panel, Bernard Bagert, said, “This wasn’t a question of guilty or not guilty.
However, after taking the attachment off Russo’s body, he proceeded to interview Russo.
He was then asked if this conversation he heard at Dave Ferrie’s apartment sounded like a legitimate plot to assassinate Kennedy.
Later that same day, two of Garrison’s lead detectives went to O’Donnell’s office.
But O’Donnell, a seventeenyear veteran of the force, had no such intention, and started to dictate the aforementioned written report to Garrison, which he delivered the next day to Garrison, the New Orleans superintendent of police, among other officials, getting copies.
At a meeting convened in Garrison’s office a few weeks later, which Alcock, Sciambra, and Russo attended, Garrison handed a copy of O’Donnell’s report to Russo and asked Russo if what O’Donnell said in his report was true.
The ruse worked and Russo admitted that O’Donnell’s report accurately reflected what he had told O’Donnell.
Though Garrison eventually tried to get O’Donnell fired, he was unsuccessful, and O’Donnell went on, as the assistant commanding officer of the Homicide Division of the New Orleans Police Department, to testify on behalf of Shaw at Shaw’s trial in 1969.
The Shaw jury’s swift not-guilty verdict showed they rejected Russo’s fairy tale out of hand.
As jury foreman Sidney Hebert told author James Kirkwood after the trial, “Actually, the whole case rested on the testimony of Perry Russo.
For all intents and purposes, Garrison’s entire case had, indeed, been built around Russo, specifically Russo’s testimony at the trial that on one occasion at a party in Ferrie’s home in September of 1963, he heard Ferrie, Shaw, and Oswald conspire to murder Kennedy.
Not only was Russo himself, as we have seen, devoid of all credibility, but also Garrison, during the trial, was unable to come up with one single witness to corroborate Russo’s fable.
Indeed, as we have seen, Garrison learned before the trial that one witness who Russo said was at Ferrie’s house on the day in question, Lefty Peterson, said that Shaw and Oswald were not at the party, and Sandra Moffett, Russo’s one-time girlfriend, who he said accompanied him to the party at Ferrie’s home, said that was impossible because she never met Ferrie until 1965.
The reader should know by now how conspiracy authors handle inconvenient witnesses like Peterson and Moffett.
New Light on the Jim Garrison Investigation , they simply don’t mention Peterson and Moffett.
If we are to believe the conspiracy theorists who still cling to Russo’s fable, apparently Russo needed truth serum and hypnosis to recall hearing three people plot to murder President Kennedy.
For instance, a mother asking him to try to get her son away from the amorous advances of David Ferrie was a much more important event than a conspiracy to murder the president, and this is why he could remember the former but not the latter.
The conspiracy buffs can’t even make the argument that hearing a plot to murder Kennedy was such a traumatic shock to Russo’s psyche that he subconsciously suppressed it.
That argument won’t fly because he told Bankston, Kemp, and Sciambra about Ferrie’s talking about the possibility of killing Kennedy.
As indicated in the main text, on January 26, 1971, Russo admitted to one of Shaw’s lawyers, Edward Wegmann, that he did not see Shaw in Ferrie’s apartment and had been brainwashed by Garrison’s office into saying he did.
Also, on April 16, 1971, Russo gave a tape-recorded interview in the office of William Gurvich to Gurvich and two of Shaw’s attorneys, Wegmann and Dymond.
But his words of recantation, alone and by themselves, are worthless, since he had no credibility on this case from the very beginning.
As opposed to what Russo told Shaw’s lawyers and Gurvich, his statements to Lambert and Posner do not appear, at least on their face, to be complete recantations, if for no other reason than that they apparently didn’t ask him if he made his entire story about Shaw up.
At least theoretically he could have meant that he told the truth about Ferrie, Oswald, and Shaw being together, but he believed Shaw was innocent and recognized that his testimony and the rest of the case against Shaw was not enough to convict.
It has to be noted that even Russo’s recantation to Shaw’s lawyers and Gurvich only pertained to Shaw’s being present at any meeting at Ferrie’s house discussing a proposed assassination.
Not only doesn’t Davy do the natural thing and quote what Russo told him, but even in Davy’s 1999 book on the case, Let Justice Be Done, in which he defends the Garrison investigation throughout, he never once mentions that Russo told him a different story from the one he told Shaw’s lawyers and Gurvich in 1971.
Since Russo was Garrison’s main witness and Russo’s recantation alone destroys Garrison’s case, if, indeed, Russo told Davy that his recantation was not real, it is inconceivable that Davy would not have spotlighted this in his book.
Parenthetically, we don’t know when one of Davy’s two interviews with Russo took place, but it was probably around the time of the other interview, which Davy says was on August 30, 1994, five years before the publication of Davy’s book. ihe article that first exposed Garrison’s case as nonexistent and fraudulent was a cover story in the May 6, 1967, edition of the Saturday Evening Post by writer James Phelan, who had been dispatched to New Orleans to cover the case.
Phelan’s article received wide circulation and contained extremely damaging revelations about Garrison’s case for the vast press corp covering the case.
Phelan writes in his article that when he arrived in the Crescent City in late February he was only one of hundreds of reporters from around the world, including the Soviet Union, who had converged upon the city.
Garrison, deluged by the media, was virtually unreachable, but Phelan collared one of There’s a certain poetic justice here in that if Garrison had not given Phelan the Sciambra memo, there’s a good chance that Shaw’s lawyers would never have learned of it and, hence, would never have used it to destroy Russo’s credibility.
At the time in Louisiana, the defense had no legal right to discovery of the prosecution’s evidence, including witness statements.
Garrison’s office called a few days later to set up lunch with the DA at the New Orleans Athletic Club.
But they never discussed the Kennedy investigation at lunch, the DA, per Phelan, being “continually interrupted by club members” who came to compliment him on his new undertaking.
At the end of lunch Garrison told Phelan he was exhausted from the ordeal and said he intended to go to Las Vegas for the weekend for a rest.
And for two days at the Sands Hotel in Las Vegas, the two talked for around ten hours on the case.
Phelan wrote about his encounter with Garrison in the Post article and in a subsequent book, Scandals, Scamps, and Scoundrels.
What it took to learn what really happened in Dallas was imagination and evaluation.
What the case boiled down to, Garrison told Phelan, was a homosexual conspiracy masterminded by David Ferrie.
Kennedy was a virile, handsome, successful man, everything Ferrie was not.
Garrison claimed Oswald and Ruby, as well as Shaw, were homosexuals and involved in the plot.
At the end of the first day’s session, Garrison said to Phelan, “I’m going to give you something that no one knows about but my top people.
Phelan, his head spinning, drove back to the Dunes, where he was staying, thinking that millions of people had been speculating for weeks about what Garrison had uncovered, and whatever it was, he had it in his jacket pocket.
Phelan writes that the first document he looked at “was a long memorandum from Garrison’s assistant setting forth what Perry Russo had said in his first interview , The other was a transcript of what Russo had said four days later , under hypnosis.
The two versions, from the same witness, told two completely different stories.
Phelan, for whatever reason, chose not to confront Garrison with the gross Phelan’s access to Garrison may have been facilitated by the fact that in 1963 Phelan spent ten days in New Orleans with Garrison and wrote a laudatory piece in the June 8, 1963, Saturday Evening Post about Garrison’s cleaning up vice in the French Quarter.
Garrison invited Phelan to his home that night, promising to have Sciambra there to explain everything.
Phelan writes, “There were four of us in Garrison’s study when I questioned Sciambra—Garrison, Sciambra, a private investigator named William Gurvich, who assisting Garrison on his probe, and myself.
I asked Sciambra why his report on his first interview with Russo said nothing about an assassination plot.
I told him I had read his report carefully and knew exactly what was in it.
Sciambra said he had been ‘awfully busy with a half dozen other things and had to sandwich in the report and might have forgotten’ to include everything.
I said it seemed incredible that he would uncover testimony that might solve the crime of the century and then forget to report it.
Fatter where he got the information he used in prompting Russo under hypnosis.
Gurvich disputed Sciambra’s story that he had written the memo in a hurry and might have forgotten to mention the assassination plot.
He told Phelan that Sciambra had worked on the memo for days, rewriting and polishing it, and it was the most important report he had written in the investigation.
Not that it’s necessary to prove the point, but Sciambra, in his own words in his memo, gives the lie to his later allegation that he simply forgot to put in the memo Russo’s telling him about seeing Shaw in Ferrie’s apartment discussing the assassination plot, which, if true, would have been the third time Russo had seen Shaw.
Sciambra wrote, “The next picture that he identified was that of Clay Shaw.
The first time was when he pulled into Ferrie’s service station to get his car fixed.
Shaw was the person who was sitting in the compact car talking to Ferrie.
At Shaw’s trial, Sciambra was trapped by the omission (in the memo of his interview with Russo in Baton Rouge) of any references to Russo telling him about seeing Shaw, Ferrie, and Oswald in Ferrie’s apartment and hearing them discuss assassinating Kennedy.
He testified that he didn’t bother to mention it because he didn’t complete dictating the memo until sometime between March 4 and 7, and by that time he had already written about this conspiratorial meeting in an earlier memo based on what Russo had said under sodium pentothal.
So, he claimed, there was no need to mention it in the memo of the Baton Rouge meeting, even though he conceded this latter memo was a “detailed, seven-page memorandum” of the meeting.
Sciambra got caught up in his lies more than once on the witness stand.
He said he “burned” his notes of his February 25 interview of Russo “very shortly” after he dictated his memorandum of the meeting.
But then, after denying he had told Jim Phelan that he had included the alleged conspiratorial meeting between Ferrie, Shaw, and Oswald in his memo of his February 25 interview (Phelan, you’ll recall, had gotten a copy of the memo from Garrison and knew it wasn’t included), he made the mistake of admitting that Phelan had asked him if he could see his notes of his interview of Russo in Baton Rouge.
Conspiracy theorist William Davy, in Let Justice Be Done, after happily embracing Sciambra’s absurd argument, goes on to allege that actually, when Phelan later interviewed Russo, Russo told Phelan that when Sciambra interviewed him in Baton Rouge, he had told Sciambra about the Bertrand-Ferrie-Oswald assassination plot conversation he heard, and that Phelan had failed to write about this fact in his Post article.
From some unpublished manuscript Davy read, he quotes Lane as turning the tables on Phelan by asking Phelan about his crucial Sciambra-like omission and Phelan (who has since died) allegedly telling Lane that he, Phelan, was bucking a tight deadline and therefore that point might have been lost.
There was no way for Davy to perform such verbal legerdemain with the Bill Bankston article in the Baton Rouge newspaper on February 24 (Russo’s very first interview on the case), or Jim Kemp’s television interview of Russo on station WAFB in Baton Rouge on the same date.
So Davy, in the very finest traditions of the conspiracy profession, virtually ignores the Bankston article, not giving the date of the article, not mentioning Bankston’s name, and far more importantly, not telling his readers that the article never quoted Russo as saying anything about Lee Harvey Oswald, Clay Shaw, or “Clay Bertrand,” or to his having been present when any plot to kill President Kennedy was discussed.
And Davy simply ignores altogether Kemp’s TV interview (as well, of course, as that of the two other TV interviews) of Russo.
Jim DiEugenio, a sincere conspiracy theorist who thinks rationally about the Kennedy assassination from time to time (e.g., his recognition of the insanity of David Lifton’s theory), and who was the chairman and coeditor of the now defunct Probe, a valuable and informative bimonthly publication on what was new in the Kennedy assassination , wrote the forward to Davy’s book.
In a 1996 issue of Probe , DiEugenio wrote a whole piece on Phelan’s connection to the FBI, adding that the “ Saturday Evening Post has had ties to the FBI” also, as if the FBI was a corrupt, evil organization, and anyone associated with it must likewise be bad.
If DiEugenio had thought the issue through, he would have seen that his attack on Phelan to destroy his credibility in the Garrison case is wrong on two grounds, one absolute and one conditional.
Phelan being an informant for the FBI would only have relevance if DiEugenio is willing to say that he believes the FBI murdered Kennedy, or Hoover ordered a cover-up for those who did.
In other words, Phelan’s alleged association with the FBI doesn’t go anywhere unless the FBI had Kennedy murdered, or were accessories after the fact to his murder, and Phelan distorted everything he wrote to help the FBI cover up its involvement—that is, Phelan is also guilty of the crime of being an accessory after the fact to Kennedy’s murder.
The absolute ground is that Phelan’s credibility is not at issue in the RussoGarrison story inasmuch as the subject documents speak for themselves.
Phelan was simply the first one to expose the fraudulence of the DA’s case based on Russo’s statements.
But even if Phelan did not exist, the three documents (the Bankston article based on his interview with Russo, the transcript of Jim Kemp’s interview of Russo, and the Sciambra memo) clearly show that Russo had nothing of any value at all to say about the Kennedy assassination.
Whatever he said of any value thereafter was invented by him or fraudulently induced.
It turns out that on April 3, 1967, a month before Phelan’s article exposing Garrison in the Saturday Evening Post was published, Phelan called the FBI in Washington to brief the bureau on his devastating findings against Garrison, his report being set forth in an FBI memorandum from FBI Assistant Director Robert Wick.
However, the first paragraph of the three-page memorandum reads that Phelan had “called my office today and said he had information he wanted to pass along regarding Garrison’s investigation in New Orleans.
Wick to Cartha DeLoach, April 3, 1967) tA corollary to the above discussion is that several pro-Garrison conspiracy theorists have strongly vilified journalists like Phelan and Hugh Aynesworth for their very aggressive and biased reportage against Garrison and his case against Shaw.
The journalists knew, as did most sensible people, that Garrison was prosecuting an innocent man.
In the Garrison case, even if the media believed, indeed knew, that an innocent man was being prosecuted for murder, the theorists believe it was the duty of the Phelans of the world to shut up.
Yet, for instance, Garrison supporter, conspiracy theorist, and DiEugenio colleague Lisa Pease, once she leaves the Garrison saga, decries the mainstream media’s acceptance of the Warren Commission, and says, “ The purpose of the news media is to give us facts about newsworthy events,” and the media didn’t have “the guts to stand up and say hey . . . here’s the real truth” about the assassination.
The key witnesses among them testified at Shaw’s trial that one morning in late August or early September of 1963, a large, black, late-model Cadillac driven by Shaw pulled up and parked across the street from the registrar’s office where the Congress of Racial Equality was organizing a voter registration drive for black people in the area.
Shaw and Ferrie, they said, stayed in the car, and Oswald got in line to register.
No documentary evidence has ever surfaced showing that Oswald, in fact, registered to vote.
The original statements of the Clinton witnesses to Garrison’s investigators in 1967 were not nearly as clear and tidy as their trial testimony.
Sciambra’s May 29, 1967, interview of Henry Palmer, 1) On the matter of Oswald’s transportation in Clinton and Jackson, a Jackson barber, Edwin Lea McGehee, said that a day or so before the CORE registration drive, he cut Oswald’s hair, and the car Oswald came to his barbershop in was old and beat-up, possibly a Nash or Kaiser.
He said that a young woman was in the car with him, and he saw a baby bassinet in the backseat.
From photos shown him, he identified Clay Shaw as the driver and Guy Banister as a passenger in the backseat.
In a later interview, he identified Jack Ruby as the driver and said Shaw was in the front passenger seat and Guy Banister in the rear seat of the car.
Per author Patricia Lambert, Marina also testified under oath to most of these things at the Shaw trial.
Few people have questioned the integrity of the Clinton witnesses, but few, other than Garrison, thought there was any merit to their observations.
A former East Feliciana Parish district attorney, Richard H Kilbourne, told author Patricia Lambert, “I said from the time I first heard about [the allegations] that I didn’t think there was a thing on earth to it and I still feel that way.
For instance, witnesses who did not identify Shaw, Ferrie, or Oswald when first contacted by the DA’s office ended up identifying one or more of them at the trial.
In an early August 21, 1967, internal memo to Garrison, Assistant DA Andrew Sciambra writes about the difficulty of getting blacks who were at the voter registration drive in Clinton to identify Shaw, Ferrie, and Oswald from photographs shown to them.
The key to solving the problem of what caused the Clinton witnesses’ improved memory very probably was a photograph the New Orleans DA’s office showed to these witnesses.
Author Patricia Lambert found an investigator, Anne Hundley Dischler, who worked for five months on the case on assignment to Garrison’s staff.
Dischler saw the photograph but never had possession of it, saying the photo received special treatment.
The photo, she discovered, had been shown to the Clinton witnesses before she came aboard the investigation.
It was a 3 X 5 inch, blackand-white photograph of a black Cadillac parked across the street from the Conspiracy theorists frequently include within the Clinton witnesses group one Henry Burnell Clark, who did not, however, testify at Shaw’s trial.
Describing himself as a twenty-nine-year-old man who lived with a relative near Clinton and who “finished six weeks into the ninth grade,” he signed an affidavit in 1967 saying that in late summer 1963 he saw a “tall man” in a business suit who reminded him of a “movie actor” he had seen on the screen walking down the main street of Clinton and get in a “black” car.
He didn’t say whether or not he saw anyone else in the car, but identified, from photos shown him, Clay Shaw as the man he saw.
During this same period of time, he said he saw a man on the main street with bushy, unusual hair that “stood up in all directions” on his head.
He identified the man from photos as David Ferrie, but did not put Shaw and Ferrie together.
And when author James Kirkwood learned of Clark’s identification of Shaw and Ferrie, he sought to interview him before the Shaw trial started in 1969, but Clark told him, “Go ’way, man.
Dischler said it looked like Clay Shaw was in the driver’s seat and Oswald was in the passenger’s seat.
But Garrison, understandably, did not use the photo at the trial and it has never surfaced.
The HSCA did a very thorough job of investigating many aspects of the assassination, but the Clinton witnesses, apparently, were not one of them.
By saying the witnesses were telling the truth “as they knew it,” it would seem that the HSCA simply used the wrong adjective, “credible,” in assessing the statements of the witnesses.
That perhaps the correct word to describe how the House Select Committee apparently felt about the witnesses was “honest,” which is not synonymous at all with “credible,” which means worthy of belief.
This is remarkable, and a bad reflection on the HSCA, since, as we shall see, the Clinton witnesses had virtually no credibility.
There is no indication in the HSCA’s very brief writing on the incident that the committee ever became aware of the earlier statements and affidavits of the witnesses to Garrison’s investigators, which contain much confusion and myriad inconsistencies.
As indicated, the resourceful Lambert took it a step further, locating an absolutely key figure the HSCA had never spoken to, Anne Dischler.
Dischler and Francis Fruge, a Louisiana State investigator, were the two outside investigators of Garrison’s who were part of the original investigation in 1967.
During a two-day interview at Dischler’s home in Eunice, Louisiana , in February of 1994, Dischler allowed Lambert to pore over all her notes, important parts of which were never incorporated into any known, surviving report or affidavit.
Most revealing in Dischler’s notes was the statement of Corrie Collins, a black man who was the chairman of the Clinton chapter of CORE at the time of the Clinton incident.
The other man, who Collins said was dressed in all white, Dischler was able to positively identify as one Winslow Foster, an employee at a nearby hospital.
Subsequently, Lambert learned from Estus Morgan’s widow, Nellie Louise, that her husband “wore blue jeans” most of the time, and one of his friends was Winslow Foster.
Lambert learned from Dischler that as soon as the Morgan-Winslow names were mentioned in her investigation, Garrison took her and Fruge off the case.
Prior inconsistent statements like this by the Clinton witnesses were the norm in this case.
Among the many statements made by William Dunn, also black, when the New Orleans DA’s office interviewed Dunn on January 17, 1968, he identified Clay Shaw in the front passenger seat of the black Cadillac, and one Thomas Edward Beckham, also in the front seat.
Dunn, who was working for CORE at the time of the alleged incident, said there were one or two other white males in the car, whom he could not identify.
But in a January 21, 1969, affidavit, he identified Oswald and David Ferrie as being the only two other people in the car with Shaw, and at Shaw’s trial he recalled seeing Oswald in the registration line and said that other than Shaw, there “maybe” was one other person in the black car, whom he could not identify.
Whether Palmer and Manchester were unreliable and impressionable people, or whether they simply fabricated their story is not clear.
For instance, Palmer’s first formal interview was fraught with improbabilities.
As previously indicated, Palmer told investigators from the New Orleans DA’s office that he saw Oswald and Clinton the first week of October 1963.
We know, of course, that Oswald left New Orleans for Mexico City on September 24 or 25, 1963, and was in Dallas from October 3 until his death on November 25,1963.
He said they were very conspicuous because they were the only two whites in the otherwise all-black line.
At a minimum waiting time of five hours, it had to be one of the slowest lines ever.
He then says that when he spoke to Morgan and Oswald separately around 4:00m., they both just happened to be interested in getting a job at the very same place, the East Louisiana State Hospital.
Possible, but Oswald, a neat freak, normally wore a shirt and tie and regular shoes.
A New Orleans I’m not sure how the political and social orientation and extremism of Palmer and Manchester have any relevance to the story in this case, as some anti-conspiracy theorists have implied.
Indeed, Palmer and Manchester putting Oswald in the company of David Ferrie (a perplexingly ambiguous figure, but seemingly more right wing than left wing) would not seem to help their right-wing cause at all.
However, the possible relevance of their both being KKK members and Manchester being a member of law enforcement is that the socalled Clinton witnesses who put Oswald, Ferrie, and Shaw together (other than, of course, Palmer and Manchester) were poor blacks, and it is not known whether there was any built-in fear of Palmer and Manchester in the small southern town that made it more likely that the blacks would “go along” with their conclusions.
As an example of racism in rural Louisiana during this period, author Adam Fairclough writes that “CORE workers and the blacks mho associated with them became perpetual objects of unfriendly police protection.
He was unable to identify David Ferrie as the man seated in the passenger seat, only saying that the eyebrows in the photo of Ferrie he was shown “looked like the type of eyebrows” the man in the car had.
At Shaw’s trial, Palmer now added that “the hair” of the man in the car was also “similar” to that of Ferrie.
The problem is that on cross-examination he conceded, “I didn’t get a good look at [the two men in the car], I just saw the back of them.
Banister, indeed, does bear a vague facial resemblance to Shaw, but he was of average height and his gray hair had much black in it, as opposed to Shaw, whose hair was all gray.
But coincidentally, Palmer knew Banister, having served in the army with him in 1943 while stationed in Orlando, Florida, and saw him as late as 1960 at the state legislature in Baton Rouge, and Palmer said the man in the car was not Banister.
Manchester says in the affidavit that he also remembers seeing a black Cadillac parked close to the registrar’s office around “the time of the civil rights demonstrations,” but did not remember any voter registration line at all.
Manchester said that “from pictures I have seen in the paper of Clay Shaw, resembled Clay Shaw quite a bit.
But Manchester also says in the affidavit that “I can’t be sure, I can’t be certain” about whether he walked up to the car.
But again, in the good hands of the New Orleans DA’s office, at Shaw’s trial in 1969, Manchester’s doubts vanished like shadows before the sun and he testified he definitely walked up to the car and spoke to the driver for “maybe two minutes,” the driver told him he was “a representative of the International Trade Mart in New Orleans,” and he positively identified Shaw as the driver.
He testified, “I walked over and asked the driver would he please identify himself.
In his earlier affidavit, he could not identify the passenger in the front seat of the car, saying only that “all that I can remember about the man is that he was not as well-dressed as the man on the driver’s side.
In his affidavit and at Shaw’s trial, he made no reference to seeing Lee Harvey Oswald that day.
Kilbourne, the former East Feliciana Parish DA, said that “Manchester was completely unreliable.
Inconveniently for Manchester and all the other Clinton witnesses, Miss Goldie Moore, Clay Shaw’s personal secretary from 1946 to 1965, told the Orleans Parish grand jury that in 1963 Shaw drove a black Ford, and that the Ford was registered to the Trade Mart.
She said she had never seen Shaw at any time drive a large black Cadillac.
Cobb said Shaw and he were extremely busy during this period, and the only workday during the entire period that he was not in contact with Shaw was September 25, 1963, when Shaw was in his hometown of Hammond, Louisiana, which is about ninety miles from Clinton.
However, even on that day, he said, a “representative” of the Trade Mart reached Shaw in Hammond.
Shaw confirmed that the only day he missed work during the subject period was the day in late September when he went to Hammond to visit his ill father, and he recalled his secretary calling him that day.
She immediately became his personal secretary and remained so for nineteen years, until his retirement in 1965.
ENDNOTES over the world—yes, even in Clinton and Jackson, Louisiana—for weeks and months on end after the assassination.
But not one word came out until Garrison’s investigation of Shaw in 1967, four years later.
At the Shaw trial, when some of the Clinton witnesses were asked why they hadn’t told anyone, they responded that if the authorities wanted to know, they could have asked them.
If anyone should have reported his sighting to the authorities, it was John Manchester, the town marshall and a deputy sheriff.
In his testimony before the HSCA he said he saw Oswald in Clinton on the subject day, and when he saw Oswald’s face on television, and photographs of him in the newspapers around the time of the assassination, he recognized Oswald as the person he had seen in Clinton just a few months earlier.
Manchester conceded that he knew the FBI, and Warren Commission thereafter, were investigating Oswald’s participation in Kennedy’s assassination.
I pressed him to give me the names of those people he had mentioned this to, but beyond a stammer or two, he couldn’t come across.
As is the custom of most conspiracy theorists, they simply don’t address the issue.
But one did step up to the plate, and his effort was not only laughable, but insulting to anyone’s intelligence.
In his book Let Justice Be Done, conspiracy author William Davy The Jackson barber, Edwin McGehee, said Oswald told him he wanted to get a job at the nearby East Louisiana State Hospital and said he referred Oswald to the home of Reeves Morgan, a state representative, who, he told Oswald, might be able to help him.
Morgan said he told Oswald that he’d have a better chance to get the job if he registered to vote in the area.
Rarick’s findings were printed in a right-wing newspaper based out of Shreveport called The Councillor ,” the inference being that Rarick must have contacted the newspaper.
Apparently no paper in Clinton or Jackson was interested in such a story, nor, for that matter, was any newspaper in New Orleans, Baton Rouge, or Shreveport.
Only a right-wing rag (the periodical of the racist White Citizens’ Council of America) had an interest in it, but the story was never checked out by anyone and it did not wend its way, as virtually all small but important stories eventually do, into the national media.
So we would expect Davy to trumpet this very important discovery of his by giving his readers the date the article was published in the Councilor (the fact that Davy didn’t know how to spell the paper’s name—it had one /, not two—is some evidence he never saw the paper), the page it was on, and obviously at least some quote from the article.
Another reason why I’m not going to look for that back issue of the Councilor is that the Councilor didn’t start publishing until 1965, so there couldn’t possibly have been an article in it not long after the assassination, as Davy suggests.
If there ever was such an article, Rarick had to have spoken to the Councilor well over a year after the assassination, again making it a ridiculously long time to wait before telling any member of the media of Oswald’s presence in Clinton in 1963.
The likelihood that Oswald, Ferrie, and Shaw were in Clinton during the incident in question is less than remote.
As we know, no credible evidence has ever surfaced connecting these three acting together under any circumstances.
Also, according to the assassination theory propounded by Garrison, not only Shaw and Ferrie but also Oswald were right wingers associated with United States intelligence.
If it started in 1965, 1978 would be its fourteenth year of publication.
But since there was no claim by any of the Clinton witnesses that the three men they identified at the trial as Oswald, Ferrie, and Shaw engaged in any mischief or effort to derail the registration effort, even that nonexistent argument fails.
The conspiracy theorists respond that Oswald was seeking a job at the East Louisiana State Hospital located between Jackson and Clinton, and was advised it would be good if he first registered to vote.
So we know that Oswald was totally immersed in national Coincidentally, this is the very same mental hospital that conspiracy icon Rose Cherami was taken to in the early morning hours of November 21, 1963, after she was struck by a car while hitchhiking near Eunice, Louisiana, about eighty-five miles southwest of Clinton.
Although the receptionist at the hospital, Bobbie Dedon, testified at the Shaw trial that she had directed Oswald back to the personnel office, and a clerk in personnel, Maxine Kemp, testified at the Shaw trial that she had seen an application in the files with the name “Oswald, Harvey” on it , Aline Woodside, who at the time was the head of the hospital’s personnel department, told author Patricia Lambert in 1993 that she and others, pursuant to a request by Garrison’s office, had conducted an exhaustive search for Oswald’s job application and found no such application on file.
She told Lambert that no one in personnel at the hospital remembered seeing Oswald, giving him an application to complete, or interviewing him.
Being unable to corroborate their story with any kind of physical or documentary evidence was a hallmark of the Clinton witnesses.
Per Anne Dischler’s notes, Henry Palmer told Dischler and Francis Fruge that Oswald actually registered to vote (Palmer testified before the HSCA that he did not permit Oswald to register to vote because Oswald had no proof he lived in the area) and signed the register.
But when Dischler and Fruge examined the register, the signature that Palmer told them was Oswald’s had been erased and another name written over it.
When Dischler and Fruge returned the next day to get a copy of the page, Palmer told them the page was “missing,” and had no idea who could have or would have erased Oswald’s name or taken the page.
Therefore, his allegedly going to the little hamlets of Clinton and Jackson, Louisiana, in late August or early September 1963, to work in a hospital and register to vote is totally incompatible with what we know was going on in his life around this time, and hence, unworthy of serious consideration.
There were other post-trial prosecutions of leading Shaw trial participants.
In addition to the two unsuccessful federal prosecutions of Garrison in 1971 for bribery, and in 1974 for income tax invasion , in December of 1969 New Orleans police arrested Judge Edward Haggerty, the presiding judge at the Shaw trial, during a raid on a hotel stag party to which Haggerty had brought three women and stag movies.
Garrison overcharged Haggerty with solicitation of prostitution, public obscenity, and resisting arrest, but Haggerty was acquitted on all charges in February of 1970.
In August of 1970, Perry Russo and another man were arrested for burglarizing a New Orleans residence, stealing property valued at eight thousand dollars, and being in possession of a stolen safe-deposit key, but Garrison’s office declined to prosecute on the burglary and theft charges.
Rose Cherami gave various ages during her life, so there is no way of knowing, absent her birth certificate, how old she really was.
Her Texas death certificate lists her date of birth as October 13, 1923, which would mean she was forty-one at the time of her death on September 14, 1965.
The HSCA, in saying Cherami was “approximately 34 years old in 1963” , and hence thirty-six when she died, was probably incorrect in that her first arrest, for vagrancy, in San Antonio, for which she was fined $3.50, was in February of 1941.
If she was thirty-four in 1963, she would have been eleven or twelve years old at the time.
Though possible, it is improbable that she would have been arrested and fined for the crime of vagrancy at that age.
Victor Weiss’s statement over the telephone to HSCA staff member Jonathan Blackmer on July 5, 1978, is that Weiss had no contact with Cherami before the assassination.
Though Weiss did not say that Bowers said Cherami had told him this (i.e., theoretically, Bowers could have heard about Cherami’s alleged statement from some third party), obviously there is a chance Cherami had told Bowers this.
In any event, Bowers was a logical person to interview, and at the bottom of Blackmer’s report of his telephone interview of Weiss in the “Recommended Follow-up” section, he wrote, “Contact Dr.
Magruder, wrote to New Orleans DA Jim Garrison (the date of the letter is unknown but it is most likely, based on a DA memo Magruder’s letter generated dated February 23, 1967, either the previous day or earlier in February) that during a “bull session” at Magruder’s home after a hunting trip with Weiss over the Christmas holiday season in 1963, Weiss told him that Cherami told him, before the assassination, that Kennedy was going to be killed.
But Garrison detective Frank Meloche interviewed Weiss (Meloche doesn’t give the date he interviewed Weiss, but suggests it was on or about February 25, 1967) and wrote that Weiss told him he didn’t recall whether Cherami’s story about Kennedy about to be killed “was told to him before or after the assassination,” the implication being that someone other than Cherami told him this.
Bowers, and the likelihood is that Magruder simply confused the details or chronology of what Weiss had told him several years earlier.
This is particularly likely since Weiss said he did question Cherami about her statement, and the indication is that she repeated it to him.
But Fruge never indicated how this was verified or by whom, and he never mentioned this information in his testimony before the HSCA, which he would have been expected to do.
Walt Brown writes in his publication, JFK/Deep Politics Quarterly, that “not a single scrap of paper has yet been found to verify Fruge’s claim that Cherami’s alleged employment with Ruby had been somehow verified.
Francis Fruge, from 1965 through 1967, was put “on loan” from his job with the Louisiana State Police to Jim Garrison’s office in the latter’s investigation of Clay Shaw for allegedly conspiring to murder Kennedy.
Fruge told the HSCA that while working for Garrison, he went back to the Silver Slipper and interviewed the proprietor of the house of prostitution, one Mac Manual.
Fruge said that Manual remembered the incident at his place involving Rose Cherami.
There is no indication in Fruge’s testimony that Manual knew the identity of these two men.
The memo said that “the FRD was created in May 1960 with the CIA’s assistance, guidance, and financial support.
Arcacha, along with Banister and several New Orleans business and political figures, founded the short-lived Friends of Democratic Cuba in New Orleans in January of 1961.
The group’s purpose was to collect money to aid Cuban exiles in their fight against Castro, but it folded after only one month.
However, what does mean something is that in the various references to Arcacha in assassination literature, he is invariably referred to as a very involved political activist, not the type who would be routinely driving from Miami to Louisiana as a professional pimp for prostitutes.
Whenever Arcacha, married and with five children, is mentioned in a context other than his anti-Castro activities, it’s as a businessman, such as in public relations and the tourist business.
It is worth noting that in a nuanced way, the HSCA suggested it may not have believed this particular part of Fruge’s testimony.
Claims is just not the word one uses when one has confidence in an allegation.
On March 7,1967, a time when Garrison was seeking to have Arcacha come to New Orleans to help in his investigation and Arcacha feared that if he went back Garrison might somehow try to improperly implicate him in the assassination, Arcadia’s Dallas lawyer, Frank Hernandez, employed a certified Texas polygrapher to test him.
In answers to questions, Arcacha said that he had never met Lee Harvey Oswald, that he did know David Ferrie and Guy Banister, though he didn’t know the latter’s first name, and that he had met Clay Shaw once in the coffee shop of the New Orleans International Trade Mart, at which time he sought Shaw’s support for his idea of a Crusade to Free Cuba, but Shaw never expressed any interest in the idea.
Arcacha said he never discussed killing Kennedy with anyone and had no prior knowledge of the assassination.
The polygrapher said Arcacha answered all of his questions truthfully, and was also a suitable polygraph subject.
Although the HSCA reported prior instances where the FBI found tips by Rose Cherami to be “erroneous in all respects,” she did give one tip that was verified.
The HSCA said that Cherami told the FBI “she had information about a heroin deal operating from a New Orleans ship.
Although, if true, this would probably constitute an implied effort to influence her, she advised that at no time did any federal agent or other law enforcement officer expressly attempt to tell her what she should say in regard to the number of shots fired or to force any other opinions on her.
Robertson and Thomas T Trettis Jr. on March 13,1964,2) In her testimony before the Warren Commission eleven days later , she said the federal agent she spoke to on the afternoon of the assassination was a Secret Service agent, and when she told him she heard “from four to six shots anyway,” he responded, “Mrs.
As to the fact that prior to March 13, 1964, she never suggested to anyone whom we know of that anyone tried to influence what she said she heard, the previous month Hill was interviewed by Mark Lane, and there’s a hint in Hill’s testimony that Lane tried to implant the whole notion of pressure and influence in her mind, “repeatedly” asking her if she had been “held” against her will.
Apart from the fact that she is incoherent on this matter, it makes no sense that anyone would have told Hill this.
Louie Witt’s testimony before the HSCA in 1978 as to his position at the time of the shots not only is incorrect, but makes no sense at all, undoubtedly the result of a failure of memory after fifteen years.
DeLoach’s memo of the conversation says that “I stated we had attempted to ascertain the identity of an individual by the name of Clay Bertrand, but to no avail.
An FBI report of February 25, 1967, shows that neither was furnishing firsthand information.
The second informant would have been reliable if he had been the source of the information, but he was not.
The same FBI report reads, “Aaron Kohn, managing director, Metro876 ENDNOTES politan Crime Commission, advised on February 24 he had received information that Clay Bertrand and Clay Shaw was one and the same.
But either these people never, in fact, told Garrison and his staff this, or it was very obvious to Garrison and his people that not only were the witnesses lying, but they could easily be exposed as liars and absent any credibility on cross-examination.
And if the witness denied, under oath, that he had told Garrison this, we know what Garrison would have done— prosecuted him for perjury.
But the fact remains that Garrison did not call one single witness to the stand at Shaw’s trial (other than the completely discredited Perry Russo) to testify that he or she knew Shaw as Bertrand or had been introduced to Clay Shaw as Clay Bertrand.
Garrison did, however, call a witness who, although her story wasn’t too believable, at least did not appear to be some nut like most of his other witnesses.
Jesse Parker was a nicely dressed, respectable, middle-aged woman who was a former hostess in the Eastern Airlines YIP lounge at Moisant Airport, New Orleans’s international airport.
She testified that on December 14, 1966, two men (one of whom she identified as Shaw) entered the lounge.
But before they did, she said, Shaw signed the name “Clay Bertrand” in the guest book.
She said she remembered Shaw “because I admired his pretty gray hair” and because he was so tall.
Apart from the fact that it would be unlikely that Shaw, if he were a part of a plot to kill Kennedy in 1963, would thereafter continue to use the same alias he had used when he conspired to murder the president, there are other problems with Parker’s story.
First, very conveniently the signature “Clay Bertrand” in the guest book is the last one on the page, meaning it could have been easily added at any time after the day in question t Second, why would Shaw, who apparently, per Mrs.
Parker, did not For example, a homosexual prostitute, William Morris, while behind bars in Texas in 1967, told DA investigator William Boxley that in June of 1958 he was introduced to Clay Shaw as Clay Bertrand at the Masquerade Bar, a homosexual hangout on St.
After a few drinks, he said, they went to a nearby apartment for paid sex.
But Morris went on to tell Boxley that one night in 1960 in New Orleans, Clay Shaw entered Morris’s apartment by mistake and he was with Jack Ruby.
His testimony could not be conclusive, but he said he was fairly sure his signature was the last on the page when he signed the book, and that he did not see Clay Shaw, whom he had known for over ten years, in the room when he was there.
Further, though Parker admitted knowing from the media that a big issue was whether Shaw was Bertrand, she never contacted the authorities.
Of course, the flip side of this is that she was not, like many of Garrison’s other witnesses, a publicity-seeking character, one who was more likely to have made up her story.
Since there’s absolutely nothing about Garrison’s prosecution of Shaw that can be trusted, this raises a question.
At that point, prosecutor James Alcock sought to introduce Parker’s supposedly truthful lie detector test results into evidence , but since the results of lie detector tests are legally inadmissible, the court did not permit the results to be received.
With large photographic blow-ups of the guest book signature as well as Shaw’s handwriting and signatures from a post office receipt and several letters Shaw had written in 1966, he pointed out in detail to the jury the many differences in style, size, and proportion, letter by letter, between the known writings and signatures of Shaw and the “Clay Bertrand” signature in the guest book.
McCarthy, in a wide-brimmed hat, “made a slow walking-from-the-hip Mae Westian entrance down the center aisle” to the witness stand.
When asked if it had been at a formal school, she replied it had not, that her teacher happened to have his office next to her law office, adding that the man had written “three books on the subject” of handwriting.
Testifying she had just been brought on the case “yesterday,” and referring to the defendant as “Mr Clay,” she said she had formed the opinion that it was “highly probable” that Shaw had signed the guest book.
When asked, on cross-examination, what equipment she had used ENDNOTES in reaching her conclusion, unbelievably, she responded, “I will show you,” whereupon she dug down into her purse and removed a pair of binoculars.
Milton Brener, a former New Orleans assistant district attorney who closely monitored the Garrison trial, knows the answer.
In his book on the case he writes that there was “another expert who examined the guest register, though he was not called to testify.
Gilbert Fortier, one of the best-known examiners of questioned documents in this part of the country , had examined the book and known specimens of Shaw’s handwriting at Garrison’s request.
After examining the questioned guest book, Fortier conferred with Garrison.
To repeat, the fact that Garrison, desperate to prove all of these points, never called any of them to the stand is conclusive proof their credibility was so extremely bad that even Garrison, who ended up calling to the stand one nightmare witness for the prosecution after another, couldn’t accept them.
June Rolfe told Garrison’s office in March of 1962 that “in the early 60s,” she “saw Clay Shaw in a light-colored Thunderbird with the top down in the French Quarter.
On October 10, 1967, he told the DA’s office that in 1960 (when he was seventeen), David Ferrie introduced him to Clay Shaw at a bar in the French Quarter.
Then, “in late ’61 or early ’62,” Ferrie, who Kimble never indicated was anything more than a casual acquaintance, asked him to accompany him and Shaw on a plane flight to Canada to pick someone up.
With Ferrie piloting and Shaw “in the back of the airplane reading books and sleeping,” they stopped, en route, in Nashville, Louisville, and Toronto before arriving at their destination in Montreal.
Kimble didn’t specifically say whom they picked up in Montreal, but the implication was that it was a Mexican or Cuban who appeared with Shaw the next day for the return flight.
Kimble also said he heard “people introduce Clay Shaw as Clay Bertrand,” though he never explained what his association with Shaw or Ferrie was.
According to Kimble, he had worked for the FBI and CIA in the past and had been paid by check or cash.
But the fact that Garrison didn’t do so did not stop a classic conspiracy theorist like William Davy, a big supporter of Garrison’s, from repeating Kimble’s story to his readers as if it were completely factual.
In a September 12,1977, memorandum to HSCA staff members Jonathan Blackmer, Cliff Fenton, and Gaeton Fonzi, Garrison set forth several other such witnesses, none of whom had been good enough for him to call to the stand nine years earlier.
One witness was Edward Julius Girnus, an inmate at the federal penitentiary in Atlanta, who told a member of Garrison’s staff that in the summer of 1963 he was at a party at Clay Shaw’s home in Hammond, Louisiana, and Lee Harvey Oswald was at the party.
Earlier, Shaw had introduced Girnus to Oswald in New Orleans as someone who was interested in buying guns.
They then proceeded to Ferrie’s apartment, where Ferrie and Shaw told him that Shaw would pay him $10,000 up front and $15,000 later to kill a man who was going to be a witness against Shaw on a case that could send him to the penitentiary.
Whalen wanted no part of the deal but pretended to be interested and Shaw gave him $300 in spending money.
The next night they met at Shaw’s apartment and Ferrie boasted that he had set up the assassination of President Kennedy and told Whalen of a meeting that he, Shaw, Oswald, and Ruby had had in Baton Rouge before the assassination.
In a telephone conversation with Assistant DA James Alcock, one David Logan said he met David Ferrie at a party in the French Quarter in 1961, and Clay Shaw, whom he already knew, was at the party.
He said Shaw was sadomasochistic, and that during a sexual encounter with Shaw after dinner at Shaw’s home, Shaw whipped him but he declined to whip Shaw when the latter asked him to.
He said Shaw “wasn’t discreet at all” about his sexuality, Shaw being a “regular patron” at a place located at the corner of Toulouse and Bourbon in the Quarter where a woman ran a male and female prostitution business.
Kirby J Hensley of North Carolina, a man, Broshears said, who could neither read nor write.
Louis, Illinois, in 1964, and serving six months in prison, he found work in a carnival for a short time, and eventually, to “escape my problems,” he said, went down yonder to New Orleans in 1965.
Thirty years old and almost penniless, he holed up in a hotel near the Continental Trailways bus depot that was so cheap it had no name, and shortly thereafter met David Ferrie at a homosexual bar in the Quarter.
An admitted homosexual, Broshears says Ferrie spent several nights in the hotel with him, and gave him handouts to live on.
Broshears said that Ferrie, in time, and only when intoxicated, would confide to him about his part in the conspiracy to assassinate Kennedy.
Ferrie, per Broshears, told him that on the afternoon of the assassination, he, Ferrie, was waiting in Houston for “two of the assassins” to fly in from Dallas, and he was to fly them to South Africa, which did not have an extradition treaty with the United States, so they’d be safe there.
But instead, these particular two assassins, who had shot Kennedy from the grassy knoll, decided to fly on their own from Dallas straight to Mexico.
Ferrie told him that the main people behind the assassination were Shaw, Hale Boggs, the United States representative from Louisiana, Kent Courtney, a financier from New Orleans, and Richard C Lauchli, a businessman from Collingsville, Illinois.
Broshears told Jaffe that “at that time the whole thing didn’t really mean too much to me.
But what Ferrie told Broshears had enough effect on him to cause him to state on a local television show in Los Angeles on July 8, 1968, “David admitted being involved with the assassin.
It resulted in his being arrested for threatening the life of the president and being committed to the Gulfport Psychiatric Hospital, a federal mental institution, for close to half a year.
As with all the people referred to in this little section, Garrison didn’t dare call him to the witness stand because his credibility was so transparently nonexistent.
Clearly, Leemans is a person of self-acknowledged small credibility, and he destroyed what little credibility he had by alleging that after his NBC appearance, the DA’s office offered him $5,000 to appear with Garrison in the latter’s half-hour response on NBC to the NBC special and assert that what he said on the special about the $2,500 offer by the DA’s office was false.
After I had already concluded that Leemans was probably lying about the monetary offer from Garrison’s office, I received a copy of an affidavit of his from the National Archives that the staff had previously been unable to locate.
Two weeks before the Shaw trial started on January 21, 1969, Leemans, after having disappeared from the Shaw stage for a year and a half, reappeared, but apparently not for an encore.
Interestingly, Leemans didn’t say in his affidavit whether or not the story he told Garrison about Shaw and Oswald was true, only that Garrison hadn’t offered him a bribe to tell it.
Then there was Clyde Johnson, a part-time itinerant preacher nicknamed “Slidin’ Clyde” because he was such a slippery, disreputable character.
Like so many of these types who like to put their name on a ballot, Johnson had run for governor of Louisiana in 1963.
He called Garrison’s office on March 30, 1967, to report that during his campaign for governor, a man he identified as Clay Shaw decided to support him because Shaw appeared to be a Republican who hated Kennedy for, among other reasons, withdrawing air support for the Bay of Pigs invasion and his pro-civil rights stance, and he liked Johnson’s anti-Kennedy remarks.
While inside the hotel room, Clyde said Jack Ruby and Lee Harvey Oswald (introduced to him by Shaw as Jack and Leon) showed up.
Clyde thought they might be talking about him so he picked up his gun, until he heard the words “coming down from Washington” and “the pressure is on,” which convinced Clyde he was safe.
Before the evening was over, Clyde saw Shaw give Ruby and Oswald each a thick envelope and Shaw gave him an envelope with fifty $100 bills in it.
And Alcock, during jury selection in the Shaw trial, actually alluded to the Baton Rouge hotel fairy tale as one of six overt acts committed by Shaw and his co-conspirators to carry out the conspiracy.
The problem is that the trial had ended several months before Johnson was killed in July.
Other various and sundry kooks who offered their services to Garrison included the former mental patient who went by the name Julius Caesar.
Aynesworth also recalls one Annie Patterson, “an American woman who was a prisoner in a Mexican jail.
Later when I found her and called her—at the jail—she said that Clay Shaw had been there too.
And then there was the “slight little guy from Houston, a piano player,” who showed up in New Orleans with his story.
This was at a time when Aynesworth was still on good terms with Garrison, before he wrote his May 15, 1967, expose of Garrison’s fraudulence in Newsweek.
Aynesworth was present when the piano man “proceeded to relate how he knew that Ruby and Oswald were longtime gay lovers.
He went into great detail, naming names of clubs he said he had played at when Ruby and Oswald dropped by—clubs in Dallas, even in Houston.
On December 23,1966, the New Orleans DA’s office summoned Clay Shaw to its office.
Shaw said he wasn’t, that he had “almost” met Oswald the day in the summer of 1963 when Oswald was passing out leaflets in front of Shaw’s Trade Mart.
Per Shaw’s diary, he told Sciambra a “commotion” occurred during the incident attracting the police and TV crews, but by the time he, Shaw, went outside to see what was happening, Oswald was gone.
His diary also says Sciambra asked him if he had ever heard of a man named Clay Bertrand, or if he knew David Ferrie, and Shaw said no to both questions.
Sciambra’s memo says Shaw told him he had never talked to Lee Harvey Oswald and did not know him.
Dauenhauer, for permission to distribute leaflets in front of the Mart, that Dauenhauer had told him he shouldn’t do it but Oswald went ahead and did it anyway.
When asked, Shaw also told Sciambra he did not know Dean Andrews, and asked Sciambra what Andrews did for a living.
Shaw told Sciambra he was retired from the Trade Mart and was now primarily a playwright and was currently translating a play from Spanish to English for the La Petite Gallery Circle Theater in New Orleans.
And Garrison doesn’t allude to any of the strong and clear language he claims Andrews used, which he put in his book and Stone put in his movie.
In the memo to the HSCA, Garrison simply writes, “I arranged a lunch with Andrews at Broussard’s Restaurant.
Betty Engelbrecht of the New Orleans Retail Credit Bureau told FBI agent Richard Bucaro that a search of her records revealed no one by the name of Clay Bertrand or Bertram.
In his book, Garrison says it was he who, aware of Andrews’s bad health, had the case dismissed, but Garrison’s last day in office was March 30,1974, several months before the case was dismissed.
Nonetheless, Garrison deserves much of the credit for the dismissal in that he joined with Andrews’s attorney in the petition to the Louisiana Supreme Court to reverse the conviction and order a new trial.
He told the Shaw jury that three “swishes” came into his office to discuss their legal problem.
Ten to fifteen minutes later they left, and as they walked out the door, Oswald and a Mexican came in, and he didn’t know whether or not there was any connection between Oswald and the homosexuals.
Andrews refused to say why Oswald came to his office, claiming “attorneyclient privilege,” only saying that Oswald had “consulted” with him and paid him no fee.
Dean Andrews’s doctor at the Hotel Dien Hospital told the FBI that during the first four days of Andrews’s nine-day stay at the hospital , he was seriously ill and under heavy sedation.
The doctor said he did not believe Andrews was capable of using a telephone durENDNOTES ing that period.
Andrews [no relation] by SA Richard Bucaro on December 5,1963) But this cannot be true, at least for two of the four days, one of which was November 25, since Andrews telephoned the Secret Service that day.
Of the two days that Andrews said Bertrand called , he has always favored November 23, a Saturday.
And on November 25, he first reported the alleged Bertrand phone call when he telephoned Special Agent John Rice of the Secret Service from his hospital bed.
He claimed to Rice that Bertrand called him on Saturday between 6:30m. and 9:00m.
The only record of Andrews’s medication on November 23 was a statement from Thelma Massarini, the medical records librarian at Hotel Dien Hospital, that at 6:00m.
At 8:00m. he received sedation in the form of phenobarbital, and he complained of pains in the chest.
Although he stuck to his story of Oswald coming to his office, he said that the Bertrand phone call now seemed “like a dream” to him.
However, the only reason he felt the telephone call was not a dream is that he called Sam “Monk” Zelden, president of the New Orleans Criminal Bar Association, at the New Orleans Athletic Club and asked Zelden to assist him in his defense of Oswald for Kennedy’s murder.
That would have been the following day, November 24, a Sunday, since when he called Zelden, Zelden told him that it had just come over television that Oswald had been shot.
Zelden said he told Andrews he wasn’t interested but he’d think about it, and right around that time he heard Oswald had been shot and told Andrews this.
And Eva Springer told the FBI that Andrews had called her at around 4:00m. on November 23 and told her a man named Bertrand had employed him to represent Oswald in Dallas.
She advised that the name Clay Bertrand was unknown to her and that she searched the office files but could find nothing on Bertrand.
However, he did recall Andrews mentioning on various occasions that an individual named Oswald had been to the office, and when he saw Oswald on TV, Oswald looked “vaguely familiar” to him and Oswald “may” have visited Andrews’s office.
Davis by FBI SA Regis Kennedy on December 5, 1963) The FBI report doesn’t say whether Davis heard Andrews talking about Oswald before or after the assassination.
If before, it is unclear what reason Andrews would have for bringing Oswald up to Davis so often.
In a December 5 interview by the FBI, Andrews said the call allegedly received by him from “Bertrand” was a “figment of my imagination,” and that he has no memory of talking to Sergeant Davis or calling his secretary Eva Springer about his representation of Oswald, but did recall calling Zelden about it.
The transcript of Eugene Davis’s testimony at the Shaw trial is not at the National Archives , and no one seems to have a copy of it, assuming it still exists, so whether or not he expressly denied calling Andrews about a bill of sale on an automobile is not known.
The victim’s mother asked him to get a lawyer for her and he called Andrews and asked him to call the mother, which Andrews did.
Aloysius J Habighorst was the New Orleans police officer who fingerprinted Shaw on the evening of March 1, 1967, in the Bureau of Identification room at the New Orleans Police Department.
Habighorst testified at a hearing outside the presence of the jury on February 19, 1969, that the personal information he typed on the back side of Shaw’s fingerprint card (which he said included Shaw’s alleged alias, Clay Bertrand) was information he had ENDNOTES “obtained from Mr Shaw himself,” and he said Shaw then signed the card.
The DA’s position was that by Shaw signing the fingerprint card, he had confessed, in writing, to being Clay Bertrand.
But it was clear to the trial judge, Edward J Haggerty, that Habighorst was flatout lying, that Habighorst had gotten the name Clay Bertrand from Shaw’s arrest report, where Clay Bertrand was listed as an alias (based on information from Perry Russo), and that he had typed the name Clay Bertrand on Shaw’s fingerprint card after Shaw signed the card.
In the long, afternoon hearing, Habighorst’s credibility was thoroughly destroyed by several witnesses, including fellow members of the New Orleans Police Department.
Habighorst had testified that Shaw’s attorney, Edward Wegmann, was present in the Bureau of Identification room off and on during the booking process and was definitely present when Shaw signed the fingerprint card.
But not only did Wegmann testify he wasn’t in the room, but Captain Louis Curole, who was at the jail that night, supported Wegmann’s testimony and added that it was a general rule at the New Orleans Police Department that lawyers were not allowed in that room, and he had forbidden Wegmann to go there.
Even worse, Curole testified that the defendant’s arrest report, including aliases, is always sent to the Bureau of Identification room at the time of the booking process, so there would have been no reason or need for Habighorst to ask Shaw if he had an alias, although Habighorst testified he didn’t see the arrest report until after he had fingerprinted Shaw and Shaw had signed the fingerprint card.
Shaw himself testified at the hearing that he never told Habighorst his alias was Clay Bertrand, that Habighorst never even asked him if he had an alias, and that at the time he signed his name to the fingerprint card, the card was blank, which New Orleans police officer John Perkins told Haggerty was the normal situation.
Even more important, Sergeant Jonas Butzman, a New Orleans police officer who was assigned to be with Shaw throughout the entire booking and fingerprinting process, told Judge Haggerty that he was present when Habighorst fingerprinted Shaw and the name Clay Bertrand was never used.
Haggerty, who showed absolutely no favoritism to Shaw at the trial, refused to allow Habighorst to testify, and refused to allow Shaw’s fingerprint card, with the name Clay Bertrand typed in as an alias, into evidence.
In addition, he ruled that Captain Curole’s not allowing Shaw’s lawyer, Wegmann, to be present in the Bureau of Identification room during the alleged question by Habighorst violated Shaw’s constitutional rights under the United States Supreme Court decisions in Miranda Arizona and Escobedo Illinois.
Haggerty shot back, “The jury is not hearing it, that is the main thing.
Haggerty sustained the defense objection to the admissibility of the fingerprint card and Habighorst’s testimony with respect thereto.
Alcock’s immediate motion for a mistrial was denied, whereupon Alcock said he would appeal.
Haggerty said that was fine with him, though the DA’s office never did.
One person who attempted to quantify the extent of the involvement of Guy Banister and David Ferrie in the anti-Castro movement, at least as to David Ferrie, was Jim Garrison.
And he asked someone who should have known, Carlos Quiroga, an anti-Castro Cuban exile who was heavily involved in the movement and someone who was a close associate of Sergio Arcacha Smith’s, the head representative of the Cuban Revolutionary Council in New Orleans in the early 1960s.
Ferrie bought them with his own money because he wanted to be active, and yet he just made a flop of himself by saying, ‘Oh, I can get this and I can get that’ and he never did get it.
Because the Cubans here, on account of Ferrie, didn’t want to get along with Arcacha.
Besides, his own appearance was not appealing to the Cubans around here.
And we know that whatever his motivation, and whether he was sincere or not, on July 18,1961, Arcacha did write a personal letter to World War I air ace Captain Eddie Rickenbacker, chairman of the board of Eastern Airlines, requesting a “60 or 90 day leave with pay” for Ferrie so Ferrie could have more time to help the antiCastro campaign in New Orleans.
Arcacha told Rickenbacker that after “the effort of April 17 failed... the morale of the Cubans in exile and the Underground within Cuba fell to zero.
But Quiroga gave no indication that Banister was actively involved in the anti-Castro movement, though he conceded he never saw Banister in 1963, Arcacha having moved out of the Newman Building in 1962.
In the first place, Quiroga said, the “camp” was only in existence “for a short time.
He said a “famous” Cuban exile by the name of “Peneque” was the commandant of the camp, but “there were only about fourteen” Cubans being trained there.
When four of the fourteen left the camp because a Castro spy was discovered in their midst and they got afraid, Quiroga paid for Greyhound bus tickets for the four to Miami.
Everyone agrees that the cache was meant to be used in the anti-Castro effort, and that it wasn’t, but they don’t agree on what happened to the cache.
At first, Quiroga readily agreed to take a lie detector test, but when asked to do so a few days later, he declined.
The last page of Garrison’s interview with Quiroga says that his office intended to ask Quiroga at a later date to take the test, but it is not known if someone did, and if so, what Quiroga’s response was.
HSCA Report, P-141) 1397 ever knew each other: And god knows Garrison made every effort imaginable to connect Oswald, Ferrie, and/or Shaw to each other.
But actually, the page in Oswald’s address book, which had many entries written and hand printed by Oswald in Russian, did not have a “P.O.” before the number “19106,” but rather two Russian letters that were Ds in English—hence, DD 19106.
Garrison made much of his discovery, claiming to the media that he personally had deciphered the numbers and they were a code for Jack Ruby’s unlisted phone number in Dallas, WH 1-5601.
A Study in the Abuse of Power, explains: “First ... it was necessary to unscramble the numbers by selecting the nearest digit, then the farthest digit, then the next nearest digit, then the next farthest digit, and so on.
Garrison said that the only other two numbers on the dial that add up to 13 are 9 and 4, conveniently forgetting 8 and 5.
Clay Shaw’s defense team pointed out that with Garrison’s type of arbitrary juggling of numbers, any number could be converted into any other number.
The New Orleans court ruled in favor of Garrison, but the latter ended up electing not to present the evidence at Shaw’s trial.
The only inference that can be drawn is that as far-out as Garrison and his case were, even he came to realize that the five-digit numbers in Shaw’s notebook and Oswald’s address book were nothing but a coincidence, and didn’t go anywhere.
ENDNOTES It should be pointed out that there was, indeed, a person named Lee Odum in Dallas, who came to New Orleans in 1966 hoping to promote a bullfight there.
The manager of the hotel where he was staying, the Roosevelt, gave him Clay Shaw’s name as a good person to contact about his venture.
What Garrison, predictably, failed to say was that PE 8-1951 was the telephone number of a Fort Worth television station.
Although the subject photograph did not depict Ferrie in the company of Shaw, at least the conspiracists came up with a photograph.
Throughout the years several conspiracy theorists have alleged that they have seen photographs of Ferrie with Shaw, or Oswald, or the three of them together, or some other combination thereof, but not one of these photographs or films has ever surfaced.
I can assure you that if any conspiracy theorist had seen such a photograph or film, he would have seized it at gunpoint (I’m joking to illustrate my point) and run off with it, and it would soon appear in papers throughout the country and on the cover of all subsequent conspiracy books on the assassination.
No one, not even conspiracy authors, takes these allegations seriously, the proof being that no reference is made to them in virtually all the conspiracy books on the assassination.
Even the occasional book that does, mentions the allegation very briefly, and it’s obvious from the context that the author certainly is not relying on the allegation in any meaningful way to make his case of a conspiracy in the assassination.
In telephone conversations with Louis Ivon on May 31 and December 20, 2000, he told me that only he had the conversation with David Ferrie in the hotel room “a day or two” before Ferrie’s death.
Contrary to the movie JFK, he said neither Jim Garrison nor anyone else was present.
I went down the list of the statements attributed by Oliver Stone to Ferrie in the movie.
I taught him everything,” but Ivon said he didn’t know if Ferrie was talking about his teaching Oswald in their Civil Air Patrol unit or what.
In fact, in Garrison’s own book, On the Trail of the Assassins, he doesn’t quote Ivon as telling him that Ferrie had admitted knowing Oswald to him.
Of course, by 1967, the belief that Ruby was connected with organized crime—indeed, had “silenced Oswald for the mob”—was a part of the American vernacular.
In response to my questions, Ivon, who until 2000 continued to work as an investigator under then DA Harry Connick Sr., said he handwrote a page and a half memorandum of his hotel room conversation with Ferrie and turned it in to Garrison.
David Ferrie was also dragged into the assassination by one Richard Giesbrecht.
In a 1967 feature article in the Canadian magazine Maclean’s Reports, Giesbrecht, a Winnipeg salesman, claimed that around 2:45m. on February 13, 1964, he was seated at his table in the Horizon Room lounge at Winnipeg’s International Airport sipping a 7-Up and planning his sales pitch for his client, who hadn’t yet arrived.
While waiting, he overheard a very disturbing conversation taking place between two men, who gave the impression of being homosexual, at an adjacent table.
One of the men, he said, had “the oddest hair and eyebrows I’d ever seen.
Giesbrecht, a Mennonite, was only able to hear bits and pieces of the conversation over the airport’s piped-in music and the muffled shriek of engines coming through the nearby twin-panel windows, enough to conclude that the two men were discussing the Kennedy assassination in a way that seemed to implicate them.
From the conversation, Giesbrecht said he “got the impression that a man named ENDNOTES Isaacs was to have been the assassin or one of them, but that he had taken on Oswald to do the dirty work.
The man with the funny hair and eyebrows wondered how much information Oswald had passed on to his wife or, for that matter, anyone else.
When Giesbrecht noticed that he was being stared at by an “ugly” man with a “flat, fighter’s nose” sitting alone across a corner of the lounge, he got spooked, left his table, and sought out the Royal Canadian Mounted Police at the airport, but when he was walking up the steps to their office, he was confronted by the same man, facing him on the stairs and still staring at him.
Geisbrecht immediately turned around and went in search of a telephone.
Finding one in a bank of phones, he started to call the RCMP but when he saw the man had followed him and was only a yard away, he hung up the phone, lost his pursuer in the crowd, and eventually left the airport.
Remarkably, conspiracy author Dick Russell postulates that perhaps “Isaacs” was one Harold Isaacs, who in 1963 was a research associate at MIT’s Center for International Studies in Boston, which some claim was a CIA think tank , though Isaacs was an avowed Communist.
Russell points out that Oswald’s New Orleans’s cousin, Marilyn Murret, was a well-traveled woman who had taught school in many gradelevel subjects in several countries, including Japan and Singapore.
Since Isaacs, way back in 1931-1936, had worked as an editor for a radical leftist paper in China that supported the Communist uprising of Mao in China, maybe Murret’s and Isaacs’s paths had crossed.
Russell then tosses out the possibility that Isaacs met Oswald through Marilyn Murret.
If Isaacs was supposed to kill Kennedy, maybe it was his friend Marilyn Murret who suggested that he, Isaacs, could get her cousin Lee to do the job.
But Russell, trying to show Murret was with the CIA (and hence would not likely be conspiring with a Communist), managed to deliberately mislead his readers twice in one short sentence.
He said the “linked” language was in “the FBI’s statement ,” when actually the FBI was merely reporting what a news columnist told the FBI he “believed” but hadn’t yet confirmed.
And Russell blithely deleted the word “Communist” before the word “apparatus” in the FBI report.
But personally, I don’t have too much trouble with Professor Harold Isaacs being designated by Ferrie and his co-conspirators to kill Kennedy , though somehow the connection between Marilyn Murret, a CIA agent, working hand in hand on the plot to kill Kennedy with Isaacs, a radical leftist and supporter of Mao, gives me pause.
I’ve asked this question so many other times in this book—Is there any end to the silliness of the conspiracy theorists?—and the answer is always no.
With the help of two articles written about Giesbrecht and his allegation in the Winnipeg Free Press, Garrison’s office got in touch with him and expressed “extreme interest” in what he had to say.
Indeed, Garrison himself spoke personally to Giesbrecht and said he wanted Giesbrecht to testify at Clay Shaw’s upcoming trial, which Giesbrecht was more than willing to do.
The most effective debunker of looney allegations in the Kennedy assassination is, ironically, Jim Garrison.
This is so because we know he called to the witness stand at Shaw’s trial perhaps the worst group of witnesses ever called by any prosecutor in a criminal case.
So if a witness couldn’t make the cut even with Garrison, you know he had to be super goofy.
We know that’s the case with Giesbrecht because whatever Garrison’s team found out about his story (among many other things, perhaps that Ferrie was proved to be somewhere other than Winnipeg on February 13, 1964), Garrison did not call poor Richard to the stand at Shaw’s trial, obviously feeling he would hurt the prosecution’s case with his nonsense.
In fact, Garrison was so contemptuous of Giesbrecht’s story that he didn’t devote one single sentence or word to him in his book, On the Trail of the Assassins, and he is very rarely mentioned in other conspiracy books.
In his November 1967 interview in the Canadian magazine, Maclean’s Reports, he said that in the conversation between Ferrie and the other man at the airport, he didn’t see the second man’s face because the latter’s back was to him.
I don’t know what a psychiatrist would say about such a response, but one thing we can all agree on is that in the context of Giesbrecht’s story and his willingness to identify Ferrie and his not seeing the second man’s face, it was a very strange and inappropriate comment.
An agent out of the FBI’s Grand Forks, North Dakota, office, Merle E Nelson, did indeed interview him.
The interview took place on February 27,1964, and Nelson said that he at no time made the remarks Giesbrecht attributed to him.
He said he contributed no information to the interview and offered no opinion.
His participation in the interview consisted solely of asking direct, pertinent questions.
In the early-morning hours of February 23,1967, about twelve hours after David Feme’s body was found, the body of Eladio “Yite” del Valle, a Cuban congressman and Havana city councilman during the Batista years who later became a Florida-based militant anti-Castro exile, was found by Miami police in his Cadillac parked in a shopping center.
He had been shot through the heart and his head split open from a machete-like blow.
But no evidence has ever emerged that Ferrie and del Valle even knew each other.
At the time of del Valle’s murder, Garrison’s office was reportedly trying to locate him in its everwidening investigation.
A murder of a Ferrie associate that conspiracy theorists have unsuccessfully sought to connect with Ferrie and JFK’s assassination is that of New Orleans Dr.
Alton Ochsner’s New Orleans cancer clinic, and because of Ferrie’s own abiding interest in finding a cure for cancer, they became casual friends.
A fifty-one-year-old widow who lived alone, she was found murdered in her St.
Two follow-up homicide reports on October 29 and November 3, 1964, shed no further illumination on the case except that her body was nude and there was no sign of a struggle or forced entry into her apartment.
Two ex-marine brothers, Dan and A1 Campbell, did various investigative jobs for Guy Banister, though the time Dan did is not clear.
Dan Campbell told the New Orleans DA’s office that it was in the summer of 1963.
And he told author Anthony Summers that it was his brother A1 who brought him into the Banister operation.
In any event, Dan Campbell told the New Orleans DA’s office in 1969 that he did not know Clay Shaw or David Ferrie, and although Oswald’s face looked familiar to him, he couldn’t place it.
His brother A1 said that he worked for Banister “around 1958 and 1959, and again around 1962 and 1963,” but never told the New Orleans DA’s office or Summers that he had ever seen Oswald in Banister’s office.
No one but a conspiracy theorist like Anthony Summers could get excited enough about Dan Campbell’s statement to devote even one word to him.
He was also a part-time detective who claimed to be an ordained American Orthodox Catholic bishop.
He had been charged with murder in Houston in January of 1952 and was arrested in Dallas, but the charge was dismissed in August of 1957.
For instance, he told HSCA investigators in 1977 that the FBI had moved David Ferrie’s body from its original grave, and that John Dean, of Watergate fame, had framed New Orleans DA Jim Garrison.
Dyson, Administration Services Bureau, July 6, 1967) On January 5, 1966, he told an associate in his Catholic Orthodox church, that he, Ferrie, and Oswald used to live together.
When he heard this, he said he “flipped” and started putting two and two together.
Ferrie and he used to be friends, and Martin recalled that Ferrie had once told him he taught the CAP cadets how to shoot weapons.
He also recalled seeing two years earlier a foreign-made rifle in Ferrie’s home that was similar to the one Oswald had used.
He surmised that perhaps Ferrie had taught Oswald how to shoot the rifle he used to kill Kennedy, and that the rifle Oswald used could have even belonged to Ferrie.
He also knew that Ferrie was an amateur hypnotist and it was his idea that Ferrie may have hypnotized Oswald and planted a posthypnotic suggestion that he kill Kennedy.
Before talking to the FBI, Martin had reported what he knew about Ferrie, as well as why he believed Ferrie may have been involved in the assassination, to station WWL-TV in New Orleans and to a Major Trosclair of the New Orleans Police Department.
On Sunday, November 24, he called an assistant district attorney he knew, Herman Kohlman, and also gave him this information, adding that he believed Ferrie had been communicating with Oswald concerning the distribution of some unidentified literature.
But Garrison confirmed that Ferrie was seen in New Orleans after 12:30m. on November 22, and hence, Garrison himself conceded that Ferrie couldn’t have left for Texas until some time on November 22 after the shooting in Dealey Plaza, thereby foreclosing his being scheduled to be a getaway pilot.
Ferrie had been working as an investigator assisting attorney G Wray Gill in Gill’s defense of New Orleans Mafia chieftain Carlos Marcello on immigration charges that Marcello had obtained a fraudulent Guatemalan birth certificate, committed perjury when he denied being responsible for the bogus certificate, and illegally reentered the country after being deported.
The case went to trial in New Orleans, and coincidentally, Marcello was acquitted of the charges on the day of the assassination.
The FBI confirmed from telephone records that Ferrie made a call from Coffee’s home in New Orleans to a skating rink in Houston around 6:30m.
Per the registration card at Alamotel in Houston, the three men checked into room 19 at 4:30m. on November 23 and left Because of Martin’s allegation, two detectives from the New Orleans Police Department immediately went out to the New Orleans airport to check on Ferrie’s plane.
That night, they drove to NASA’s Manned Space Craft Center in Houston, and then drove a hundred miles to Galveston,t checking in to the Driftwood Motor Hotel at 11:00m. and leaving at around 10:00 the following morning, November 24, for the return drive to New Orleans.
The FBI’s check of the Alamotel registration records showed that the three men checked out between 8:00 and 9:00m. on November 24.
After spending the whole day in Houston on November 23, there is no evidence in any of the records that they spent another full day there before leaving for Galveston on the evening of the twenty-fourth.
Moreover, hotel registration card 38063 at the Driftwood Motel in Galveston shows Ferry and his two friends checked in at 11:00m. on November 23 and checking out around 10:00m. on November 24.
This would be much more consistent with the rest of the evidence, including Ferrie returning to New Orleans on November 25, and he and his attorney appearing at the New Orleans DA’s office at 4:30m.
Wall’s show in Dallas had suspended its performance out of respect for President Kennedy, so he had gone to Galveston in the late afternoon with his partner, Joe Peterson, to stay overnight at the home of Thomas McKenna and his wife.
Wall had lived with the McKennas when he first came to Dallas, and they had moved to Galveston.
Wall was the president of the Dallas office of the American Guild of Variety Artists , and he testified before the Warren Commission that Ruby called him to determine whether or not AGVA had met concerning a dispute Ruby was having with the union.
Moreover, we know whom Ruby called in Galveston, and it was not Ferrie.
But because Ruby placed a call to a city where Ferrie also happened to be, the conspiracy theorists predictably can’t help but feel this is a very suspicious circumstance, confirming what we already know—that Garrison’s “propinquity” theory is not indigenous to him.
When he finally reached Gill, Gill told him that Jack Martin had been the source of the allegation against him and that the police wanted to ask him “some questions” about the assassination.
When he arrived in New Orleans that Sunday, November 24, he noticed all the people and cars around his apartment and suspected the police were inside.
Ferrie hung up and spent the night at a friend’s home in Hammond, Louisiana.
The next day, November 25, Ferrie went to Gill’s office and then, accompanied by Gill, surrendered to the DA’s office (CD 75,292, FBI interview of David Ferrie on November 25, 1963; 10 HSCA 113), where he was interrogated by several members of Garrison’s staff, including First Assistant DA Frank Klein and Garrison himself.
Garrison found it suspicious that Ferrie drove to Texas on the day of the assassination to go ice-skating, particularly when they had to drive through inclement weather—a rain storm.
Within a matter of days, both the FBI and Secret Service concluded that there was no foundation for Martin’s allegation that Ferrie may have been involved in the assassination, and he was released.
Garrison accepted the FBI’s conclusion and his Though Garrison doesn’t say it in his book, there have been references through the years in the conspiracy literature and in Oliver Stone’s movie JFK that Ferrie told the DA’s office that he and his two friends went goose or duck hunting on the trip.
But in a September 13, 1994, interview with author Gus Russo, Beauboeuf said, “While we were on the road, I suggested we go deer hunting, not duck hunting, in Alexandria, Louisiana.
I had plenty of relatives in the area from whom we could borrow rifles if we needed them.
No such library card of Ferrie’s, we know, was found in Oswald’s possession at the time of his arrest or at any other time.
When the FBI interviewed Ferrie on November 25 and 27, 1963, he himself brought up Martin’s allegation and said that the allegation was untrue and that his library card—which along with other possessions of his was in the custody of the New Orleans Police Department following his arrest earlier on the day of November 25—“had never been out” of his possession.
We know that Ferrie left New Orleans for Houston with two of his friends around that very same time on the night of the assassination.
Garner’s story is indirectly supported (but not as to the date of its occurrence) by a statement made to the New Orleans DA’s office in 1968 by a neighbor of Oswald’s, Mrs.
She said that Ferrie had come by her house after the assassination inquiring if her husband (who apparently worked at the library) had any information regarding Oswald’s library card, which he did not.
The FBI report of its interview of Martin on November 25 carries no hint of recantation.
Martin merely said that the charges he had made against Ferrie were only “suspicions” on his part—that is, he had no evidence to support them.
He went no further; indeed, he suggested that the FBI should investigate Ferrie because he “could” be involved in Kennedy’s death.
Though there is no way of knowing, it’s possible this could have been sloppy writing by the Secret Service agents who wrote the report, being influenced in their characterization of what Martin told them by what the FBI had erroneously told these same agents Martin had told them.
Since it was all drivel, he could just as well have admitted doing so, but it’s not clear from the record that he did.
He has a scene where Martin and Banister , on the evening of the assassination, return to Banister’s office after a hard night of drinking.
Martin slurs back, “You may not like this, chief, but you’re beginning to act paranoid.
And a lotta strange people” (the clear implication, and the inference Stone obviously wants his audience to draw, being that Martin had seen Oswald, the presidential assassin, meeting in Banister’s office with his two co-conspirators, Ferrie and Shaw), whereupon Banister, cursing and in a state of rage, takes his revolver out and strikes Martin hard in the temple, knocking Martin down.
The only problem with this physical confrontation between Banister and Martin, which actually took place, is that it almost assuredly had nothing to do with Banister suspecting Martin of looking into his files for incriminating evidence on the Kennedy case or any other case.
Martin, after being pistol-whipped by Banister, called the New Orleans Police Department from his home around 8:45m. and reported being beaten.
Martin then went to Charity Hospital and received treatment,” then went home and called the police.
The police took Martin to the Baptist hospital, where his injuries were photographed.
But Jim Garrison, in On the Trail of the Assassins , claims that one day in his office in the autumn of 1966, which was three years later, Martin, apparently for the first time, told him that Banister had actually beaten him over Martin’s allegedly snooping into his files.
Since Garrison thought the incident was important enough to devote several pages in his book to, including the second page of his book, and since the New Orleans DA’s office reduced to memorandums the interviews they conducted with hundreds of witnesses, a great number of which were on matters much, much less significant than this, it is worth noting that no record has ever surfaced of this alleged interview of Martin by Garrison.
But even assuming, for the sake of argument, that Martin did tell Garrison this, we know that Martin has no credibility.
And between the two stories, one he gave to the police right after the incident , and one three years later, by which time Martin had told many contradictory stories about the assassination and had already been found by the authorities to be completely unreliable, it would easily seem that Martin’s story to the police on the evening of the incident would be the more reliable.
Garrison’s corroboration for Martin’s version of events was only partial and came from a totally discredited source , Banister’s secretary, Delphine Roberts.
In 1978, long after Garrison’s version of the event (as allegedly told to him by Martin) was out, Roberts, who knew Martin, told the HSCA that she saw the whole event, and that Martin was behind a railing where the files were kept.
About the time she told him not to go there, Banister walked in (it had been believed that Banister and Martin returned to the office together from the bar) and the two exchanged words , whereupon Martin punched Banister, and it was only then that Banister drew his gun and beat Martin.
After Martin left the office bleeding, she says, Banister looked up the Oswald file, which was in her desk because she hadn’t “mounted and indexed” it yet.
She told the HSCA that Banister told her many times that he believed there had been a conspiracy to murder Kennedy—as most Americans also believed at the time, and still do.
Lewis was a protege of Martin’s and actually lived with him for awhile, vigorously competing with his mentor as to who could be the most unreliable.
But not to Garrison, inasmuch as when he started his investigation the “Martin and Lewis” show was literally all he had.
The same month in 1966 that Martin told Garrison about seeing Ferrie and Oswald in Guy Banister’s office, Lewis told the New Orleans DA’s office that “in the late summer of 1963” he stopped by Mancuso’s restaurant, which was adjacent to Banister’s office, and saw Sergio Arcacha, “Carlos” , and a man Carlos introduced to him as “Lee Harvey” (whom Lewis identified from photos as being Lee Harvey Oswald), having coffee together.
When he failed a lie detector test, he said he made the story up because he thought it would please Garrison.
Bob Guzman, a New Orleans private eye who knew Lewis, described him as an “uneducated, completely incompetent, detective-happy” individual.
He said when Lewis got a twenty-five-dollar check from Banister for his part-time work, he immediately proceeded to buy a seventeen-dollar shoulder holster.
He then purchased a plastic pistol from Woolworth’s department store and started to flash the holster and plastic gun around town.
Only good things could be expected to flow from an investigation that had such a distinguished ancestry.
In 1968, Lewis and Martin capped their madcap intrusion into the Kennedy assassination when they authored two affidavits totaling forty-nine pages, which they furnished to Garrison and in which they suggest that British spy master Kim Philby, assisted by the influence he exercised over Robert Kennedy, and through international intrigue involving Cuba, Guatemala, and France, was behind the assassination.
The conversation among Garrison and his two assistants suggested to the audience that Oswald was a United States intelligence agent.
Oswald’s alleged connections with the CIA and FBI have been discussed earlier in the main text.
One is a brief summary of what ONI had heard from other sources as to the facts of the assassination, including misinformation such as Oswald’s rifle being found “on a back stairway” in the Depository Building.
The document also contains the curious statement that Oswald’s half brother Edward J Pic “is said to be wild and crazy,” a characterization I had not heard before.
ONI came up when the HSCA investigated an allegation by a former Marine navigator named Larry Huff that on December 14, 1963, he was on a flight with ten to twelve military investigators that left the Kaneohe Bay base in Hawaii for Tachikawa, Japan, the closest landing base to Atsugi, where Oswald was stationed.
Per Huff, the investigators went there to investigate Oswald’s stay at Atsugi.
He says he dropped the investigators off, returned to Hawaii, then went back to Japan in the latter part of December to bring the investigators back to Hawaii.
En route back, Huff claims that the investigators showed him their report, which was classified “Secret, for Marine Corps Eyes Only,” and the report’s conclusion was that Oswald was incapable of committing the assassination alone.
Although the HSCA was able to confirm the flights from Kaneohe Bay to Tachikawa, the committee could find no documentary support, or support of any other kind, for the mission Huff claimed.
Among those interviewed was Lieutenant General Carson A Roberts, who was in charge of the base at Kaneohe Bay at the time.
He said he knew of no military flights or investigations by military or civilian personnel connected with the assassination of President Kennedy that emanated from his base.
Also, Lieutenant Colonel Bill Brewer of the Intelligence Division of Marine Corps headquarters told the HSCA that his office conducted no such investigation, saying it wouldn’t have even had jurisdiction to do so.
And one Roy Elmquist of ONI told the HSCA that the only investigative request his office received that had any bearing on the assassination concerned the death of Martin Schrand, who served at the Cubi Point Naval Air Station in the Philippines at the same time Oswald had in 1958.
Huff’s story sounds fictitious on several grounds, the main one being that there Today the Marine Corps is a branch of the United States military, not the United States Navy, although it still falls under the United States Department of the Navy.
If such a mission had taken place, all types of documents would have been generated, and they were not.
His wife, not Huff, contacted the HSCA about his story, which he then reiterated.
Also, George Moffitt, a military friend of Huff’s at El Toro Marine Base, said Huff, whom he liked, had a mental problem in the past.
Finally, the report’s conclusion from talking to people at Atsugi that Oswald was “incapable” of committing the assassination alone sounds ludicrous on its face, not being the type of conclusion that any responsible investigative team would reach.
But other than the thoroughly discredited Jack Martin, the only person who put Oswald in Banister’s office for the HSCA was Banister’s bantam secretary and purported mistress, Delphine Roberts, someone so flaky that the defense at the London trial didn’t dare put her on the stand, though she was eager to testify.
In a February 7,1986, telephone interview with a staff researcher for London Weekend Television, she said that in 1960 she tried to have a flagpole erected in a square in New Orleans, and none other than Fidel Castro came up to her booth where she was soliciting support.
In a July 6, 1978, interview with the HSCA she said that Castro and his number-one man, Che Guevara, walked by the booth in early 1961 or 1962.
But there is no known record of Castro coming to the United States after his visit here in April of 1959.
The racist and staunchly antisegregationist Delphine, who was a member of the white supremacy southern group White Citizens’ Council, believed that Franklin Roosevelt’s wife, Eleanor, was a Negro, and the two of them had gotten the United States into the United Nations (not even in existence at the time of the Roosevelts), an organization whose charter was based on the Communist manifesto.
But it wasn’t just because Delphine was daffy that the HSCA concluded it could not rely, without corroboration, on her word about Oswald being in Banister’s office.
But when Buras reinterviewed her the following month, on August 27, 1978, she told him that she had interviewed Oswald for a position as an investigator for Banister, that on a later occasion Banister introduced her to Oswald and his wife, Marina, and that Oswald came to the office “several” times and went right into Banister’s office.
And way back in 1967, when Garrison was desperately trying to connect Oswald with Ferrie and Shaw, and the three of them with Guy Banister’s office, Roberts, in a long statement to the DA’s office, followed by questions from Louis Ivon, spoke of seeing all types of people in Banister’s office, including David Ferrie, but said nothing of seeing Oswald and Shaw there.
One of those employees, Joseph Newbrough Jr., worked with Banister as a private investigator from 1958 until Banister’s death in 1964, almost the entire period of time that Banister had his detective agency, and he told the HSCA that he had never seen Oswald except in the media.
And Jack Mancuso, owner of Mancuso’s Coffee Shop on the ground floor of the Newman Building, said that Banister, Ferrie, and Jack Martin were “steady” customers, but could not recall ever seeing Oswald in the restaurant.
Nitschke said he never saw Oswald in Banister’s office, only in the media.
Higgenbotham told a DA investigator during a series of interviews on April 12,16, and 17,1968, that one time he was kidding Banister about sharing a building with people passing out leaflets on the street, and Banister said, “Cool it.
Further, Higgenbotham worked for Banister in 1960-1961, and Oswald wasn’t even in New Orleans during this period, though Higgenbotham continued to have some social contact with Banister after that.
The information Higgenbotham furnished the DA’s office, possibly because he was facing a charge of marijuana possession, was further suspect.
For instance, he said a fellow gay , Eddie Porter, told him that Oswald was a “hustler” on Royal Street.
Stone has said that in addition to Perry Russo, O’Keefe was a composite of two other men, each of whom was a homosexual hustler—David Logan and Reverend Raymond Broshears.
We all know that when we expect more of someone, we become more disappointed when that person fails.
That is how I feel about Joan Mellen and her 2005 book about Jim Garrison and the Clay Shaw case, A Farewell to Justice.
Since I already knew that Clay Shaw had as much to do with the Kennedy assassination as the actor Clark Gable did, I also already knew that any new book saying he did, and Jim Garrison was right, had to be, by definition, the equivalent of a press release from the Flat Earth Society.
All the completely discredited witnesses, even mental cases, who had made bizarre allegations years ago in the Shaw case, even those who had been rejected by Garrison himself 'and not called to the witness stand (e.g., Richard Nagell, Fred Leemans, June and Richard Rolfe, Jules Kimble, the Reverend Clyde Johnson, Jack Martin, Richard Giesbrecht, and many more), were actually, per Mellen, telling the truth.
In other words, the culturally genteel English professor who doesn’t have one day, one hour of experience in law enforcement was able to look back, over thirty years later, and, in effect, tell Garrison and his legal staff that she knew more about the case than they, and she was able to determine the credibility of these people better than they.
She doesn’t expressly say this, but this is precisely her point, if we’re to believe the essential theme of her book.
In this same regard, she also clearly and deliberately misleads her readers.
What Mellen did throughout her book is take the stories of all the wackos in the Shaw case, embrace and embellish them, and present them all over again, virtually never presenting any of the evidence previously gathered by the official record and a considerable number of other writers and authors demonstrating beyond all reasonable doubt that these people had no credibility.
There have been several pro-Garrison books before hers, every one of them lacking in credibility, but hers is the very worst.
Even William Davy’s Let Justice Be Done is not as bad as Mellen’s book, and that’s saying something.
Mellen doesn’t tell her readers, of course, why Garrison would have never dreamt of calling Martin to the witness stand.
As noted in the main text, Lynn Loisel, one of Garrison’s chief investigators (who didn’t know Martin as well, apparently, as Ms.
Phew . . . that sack of roaches . . . believe you me, anything that he said, 99 percent of it was checked out to be false, you know, madeFor example, Vernon Bundy had a record, but Garrison believed his story and Bundy became one of Garrison’s star witnesses at the trial.
His second reason or excuse was even more absurd, saying that the rules of evidence in our American court system restricted what evidence he could present , but he did not elaborate on what he meant to the Times.
Even poor Rose Cherami comes across as a completely truthful witness, and Mellen’s readers would never know that Cherami changed her story every time she told it.
Dean Andrews himself admitted that his story was a lie, but if you read Mellen’s book, his whole story was the truth.
She actually claimed that Jack Martin wasn’t even who he said he was, or whom everyone, including Mellen’s hero, Jim Garrison, and Oliver Stone thought him to be.
He was really Joseph J Martin, a former CIA agent who worked for the CIA between November 1950 and June of 1958, when he retired on disability.
Indeed, Mellen says, Carl John Stanley, aka “Most Reverend Christopher Maria Stanley,” who knew Jack Martin, told the FBI that “John J Martin” was an alias of Jack Martin.
Mellen claims that the New Orleans Martin never actually retired from the CIA, as the CIA said that Joseph J Martin did, and was simply continuing to work for the agency in New Orleans on its plot to murder Kennedy.
Since it turned out that the real Joseph J Martin, after he left the CIA, became an alcoholic who was mentally disturbed , and even expressed a dislike for John F Kennedy, and since the height and weight of the two men were close enough , the CIA itself, though believing it was highly unlikely that its own Martin was the New Orleans Martin, decided to check it out.
The agency concluded that its former agent, Joseph J Martin , who lived in Washington, D.C. (his wife was a secretary for a Washington law firm), and the New Orleans Jack Martin (born in Phoenix in 1915) were different people.
Not identical,” a CIA employee, one B Soles, handwrote on the bottom of a CIA report on the matter.
IVlellen, with not an ounce of research to back her up, accepts without questioning that Oswald was innocent of killing Kennedy; that he, Ferrie, and Shaw were all CIA operatives; that they conspired to murder Kennedy; that Oswald wasn’t even a leftist, only posing as one; and that Oswald was working not only for the CIA and FBI, but also for United States Customs.
In her book of street gossip, rank rumors, and deception, Mellen also charges that the CIA and FBI joined together to subvert Garrison’s investigation and prosecution of Shaw, treating as criminal the CIA’s normal and proper effort to convince the media that Garrison’s charges that they were behind Kennedy’s murder were wrong, and as only an effort to prevent Garrison from proving that they, in fact, did have Kennedy murdered, something she accepts as a fact without preI know that the name Jack is a form of John, not a form of Joe, a different name.
But because Mellen was filching the identity of CIA agent Joseph Martin, she apparently thought John was close enough, particularly since the middle initial, J , that the Reverend Stanley gave for Jack Martin’s alias John Martin (Jack Martin’s real middle initial was S) was the same as Joseph’s.
She also claims that the CIA had nine CIA “plants” in Garrison’s office, or infiltrating his investigation, including William Gurvich, Bill Boxley, Jack Martin, and Thomas Bethell, but presents no credible evidence that any of the nine were in fact CIA operatives (one of them, Boxley, was a former CIA agent, the very reason why Garrison wanted him as an aide) and that the CIA had “planted” them to obstruct Garrison’s investigation.
She also alleges that the FBI installed a wiretap in Garrison’s office.
But Although there is no question that the CIA closely monitored the proceedings in New Orleans, including the trial, with two minor exceptions I am aware of , the agency did not, contrary to Mellen, help the defense team.
However, early on, although Shaw’s lawyers felt he was innocent, “they were confused by the smoke screen Garrison was raising” and wanted to talk to “someone in government who could steer them” to the true facts of the case.
An overture was made to the CIA on their behalf on September 18,1967, by Herbert “Jack” Miller, Walter Sheridan’s lawyer.
The CIA contacted its office of general counsel on September 18, 1967, saying, “We have been authoritatively advised that Donald P Norton has falsely claimed affiliation with CIA,” asking the general counsel’s office what to do with the request from the head of its New Orleans office.
What is known is that Garrison never called Norton to the stand at Shaw’s trial, proof that he believed that Norton’s tale was patently untrue.
The second exception, the most explicit and direct one I am aware of, involved one Alfred Moran, a member of the board of Shaw’s Trade Mart in New Orleans whose signature was reportedly on the same page of the guest book at the Eastern Airlines VIP lounge at New Orleans International Airport that contained the forged Clay Bertrand signature.
Hunter Leake, a CIA agent working out of the New Orleans office, spoke to Moran at a cocktail party at which Mellen says that Moran told Leake that Shaw was Bertrand.
On November 30, 1967, CIA General Counsel Lawrence Houston wrote to the head of the New Orleans office giving his approval to Leake’s request.
Houston wrote, “Since Moran has in the past always been most helpful and cooperative with the Agency [as we know Shaw had been in his reports to the CIA’s Domestic Contact Service], we believe in this case an exception might be made to the caveat on discussing the Clay Shaw case.
It makes no sense for Clay Shaw to use the name Clem Bertrand ... so we assume they were two different people.
Houston goes on to say that if Shaw and Bertrand were two different people, this fact could be furnished to Shaw’s lawyer, Irvin Dymond, without Leake or the CIA being involved.
It should be noted that although the CIA established a policy of not helping Shaw’s lawyers and getting involved in the case, and, except for some minor exceptions, for all intents and purposes adhered to that policy, the CIA’s New Orleans station did monitor everything that was happening and sent its reports to CIA headquarters.
Walter was also the source for Mellen’s assertion that the FBI had asked former FBI agent Raymond Beck to spy on Jim Garrison.
I got the sense in reading Mellen’s book that she was the counterpart of Gerald Posner.
Not in terms of credibility, since Posner’s credibility far exceeds Mellen’s.
But in the sense that Posner and his publisher tried to convince their readers that he had solved the mystery of the Kennedy assassination that the Warren Commission couldn’t, whereas Mellen, if we’re to believe the thrust of her book, solved the case that Jim Garrison was trying to prove—that Oswald conspired with Shaw and Ferrie to murder Kennedy.
In other words, both the Warren Commission and the FBI, and Garrison and his staff of investigators, were helpless in trying to prove their respective cases.
The Warren Commission had to wait for close to thirty years for Posner to come along and figure everything out for it, and Garrison had to wait for over thirty-five years, when the trail was so cold there was ice on it, for the Temple college professor to prove everything he couldn’t.
For instance, if Garrison and his staff, who lived in New Orleans, and were all members of law enforcement, couldn’t find anyone other than Perry Russo to put Oswald, Shaw, and Ferrie together, or any two of them together, no problem.
Mellen came up in 2002, over thirty years later, with a witness whose brother, a lawyer, told him that his client, a contractor, told him that he saw all three of them together at Shaw’s home.
I know it’s multiple hearsay, but back then a subpoena to the contractor would have eliminated all the hearsay.
Mellen also came up with a witness in 2001 who told her that he worked at a parakeet stand at the Old Pontchartrain Amusement Park, and one day Ferrie and Oswald came by the stand to throw a few nickels at the plates to win a parakeet, which they didn’t.
And Mellen found a witness who saw Shaw and Ferrie together in a lawyer’s office just days before the assassination.
In fact, she even found a witness who had a document with Ferrie’s and Shaw’s signatures on it.
Although, as we have seen, the CIA was very reluctant to get involved in the Garrison case, there is evidence that the United States Justice Department decided at one point to get involved in Shaw’s New Orleans trial.
When autopsy surgeon Pierre Finck testified that some army general was in charge of the autopsy (see discussion in main text of autopsy section), the Justice Department’s Carl Eardley immediately dispatched fellow autopsy surgeon Thornton Boswell to New Orleans (Dr.
He said he spent a part of the night at the United States attorney’s office reading the transcript of Finck’s testimony.
In his testimony before the ARRB, Boswell is clear about going to the United States attorney’s office but also says he “met somebody, some lawyer in another firm that night,” which could have been a reference to one of Shaw’s lawyers.
So Shaw and Ferrie, per Mellen throughout her book, were working and conspiring with the CIA in the CIA’s plot to murder Kennedy, but Ferrie has to borrow four hundred dollars to make a needed flight to Dallas before the assassination.
Garrison couldn’t come up with anyone other than Perry Russo to say that Clay Shaw was Clay Bertrand.
The committee couldn’t come up with any credible witnesses stating that Oswald knew Guy Banister , but Mellen found several witnesses.
Where Mellen can’t find some already well-known nut in the Garrison case to rely on or tell her what she wants to hear, she comes up with more obscure nuts, the most important of whom is a roustabout named Thomas Beckham.
Beckham had nothing to volunteer to the Warren Commission so his name doesn’t appear in its volumes.
And his name appears in virtually none of the books written on the Garrison-Shaw case, including Jim Garrison’s book.
Beckham wasn’t left out because no one knew of him, but because no one before the extraordinarily perceptive Joan Mellen wanted to diminish or contaminate whatever they published on the case with anything he had to say.
In 1977 and 1978 Beckham told the HSCA much of the same fabricated story he told Mellen when she caught up with him in 2002, and the committee predictably never published one word of it or even alluded to it.
Mellen says “Tommy” was a protege of Jack Martin , and at times, because of his good strong voice, picked up a dollar or two singing and yodeling, being a Bourbon Street barker, and calling out bus departures at the Greyhound bus depot.
He said a friend of his had “taught me, you know, how to read.” tBeckham says that David Ferrie asked him if he wanted to be an ordained priest in the Catholic Church and run a “Church” that was being set up called the United Catholic Mission Fathers (also known as the United Cuban Mission Forces), which was actually being used to solicit funds for the anti-Castro effort.
Beckham agreed and paid five dollars for his “ordination” papers, sent to him by someone in Toronto, Canada.
By Beckham’s own admission, he was “committed” to the Louisiana state mental institution in Mandeville “three times,” the Charity Hospital mental ward in New Orleans once, and the federal mental hospital in Springfield, Missouri, once.
But if Tommy couldn’t pass muster with the down-and-out alcoholic Martin, that didn’t mean the United States government felt the same way about him.
In other words, the CIA is thinking about murdering Mao and Khrushchev, and one of its top candidates to do so is Tommy.
He is also taught all types of things, like how not to leave a paper trail, how to walk without giving away who you are, and how to use guns.
Tommy didn’t tell the almost childishly gullible Joan Mellen what happened next.
Then Mellen writes that “this revelatory and never-before-seen document [only you, Joan, were privileged enough and important enough to see it] reveals how military intelligence, the Army, and the CIA, working in concert, had set up a scapegoat.
What I want to know is just how Beckham fit into the assassination of Kennedy.
According to Mellen, Beckham told her that in the summer of 1963 he had attended several meetings where assassinating Kennedy was discussed—at a place in Algiers, a suburb of New Orleans, and at Carlos Marcello’s Town and Country Motel in Jefferson Parish.
Even Jack Ruby showed up at some of the conspiracy-to-murder-Kennedy sessions, and there was always a representative of organized crime present.
Just before the assassination, Tommy says he was sent to lawyer G Wray Gill’s office.
He is told to fly to Dallas and deliver it to a man at the Executive Inn whom he will recognize as having met at the “United Catholic Mission Fathers” in New Orleans.
When Tommy, on the day of the assassination, tells a New Orleans member of the Ku Klux Klan, A Roswell Thompson, that Tommy’s friend, Oswald, “did it,” Thompson said, “No he didn’t.
I thought you said that “ United States military intelligence, the Army, and the CIA, working in concert,” were behind the assassination.
Getting back to Beckham’s story, what he told the HSCA in 1977-1978 and Mellen for her 2005 book isn’t what he told the Orleans Parish grand jury in 1968 when Garrison was preparing for his prosecution of Clay Shaw.
Indeed, though it is not crystal clear, the most reasonable inference is that Beckham was in Mississippi, not New Orleans, during the period just before the assassination when he was supposedly flying to Dallas for the conspirators.
And in the summer of 1963, if he was in New Orleans it was to visit his parents now and then, not to be a regular attendee of plots to murder Kennedy.
Instead, she merely tells her readers that Beckham lied before the grand jury about his education and whether or not he was living in New Orleans in 1963 because of his fear of retaliation if he told Garrison the truth, and the fear Garrison might prosecute him “for criminal conspiracy” to kill Kennedy.
At the grand jury, Beckham testified he was not in Dallas in 1963 (in which case he could not have been a courier for the conspirators as he later told the HSCA and Mellen he was), only being in Dallas once in his life, in 1966.
He also said he had only met David Ferrie once in his life, and had never met, at any time, Jack Ruby, Clay Shaw, or Lee Harvey Oswald.
According to the incredible Mellen, now Blakey and the HSCA are part of the cover-up.
Because of “his own complicity in Castro’s planned assassination” and “his acquaintance with the people” who murdered his brother.
In other words, he knew who murdered his brother, but because he was their acquaintance, and because of his being part of the plot to kill Castro (Mellen confuses Operation Mongoose, the effort to overthrow Castro, with the separate effort to kill him), he made an “active effort to sabotage Jim Garrison’s investigation and ... to assist the CIA in its coverup” of the assassination.
Of course, despite the blizzard of citations Mellen throws at those checking her work, she has none to support these wild charges.
According to you, he had just gotten $8,000—at least the equivalent of $25,000 today.
In any event, Tommy made ends meet, according to Mellen, by joining a carnival and riding a stripped-down motor bike inside a drum with the centrifugal force holding him up.
But hey, life’s a struggle, and Tommy was just trying to make his way in the world.
Mellen doesn’t tell her readers that even Jack Martin, who was, per Mellen, Beckham’s mentor and someone she claims was credible, thought that Beckham, the hero of her book, was of bad character and a liar.
And when the investigator checked with Jim Garrison, Garrison told him that Beckham had nothing of any value to tell his investigators during the Shaw case.
In 1992, author Gus Russo tracked Beckham down to where he was living in Louisville, Kentucky.
Russo said about his encounter with Beckham, “Beckham basically acknowledged to me being what most people would call a flimflam artist.
They were filled with bogus diplomas from every major university; he was selling them and cheap trinkets, like whoopee cushions, for a living.
He told me he not only recorded but wrote three Number One hits, which he named—‘From Jack to a King’ was one.
By the way, Mellen won’t be learning anything new from the foregoing Russo reference in this book.
In it, though he admitted he only attended school through the third grade, he acknowledged that he held himself out to others as being, though he said he was not, a licensed physician for the state of Maryland and as having a certificate in psychotherapy from a Palm Beach College.
He even advertised himself in a local newspaper as T Edward Beckham, DD, PhD, having received his PhD from an English university.
For good measure, he told the HSCA he was “an ordained priest of about four different Catholic denominations,” as well as having an “ordination” in the Episcopal and Baptist churches.
Even though Mellen had the same information about Beckham that the HSCA did, the same information that would cause any rational and well-intentioned person to disregard Beckham, Mellen decided to make him the centerpiece of her book.
I could give many examples, but Mellen’s book doesn’t deserve the space.
We’ve seen that Perry Russo’s credibility was destroyed (among many other ways) by the fact that in five interviews before he said under sodium pentothal that he was present when Oswald, Ferrie, and Shaw conspired to murder Kennedy, he never said a word about this, or even about seeing Oswald, Ferrie, and Shaw together, period.
Mellen has Shaw telling New Orleans police officer Aloysius Habighorst that his alias was Clay Bertrand, even though she had to know that a court hearing clearly established that Habighorst was lying when he said Shaw told him this.
Mellen has to know this is a lie, and the only document she cites, apparently to prove this allegation, refers to Banister and a QKENCHANT clearance, but has absolutely no reference to Clay Shaw.
Though it was clearly proved at Shaw’s trial that Shaw never signed the guest register in the Eastern Airlines lounge at Moisant Airport, Mellen ignored all the evidence that proved this and said he did.
Though she had to know this was not the truth, she tells her readers that Dallas DA Henry Wade believed that Oswald had been to Ruby’s Carousel Club, and Oswald used Jack Ruby as a personal reference for a job.
The allegation of the source on whom Mellen relies for the Ruby reference contains its own refutation.
Orvie Aucoin, a cameraman for Channel 12, WVUE-TV in New Orleans, told an FBI source that Garrison’s “ace in the hole” at the upcoming trial of Shaw for having conspired with Ferrie and Oswald to kill Kennedy was a “certified photostatic copy” of a job application filled out by Lee Harvey Oswald in his own handwriting during the spring or summer of 1963 for a position with a trucking company in New Orleans.
Mellen said Cherami yelled, “POW,” as the shots rang out over the television set.
And here, through the years, we’ve all been relying on the Zapruder film of the assassination, not knowing that there undoubtedly is a much clearer film of the shooting in some network archives, and with audio to boot.
But if the assassination was televised, Rose Cherami must have been the only person in the whole country who was watching a TV set at the time.
As set forth in the main text, when Garrison prosecuted Shaw for perjury after Shaw’s acquittal, Shaw sought an injunction in the federal courts to prohibit the prosecution, and secured the requested relief.
Judge Herbert Christenberry, in setting forth the basis for his concluding that Garrison was acting “in bad faith,” justifying the issuance of the injunction, was openly scornful of Garrison’s conduct.
One of the reasons for his finding bad faith, which took up only two pages in his twelve-page opinion (i.e., just one-sixth of what he wrote), was the fact of the private group of New Orleans businessmen who called themselves “Truth or Consequences” that had funded part of his investigation of Shaw.
Christenberry found no impropriety in the group’s contribution, but did infer that perhaps one reason for Garrison’s perjury prosecution of Shaw was that if he succeeded he would at least be giving the group something for its investment.
In fact, one of the members of the group testified at the hearing that he obviously expected results for the money cation Oswald listed three personal references, one of whom was Jack Ruby.
But Mellen doesn’t give her readers Aucoin’s full allegation, knowing that if she did, it would disprove what Mellen wanted her readers to believe.
But in Dischler’s February 10, 1999, letter to Lambert in which she had all the opportunity in the world to do so, she doesn’t write one single word of criticism about how Lambert handled the Clinton witnesses and story.
She did tell Lambert that she was “ashamed to be part of the book ‘False Witness’ ” and that she was “appalled” by the book.
But consistent with Mellen’s duplicity, Mellen doesn’t tell her readers that just before the “ashamed” and “appalled” language, Dischler, who was a minister at the time, writes, “The facts of Jim Garrison’s life were never mentioned to me by you.
But any reading of Christenberry’s decision clearly shows that the Truth or Consequences issue was very secondary and subordinate to the main reason for his issuance of the injunction.
The main reason, and the one he spent five-sixths of his opinion writing about, was that Garrison’s investigation of Shaw was “baseless” and therefore he “was not prosecuting Shaw in good faith,” referring, among other things, to the “publicity Garrison was obviously seeking” in the way Garrison handled Shaw’s arrest and the way Garrison cultivated the media on many occasions.
The perjury prosecution was a “continuing harassment” of Shaw without any justification.
Christenberry said that without “direct federal court intervention,” there was no reason to believe that it would not continue.
Throughout Christenberry’s opinion he reveals his contempt for Garrison’s conduct from the beginning of the investigation forward, using adjectives like “appalling,” “inexcusable,” and “outrageous,” at one point accusing Garrison of using drugs and hypnosis on Russo to “concoct” a case against Shaw.
But readers of Mellen’s book would get no sense at all of what I have just written.
In other words, Mellen strongly implies, the perjury charges were dismissed by Christenberry not on the merits, but on the technicality that the Truth or Consequences contributions were illegal.
Nowhere does Mellen mention Christenberry’s severe denunciation of Garrison’s conduct, nor its serving as the main basis of his issuing the injunction.
So Mellen deceived her readers into believing that Christenberry issued his injunction because of the impropriety or illegality of the Truth or Consequences contributions, which we’ve seen Christenberry did not say; deceived them into believing that it was the only reason why he dismissed the perjury charges, another lie; and deliberately deprived her readers of knowing the main reason why Christenberry issued his injunction.
Immediately after this, Christenberry proceeds to only discuss the “outrageous,” “inexcusable” and “appalling” way Garrison went after Shaw.
Indeed, if Mellen had read her own hero’s final summation in the case, she would have seen that even he never believed Shaw was guilty.
Instead, he only told them, as if they didn’t already know, that they were there to decide whether Shaw was guilty or not guilty.
If prosecutors believed in their case that little , there would be a lot more defendants out on the street.
About Mellen perhaps not reading Garrison’s summation to the jury, for anyone writing a book about the Shaw case, Shaw’s trial has to be the most important event of the whole saga.
She seems to have picked up what little she had on the trial from newspapers and other sources.
I wish I had the luxury of dismissing a terrible book like this by saying it’s beneath any commentary by me, but since I’m writing a book about the assassination, I can’t.
Despite its literary affectation of many citations—essentially worthless since they are only citations, for the most part, to silliness—I’ve treated Mellen’s book with about the same lack of respect as I treated the charges of Judyth Baker, but with much more bitterness.
The Kennedy assassination has already been polluted beyond all tolerable limits by nuts and quacks and phony stories.
Garrison, who was building his whole case on motive, then engaged in a disconnect.
Though Garrison had alluded to the military-industrial complex in this interview, he said the assassination was a “100% CIA” operation, whereas in Stone’s movie, though the CIA was complicit in the murder, the main group that made the decision to kill Kennedy, and decided how to implement it, was the military-industrial complex.
In fact, 1,000 American military personnel on duty in Vietnam were returned home by the end of December 1963.
But since Kennedy, the month before NS AM 263, had agreed to a slight increase in our military presence in South Vietnam, the troop strength at the end of December was reduced by around 800, not 1,000.
The 1,000-troop withdrawal was only important as a signal of intentions anyway.
The important question was whether the remaining 15,000 American troops in Vietnam would be coming home by the end of 1965.
But number one, this “planning” for programs is tethered to the provisions of paragraph 6, which, as indicated, were the same as the draft under Kennedy (“programs of military and economic assistance” to the Vietnamese government), but more importantly, paragraph 7 of the draft under Kennedy did not contain the “possible” language.
There are ambiguities lending themselves to different interpretations in paragraphs 6 and 7 of both the draft and the final version of 273.
Although the nature of our involvement, if any, in the coup of Diem remains unclear, one thing does not.
I should never have given my consent to it,” implying not direction or even complicity, but acquiescence.
Though LBJ was not known for parsing his words and we can probably assume he did not mean what he said about JFK murdering Diem literally, the remark is further support for the belief that the Kennedy administration was not as clean as it could have been in the events that almost inevitably led to Diem’s murder.
But there is no question but that President Kennedy and all of us who advised him bore a heavy responsibility for these happenings by having encouraged the perpetrators through the public display of our disapproval of Diem and his brother.
It has been argued that the so-called Gulf of Tonkin incident in August of 1964 militates against the contention that LBJ did not want to go to war in Vietnam, but this argument does not appear to have any merit.
Briefly, at 3:40m. on August 2, 1964, a United States destroyer, the USS Maddox, on reconnaissance patrol in the Gulf of Tonkin was fired on by three North Vietnamese torpedo boats, though none of the torpedoes struck the Maddox.
Aircraft from the nearby United States aircraft carrier Ticonderoga destroyed one of the torpedo boats and damaged the other two.
The Maddox and Ticonderoga were in international waters about 28 nautical miles off the North Vietnam coast conducting covert operations at the time.
This attack on the Maddox is not in dispute and North Vietnam never denied the attack, although in 1997 General Nguyen Dinh Uoc, the director of the Institute of Military History in Hanoi, said that the assault was instituted by a local North Vietnamese commander, not the North Vietnamese government.
However, beyond the actions of the aircraft from the Ticonderoga, the Johnson administration did nothing to retaliate.
So at least up to this point no one could possibly claim that the Gulf of Tonkin incident reflected any desire by LBJ to go to war.
Where the “LBJ wanted to go to war” proponents make their argument is with a second alleged attack, again by three torpedo boats, on the Maddox in the late morning of August 4, 1964.
One has to say “alleged” because such an attack was never confirmed to anyone’s complete satisfaction.
Freak weather effects and overeager sonarman may have accounted for many reports.
Sharp continued to investigate and at 5:23m. called Air Force Lieutenant General David A Burchinal of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and stated he had no doubt that a second attack on the Maddox had, indeed, taken place.
On LBJ’s authorization, at 10:43m., United States aircraft from the Ticonderoga and Constellation started flying sixty-four sorties against North Vietnamese patrol boat bases and a nearby oil complex supporting the boats.
It was the first United States bombing of North Vietnam in what was to become the Vietnam War.
It was estimated that twenty-five North Vietnamese patrol boats were damaged or destroyed and 90 percent of the oil complex was destroyed.
In other words, Congress gave President Johnson the authority to go to war in Vietnam if he so chose.
The historian, Robert J Hanyok, wrote in his report he had concluded that during this second incident, NSA officers misinterpreted NorthVietnamese intercepts in an apparently honest mistake that there had been an attack.
But after spending months studying documents in the NSA archives, he further concluded that midlevel agency officials at the NSA discovered the errors very shortly thereafter but covered them up and doctored documents so as to provide evidence of an actual attack.
Hanyok’s report also concluded that neither President Johnson and his advisers nor top NSA and Defense Department officials knew of the deception.
If Hanyok is correct, this inexcusable deception played a part in Congress ultimately signing the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, which authorized war with North Vietnam.
So the deception could not have been more serious, although, as indicated, no one disputes the first attack on the Maddox , which alone could have contributed substantially to the resolution.
In the report, Hanyok says the NSA’s intelligence officers “deliberately skewed” the evidence passed on to policy makers in LBJ’s administration to lead them to believe that NorthVietnamese ships had attacked American destroyers on August 4,1964.
Hanyok said that 90 percent of the NSA’s intercepts of North Vietnamese communications regarding the alleged August 4 attack were never passed on to policy makers.
The corollary argument, shorn of its political allegation, has also been made that the incident was provoked or staged to enable Johnson to get a congressional resolution authorizing war.
But William P Bundy, assistant secretary of state for Far Eastern affairs, told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on September 20, 1966, that he was in the process of drafting a similar resolution for the Johnson administration before the Gulf of Tonkin incident occurred, explaining this was routine and normal contingency planning to prepare for the reality that “things might take a more drastic turn” for the worse in Vietnam.
But in addition to the very important fact that no evidence has surfaced in over forty years that the Gulf of Tonkin incident was provoked or staged, there is one reality that clearly demonstrates that everything was on the up and up, at least as far as Johnson and his advisers were concerned.
And that comes from the valuable book Taking Charge , edited with commentary by presidential historian Michael Beschloss, which was published in 1997 and contains transcripts of taped telephone conversations between LBJ and his advisers, primarily Secretary of Defense McNamara, during the Tonkin incident.
As the transcripts reflect, from the moment LBJ first discusses the incident through his working out how to resolve it, he clearly is dealing with new information and an evolving situation not of his making.
McNamara: Mr President, we just had word by telephone from Admiral Sharp that the destroyer is under torpedo attack.
McNamara: I think I might get Dean Rusk and Mac Bundy and have them come over here and we’ll go over these retaliatory actions and then we ought to— LBJ: I sure think you ought to agree to that.
Presumably from these unidentified craft that I mentioned to you a moment ago.
We thought that the unidentified craft might include one PT boat, which has torpedo capability, and two Swatow boats, which we don’t credit with torpedo capability, although they may have it.
By way of footnote on this issue, in November of 1995, McNamara, on a visit to Hanoi, spoke to GeneralVo Nguyen Giap.
Giap was the North Vietnamese vice premier for defense during the Gulf of Tonkin period, and McNamara reported that Giap had convinced him that no second attack on the Maddox had ever happened.
If McNamara had been part of a deliberately provoked or staged Gulf of Tonkin incident , he hardly would have made any concession suggesting that the second attack never took place and was not therefore real.
If the Gulf of Tonkin incident that led to the resolution had been provoked or staged to get Congress to pass the resolution, it would seem that with the nation and the whole of Congress behind him, that would have been the opportune time, politically, for LBJ to have sent combat troops to Vietnam.
But as we’ve seen, it wasn’t until March 8,1965, seven months after the resolution was passed, that he finally sent United States combat troops to Vietnam, and July 27,1965, that he decided to embark on a major ground war in Vietnam.
Following the Second World War, the cold war between the United States and the Soviet Union was an almost natural progression for two world powers whose political ideologies of capitalism and communism could hardly be more starkly conflicting, particularly since the Soviets, led by the tyrannical Josef Stalin, had ominously and rapidly spread their hegemony over much of Eastern Europe, even North Korea.
The United States position, from the end of World War It didn’t help the North Vietnamese cause that there was an unprovoked attack on American soldiers the previous month.
On February 7, 1965, an American compound as well as an airfield near Pleiku, South Vietnam, came under attack by Communist guerrillas.
The United States saw great significance in the timing because that day, McGeorge Bundy, President Johnson’s special assistant for national security, was in Saigon.
In response, the United States began sustained bombing raids on North Vietnam, raids that continued until the fall of 1968.
In 1997, Lieutenant General DangVu Hiep, a former deputy of the North Vietnamese army’s political department, said that the attack was “a spontaneous attack by the local commander,” and had not been directed by Hanoi.
The conceiver of this strategy, one which required no birth since it was inevitable, is usually thought to be George Kennan.
He was part of the small staff that reopened the American embassy in Russia’s capital city in 1933, and returned to Russia in 1944 as the right-hand man of the American ambassador to Russia, Averill Harriman, during the difficult war negotiations with the Kremlin between 1944 and 1946.
On February 22,1946, he sent the State Department in Washington, D.C., one of the most celebrated cables in American history.
Thus, if the adversary has sufficient force and makes clear his readiness to use it, he rarely has to do so.
Gellman, Contending with Kennan , 11) In the ensuing years, Kennan’s words, of course, presaged the American posture toward the Kremlin, most notably in the Cuban missile crisis sixteen years later. 1422 best seller : Kennedy’s second and last book, Profiles in Courage , about biographies of United States senators he felt had taken courageous positions in American history, was published in 1956.
It, too, was a best seller and gained Kennedy a Pulitzer Prize in the category of biography.
Famed linguist Noam Chomsky weighs in on the issue of what Kennedy would have done by concluding that Kennedy would not have withdrawn from Vietnam unless victory (by South Vietnam) was assured.
He rejects the position of Ken O’Donnell and Dave Powers, and others who agree with them, by noting that most of them took their positions “postTet”; that is, the Tet offensive convinced nearly everyone that the Communists were as strong and determined as ever and there was no end to the conflict in sight.
At that point, Chomsky says, the “Camelot memoirists,” to save Kennedy’s image, felt they had to do what they could to separate JFK from the widening disaster in Vietnam.
And Chomsky does cite some examples of Kennedy loyalists changing their earlier positions on the war.
The wacky, right-wing Fletcher Prouty couldn’t even claim authorship for his military-industrial-complex assassination theory.
Unless it’s a coincidence, his articulation sounds very much like an ironical borrowing from the other end of the political spectrum.
Assassin or Fall Guy?, published by pro-Soviet American publisher Carl Aldo Marzani, Joesten supported Moscow’s attempt to deflect suspicions right after the assassination that Oswald, a Marxist, must have killed Kennedy at the behest of the Soviets.
Between Prouty, who has little credibility, and the Christchurch newspaper staff, it would be safer to go with the paper’s version, not Prouty’s.
It is noteworthy that the “before noon” reference only appears in Prouty’s book and didn’t make it into the movie, which only said the paper came out before 2:00m.
X doesn’t bother to tell Garrison why the plane trip was “strange,” unless you want to accept X’s cryptic statement that they were in the air “to get their perception out of the way” as an explanation.
After turning around over the Pacific nine hundred miles west of Honolulu when news of the shooting was received via Teletype at 12:40m., the plane returned to Honolulu and then departed for Washington.
The cabinet members’ remarks of grief and sorrow to the news media when they landed forty minutes after midnight at Andrews Air Force Base in Maryland certainly never had any significance as far as the assassination and its alleged cover-up was concerned.
Either Salinger and the six cabinet members were in on the conspiracy to murder JFK, or the conspirators arranged to have them up in the air at the time of the shooting.
Stone, of course, didn’t tell his audience why Salinger and the cabinet members were en route to Tokyo.
It was their boss, John F Kennedy, not the alleged conspirators, who sent them there to set things up for his scheduled visit to Japan in February for political and economic talks.
Assassination researcher David Phinney, who leans toward the conspiracy theory, has come up with a variation of the notion that a great number of people were involved in a conspiracy to kill the president and cover it up that has more arguable merit than those propounded by the bulk of the conspiracy community.
In other words, he says, they were “unwitting allies” in the conspiracy.
He analogizes the situation to a wartime situation when a commander gives an improper order and the troops below carry it out without questioning it.
But even Phinney sees the weakness in his theory, which, admittedly, is better than others.
He notes that when it was all over, at least some of the considerable number of people who unwittingly carried out the conspiracy would look back at their conduct and say, “Hey, there really was no valid reason for my having to do” a particular thing or things, and this would open up a whole line of questions, the answers to which would lead back to the actual conspirators.
Indeed, I would add that not just afterwards, but while they were carrying out the conspiracy, a large number of them would sense that what they were doing was clearly counterintuitive, and at some point at least some of them either wouldn’t do it or would start to talk, a situation that would start to unravel the conspiracy.
In any event, though some conduct could be engaged in that might not arouse suspicion in the “unwitting” spear carriers, other conduct unequivocally would.
True, troops will carry out orders without questioning them, but they have to be the type of orders they have no reason to question in which they make the necessary assumption that the orders were predicated upon information they were not privy to.
But say the orders were to go into a village and kill all civilians, including women and children, even though they are unarmed.
For example, say higher-ups ordered the lawyers for the Judge Advocate General Corps, in a court martial for these murders against the soldiers who killed the civilians, to suppress critical evidence favorable to the defendants— that is, proof that they were merely following orders from their superiors.
Even if there were, it would have been sexless and would not have excited the intellect and concern of millions the world over who sense the dark hand of powerful forces behind Kennedy’s murder.
Indeed, it is virtually unheard of for any conspiracist to make the accusation that a second gunman in the shooting of the president, or any person behind Oswald’s act, was some other misfit like Oswald, acting alone with him.
Almost without exception, the coconspirators are well-known groups such as the CIA, FBI, mob, and so on.
The first mention in a Dallas newspaper of President Kennedy coming to Dallas was a front-page headline story (“President to Visit Dallas, 3 Other Texas Cities Soon”) in the Dallas Times Herald on September 13, 1963.
Ah, the naysayers say, but RFK’s statement to the media on September 7, 1964, was just for public consumption.
The one time occurred at a newsstand at O’Hare airport in Chicago at the height of Jim Garrison’s investigation in New Orleans.
When Mankiewicz said he didn’t know, RFK told him to keep current with the matter for him.
On the other hand, Mankiewicz said that about a week before the California primary for the Democratic nomination for president, which was on June 5,1968, he was with RFK at an outdoor rally for RFK at San Fernando Valley State College in the San Fernando Valley of Los Angeles.
Lifton wrote that he was present when RFK came to San Fernando Valley State College in early June of 1968.
Lifton recalls the “sense of anger and betrayal” he felt over RFK’s answer.
Lifton said that Patricia Lambert, a conspiracy theorist at the time, was also present that day and heard RFK say the same thing.
And we know, from the newspapers and magazines of that period, that this never happened.
Mankiewicz, himself, traveling with RFK, has no recollection that he did.
A later posting on McAdams’s Web site from Clark Merrill dated March 7,1995, seems to have finally clarified the matter.
She said there was a “good gap” between the time of RFK’s speech and the election on June 4.
With a new date to check out, Merrill found two newspaper articles covering RFK’s speech on March 25, an AP story and one from the London Times, both of which agreed that RFK had said he would not reopen the case.
Another possibility is that RFK did say what Mankiewicz recalls, but it was at some other event, and he is conflating the two.
RFK biographer Evan Thomas writes that “although he would deny it,” RFK was indeed interested in the various conspiracy allegations in the death of his brother.
Among other things, Thomas offers as support for this assertion his interview with Walter Sheridan’s widow.
As we know, Sheridan, an RFK loyalist who had gone to work for NBC when RFK became a United States senator, traveled to New Orleans for the network to cover Jim Garrison’s investigation of Clay Shaw for JFK’s murder.
And Sheridan’s widow told Thomas that her husband, from New Orleans, regularly kept RFK informed on the New Orleans probe.
Mankiewicz told me, “If anyone would know if such a meeting took place, I would, and my memory is good.
Oswald’s federal income tax return for 1956 showed a reported income of $772.46.
In 1964, the IRS told the Warren Commission, “We have not located a 1957 return for Oswald.
Oswald’s federal income tax return for 1958 showed a reported income of $980.09 and his return for 1959 , an income of $996.31.
Adams of the TEC and said that he had interviewed Oswald for a job as a warehouseman, and believed the TEC had sent Oswald out.
However, Adams told the FBI that the TEC had no record of having sent Oswald to the A1 Semtner Drug Depot.
There’s no indication in the FBI report that Hamilton gave any date for the interview of Oswald.
Adams on December 2, 1963) When the FBI interviewed Hamilton four days later, he said he had contacted the TEC on September 23, 1963, and asked it to start referring applicants for the job of warehouseman to his company, and said he recognized the name of Lee Harvey Oswald as someone who had applied for a job sometime “during the period” between September 23 (when we know Oswald was still in New Orleans) and the day of the assassination.
Hamilton was unable to identify a photograph of Oswald being the person he interviewed.
Though this is all true about Oswald, it was not true that he came across this way in job interviews, where he was always on good behavior and consistently impressed interviewers with his appearance and demeanor.
During the week of October 7-14,1963, when Oswald stayed at a residence on Marsalis Street in Dallas (the week before he moved to his last residence on Beckley Street), the landlady, Mrs.
An opposite inference, though not as likely to me, is that Oswald never took his revolver to work with him because he thought that if he was stopped while leaving the building after he shot Kennedy, having a revolver would make him look guilty.
But if he did this much thinking, he’d probably realize that an unfired revolver wouldn’t be that incriminating.
Further, that unless he became an immediate suspect, the likelihood is he wouldn’t be searched on his way out of the building.
He could anticipate that in due time, everyone in the building might be searched, but he had to know that before such a sealing of the building and a search of all employees was organized, he’d easily be far away by then.
My sense is that if he had really prepared the shooting of Kennedy, arming himself for his escape would have been a more likely thought.
The Trial of Jack Ruby by John Kaplan and Jon Waltz is the best and most comprehensive book on the Ruby trial.
But curiously and exasperatingly, like virtually all the books on Jack Ruby and the Ruby trial, as opposed to those on the assassination of Kennedy, it has no source notes for citation purposes.
Earl Ruby, Jack’s brother, told the Warren Commission that Joe Tonahill, one of his brother’s defense attorneys, told him that the FBI had furnished the Dallas DA’s office with evidence that Jack had received psychiatric help at the age of ten.
Not only is it rather unlikely that Jack Ruby could receive psychiatric attention without anyone in his family knowing about it, but when I asked the lead prosecutor, Bill Alexander, about it, he said, “This is the first time I’ve heard of this.
In an effort to raise money for legal fees before the trial, Earl Ruby negotiated with a photo-journalist named Billy Woodfield for Woodfield to interview his brother and write a series of articles to be sold to newspapers.
The articles, sympathetic to Ruby, contained nothing significant that was not already known.
After Woodfield and his associate, Larry Schiller, took about $15,000 from the approximate $45,000 realized from the sale of the articles, Ruby’s $30,000 was divided up between Belli, who received $11,000, and several other lawyers, and the rest was used for defense costs, including $5,000 to pay doctors their expert-witness fees.
Ruby may have done better with another colorful and flamboyant San Francisco attorney, Jake “the master” Ehrlich, on whose legal cases the television series Sam Benedict was reportedly based.
Though not quite as well known nationally as Belli, he had more of a background in the criminal law.
And in fact, Ehrlich told UPI on Tuesday, November 26, 1963, that Ruby’s sister, Eva, had called him and asked if he would be willing to represent her brother.
Ehrlich, who said he was definitely interested, said he told Eva that since her brother was already represented by a lawyer, Tom Howard, it would be best if she had Howard call his San Francisco office.
Jack Ruby had two built-in problems working against him, one because of existing law, the other possibly because of a miscalculation on the part of his lawyer, Melvin Belli.
As to the first problem, the law at the time entitled prosecutors to excuse any prospective juror for cause if he said he had a conscientious objection to the death penalty, and it is pretty much conceded that jurors who have no such objection to the death penalty are more conservative and hence more likely to vote not just for death as a punishment, but a conviction.
The second problem was Belli’s purported decision to pick an intelligent jury because his defense of Ruby was based on a technology that he felt less intelligent people would not comprehend.
This may have been true as a general proposition, but one should be careful not to extend principles beyond the limits of their logic.
Several Dallas trial lawyers commented that the Ruby jury was the “smartest” they had seen for a murder case.
It consisted, among others, of an accountant, research analyst, two engineers, a bookkeeper, two salesmen, a secretary, and a corporation vice president, a jury that the prosecution itself was very happy with.
As Ruby appellate lawyer Elmer Gertz observed, the composition of the jury “was a sure recipe for disaster, for such Dallas citizens would be utterly unsympathetic to Jack Ruby, his occupation, his derivation, his crime.
It is remarkable how even an essentially shrewd man such as Belli could deceive himself.
It does seem that Ruby would have been better off with a jury “of his peers,” those more a part of the gritty, unbuttoned, and freewheeling life of the city.
On the other hand, Belli pointed out that there were precious few of those kind of people to pick from on the jury panel.
Sixty-two of the prospective jurors were dismissed for cause by the court on a motion of the prosecution’s (virtually all because of their *Four years later, in the United States Supreme Court case of Witherspoon Illinois , the court held that a mere conscientious objection to the death penalty was not a ground to dismiss a juror for cause.
Only if the juror said he would, in all cases, automatically vote for life imprisonment could he be excused.
In other words, the juror who said he was opposed to the death penalty, but could nevertheless vote for it in some egregious cases, could no longer be disqualified for cause.
As a result of Witherspoon, whose ruling the court made retroactive, thousands of death penalty verdicts around the country were reversed and remanded for a new trial on the issue of penalty.
I’m not clairvoyant, but I fortunately had been complying with the ruling during my jury selection in death penalty cases before Witherspoon came down, and no death penalty verdict I secured was reversed because of Witherspoon.
Each side was allotted fifteen peremptory challenges , and Judge Brown gave the defense an extra three.
The alleged remark by Ruby that he had first thought of killing Oswald two days earlier was testified to by Sergeant Patrick Dean on March 6, 1964, and was the most devastating to Ruby’s case, showing premeditation.
It should be noted that although Sorrels’s testimony was on May 6, 1964, almost two months after Griffin accused Dean of lying, since Griffin was working on the Ruby part of the Warren Commission investigation we can assume he had spoken to Sorrels before Dean’s testimony and already knew Sorrels’s position.
Wade took the matter up with the Warren Commission’s general counsel, J Lee Rankin.
Wanda Helmick, an eighteen-yearold carhop who worked for Ruby’s close friend, Ralph Paul, at his Bullpen DriveIn in Arlington, Texas, told the Warren Commission that around eight or nine o’clock on Saturday night, the night before Ruby shot Oswald, she was sitting in a booth after work at the restaurant waiting for her girlfriend or husband to pick her up when she overheard Paul’s end of a telephone conversation with a man named Jack.
The conversation sounds like it could very well have occurred, but there are several things working against Ms.
Helmick said she got off work at 5:00m., this means that to hear this conversation, she would have had to have been sitting around the restaurant waiting for a ride home for almost six hours, which would seem to be rather unlikely.
A smaller problem is that just three days before her Commission testimony she said the first time she heard any reference to a gun was not Saturday night but the next day, after Ruby shot Oswald, when she again overheard Paul talking over the phone.
Paul told the person to whom he was talking that he had spoken to Ruby the previous night, that Ruby had made little sense, and that Ruby had mentioned something about a gun, and she concluded this must have been the conversation she overheard the previous night when Paul asked Ruby if he was crazy.
Donald Wanda Helmick on July 21, 1964; but see also CE 2823, 26 H 264, FBI interview of Helmick on June 9, 1964) A further problem for Mrs.
But Paul told the Dallas Morning News in 1968 that “in the course of the conversation [presumably the longest one, the nineminute conversation on Saturday evening] he started talking about Oswald.
From the testimony of the defense medical experts, it was obvious that Ruby’s alleged psychomotor epilepsy was of the petit mal type, which is characterized by a momentary loss of consciousness, as opposed to the grand mal type, which is characterized not only by a temporary loss of consciousness but also by violent convulsions.
In Melvin Belli’s book Dallas Justice , he wrote that Ruby told him he shot Oswald because he wanted to save the president’s widow the trauma of appearing in the Oswald trial.
Tom Howard, the local lawyer .. . had been talking about that from the start and, whether he unconsciously planted the idea in Ruby’s mind or simply reinforced a confabulatory glimmer that was already there, I don’t know.
For years, conspiracy theorists have maintained that killing Oswald to save Mrs.
Kennedy from having to come back to Dallas to testify at Oswald’s trial was a lie.
And the reason for Ruby’s lie, they say, was to cover up the real reason he killed Oswald—to silence him for the mob.
But there can be little question that even if he did, it did not accurately reflect what happened.
Dallas Secret Service head Forrest Sorrels, within a half hour of Ruby’s arrest, and before Ruby had any contact with his first lawyer, Tom Howard, interviewed Ruby in the fifth-floor jail.
In his report of that interview he writes that Ruby said “when he read an article about Mrs.
Kennedy having to go to Dallas for the trial he thought why should she be brought down here and have to go through the ordeal on account of that no good son-of-a-bitch, that he had seen... a letter to little Caroline,” and so on.
So the business about saving Jacqueline a trip couldn’t possibly have come from Howard.
Indeed, if he had been retained, he obviously would have instructed Ruby not to talk to Hall, or at a minimum would have sat in with Ruby during his interrogation.
It appears that if the Howard story is true, what most likely happened is that Ruby told Howard the same story he had already told Sorrels, and Howard told Ruby it was a good defense and to go with it, and Ruby, if he in fact did ever write such a note to Tonahill, loosely suggested that Howard had come up with the idea.
A former president of the American Board of Psychiatry, he was a highly qualified electroencephalographer.
To eliminate the possibility of any bias, prosecutor Bill Alexander had flown to Wisconsin to meet with him before the trial and brought along three electroencephalograms , each from a different person, one of them Ruby, though not telling Forster which one was Ruby’s.
This type of thing is typical in high-visibility criminal cases, where defense attorneys vie with each other to become the lawyer of record on the case.
For instance, in the Charles Manson murder case, before Manson settled on a lawyer to represent him, Los Angeles County jail records reflected that over two hundred lawyers came to visit him, including Mel Belli, who I later learned offered to represent Manson without payment of a fee.
Perhaps more tellingly, he testified that if a person had recall of his activity, then he was not having a psychomotor seizure at the time he engaged in the subject activity.
When Alexander presented to Forster Ruby’s statements made during and shortly after his shooting of Oswald in the form of a hypothetical question, Forster responded by telling the jury that someone with that level of recall could not have been in the throes of an epileptic seizure at the time.
Belli, on cross, couldn’t budge Forster with his argument that “confabulation” may have allowed Ruby to fill in the blanks of his amnesia, Forster saying that confabulation is not a phenomenon of an epileptic seizure.
Alexander, who obviously did his homework and prepared well for the trial, had flown to Chicago to show Mackay Ruby’s EEGs.
Mackay testified that Ruby’s EEG did not indicate psychomotor epilepsy.
The issue of Ruby’s sanity came up again in a sanity hearing in Dallas on June 13, 1966, before Judge Louis T Holland, who had replaced Judge Brown on the Ruby case.
Ruby and his family had succeeded in having Joe Tonahill removed as Ruby’s attorney in a Dallas court hearing on May 24, 1965, in which Ruby’s brother Earl and Tonahill hurled bitter charges of financial profiteering against each other.
Tonahill said Ruby was insane and, hence, not qualified to judge who should defend him.
Earl Ruby conceded that his brother was currently insane but said that he was sane at the time he signed an affidavit shortly after his conviction in 1964 stating that he no longer wanted Mel Belli or Tonahill to represent him.
Tonahill asked Earl Ruby at the hearing if he did not think his brother being represented by Kunstler “would be detrimental to your brother’s public image” because of Kunstler’s past representation of persons accused of Communist ties.
Kunstler was so far to the left, and radically so, that he said somewhere (I vaguely recall in a high school classroom) that the assassination of President Kennedy was a positive or good thing.
But before the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals agreed to hear Ruby’s appeal from his murder conviction, it ordered the aforementioned sanity hearing to decide not if Ruby was insane at the time he shot Oswald , but if Ruby was mentally competent enough to fire Tonahill.
At the June 13, 1966, sanity hearing, the Dallas jury of seven men and five women, deliberating less than fifteen minutes after hearing testimony from four of Ruby’s jailers and a jail doctor that Ruby appeared to them to be of sound mind, found Ruby to be sane.
One of the jailers testified he had caught Ruby cheating in a game of gin rummy with him.
Ruby’s lawyers did not offer any opposing evidence or question the five witnesses since Ruby and his family were opposed to the hearing.
Indeed, Ruby himself took the stand and denied that he was insane or had ever claimed to be.
Prosecutor Bill Alexander, in his brief address to the jury arguing that Ruby was sane, said, “I almost feel sorry for Jack.
Belli would later write, “After the verdict, I was standing amid a cluster of reporters when Judge Brown broke away from his own interviewers and pushed his way through to me.
There were tears in my eyes, some of them for this fundamentally humane and decent man who had been a prisoner of his community’s prejudices.
A perfect example of the Dallas Citizens Council manipulating the direction of the city to promote its image was in the area of race relations.
Though racial antipathy existed among many Dallasites in the ultra-conservative city, the council, seeing that integration was inevitable, decided that resistance to it would be deleterious to the city’s image.
So the council got its members to educate the employees of their large companies on the advisability of integration and got both Dallas newspapers to promote the integration of blacks At the Dallas hearing, Ruby voluntarily took the stand and told of his fears that there would be an attempt in future years to link him as a conspirator with Oswald in Kennedy’s murder.
At the beginning of Belli’s final summation to the jury, he did try to mitigate the damage he probably knew he had already caused.
I have been treated graciously here from the high to the low, from the taxicab driver to the waitress, from the millionaire to the pauper, the Rabbi and the Reverend; all individually have treated me graciously.
A day or so after Ruby’s conviction was reversed, Earl Ruby and two of Jack’s appellate lawyers, Elmer Gertz and Phil Burleson, went to visit him at the county jail.
Gertz wrote in his book, Moment of Madness , that “Jack shuffled in, almost furtively.
Within days, Gertz returned to visit Jack with another Ruby appellate lawyer, William Kunstler, who had come into town.
If you only would have believed me all along you would have found some way to check out what I said.
Phil was in on the conspiracy all along, and he was very instrumental in the frame-up they planned, that I was in on the assassination of the President.
Don’t be fooled by his working on the briefs, now that has done all the dirty work, he put himself in a position to make every effort that he is on our side.
Earl, they are going to torture you to death, and you will witness your own family being put to death.
Earl, I know what I am talking about, and I’m sure you think I’m crazy.
If you know your family is gone, then you know all is lost and you can’t save anything.
Then you tell the Russians how Egypt has been using them all along, but they are much closer to Johnson, because of what is happening to the Jews in the United States Then they will understand what kind of person Johnson is, and then they may be able to save Israel.
You may have lost your family by now, but there is nothing you can do about it now, and you can save millions of people who are doomed to be slaughtered.
On December 9 Ruby was taken to Parkland Hospital, where the initial diagnosis of his condition was pneumonia.
He remained hospitalized there until his death less than a month later, on January 3, 1967.
I found the answer, no, elsewhere), but when I called the Army-Navy Surplus Store on August 18,2004, Corey Roberson, Linda Wilson’s cousin, answered the phone and told me the surplus store had been closed, that he was operating a foam rubber supply store at that location now, and Marina did not work there.
I asked Corey if he would get in touch with her for me because I had some more questions, none of them heavy, to ask her, and gave him my phone number to give to her, saying she should call me collect.
Thirty-one-year-old Corey, whom Marina used to babysit for, made every effort to get Marina to talk to me, but although he never told me she refused, he could never get her to do so.
Even my suggestion that he tell her I would set forth my questions in writing didn’t help.
I told Corey, as I’m now telling the reader, that there’s nothing intimidating about me.
Maybe those whom I have prosecuted were intimidated by the fact that they knew I had done my homework and was very prepared, but other than that I definitely don’t feel there’s anything intimidating about me.
Moreover, as indicated in the main text, Marina’s curt remarks to me when I first met her in Dallas showed anything but intimidation.
In any event, I never spoke to Marina after December 5, 2000, and although I have her unlisted home number , I never invaded her privacy by calling her there.
Photostatic copies ofTorbitt’s manuscript began circulating in the conspiracy community in 1970, and it has acquired a certain cachet in conspiracy lore, I can only imagine because of the mystery of who the author was and the colorful and enigmatic name by which it came to be known.
It can’t be because of the quality of the document itself, being unimaginably bad.
Indeed, other than a foreword and introduction, “Nomenclature of an Assassination Cabal” is the whole book.
No author is listed on the cover, and only the foreword and introduction are copyrighted.
The book names more groups (FBI, mob, NASA, Nazis, exiled czarist Russians, Defense Intelligence Agency, Defense Industrial Security Command, Free Cuba Committee, American Council of Christian Churches, etc.) and people (from LBJ and RFK’s assistant Walter Sheridan down to Ruby stripper Tammi True and lawyer Roy Cohn, with a great number of other named conspirators in between) as being involved in the conspiracy to kill JFK than perhaps any other conspiracy book ever written.
The problem is that Torbitt names these groups and people completely willy-nilly, without telling his readers how he came by his information or even why he says what he does.
He just names people, fifty-seven on one page, and wanders aimlessly back and forth from subject to subject.
But I must say, I did learn a few things from Mr Torbitt, of which I am duly appreciative.
I learned that “the Warren Commission did not find that Lee Harvey Oswald killed President Kennedy.
Conspiracy theorists in the Kennedy assassination have several problems with their “It’s not a coincidence” argument.
One is that, in seeming defiance of the law of probabilities, coincidences are remarkably common.
Second, they make the allegation that there are too many coincidences in the Kennedy case, but when they finally get around to setting forth what they perceive to be a suspicious “coincidence,” either it isn’t a coincidence or, if it is, it can b z proved that it is, in fact, truly fortuitous.
The conspiracists maintain this may be no coincidence at all since the man in the doorway may be Oswald (many conspiracists to this day flat-out declare it is Oswald) on the steps, and the conspirators are framing him for Kennedy’s murder.
But the problem for the theorists is that, as discussed in an earlier endnote, we know that the man on the steps was not Oswald but a coworker named Billy Lovelady, who identified himself as being the man in the photo, as did coworkers of his who were on the steps with him at the time.
Upon learning from Warren Commission counsel that the Commission intended to call Marguerite Oswald as a witness, Marina said to the Commission, “I am sorry that you will devote your time to questioning her, because you will only be tired and very sick after talking to her.
I am very much ashamed to have this kind of relationship to my mother-in-law.
Robert Oswald told the Commission, “She is rather persistent to the extent that ... we have never really gotten along.
Marguerite Oswald died at age seventy-three of cancer in a Fort Worth hospital on January 17,1981.
John Johnson, told the media, “She was alone and estranged from her family and had to make all the decisions concerning her own case and welfare.
And it wasn’t as if Robert never knew that his mother was in the hospital and near death.
The common consensus is that Marguerite was a quirky woman and had an overbearing personality, making her difficult to get along with.
Since I never knew her, I am not in a position to weigh in on this issue.
But I think I am in a position to say that if Robert never showed his mother the ordinary respect and dignity of being with her and helping her in her dying days, he failed in his book about his brother Lee and the Oswald family to meet his burden of proof in explaining to his readers why this type of conduct by him was justified.
Parents who are much worse than what he writes about Marguerite very often receive warmth and compassion from their children near the end.
My sense of Marguerite is that with her usually menial wages, and raising three sons all by herself, she did the best she could to take care of them, and loved them, particularly Lee.
The account was opened with a deposit offl.OO and additional deposits offl.OO on December 14,1951, and January 10,1952.
But if it was the truth that she didn’t have the money, as it almost assuredly was, what did Robert expect Marguerite to say, “Yes, I do have enough money.
Marguerite told the Warren Commission, “I have always been broke, and I mean broke.
The evidence is clear from the literature that Marguerite worked hard virtually all of her life.
This, of course, reflects that the belief that Kennedy and what he stood for were very special was international.
Theodore Roosevelt was forty-two when President William McKinley’s assassination in 1901 elevated Roosevelt to the presidency.
As is shown in the main text of this book, the investigation of the assassination by local and federal law enforcement agencies commenced within minutes after the shooting in Dealey Plaza.
Their interviews of witnesses and reports became what is known as “CDs,” for Warren Commission documents, and appear in volumes 22 through 26 of the Warren Commission volumes.
These documents were the basic support documents for the Warren Commission’s investigation of the assassination.
I asked the man I call “Mr CD” (because he knows more about these documents and their provenance than anyone I know), assassination researcher Bill Drenas of Lowell, Massachusetts, to furnish me with some additional information about the CDs.
Many of these CDs, or portions thereof, are reproduced in the Warren Commission volumes as “CEs,” or Warren Commission exhibits.
It would be easy to say that the Warren Commission only put the most important CDs into its volumes as CEs, but although this may generally be true, any assassination researcher will tell you that there are a great number of important CDs that for whatever reason never made it into the volumes.
It should be noted that the “Contents” section at the beginning of each of volumes 22 through 26 of the Warren Commission volumes, wherein all the CEs for that volume are listed, includes the corresponding CD number from which the CE came.
For clarity, tightening, and mostly to help expedite finding a CE in the volumes, I do not give the page number of the CE that I am quoting from, only the page number in the Warren Commission volume on which the quoted material appears.
The first fifteen volumes are almost exclusively the sworn testimony of witnesses, the only other things included in these volumes being sixty-one affidavits and two statements.
The testimony of witnesses in volumes 6 through 15 was taken for the most part by a Warren Commission assistant counsel, and in offices throughout the country, mostly Dallas.
Volumes 16 through 18 contain all the Warren Commission exhibits that arose out of, and are referred to, in the testimony of witnesses in the first five volumes.
These CEs only have a number, for example, CE 460, and give no express indication of the witness from whose testimony the CE arose.
For whatever reason (when I asked Drenas, he said he didn’t know why), starting with volume 6 and continuing through volume 15 of the Warren Commission volumes of testimony, any exhibit arising out of the testimony is named after the witness who testified, and these Commission “deposition exhibits” were marked as exhibits during the witnesses’ testimony and placed in volumes 19 through 21 of the Warren Commission volumes.
Volumes 22 through 26 of the Warren Commission volumes contain, as indicated, “support documents,” CDs that became CEs and support a position taken by the Warren Commission in its one-volume Warren Report.
In the previous paragraph I said that the three-digit number at the beginning of the thirteen-digit number refers to the agency or group that “normally” generated the document with that number.
But very frequently this is not so—a document whose three-digit designation would outwardly indicate that it was generated by that agency or group might have been generated by another agency or group.
Flowever, the compilation includes non-assassination books also—indeed, books that only have a chapter or two on the assassination.
Fie told me that more than 2,000 books had chapters on the assassination.
Eighty percent voted guilty, 20 percent not guilty, and 71 percent of the television audience said that Oswald was part of a conspiracy.
In an interview following the vote, I commented that national polls at the time showed that 85 percent of the American people believed there was a conspiracy in the assassination, and that after the audience (certainly a representative sample of the 16 ENDNOTES national population) watched only four and a half hours of the twenty-one-hour trial, the number had dropped to 71 percent.
The Warren Report , part I, June 25, 1967,7, CBS Television Archives). 31 he doesn’t see anyone on the sixth floor: Bonnie Williams testified that “at the time I couldn’t see too much of the sixth floor because the books at the time were Four Days in November 23 stacked so high.
Indeed the limousine doesn’t appear to start speeding up until Z frame 367, when Hill is finally aboard the car (Telephone interview of Richard Trask by author on October 17, 2005)/ * According to some witnesses, Greer himself felt he did not react instantaneously, and hence blamed himself for the president’s death.
Fie told the FBI that at the time of Tippit’s murder, he and his friend, William A Smith, were seated inside his brother Billy Burt’s house located at the corner of Ninth and Denver streets, about a block and a half from the murder scene, when he heard a total of what he believed to be six shots.
TAn Oswald-was-proceeding-west witness whom no one pays attention to is a man with the last name of Clark who worked at the Tenth Street Barbershop near the corner of Tenth and Ewing, seven blocks east of Tenth and Patton.
THSCA investigators, during their reconstruction of the event, strangely concluded, in contravention of Roberts’s observation that Oswald was “in a hurry ... all but running,” and with nothing to support their conclusion, that Oswald was at Beckley for five minutes, an inordinate length of time.
Of course, even if Bowley is correct, and Tippit was killed at 1:10 or earlier, it would be irrelevant, since we know Oswald killed him.
Warren Commission counsel asked Fritz in his April 22, 1964, testimony.
Flowever, other testimony indicates that the heart and lungs were not removed until the latter stages of the autopsy.
The difficulty of finding the bullet that entered Kennedy’s upper back is reminiscent of the much longer search for a bullet to the back of President James A Garfield, shot by Charles Guiteau on July 2,188F While Garfield lingered near death for eighty days, his doctors, not having X-rays at the time, probed for the bullet that entered Garfield’s right back with unsterilized instruments or their bare hands, a common practice at the time.
Five witnesses, four of whom knew Ruby, testified that they saw him on the third floor of police headquarters at City Flail sometime earlier, between 5:30 and 8:00 that Friday evening.
Indeed, when it was published in 1977, Marina made a number of joint television appearances with McMillan to promote the book.
Labro told him, and Ruby responded, “Oooh la la, Folks Bergeresl ” That, Labro saw, just about exhausted Ruby’s acquaintance with the French language.
Perhaps this is not worthy of mention, but three Dallas WBAP-TY television technicians told the Warren Commission they believed they saw Ruby near City Hall from their TV truck parked on Commerce Street at various times between eight and eleven o’clock Sunday morning.
The HSCA was unable to find the test or any report of it and concluded that the Dallas Police Department may have withheld this information from the Warren Commission.
This rumor was based on the observations of Detective Wilbur J Cutchshaw, who saw three men pushing a WBAP-TY camera into the basement two to three minutes before the shooting.
However, after returning to Robert and Vada’s home that day, she called Martin and when she found out Mrs.
Flowever, the evidence is very substantial that Gordon Shanklin lied under oath not only at the FBI oversight committee hearings, but before.
On July 29, 1975, J Edgar Floover wrote a memorandum to the United States attorney general stating that on July 3, 1975, he and Deputy Associate Director James B Adams met in his office with a reliable informant who requested that his identity not be revealed to third parties.
Floover purportedly learned for the first time from the informant that Oswald had left a threatening note at the Dallas FBI office prior to the assassination, and the visit and note were not properly reported to FBI headquarters following the assassination.
Floover proceeded to tell the attorney general about the extensive investigation he personally oversaw into the charges.
Flosty’s affidavit that Shanklin knew *One wonders how much a revelation about Lee contributed to her dissipation.
Fie writes, “As former President Ford now acknowledges, ‘Judgments were made back then that seemed rational and reasonable.
Two almost universally accepted misconceptions were responsible for the public’s desire to have the assassination records disclosed and for the very enactment of the JFK Act.
As alluded to in a previous endnote, after Marina Oswald testified on February 3, 1964, which was the very first day of the Warren Commission hearings,t Warren told newsmen outside the hearing chambers in Washington, D.C., that as Mrs.
It wished them to he held there for the benefit of the American people.
Indeed, I’ve always been amused by the belief propounded by the conspiracy theorists and accepted by millions of Americans that hidden deep in the files of the Warren Commission is a document that will refute the official finding of the Warren Commission that Oswald killed Kennedy and acted alone.
I And this is why “they” (i.e., our federal *On April 20, 1965, Robert Johnson, the Cedar Rapids mayor who had served as the catalyst for the relaxation of the National Archives’s seventy-five-year policy, was rewarded by a letter from Bundy on White House stationery, thanking him for his “patience” and informing him that pursuant to his request the government had investigated the matter and indeed concluded that the “standard regulations of the National Archives” were to be modified “in view of the special nature of the investigation conducted” by the Warren Commission.
TThe Dallas Police Department did not turn over many of its JFK documents to the Warren Commission, though it furnished all those requested by the Commission.
For instance, under the JFK Act, all congressional records on the assassination, including, most importantly, the records of the FISCA that had not been published in its twelve volumes were now subject to release to the American public.
With this in mind, the Review Board, after conducting two public hearings on the matter^ and much deliberation, expanded the definition of an assassination record to include “all records, *Under Section 3 , the JFK Act also compelled the release of assassination records of “any State or local law enforcement office that provided support or assistance” in the investigation of the assassination.
The Dallas Police Department had two radio channels to communicate with policemen , each on a different frequency.
FISCA chief counsel G Robert Blakey had substantial misgivings about the benefits of such a conference.
The HSCA asked Barger if he would review the work of Weiss and Aschkenasy, and he agreed, reporting back that the new analysis had validated his work and removed much of his own uncertainty.
TAlthough Cornwell’s carefully crafted questions had managed to elicit from McLain at least a little uncertainty over which channel his radio was set at on the day of the shooting , thereby still being able to hold onto McClain as the cyclist with the radio open to channel 1 whom they needed, House Representative Robert W Edgar of Pennsylvania asked McLain whether, considering his duties that day as a motorcycle officer, it would have been common for him not to be on channel 2, which Chief Curry was using to handle the motorcade traffic.
The FISCA conclusion, if believed, also was in direct conflict with its own finding that 80 percent of the witnesses in Dealey Plaza heard three shots and 10 percent only two.
The Los Angeles Times's Jerry Cohen, who was present in Dallas when McLain emerged from a room with Bowles after hearing the tapes, wrote in the next day’s Times , “McLain said committee members had not played the tape for him Friday in Washington, but instead had shown him three photos of a motorcycle, which he identified as his.
TDallas Police motorcyclist Bobby Joe Dale, who was a part of the motorcade, told me he has a copy of the subject channel 1 tape and that he and others in his unit were all convinced that the sound of the motorcycle engine on the tape “clearly sounded like that of a three-wheeler.
Unfortunately, the Flughes film sequence ends before McLain’s motorcycle gets much farther north on Houston than the crosswalk at Main and Houston, which leaves the question of his exact position at the time of the shooting unresolved.
The Hughes film clearly shows that the presidential limousine had already turned the corner onto Elm before McLain started north on Houston,^ increasing the distance, by around 20 to 30 feet, that McLain would have had to make up.
Since McLain would have no reason to concentrate on what car was “turning the corner,” and he was never asked, the Hughes film indicates he would have had to have seen, not the dark blue presidential limousine, but the black Cadillac Secret Service follow-up car or the steel-gray Lincoln vice presidential car.
In the summer of 1979, Steve Barber, a twenty-four-year-old musician from Shelby, Ohio, who describes himself as a “progressive rock-jazz drummer,” picked up a copy of the July issue of the girlie magazine Gallery after learning that as part of the magazine’s special coverage on the JFK assassination it contained a thin, plastic, tear-out, three-minute 33V3-rpm recording of excerpts of the transmissions from Dallas police radio channel 1.
The HSCA’s “best estimate” as to the time of the first shot in Dealey Plaza as indicated from transmissions on the channel 2 clock was 12:30:12m., and on the channel 1 clock, 12:30:47 m.
The author of the study, Donald B Thomas, an entomologist working for the United States Department of Agriculture’s Subtropical Research Laboratory in Weslaco, Texas, and a part-time conspiracy buff, told the Washington Post that “the failed to take into account the words of a Dallas patrolman that show the gunshot-like noises occurred at the exact instant that John F Kennedy was assassinated,” and that the odds were now only 1 in 100,000 that the CBA was correct in concluding that the impulse sounds, described as being gunshots by the FISCA, were recorded one minute after the assassination.
Thomas became interested in the Kennedy assassination after seeing Oliver Stone’s 1991 fictional epic JFK, and believed that the shot from the grassy knoll (number three in the FISCA’s sequence) was the one that killed the president.
Thomas, in his article, did not acknowledge Mack’s earlier discovery, but Mack said this was not intentional on Thomas’s part, Mack satisfied that Thomas was “unaware” of his earlier discovery at the time he wrote his article.
The first of the /wt-assassination simulcasts is known as the “Decker crosstalk,” which I discovered on channel 1 in September, 1980, and it occurred about a minute after the shooting.
So ironically, the two films that the HSCA says support its position, in reality refute it.
Later on page 12, the authors write, “Humes explained that he was in a hurry, that the family was waiting for the body” This is somewhat misleading.
The widely held belief among students of the assassination that the bootlegged autopsy photographs are second-generation copies of the originals improperly obtained by Robert Groden when he was a photographic consultant for the FISCA in 1978 was confirmed by Groden himself.
The best examples of this are the Robert Croft photo (approximately frame 161) as the limousine is proceeding down Elm , and the James Altgens photo of Kennedy and Connally as the presidential limousine is proceeding north on Elouston Street just before the turn onto Elm.
Yet she reported receiving all types of other calls that apparently were much more important for her to take notice of She even reported calls received by other operators on her watch.
The Warren Report, part II, June 26, 1967,ll, CBS Television Archives) And this is the position taken by the HSCA, which referred to the drawings as “a crude representation used as a worksheet primarily to assist in the preparation of the report and was not necessarily an exact representation of the wound.
If we take the upper end, 18 degrees, as being accurate, since the angle of declination of the bullet, per the Warren Commission, was around 17V2 degrees , the president’s upper body (not his head, however) would be hunched forward at a slightly greater degree than the downward angle of the bullet, accounting for the lower margin of the wound, at least per the HSCA, being abraded upward.
In a letter to Captain Stover, dated December 5, 1963, Secret Service agent Robert I Bouck noted, after a recount, that there were actually twenty-one sheets of color transparency film, not sixteen (and eighteen sheets of black-and-white photographs, not twelve), as reported in the receipt signed by Kellerman.
No date for the changes is noted, but it must have been November 22, since the new numbers were on the final typed memo of that same date.
David claimed that the slides and prints showed a round, Yh to %-inch-diameter hole in the right front temporal area of the president’s head, just below the hairline, and that the 16millimeter film showed a gaping wound in the back of the president’s head.
Flere, with literally hundreds of people from various official investigative agencies (e.g., Dallas police, FBI, Secret Service, F1SCA, Clark Panel, ARRB, employees at the National Archives, etc.) examining and working with the photos throughout the years, I not only don’t find it suspicious, I find it completely predictable that one or more photographs ended up missing, misplaced, or expropriated by people through whose hands they passed.
In fact, as we’ve seen by his admission at the O J Simpson civil trial, while he was working as a consultant to the photographic panel of the FISCA, Robert Groden, the chief photographic expert for the conspiracy theorists, must have himself either directly stolen or made copies of some *An incident involving a possible aborted theft of autopsy photographs in the summer of 1978 concerned Regis T Blahut, a CIA officer who was assigned as a liaison officer to the HSCA to assist the committee in securing the CIA documents it wanted.
Yrtacnik said it had wooden pegs through it marking the paths of the bullet, and was labeled “President Kennedy’s brain,” or words to that effect.
The panel members noted that it was “an oblong area of blue discoloration” that was “within the bullet track” of the bullet that entered the rear of the president’s head, thereby virtually eliminating the likelihood that it was a second bullet having the same bullet track as the other one.
Shaw’s postoperative report and subsequent interview by the Warren Commission do not mention any “significant undermining or abrasion” on either side of the wound/ The second and by far the most logical interpretation of the oval entrance wound is that the bullet was out of alignment with its trajectory just before striking the skin.
He took approximately ten seconds of film as the presidential motorcade was driving through and emerging from the underpass.
This is the session in which Senator Russell made a motion that his dissent to the singlebullet theory be formally acknowledged in a footnote in the Warren Report.
It has to be noted that six of the seven Commission members kept their regular jobs (Allen Dulles was retired) during the entire Warren Commission period; for example, Senators Russell and John Sherman Cooper didn’t stop being United States senators and Chief Justice Earl Warren didn’t stop performing his duties as chief justice.
If, indeed, he was the sole author of the single-bullet theory, surely he would find a minute or two over a year or so to respond to someone who was potentially going to tamper *Ford was a member of the Warren Commission, not the nuts-and-bolts staff, so was not in the best position to know precisely the origin of something starting at the staff level, particularly when Specter was the main spokesman for the matter.
The bottom line is that no bullet is visible in any of the Murray-Alien photographs.
Eight months earlier, Liu told the HSCA that Rosemary said to him that “she recalls stopping because she saw the bullet hit Kennedy’s hack , not because she heard the sound of the shot.
Olson and Turner realized that f/'W' illis was right about snapping slide number 5 at the sound of the first shot, then there must have been a second gunman, since Kennedy was still hidden from Oswald’s view by an oak tree at the time of Z202, and therefore presumably couldn’t have been shot from Oswald’s sixth-floor sniper’s perch.
The possibilities stated here, of course, give hope to conspiracy theorists who are certain the head snap to the rear was caused by a shot from the president’s right front, not from his rear as the Warren Commission concluded.
Sure enough, as the bullet tumbled and plowed into one of the ribs, removing 4. centimeters (l 3 A inches was destroyed during the actual assassination), it exited at a point compatible with the exit wound in Connally’s right chest.
This so-called jet effect, first enunciated in 1969 by author William H Hanson in his book The Shooting of John F Kennedy: One Assassin, Three Shots, Three Flits—No Misses, was most prominently advocated in 1976 by Nobel Prize-winning physicist Luis W Alvarez.
I later discovered a reference in the HSCA volumes to the HSCA’s physical scientist, Larry Sturdivan, using a mathematical formula involving energy, momentum, weight, and speed of the bullet, as well as the momentum lost upon impact.
Film 3 would then be rewound and film 1 (the wound surrounded by black) would be run through the printer exposing film 3 again.
Fie then goes on to discuss “the problem of registration,” keeping each frame in the same relative position.
Fie writes that “it was easy ... to describe the process of rotoscoping and optical printing, but it would have been impossible for anyone to have been able to maintain perfect registration of the wound on the head.
He did find a declaration by Harvey F Oswald, one of Lee’s paternal uncles, dated October 25, 1939, and attested to by Naomi Drake, the deputy registrar, that Lee was bom on October 18,1939, at French Hospital, and learned that in Louisiana such a declaration is allowed in lieu of a birth certificate, but normally only when the birth occurred outside of a hospital and without a doctor, which was not the situation here.
Anyone who happened to be near any one of the bases from which it operated would have been able to see it land and take off As far as the Soviets knowing about it, at one base at Giebelstadt in West Germany, pilots had often noticed a long, black limousine parked at the end of a runway.
Ele found Schrand lying in a pool of blood on the concrete, about six feet from his riot gun.
In the prosecution of a criminal case, the Government cannot establish a prirna facie case solely on a defendant’s unsupported confession.
And in a 1988 interview with Ladies’ Horne Journal , Marina said, “In behavior, he was capable of acting like a wild dog.
But conspiracy theorist Sylvia Meagher points out that the advertisement was for a $12.88 Carcano that was 36 inches long, weighed SVi pounds, and had a catalog number of C20-T750, though we know the $19.95 Carcano that was sent to Oswald was 40 Vs inches long and weighed 8 pounds, which was closer to the 40-inch Carcano weighing 7 pounds advertised in the November 1963 ad in a different magazine, Field and Stream.
The panel pointed out that when a camera lens projects an image of our three-dimensional world onto a two-dimensional sheet of film negative, the result can make parallel lines in space appear to con*HSCA photographic expert Cecil Kirk discovered yet another first-generation print just a few days before he testified to the HSCA in September 1978.
However, Pickard, a photographic expert with the Department of Defense in Canada, told the HSCA staff that he spent less than one hour preparing for his public comments on the show and had made no scientific analysis of the photos before rendering an opinion.
She also thought the bag might have been about 27 to 28 inches long—the bag found in the Depository was actually 38 inches in length, while the 40V5-inch rifle, disassembled, measured 344/5 inches.
When counsel asked him to indicate on a desktop an estimate of the length of the package he had guessed was about thirty inches long, the length Paine indicated was measured by Warren Commission counsel to be 37'/2 inches.
The source of Captain George Doughty’s directive was Dallas police chief Jesse Curry . 80 1 he pointed out to the FBI man the area where the palm print was: In a 1998 book, Lieutenant Day told essentially the same story.
But this part of the film Alyea claims he shot has never surfaced—a highly unusual circumstance considering that much of Alyea’s film was broadcast unedited over WFAA-TV the weekend of the assassination.
In any event, if he in fact saw Fritz pick up the shells it probably was after the crime scene photos had been taken.
TOn the other hand I have to admit that the disturbance of a crime scene before the crime-lab people arrive is unfortunately almost as common as bad debt.
Wright left the bullet on the stretcher, told Tomlinson not to let anyone touch it, and went to look for a federal officer to take charge of it.
Wright, or some third party, or was simply speaking loosely, was never explored.
Chad Zimmerman to author dated April 30, 2005, unnumbered 11; Letter from Dr.
In his 1977 report to the FISCA, Guinn explained, “The FBI reported the results of its tests as inconclusive due to the wide variety of absolute values obtained each time a sample was tested.
Asked during his testimony before the FISCA to provide a degree of certainty to his conclusion that the fragments from Connally’s wrist originated from the stretcher bullet, Guinn stated, “I wish I could put a number on it, as we often can do, that is, calculate a probability, but we really don’t have the background information to make a numerical calculation in this case.
Not only did the widths of the land and groove impressions vary by approximately '/too inch, but the individual microscopic marks on the Lester slug did not match up with those on the two testfired bullets.
She also claims that two days before her testimony, there was an attempt to break into her house at night while her husband was at work.
Myers tracked down some silent WFAA-TY film footage of the Dallas police outside Tippit’s car at the murder scene, and lo and behold Sergeant “Bud” Owens is seen holding Tippit’s service revolver in his left hand and a man’s leather wallet in his right.
Dallas WFAA-TY cameraman Ron Reiland, narrating the silent footage for his viewers, said it was Tippit’s wallet.
But we know that several officers went to Methodist Flospital, where Tippit’s body was brought into the emergency ward, and they could have brought Tippit’s wallet from the murder scene to either there or Parkland.
There appears to be no conclusive way to determine what shirt Oswald was wearing at the time of the assassination.
Next, Roffman offered still frames from a news film shot by WFAA-TY cameraman Malcolm O Couch as evidence that Baker actually entered the Depository earlier than the Commission estimated.
Dallas deputy sheriff A1 Maddox said, “When you came out of the jail on the Flouston Street side [of the Dallas Criminal Courts Building], you’d hear jets coming over sometimes in the afternoon.
Moreover, from this point, a line of sight and line of fire to President Kennedy could have existed only for less than Go second before the fatal round because of permanent vertical obstructions.
Moorman loaned her two photos to the EISCA’s photographic panel for examination , and the E1SCA published the second photo, the assassination one, in three of its volumes (1 EISCA 109; 4 E1SCA 416; 6 E1SCA 125), but not the first one, which had no evidentiary value.
Elowever, Gary Mack knows Mary Moorman well, and Moorman told him she took two other photos that day on Elm, one each of police officers she knew.
It was also suggested for a time that the discarded light-gray jacket found near theTippit murder scene was Vaganov’s, until it was discovered that the six-foot twoinch Vaganov wore 36-inch sleeves and the evidence jacket sleeves were 32 Vi inches.
Apparently it was an open secret that “they” were going to kill Kennedy and “they” were asking Hemming and everyone else like him to please do the job, literally shopping it around (i.e., the group that was asking everyone to kill JFK was the same group that was afraid to use JFK’s name, using Castro’s name as JFK’s alias, when in a room by themselves?), but Hemming said noA I wish Hemming had said no to Noel Twyman when he wanted to talk to him, so I wouldn’t have had to read about this silliness in my book.
Detective Jim Leavelle told me the explanation for this is that either Oswald was also checked into his fifth-floor jail cell earlier on the twenty-second, or when he made a phone call authorized by Captain Fritz on the twenty-second, he was escorted up to the fifth-floor jail to make it because of the increased privacy he would have there, as opposed to the third floor, which was teeming with police personnel and reporters.
Fie added, however, that sometimes an employee would buy his lunch from the catering truck during the morning break.
It would seem that Fritz’s writing, in his handwnttzn notes, “Bill Shelley in front” probably was a reference to Oswald telling him during the interrogation that on his way out of the building, he saw Bill Shelley in front of the building.
But thirty-five years later (certainly not too long a time by any fair measurement) Judyth remembered and would try to tell the worldt a far different story.
But she said that when Clay Shaw learned about their lack of money forcing them to make love in such places, he felt sorry for them and started paying for their trysts at nice hotels in the city.
TThe staff of CBS’s 60 Minutes gave Judyth’s story long consideration before deciding not to do it.
Mary Sherman worked on their research project in Ferrie’s and Sherman’s apartments in New Orleans.
And, like the previous one, it fits the modus operandi of virtually all mainstream (as opposed to fringe) conspiracy theorists like Aguilar, Anthony Summers, Flenry Flurt, John Newman, and others.
Koepke assured his readers that “all the members of Mensa supported” his investigation of the assassination.
Perhaps ironically (I say “ironically” because there is much, much more of a belief in a conspiracy in the assassination of President Kennedy than in the murder of his brother, Robert, on June *1 had thought that Koepke’s Watergate theory of the assassination, as bad as it was, was at least his, but I later found that an earlier book by conspiracy theorist Monte Evans floated the same theory, among many others, and it’s possible that Koepke got his argument from this book, though there is no way for me to know.
When I say “evidence” of a conspiracy, this is not the same as saying there mas a conspiracy.
David said that he didn’t believe Pitzer committed suicide.t Livingstone and Robert Groden, the coauthors of High Treason, state that “Pitzer was murdered as part of the cover-up in the death * Although the FBI report said the bullet exited “near left temple,” Walt Brown reports in his JFK/Deep Politics Quarterly that in August of 2002, pursuant to a request from Pitzer’s son Robert to the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology for autopsy photos of his father, Robert received “approximately twenty color and black and white autopsy photographs.
But of course pictures taken on the very same day, in fact by *1 remember Armstrong telling me about them in Tulsa, Oklahoma, years ago and shortly thereafter sending me a copy of his chronological poster, which I assume he put together with conspiracy theorist Jack White, who had included many of the photographs in his earlier videotape, The Many Faces of Lee Harvey Oswald.
Armstrong doesn’t tell his readers that Lionel Slater Jr., a messenger at Pfisterer, also told the FBI in 1963 that Oswald worked at Pfisterer “about 1956” (CE 2230, 25 H 130, FBI interview of Lionel Slater Jr. on November 25, 1963). /xrmstrong goes from the ridiculous to the sublime in another one of his examples that he cites to support his two-Oswald argument.
Fie adds a further improbability, asserting that the FBI, having taken the originals, never gave him a receipt for the records.
Therefore, Armstrong is certain that the Oswald at Stripling in 1954 must have been Flarvey Oswald, the Russian refugee impersonating Oswald, and that the FBI was definitely a co-conspirator with the CIA in framing “Oswald” using the double-Oswald device.
Naturally, since we know that conspiracy theorists manage to find numbers of witnesses to say anything that the theorists are seeking to prove, and we know their statements are erroneous, it’s not surprising that the indefatigable Armstrong found two former students who claim they went to school with Lee Flarvey Oswald at Stripling in 1954, and that he lived right across the street from the school in a duplex at 2220 Thomas Place.
And if not, why he waited over thirty-five years to finally tell it to Lowery.
Her married name in 1963 had been Thompson and she worked as a waitress at Austin’s Barbeque in Dallas, where Tippit also worked as a security guard.
Slawson visited the Mexico City CIA headquarters in April of 1964 with fellow assistant counsels William Coleman and Howard Widens.
I have found that when people say some^Indeed, a former CIA officer told the HSCA he had seen CIA surveillance photos of Oswald taken in Mexico City.
J.hcre are two other Mexico City allegations, indirectly related to the issue of imposture, that deserve only scant attention.
The grand conspiracy theory of controlling the autopsy and making changes at Bethesda Naval Flospital was not necessary.
The autopsy report and photographs were immediately sent to the White Flouse.
But since the report contained what was supposedly told to the FBI agent, as opposed to the actual testimony of Flyman Rubenstein, I’ve opted to use Flyman’s version in the book.
Fie said Ruby served as a bouncer in several Chicago clubs and often wore a hearing aid to avoid the World War II draft.
Who better to have that number than Dallasite Ken Flolmes, an assassination researcher who specializes in the historical, non-evidentiary details of the assassination saga.
In 1991, Flolmes, who had one of Ruby’s Carousel cards with the phone number on it, called the local telephone company on a whim and asked if that number was still available.
Flowever, from those who definitely would know, *A former employee at the Carousel who said he was a “general handy man,” which included bartending and helping to book shows, told the FBI that during the three-month period he worked for Ruby in 1960, Ruby had instructed the bartenders and waitresses not to charge police officers for anything they got at the club.
Dallas police officer Joe Cody said, “When people from out of town would come in, he’d charge them $1.50 for a beer when he’d only pay 9 V 2 cents.
Among other phone calls Ruby made to shady characters during the pre-assassination period was one to Murray W “Dusty” Miller on November 8, 1963 (the same day that Ruby spoke to Barney Baker for the last time), at the Eden Roc Flotel in Miami.
A longtime friend of Ruby’s and Me Willie’s, Meyer Panitz, was living in Miami at the time, and Panitz told the FBI that McWillie called him and told him their mutual friend, Ruby, was presently in Miami Beach, and Panitz said he visited Ruby there and “believes” Ruby was there for two or three days and that he visited Ruby twice.
The FBI located the source of the rumor, one W illiam Fluffman, who worked at a boat fueling dock in Key West.
An Italian writer, Gino C Speranza, described it in an American magazine.
The source for this high number was always thought to be Joseph Valachi.
Valachi had been serving time on two drug trafficking convictions at a federal penitentiary in 1962.
He was sharing a cell with Vito Genovese, the head of the Mafia family Valachi was a member of, who was serving time on his own narcotics conviction.
In an interesting book on the Chicago mob, The Outfit: The Role of Chicago’s Underworld in the Shaping ofModern America , author Gus Russo suggests that at least JFK’s father, Joe Kennedy, felt his son needed the mob to win the presidential election.
Flersh says Joe Kennedy had turned to Touhy, an old friend, to set up the meeting and Touhy had in turn asked Robert McDonnell, a mob attorney, for help.
Flersh says McDonnell told him that he gave Touhy the name of a local politician to set up arrangements for the meeting.
But in a long cover story by writer Kitty Kelley in the February 29, 1988, edition of People magazine, she changed her story and came up with the extremely improbable tale that she was Kennedy’s link with the mob, and she told Kelley that at Kennedy’s insistence, she actually set up about ten meetings between Kennedy and Giancana, one of which, she believes, was at the White Flouse.
Steven Aftergood, a senior research analyst at the Federation of American Scientists in Washington, D.C., said that as a result of a Freedom of Information Act request of his, in 2005 a federal court ordered the CIA to disclose the CIA budget for 1963.
He said that Joannides’s predecessor, CIA agent Ross Crozier, filed a threeor four-page summary report to JM/WAYE, the CIA station in Miami, each month from September 1960 to November 1962 on his relationship with the DRE, the report including such things as how the budget given the group by the CIA was being spent.
But unwitting is synonymous with innocent, since one cannot be guilty of any serious crime unless they have “mens reaf a guilty and reprehensible state of mind.
I And Morley hasn’t yet spelled out for our edification how Joannides or anyone else used the DRE, without its knowledge, to get Oswald to murder Kennedy.
We know that *He does let someone else make the accusation in just one sentence—Fabian Escalante, the retired head of the Department of State Security under Castro.
I In a February 9, 2005, letter to me, Morley rejected the notion that the DRE hated Kennedy as much as Castro, only saying that “the DRE vehemently opposed Kennedy’s Cuba policy,” something of course that a great number of Cuban exiles also did.
Before we leave the Joannides affair, we should discuss its real origin, which is none other than a tired and hoary allegation from conspiracy theorist extraordinaire Gaeton Fonzi, the former HSCA investigator whose main claim to fame in the conspiracy constellation is his charge that an anti-Castro militant named Antonio Veciana Blanch had dealings for many years with a CIA agent named Maurice Bishop, and on one occasion he saw Bishop with Oswald in Dallas.
As set forth in the main text, Fonzi was positive Bishop was CIA agent David Atlee Phillips, and even after Veciana saw Phillips in Washington, D.C., and told Fonzi he was not Bishop, the incredible Fonzi refused to give up his belief.
WAVE expecting priority message, concerning maritime exfiltration of headquarters asset, in exit pouch which presumably will arrive next 22 Nov.
In April and May of 1962, he had checked himself into the psychiatric ward of the YA hospital in Westwood, California, and in December of 1962, around the time, apparently, when he says the CIA was having him infiltrate the KGB, and the KGB wanted him to talk Oswald out of killing Kennedy, or failing this, to kill Oswald, he had checked himself into the Bay Pines YA hospital in St.
Two mechanics, Flenry Wiggins and William Branch, were in the vicinity at the time of the two shots.
Chicago time, the pos712 ENDNOTES sible thought of unknown associates of Vallee’s still at large could have contributed to the White House decision to cancel the trip.
Four hours after the speech, just after midnight on June 12, Medgar W Evers, a black thirty-seven-year-old field secretary of the Mississippi NAACP, pulled into the driveway of his Jackson, Mississippi, home.
In 1997, I was working for Sy Hersh and ABC on the adaptation of his book, The Dark Side of Camelot.
Fie was sent to Mexico City because Mann was requesting an FBI investigation of the Alvarado allegation.
He’s able to delude his readers into believing this since he keeps from them the fact that the plan was drafted by McNamara’s and Rusk’s own departments.
The one new element that Waldron brings to the issue, one he guards virtually to the point of deception, is the fact that he had several interviews with Enrique Ruiz-WIlhams, a Bay of Pigs veteran and leader who worked very closely with RFK in the anti-Castro effort.
Waldron gets around this by saying that Ruiz762 ENDNOTES Williams, who fought alongside Artime at the Bay of Pigs, told him that “Am ime was under me,” along with three other exile leaders and Cuban-American troops training at Fort Benning, Georgia.
But okay, let’s assume that Varona told the mob about C-Day even though, per Waldron, he himself was not a part of the C-Day project at that time.
Fie doesn’t know who actually killed JFK for the mob in Dallas, but said possibilities were Johnny Roselli and Charles Nicoletti.
Consistent with the rest of Waldron’s book, he presents no evidence that Vallee and Lopez were being set up by the mob or that the mob even knew of their existence.
They wanted an outright invasion of Cuba by United States forces (Bamford, Body of Secrets, 82), not anti-Castro Cuban exiles.
But it gets much worse. u We could develop a Communist Cuba terror campaign in the Miami area, in other Florida cities and even in Washington.
The source of the story was Washington insider Edward R Morgan, a former FBI agent and well-connected Washington attorney.
J hough to this day no clear and unambiguous evidence has emerged that JFK (or RFK) approved of either of the two CIA-mob plots or any of the various other CIA plots to kill Castro, at least one reporter has said that JFK (and hence, automatically RFK) knew of the CIA’s desire for presidential authorization to kill him.
To this very day, Castro, eschewing the cult of personality of, say, Mao or Stalin or Saddam Hussein, has far more billboards and paintings of Guevara on display in Cuba than he does of himself And in Cuba’s two main museums commemorating the revolution, in Havana and Santiago de Cuba, Guevara is featured over all other members of the revolution, including Castro.
There he was leading a malnourished and poorly armed band of fewer than twenty Cuban, Bolivian, and Peruvian Communist guerrillas to foment a revolution among the peasant majority against the government of Air Force General Rene Barrientos Ortufto.
There are conflicting reports over whether Guevara, after the successful uprising, enjoyed organizing the firing squads ordered by Castro of Batista’s main henchmen , or whether he took every execution hard and pardoned as many condemned men as he could.
We all know by now that J Edgar Floover, for years, kept files on the private lives of many prominent, law-abiding citizens.
He unwittingly revealed how much the Helms subpoena had only been a publicity stunt by not even referring to it in either of his two books on the case, Heritage of Stone and On the Trail of the Assassins .t On March 7,1968, Garrison, pursuant to the federal Uniform Witness Act, also had his office secure a certification from an Orleans Parish judge, Matthew Braniff, stating that former CIA director Allen Dulles was a “necessary and material witness” in Garrison’s investigation of Clay Shaw.
However, Paese Sera' s accusation was immediately picked *It is not known when Shaw ceased to be a member of the WTC board, but it would be no later than 1964, when the WTC closed its operations in Rome.
I mas able, however, to get a small item of information here and there from the CIA throughout the years.
While it is true he never prosecuted or apparently even investigated major organized-crime figures in New Orleans, and always maintained there was “no organized crime” in New Orleans^ (as far back as 1951, the Kefauver Committee identified Carlos Marcello * Author Patricia Lambert’s suggestion that “Garrison’s underlying, perhaps unconscious, motivation” for his prosecution of Shaw is “the possibility that he was driven to pursue Clay Shaw by his discomfort with his own sexuality” is mere conjecture and unlikely to be true.
TAll of Carlos Marcello’s gambling casinos and most of his pinball machines were in Jefferson Parish (adjacent to Orleans Parish), over which Garrison, the DA of Orleans Parish, had no jurisdiction.
J here were two highly questionable federal prosecutions of Garrison involving alleged contact by him with small-time organized crime.
Herb Caen reported in his inimitable column in th z San Francisco Chronicle way back on February 13,1978, “Ex-FBIer Bill Turner is certain that Watergate’s ‘Deep Throat’ was former Asst.
TGarrison claimed that two women who later moved into Novel’s apartment found a hidden, undated letter from Novel to a “Mr Weiss,” in which he says he feared that Garrison’s investigation might expose his ties to the Double-Chek Corporation in Miami, an alleged CIA front that reportedly recruited pilots and saboteurs for the Bay of Pigs invasion.
In any event, the thinking of the Dallas authorities was that if any crime was committed, it was by the Schlumberger corporation for violating the federal Neutrality Act.
The particular statute involved in this case is 18 USC § 960, enacted by Congress on June 26, 1948, and prohibiting any American citizen from helping in “any military or naval expedition or enterprise to be carried on from against . . . any foreign state ... or people with whom the United States is at peace” Although the United States was for all intents and purposes at war with Cuba in that the government was making every effort to overthrow Castro, it was a “secret” war.
He immediately abandoned the effort when Moffett let it be known she was not at Ferrie’s apartment.
Garrison charged Layton Martens, a friend of David Ferrie’s, with perjury for denying before the Shaw grand jury that he knew Gordon Novel.
TA Jimmy Hoffa associate, Zachary A Strate Jr., who had been convicted in Chicago of mail fraud and conspiracy to commit mail fraud in an investigation headed by Walter Sheridan for the Justice Department, told a completely improbable story to the Orleans Parish grand jury in August of 1967.
Ferrie himself admitted to FBI agents when they interviewed him on November 27, 1963, that he probably had said that Kennedy “ought to be shot” because of failing to provide air cover during the Bay of Pigs invasion.
I But Russo, like so *At Clay Shaw’s trial, Shaw’s attorney, Irvin Dymond, asked the prosecution to produce the alleged letter, but they were unable to do so.
Yet Russo conveniently waited until Ferrie died, and was thereby unable to refute his nonsense, before he came forward with his story. tBut he also told FBI agents Ernest Wall Jr. and Theodore Viater in their interview of him on November 27 that he had also been accused of being “a worshiper of President Kennedy” because he was a “liberal” who strongly believed in President Kennedy’s civil rights program.
As New Orleans States-Itern reporter Neil Sanders wrote, “New Orleanians who knew Lee Harvey Oswald when he last lived here are mystified by the ill-kempt, unshaven picture drawn of him [by Perry Russo] in the Garrison investigation.
Ruth Paine said, “When I came to New Orleans, about September 20th [right around the exact period—“middle of September” of 1963—that Russo would later testify he saw Oswald at Ferrie’s apartment with Shaw] he was clean-shaven then, and I never saw him with a beard.
Fie said he saw Oswald at Ferrie’s apartment, per the memo, “sitting on a chair with his leg up cleaning a rifle.
Fie added (again, in this game, unless you simply forgot what you previously said, you can add but not contradict) that he saw the man he identified as Clay Shaw, not just twice, as he told Sciambra two days earlier, but one other time at Ferrie’s apartment on Louisiana Avenue Parkway sometime between September 20 and 25,1963.
The relationship would later sour when Garrison gave an exclusive interview to the Saturday Evening Post , and additionally, when Life began to see that Garrison had nothing.
If a conspirator, say Shaw, needed to establish an alibi, the very best way to have done so would have been to stay right at his desk at the Trade Mart in New Orleans, where everyone knew him, not go to a distant city where he was largely unknown.
TActually, Goldie Moore, Shaw’s personal secretary, testified at Shaw’s trial that on May 10, 1963, officials in Portland, Oregon, who were interested in building a trade mart in Portland, wrote to Shaw about their plans.
The defense, in addition to O’Donnell’s testimony, destroyed Russo’s credibility on his allegation of being present when Shaw, Ferrie, and Oswald supposedly conspired to murder Kennedy, by showing that in the alleged letter to Garrison’s office and in his separate interviews on February 24, 1967, by Bankston, Kemp, and two other reporters, Russo never mentioned anything about Lee Flarvey Oswald, Clay Bertrand, or Clay Shaw, or any conspiracy by these two with Ferrie to murder Kennedy.
Parenthetically, we don’t know when one of Davy’s two interviews with Russo took place, but it was probably around the time of the other interview, which Davy says was on August 30, 1994, five years before the publication of Davy’s book. 1 he article that first exposed Garrison’s case as nonexistent and fraudulent was a cover story in the May 6, 1967, edition of the Saturday Evening Post by writer James Phelan, who had been dispatched to New Orleans to cover the case.
The other was a transcript of what Russo had said four days later , under hypnosis.
Fie testified that he didn’t bother to mention it because he didn’t complete dictating the memo until sometime between March 4 and 7, and by that time he had already written about this conspiratorial meeting in an earlier memo based on what Russo had said under sodium pentothal.
TAndrew Dunn said he was sitting in front of a barbershop across the street from the Office of the Registrar of Voters when he saw the black Cadillac drive up with four people in it.
A New Orleans *Fm not sure how the political and social orientation and extremism of Palmer and Manchester have any relevance to the story in this case, as some anti-conspiracy theorists have implied.
As an example of racism in rural Louisiana during this period, author Adam Fairclough writes that “CORE workers and the blacks who associated with them became perpetual objects of unfriendly police protection.
Even if *The April 15, 1978, edition of the Councilor says in its letterhead that “it has never had to print a retraction, nor has it ever been sued for libel in its 14 years of publication” If it started in 1965, 1978 would be its fourteenth year of publication.
On March 7,1967, a time when Garrison was seeking to have Arcacha come to New Orleans to help in his investigation and Arcacha feared that if he went back Garrison might somehow try to improperly implicate him in the assassination, Arcacha’s Dallas lawyer, Frank Hernandez, employed a certified Texas polygrapher to test him.
Jesse Parker was a nicely dressed, respectable, middle-aged woman who was a former hostess in the Eastern Airlines VIP lounge at Moisant Airport, New Orleans’s international airport.
In a telephone conversation with Assistant DA James A1 cock, one David Logan said he met David Ferrie at a party in the French Quarter in 1961, and Clay Shaw, whom he already knew, was at the party.
Ferrie told him that the main people behind the assassination were Shaw, Flale Boggs, the United States representative from Louisiana, Kent Courtney, a financier from New Orleans, and Richard C Lauchli, a businessman from Collingsville, Illinois.
In the early-morning hours of February 23,1967, about twelve hours after David Ferrie’s body was found, the body of Eladio “Yite” del Valle, a Cuban congressman and Havana city councilman during the Batista years who later became a Florida-based militant anti-Castro exile, was found by Miami police in his Cadillac parked in a shopping center.
Before talking to the FBI, Martin had reported what he knew about Ferrie, as well as why he believed Ferrie may have been involved in the assassination, to station WWL-TY in New Orleans and to a Major Trosclair of the New Orleans Police Department.
Further, Fliggenbotham worked for Banister in 1960-1961, and Oswald wasn’t even in New Orleans during this period, though Fliggenbotham continued to have some social contact with Banister after that.
The information Fliggenbotham furnished the DA’s office, possibly because he was facing a charge of marijuana possession, was further suspect.
This fact alone renders Mellen’s book devoid of any credibility, and I will not dignify it by putting any of her allegations, and my response to them, in the main text.
In her book of street gossip, rank rumors, and deception, Mellen also charges that the CIA and FBI joined together to subvert Garrison’s investigation and prosecution of Shaw, treating as criminal the CIA’s normal and proper effort to convince the media that Garrison’s charges that they were behind Kennedy’s murder were wrong, and as only an effort to prevent Garrison from proving that they, in fact, did have Kennedy murdered, something she accepts as a fact without pre*1 know that the name Jack is a form of John, not a form of Joe, a different name.
But because Mellen was filching the identity of CIA agent Joseph Martin, she apparently thought John was close enough, particularly since the middle initial, /, that the Reverend Stanley gave for Jack Martin’s alias John Martin (Jack Martin’s real middle initial was S’) was the same as Joseph’s.
Martin, a paragon of mental stability himself, thinks Tommy, who can’t read or write, isn’t all there—a belief not decreased when Tommy was arrested for impersonating a priest.
TBeckham says that David Ferrie asked him if he wanted to be an ordained priest in the Catholic Church and run a “Church” that was being set up called the United Catholic Mission Fathers (also known as the United Cuban Mission Forces), which was actually being used to solicit funds for the anti-Castro effort.
Fie is told to fly to Dallas and deliver it to a man at the Executive Inn whom he will recognize as having met at the “United Catholic Mission Fathers” in New Orleans.
Gellman, Contending with Kennan ,ll) In the ensuing years, Kennan’s words, of course, presaged the American posture toward the Kremlin, most notably in the Cuban missile crisis sixteen years later. 1422 best seller : Kennedy’s second and last book, Profiles in Courage, about biographies of United States senators he felt had taken courageous positions in American history, was published in 1956.
The issue of Ruby’s sanity came up again in a sanity hearing in Dallas on June 13, 1966, before Judge Louis T Flolland, who had replaced Judge Brown on the Ruby case.
Second, they make the allegation that there are too many coincidences in the Kennedy case, but when they finally get around to setting forth what they perceive to be a suspicious “coincidence,” either it isn’t a coincidence or, if it is, it can be proved that it is, in fact, truly fortuitous.
The account was opened with a deposit of $1.00 and additional deposits of $1.00 on December 14,1951, and January 10,1952.
