In this article the author takes a critical view of the legality and good faith of the American action.
International Crises and the Role of Law, which he takes to be an authoritative statement of the American position by a former legal adviser to the State Department.
In contrast to the almost universally favorable interpretation of the American action in published legal opinions, Shalom rejects the official American justification in terms of regionalism and self-defense as incompatible with established principles of international law.
International law, like domestic law, is obviously not the ultimate standard by which conduct ought to be judged.
All law is formulated by the powerful, and it often diverges markedly from justice.
In cases where law and justice clash, it is the moral course to follow justice and ignore law.
It enables us to assess the conduct of ""great powers"" in accordance with the standards they themselves have written and publicly espoused.
The Cuban missile crisis of October 1962 provides an illuminating * The author would like to acknowledge valuable comments from Marc Miller and Robert C Rosen.
It exhibits the extent of United States compliance with international law and, more important, it demonstrates how that law may affect international action in time of crisis.
Moreover, the arguments set forth in defense of the United States course of action permit us to assess the objectivity exhibited by international lawyers and other commentators.
International Crises and the Role of Law,' since it is the only book-length treatment of the legal aspects of the missile crisis.
Chayes, a professor at Harvard Law School, was Legal Adviser to the Department of State from 1961 to 1964.
The book is not, however, a participant's account written during the heat of crisis.
Rather, it represents the measured reflections of a prominent participant-scholar writing more than a decade after the fact; and, as such, it warrants serious attention.
It suggests that once such advice is given the obligations of the legal adviser are discharged.
It does not obligate the State Department's legal advisers to speak out when the United States is violating or about to violate international law.
It is striking, however, that Chayes nowhere asks even the questions Rusk includes among the legal adviser's limited responsibilities.
All subsequent page references to this book will be indicated in the text.
United States Department of State, Department of State Bulletin, 27 Sept.
However, Chayes's understanding of the terms ""persuasive,"" ""serious,"" and ""responsible"" is so broad as to subsume the most perfunctory efforts at legal justification.
For example, he tells us that a blockade is a threat or use of force in the dictionary meaning of the words, in the minds of United States policymakers, and in the view of the State Department's legal advisers.
Since there is always disagreement on any question, we are reduced by Chayes's standard to a legal relativism, which justifies the actions of all parties to a dispute and prevents us from distinguishing between those who abide by law and those who violate it.
Without such a distinction, it is difficult to see what possible relevance law can have.
The Legality of United States Actions When we turn to the specifics of Chayes's argument for the legality of the United States action during the missile crisis, Chayes's reasoning is neither ""persuasive,"" nor particularly serious notwithstanding the faqade of legal terminology.
Covey Oliver, an international lawyer, wrote these words only to dismiss them derisively as ""the favorite popular syllogism in more or less informal logic,"" and he capped his dismissal with the remark that some telegrams to the White House containing legal criti3.
Proceedings of the American Society of International Law, 57th meeting , 11.
A reviewer in the Harvard Journal of International Law commends Chayes's book, but wonders whether the view Chayes criticizes (that law, inter alia, ought determinately to prohibit conduct) might not be ""made of straw,"" ""whether anyone in these professions really subscribes"" to this view.
A Hopeful Prescription for Legal Writing,"" American Journal of International Law 57 (April 1963): 373.
The first part of the argument asserts that the quarantine was a blockade in everything but name.
And Chayes himself has admitted that his assistant ""suggested the use of the term 'defensive quarantine,' at least in part"" to avoid the question of whether it was an act of war.
The second part of Covey's ""popular syllogism"" asserts that a blockade is an act of war.
Blockade is an act of force which, if not accepted by the other side, would be interpreted and approached as an act of war.
All that a pacific blockade is is an announcement by the blockading party that these steps you are taking are all you have in mind.
If the other side refuses to accept that measure, it is an act of force which can be interpreted or could be interpreted as an act of war.
So that I would think, as far as the United States is concerned in regard to Cuba, and given the involvement of the powers in that situation, that if we decided to institute a blockade we would have 5.
The Official United States Case In place of the ""popular syllogism,"" the State Department Legal Office justified United States actions on the basis of the rights of regional organizations as formulated in the Rio Treaty and the United Nations charter.
Article 53 of the United Nations Charter precludes enforcement action by regional organizations without Security Council authorization; but the quarantine was not enforcement action and, in any case, authorization does not necessarily mean prior authorization.
All of these would violate territorial integrity, sovereignty, or political independence without being an armed attack.
But it is hard to see how Soviet missiles placed in Cuba with the consent of the Cuban government violate the sovereignty or independence of either Cuba or any other American state.
Article 2 of the United Nations Charter requires that member states ""refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force 8.
We are thus expected to accept that when the USSR placed missiles in Cuba with the Cuban government's consent, it violated the political independence of other American states, while the United States blockade of island Cuba did not violate Cuban political independence.
It is essential to the State Department's legal case to consider Cuba part of the ""inter-American system,"" for regional organizations may take action against nonmember states only in case of self-defense against armed attack.
Unfortunately for the United States position, in early 1962 at the Punta del Este Conference, the United States had had Cuba excluded from the inter-American system.
Elsewhere, however, Chayes has dealt with this difficulty by denying that Cuba had been expelled.
The Castro government, says Chayes, had been ""suspended"" from participation in OAS agencies.
To argue that this is only a suspension because the resolution refers 11.
As Quincy Wright has noted , this makes the blockade illegal vis-a-vis the Soviet Union even if it were legal against Cuba.
Chayes replies that this results in a legal anomaly because law would then allow an air strike but not the more moderate blockade-assuming, contrary to fact, that the Soviet Union would not be affected by the air strike.
No one, for example, considers it an anomaly that a state may imprison one of its own citizens but may not even tax residents of another state.
But nowhere does he specify any subsisting rights, and it is difficult to imagine what these might be.
In any case, the Punta del Este resolution, in view of Cuba's alleged failure to live up to its obligations, declared that no member state of the inter-American system could claim the rights and privileges of membership if it failed to recognize the corresponding obligations.
The first precedent involved OAS-imposed sanctions against the Do minican Republic, in particular the severance of diplomatic relation and the partial interruption of economic relations.
Since enforcement actions involve the threat or use of force, it is neither surprising nor relevant to the status of a blockade that breaking diplomatic or economic relations do not qualify as enforcement action.
Thus, it appears from the practice of the Security Council, that measures taken by a regional organization to deal with a threat to the peace, are not necessarily ""enforcement action"" even though they are obligatory in character.
The defective logic of the argument posits that some obligatory measures are not enforcement action; the quarantine was recommendatory; therefore the quarantine was not enforcement action.
Actually, the Suez operation was not an enforcement action, not because it was only recommended to member states that they contribute 17.
A regional organization could recommend to its members any military action whatsoever; and, since it would only be a recommendation, it would not be enforcement action.
Moreover, the official United States argument showing the quarantine decision to have been a recommendation-that Article xx of the Rio Treaty states that no country can be required to resort to armed force against its will-leads to the absurd conclusion that there is no possibility that the OAS could ever take enforcement action.
But his only answer is that ""each of these objections could be rebutted, but the position was unwieldy enough to cause a shift in official exposition towards a second approach.
The U.N. force in Suez, however, required the direct consent of the parties, not just the consent entailed in United Nations membership.
To argue that an action taken by the OAS is not enforcement action because Cuba consented by virtue of its OAS membership, is to argue that it is impossible for regional organizations to take any actions against members that might be characterized as enforcement action.
One may wonder just how easy such a rebuttal would be, but in any case let us consider the treatment of the concept of ""authorization"" in the official United States position.
The United States legal position maintains that such authorization need not be prior authorization, despite Chayes's acknowledgment that ""very probably"" the intent of the framers of the United Nations Charter was that authorization take place before the enforcement action .22 This is plain common sense, since once an enforcement action has begun the view of the Security Council may well be moot.
In any case, to view ""authorization"" as including after-the-fact authorization does not make the quarantine legal, because at no timebefore or after the fact-did the Security Council authorize the OAS action.
Authorization was now interpreted to include the absence of disapproval by the Security Council.
Although explicitly rejected by the United States government, the argument is worth considering if only to show the extent to which international lawyers view their craft as a creative enterprise.
These provisions would seem clearly inapplicable in the case of the Cuban missile crisis, where no armed attack had occurred.
Under strict logic, these two articles together are the equivalent of permitting self-defense ""if and only if"" an armed attack occurs.
Other jurists have argued that the ""inherent"" right of self-defense by tradition permits action in those cases where an enemy is just about to attack.
To be sure, this is of no relevance to the case of the Cuban missile crisis because, as numerous high administration officials have stated, they took it for granted that the Soviet Union was not preparing a surprise attack.
Moreover, as many officials acknowledged, the Soviet missiles in Cuba did not come near eliminating United States strategic nuclear superiority.
To argue, as some have done,""6 that the missiles in Cuba doubled the Soviet first-strike capability is simply beside the point, since a Soviet first-strike would be patently suicidal in the face of the United States two to one advantage in strategic nuclear weapons.
Allison has also argued that there is no reason to assume that the Soviet Union would have stopped with the planned 72 missiles in Cuba; an indefinitely greater number could have been installed, thus shifting the balance of power.
But this is like saying that the United States troops in Berlin were a threat to Moscow because they could have been augmented with many millions more.
In both cases, the hypothetical danger could be dealt with when it threatened to become actual.
But if military action is permissible any time an adversary installs a missile base, then every great power would be justified in attacking any othera situation hardly conducive to strengthening world law.
American missiles were installed in Turkey and Italy during the Eisenhower administration.
Apologists for American policy have tried to distinguish between the ""defensive"" missiles of the United States and the ""offensive"" missiles in Cuba.
In the United Nations Security Council, for example, Adlai Stevenson delivered a lengthy disquisition on the subject.
United States missiles, he said, ""help a country to defend its political independence,"" ""leave the political institutions of the recipient countries intact,"" ""are not designed to subvert the territorial integrity or political independence of other states,"" etc.
In the Soviet lexicon evidently all weapons are purely defensive, even weapons that can strike from 1,000 to 2,000 miles away.
It is unlikely that the United States response would have been less belligerent had Khrushchev announced in advance that long range missiles were being installed in Cuba.
Moreover, according to the United States intelligence estimate, the Soviet Union presumed the United States knew about the ""secret"" missiles.
In a memorandum prepared in August 1962, United States Assistant Attorney General Norbert Schlei argued that The States in which bases are maintained by the United States are in each case among the major targets of Soviet military preparations.
See also Henry Kissinger, ""Reflections on Cuba,"" Reporter, 22 Nov.62, 22.
For Cuba to harbor Soviet missiles would constitute a wholly disproportionate response to any sane estimate of its defense needs against the United States.
In April 1961 the United States sponsored an invasion of Cuba at the Bay of Pigs.
In the ten months preceding the missile crisis, a program to help overthrow the Castro government-""Operation Mongoose""-had been approved at the highest levels of the Kennedy administration and sabotage missions against Cuba undertaken.
The whole conduct of the United States over the past fifteen years gives no suggestion of aggressive intentions, as the overwhelming majority of the international community would testify.
According to Sorensen , it was estimated that all the Soviet military aid to Cuba short of the ballistic missiles, but including the MIG'S and the anti-aircraft missiles, could do no more than slow down an American invasion of Cuba by 24 hours.
Sorensen, Kennedy, 696, citing an adviser who had served in the preceding administration.
What is significant is that almost every American legal expert writing on the missile crisis found the United States action legitimate under international law by virtue of one of these two rationales.
But there was also a less commendable type of exception, that is, that the United States acted illegally but that this was how it should have acted.
While all other uses of force require Security Council authorization, self-defense-even unilateral self-defense-against armed attack is permitted, precisely because survival may be at stake.
To say that the United States may take whatever actions it wants in defense of its power, position, and prestige is refreshing in its candor after all the convoluted legal casuistry, but it is no less an apologia for imperialism, nor does it move on a higher moral plane.
On the whole, much of what passes for debate on the missile crisis reflects a rather limited difference of opinion.
Some hold United States actions to have been legal and, therefore, justified, while others argue that United States actions were illegal but justified nonetheless.
The Role of Lawyers Chayes considers it significant that lawyers were well-represented among United States policymakers, both in formal legal capacities and otherwise.
Three formal legal advisers put forth arguments regarding the blockade.
Other lawyers participating in nonlegal capacities included Robert Kennedy, a key figure in ""Operation Mongoose,"" who had pushed for ""massive activity"" against Castro;40 George Ball, who felt that a blockade would have more ""color of legality"" than other measures;41 and 39.
Consider that Nicholas Katzenbach, a professor of international law, as a member of the Johnson Administration reassured the president that he need no more legal authority than the Tonkin Resolution to justify escalation of the Vietnam War.
Strikes at population targets are likely not only to create a counterproductive wave of revulsion abroad and at home, but greatly to increase the risk of enlarging the war with China and the Soviet Union.
Destruction of locks and dams, however-if handled right-might offer promise.
He claims that legal considerations were instrumental in the choice of the blockade as the prudent and moderate course of action.
But since the air strike option was thought likely to precipitate an all-out nuclear war, and the invasion option ""more than any other course"" was feared to risk world war,""4 prudence was dictated by utilitarian considerations rather than by a deep respect for law.
But in the relevant chapter, the inquiry is significantly narrowed to exclude ""milder"" responses.
Evidently he considers this sufficient reason for omitting other options (such as negotiations) from his analysis.
Thus, if law pointed to the blockade, it was because of the drastically restricted list of available options.
Robert Kennedy was emphatic that he would not have his brother go down in history as the Tojo of the sixties.
The point would be more convincing if the air strike had not also been rejected because of doubts that it would accomplish its intended purpose, that is, the ""surgical"" elimination of the missiles.Nevertheless, it is instructive to examine what Robert Kennedy understood by his Pearl Harbor analogy.
He obviously was not expressing a blanket rejection of surprise air attacks by big countries against small ones, for he had approved of such attacks preceding the Bay of Pigs.
It is certainly true that jingoist feeling was widespread, but the Kennedy Administration must bear much of the responsibility.
As Allison observes , the Bay of Pigs taught the American people that Castro was a dangerous threat to United States security and that calls for invasion had legitimacy.
Four days after Robert Kennedy raised the Pearl Harbor analogy, the president was still asking the military whether the ""surgical"" air strike could succeed.
But Taylor's view as quoted by Abel was shared by Rober Kennedy and those who accepted his Pearl Harbor analogy; that is to say, they did not object to a air strike killing thousands, but only to the fact that there would be no warning.
This is clear fro the testimony of participants52 as well as from the fact that every policy maker was willing to go ahead with an air strike if Khrushchev did no capitulate.
Necessity and Proportionality A third way in which the law influenced policy, according to Chayes, was in the adherence to the standard of necessity and proportionality But in view of the legal obligation to make every effort to settle disputes by peaceful means, the United States response diverges sharply fro this standard.
In his first State of the Union message in January 1961, Kennedy declared that ""communist domination in this hemisphere can never b 50.
Thus, the United States brought the world to the brink of nuclear war only to accept roughly the same terms it had rejected before the crisis.
From the time the United States discovered the missiles, negotiations were never a significant consideration.
During the crisis, an opportunity for a peaceful settlement presented itself when Khrushchev offered to trade his missiles in Cuba for the United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey.
This would have involved absolutely no military cost to the United States since the Jupiters were obsolete and, in fact, Kennedy had wanted them removed earlier.
However, John Kennedy, in his brother's words, ""obviously did not wish to order the withdrawal of the 54.
This highly significant speech is totally ignored in the accounts of Robert Kennedy, Abel, Sorensen, Schlesinger, and Chayes.
By similar logic, one supposes, Brezhnev followed the diplomatic path in Czechoslovakia after his tanks had arranged the military setting that made diplomacy effective.
It was the United States that was now threatening Cuba with air strike or invasion, while Khrushchev was desperately clutching at any straw that would make his defeat appear less than total.
In any case, United States policymakers rejected the ""not unreasonable"" Soviet proposal, and they did so knowing that their rejection carried with it a significant chance of nuclear war.
But the strangest rationale for United States intransigence is Graham Allison's suggestion that the United States did in fact accept the Soviet offer.
Kennedy, says Allison, offered in private to accept Khrushchev's deal even though he rejected it in public.
This in fact was how Dean Rusk explicitly put it when asked a few wee before the crisis if the United States might not be approached to shut down so of its overseas bases in return for the Soviet Union closing down its Cuban bas ""This is not a negotiable point.
His concern was solely with avoiding the appearance of capitulating to Kennedy.
A public trade would serve this end, though Khrushchev knew he would be giving up new missiles for old, because it might strike world opinion as an even-handed resolution of the crisis.
A private commitment from Kennedy to remove the missiles some months later, on the other hand, could obviously neither alter strategic realities nor prevent Khrushchev's humiliation, since humiliation is by its nature public.
And, indeed, Schlesinger tells us that Robert Kennedy made clear to Ambassador Dobrynin that the understanding would be cancelled at once if the Soviet government made it public.
Thus, at no point during the crisis did the United States drop its insistence that the Soviet Union suffer a public humiliation.
A final episode revealing the United States commitment to ""necessity and proportionality"" involved the IL-28 bombers.
Only when Khrushchev sent word a few hours before the news conference that he would remove the planes did Kennedy finally declare the end of the quarantine.
International Organizations Chayes sees still another influence of law on United States policy in 64.
To support this claim, he obviously must show not just that the United States went to the OAS or the U.N., but that it actually intended to abide by the decisions of these bodies, that it took their deliberations seriously, and that it was willing to assume legal obligation beyond political expediency.
Not only does Chayes fail to show this, but he provides evidence to the contrary.
Sorensen relates an Executive Committee discussion in which the point was made that without a two-thirds OAS vote ""allies and neutral as well as adversaries might well regard it as an illegal blockade, in violation of the United Nations Charter and international law.
Robert Kennedy's regard for the OAS is also indicated by his suggestion in mid-1961 that the OAs could be persuaded to prohibit any external arms shipment to Cuba if th United States falsely reported that Cuban MIG's had attacked Guantanamo.
The most telling indication of the United States attitude toward the OAS was its resolve, if the OAS had failed to endorse the quarantine, to go ahead anyway.
Kennedy's October 22 speech was purposely ambiguous on this point, and at a briefing for the press that evening Chayes and George Ball were questioned about it.
Here then was an opportunity to witness law in action, as the State Department's legal adviser and an undersecretary of state, himself a distinguished lawyer, fielded the reporters' questions.
One group for whom law was clearly not important was United States policymakers.
In 1974, Chayes wrote that the appeal to the OAS confirmed the importance of law because if the OAS had rejected the United States blockade, it would have been difficult to go ahead with it.
Political difficulties can be minimized, for example, by secrecy or bribery, or can be accepted as a cost that can be balanced in a cost-benefit analysis.
Although the OAS action was to provide the legal basis for the blockade, and United States officials charged that Latin America was as much the target of the Cuban missiles as was the United States, United States 74.
The next day the United States rushed through the OAS a resolution endorsing the quarantine.
Kennedy was aware that time for deliberation had swayed his Executive Committee in favor of the blockade rather than the air strike.
But similar time for sober deliberation was not given to the OAS nations.
Nor did the OAS structure give members much leeway for qualifying their positions on the United States resolution.
Brazil, Mexico, and Bolivia abstained on a sentence authorizing members (that is, the United States) to use force beyond the blockade.
The reluctance of governments representing more than half the population of Latin America to endorse United States action beyond the blockade seems not to have been of any concern to United States policymakers in considering further steps; indeed, most accounts of the missile crisis do not even refer to the reservations of Brazil, Mexico, and Bolivia.
One of the main reasons for putting off the President's speech from Sunday to Monday-a delay that nearly resulted in premature disclosure-was Assistant Secretary Martin's view that it would be virtually impossible to get to the Latin American heads of state on Sunday.
It cannot be said, therefore, that the reference to the OAS was a gesture in the direction of legalism, adopted at the stage of execution, carrying no risks for the basic policy chosen.
But the State Department stressed that our ambassadors had to brief Allied and Latin-American leaders and noted the impossibility of reaching them all on a Sunday.
The President agreed to Monday, but stated he would still speak Sunday if the story appeared certain to break.
He was, moreover, going ahead regardless of Allied reaction, though he wanted them to be informed.
Abel, Crisis, 113, mentions only that Bolivia abstained on a single paragraph without indicating what it was.
Second, since Kennedy was concerned with briefing not just Latin American governments but also the Europeans-who had no role in legalizing the blockade-he was clearly moved by political, rather than legal, considerations.
Indeed, it was Dean Acheson-the lawyer who said that ""legal niceties were so much pompous foolishness"" 79-who urged that Kennedy inform the NATO allies.
Chayes believes ""that ultimately, the OAS would have been involved, even if the decision had been for air strike or invasion.
Since Chayes considers air strike and invasion to be clear violations of the United Nations Charter , he thus concedes that it was not a deep sense of legality that impelled the United States to seek OAS sanction, but rather political expediency.
The United States approach to the United Nations evinced an even greater lack of concern for law.
The characteristic response of the United Nations in major crises had been some kind of standstill resolution, an effort to stop the shooting and slow down the momentum of the crisis to give time for cooler heads to prevail.
Moreover, during this time it would be much more difficult for the United States to escalate in any way that would intensify the pressures on the U.S.S.R. and Cuba.
It was pretty certain that once the crisis was made public, the world would know that it was closer to a nuclear showdown than ever before.
That perception might very well translate itself, whether from disapproval or from fear, into a United Nations demand that the United States not only stand still, but stand down.
Sorensen, Kennedy, 697; Dean Acheson, ""Dean Acheson's Version of Robert Kennedy's Version of the Cuban Missile Affair,"" Esquire, Feb.69, reprinted in Divine, Crisis, 203.
It was the basis for a United States holding action in the United Nations 'The U.N., which the United States was treating in so cavalier a fashion, was by no means a Soviet puppet-as shown most clearly when it took no action whatsoever against the American-sponsored Bay of Pigs invasion.
On October 24, two days after Kennedy's announcement of the blockade, U Thant addressed identical letters to Kennedy and Khrushchev asking for a two to three week suspension of arms shipments to Cuba and of the quarantine, so that negotiations could take place.
The Soviet Union accepted but the United States rejected U Thant's appeal.
Kennedy had been ""anything but grateful"" for the secretary general's intervention.
U Thant's proposal ""would clearly blunt the American initiative and destroy its momentum,"" as Roger Hilsman put it.
However, the Kennedy statement that Chayes quotes was not a reply to U Thant's October 24 letter, which the United States unambiguously rebuffed.
Rather it was a reply to a second appeal by the secretary general on October 26, after the Soviet Union had already backed down by turning its ships around.
Kennedy responded to this second appeal, in Sorensen's words, ""simply stating the obvious-that there would be no incidents if Soviet ships stayed 81.
To most liberal American commentators, the notion that the United States bore primary blame for the crisis has been simply unthinkable.
Again, there surely was an asymmetry here, but not of the kind Chayes assumes.
Conclusions Scholars were quick to pronounce new principles of international la derived from the missile crisis.
But their authors mus certainly have known that these new principles did not apply equally all nations.
The United States did not bother to obtain ""mutual agre ment"" for stationing nuclear weapons in Korea or Japan or West Ger many or the Philippines.
Nor did any United States legal scholar denounce such American violations of nuclear-age law.
If international la is to have any meaning, the great powers and their international lawyers will have to be more consistent in applying and interpreting its rules.
