Foreword T hough the year 2009 was a gloomy one in terms of the deep recession that gripped the globe and the H1N1 flu pandemic that infected hundreds of thousands, the year also offered a chance to reflect upon the 200th anniversary of the births of two historical giants—Abraham Lincoln and Charles Darwin—who were bom on the same day in 1809, as well as the 40th anniversary of the musical experience that became known as Woodstock.
Though Mexico grappled with ferocious drug wars, Pakistan battled Islamist extremists, and the recruitment of child soldiers remained a scourge, the future looked promising in some respects.
China prospered; electric cars geared up; and unmanned aerial vehicles helped fight wars and defend borders.
In the sciences, autism therapies were tailored for youngsters, primate research became a key to understanding what it means to be human, and ""Ardi,” a possible ancestor older than the hominin skeleton Lucy, captured headlines.
In the swimming world, the advent of nontextile swimwear led to the smashing of hundreds of records.
The arts and music world experienced a particularly grave loss of talent with the deaths of American painter Andrew Wyeth, German-born American composer Lukas Foss, American author John Updike, and pop superstar Michael Jackson.
Also leaving the scene were Walter Cronkite, the dean of American journalism, and Edward Kennedy, the lion of the United States Senate.
Banking Emerges from the Worldwide Financial Crisis Computers and Information Systems.
Geology and Geochemistry, Geophysics, Meteorology and Climate Education.
Zoology, Botany, Molecular Biology and Genetics, Paleontology Literature.
English, German, French, Italian, Spanish, Portuguese, Russian, Persian, Arabic, Chinese, Japanese Military Affairs.
Sean Gallup/Getty Images X Dates of 2009 Giant dominoes placed in front of the Brandenburg Gate fall in a symbolic act during ceremonies on November 9 to commemorate the 20th anniversary of the fall of the Berlin Wall.
Chinese naval personnel march past Tiananmen Square in Beijing on October 1 as part of China's celebrations marking 60 years of communist rule.
A Samoan man surveys damage left behind by a tsunami that was generated by a magnitude-8. earthquake near Samoa on September 30.
Sri Lankan children 'right) participate in a victory procession on May 20 following the capture of the final enclave of the Tamil Tiger rebels and an end to Sri Lanka's long-running civil war.
Chris McGrath—Getty Images; Eranga Jayawardena/AP Photos: Rodolfo Gonzalez/AP; NASA Family members of a soldier killed during the November 5 mass shooting at the United States Army base at Ft.
Hood, Texas, grieve during a memorial service honouring the 13 people who lost their lives.
Astronaut Andrew Feustel performs work on the Hubble Space Telescope on May 14.
January In reaffirming the greatness of our nation, we understand that greatness is never a given.
Barack Obama in his inauguration address, January 20 I With the beginning of the new year, the Czech Republic, led by Prime Minister Mirek Topolanek, assumes the presidency of the European Union.
A suicide bomber detonates his weapon among a crowd of pilgrims visiting a Shi'ite shrine in Baghdad; at least 40 people, many of them Iranians, are killed.
The new United States embassy compound in Baghdad is dedicated; it is the largest United States embassy in the world.
Some 40 Palestinians are killed by Israeli shelling outside a UN educational facility that was being used as a refuge in the Gaza Strip.
George W Bush creates the largest marine reserve in the world, totaling 8 January 505,773 sq km (195,280 sq mi) in area, by designating the Mariana Trench, Pacific Remote Islands, and Rose Atoll as marine national monuments.
The centenary of the U.K.’s domestic intelligence agency, MI5, is marked by the first-ever interview of the agency’s head by the press as Jonathan Evans meets with reporters at MI5 headquarters in London.
The Sirius Star, a Saudi-owned supertanker that was seized by Somali pirates in November 2008, is released in return for the payment of $3 million in ransom; however, a boat carrying pirates to shore capsizes, which results in the drowning of five of the pirates and the loss of some of the ransom money.
U At the Golden Globe Awards in Beverly Hills, Calif., best picture honours go to Slumdog Millionaire and Vicky Cristina Barcelona; the award for best director goes to Danny Boyle for Slumdog Millionaire.
Lee MyungBak of South Korea and Prime Minister Taro Aso of Japan agree to embark on a program of economic cooperation in view of the global economic crisis.
Ethiopian troops complete their withdrawal from Mogadishu, Som.; various Islamist groups, notably al-Shabaab, take over vacated posts, and fighting between Islamist forces and Ethiopian troops leaves at least 15 people dead.
Israeli armed forces shell a hospital run by the Palestine Red Crescent Society and the headquarters of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency in Gaza City; another attack kills Said Siam, the head of Hamas security forces.
A demonstration in Vilnius by thousands of people opposed to proposed adjustments to economic austerity in Lithuania turns into rioting.
Israel declares that it will begin a cease-fire early the following day in its operations against Hamas in the Gaza Strip; some 1,200 Palestinians and 13 Israelis have died during the 22-day operation.
Prime Minister Vladimir Putin of Russia and Prime Minister Yuliya Tymoshenko of Ukraine reach an agreement on the price that Ukraine will pay for Russian natural gas; previous accords have fallen through, and at least 12 people have frozen to death while some 20 countries are cut off from gas supplies from Russia.
In the Swat valley in Pakistan, five schools closed for winter vacation are bombed; authorities believe the culprits are Taliban fighters determined to prevent the education of girls.
Barack Obama is inaugurated as the 44th president of the United States before what is perhaps the largest crowd ever to attend a presidential inauguration.
Hillary Rodham Clinton is confirmed as United States secretary of state, and Janet Napolitano is sworn in as United States secretary of homeland security.
The online marketplace company eBay reports its first-ever revenue decline.
Japan reports that its export rate in December 2008 fell drastically, while China announces a sharp slowdown in growth in the final quarter of the year, and South Korea says that its economy shrank in the same period; all these results are related to the economic crisis in the United States and Europe.
Barack Obama signs executive orders requiring that the military prison at Guantanamo Bay in Cuba be closed within a year, insisting that interrogation methods fall within the guidelines of the Army Field Manual, and ending the CIA's secret overseas prison program.
The British Office for National Statistics releases data showing that the U.K. officially went into recession in the final quarter of 2008, and Spain’s National Statistics Institute reveals that the country’s unemployment rate during the last quarter of 2008 reached 13.9%, the highest in the euro zone.
A suicide car bomber detonates his weapon near an African Union peacekeeping base in Mogadishu, Som., as a public bus is passing; at least 15 people are killed.
The coalition government of Iceland falls, a victim of the collapse of the country's economy.
The United States House of Representatives passes an $819 billion economic stimulus package supported by Pres.
Afghanistan’s Independent Election Commission postpones the country's presidential election until August 20, saying it would be impossible to be ready sooner; the constitution requires that an election be held at least 30 days before May 22, when Pres.
Rod Blagojevich is guilty of abuse of power and removes him from office; Pat Quinn becomes governor in his place.
Morgan Tsvangirai agrees to become prime minister of Zimbabwe in a coalition government with Pres.
Robert Mugabe; the Southern African Development Community pushed for this solution to the impasse.
In Djibouti, Somalia’s transitional legislature elects Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed, former head of the Islamic Courts Union, president; the news is greeted with exultation in Mogadishu.
Australian Prime Minister Kevin Rudd in response to wildfires that have consumed 1,995 sq km and left dozens dead, February 8 Johanna Sigurdardottir is sworn in as prime minister of Iceland at the head of a caretaker coalition government.
A government report in South Korea shows that the country’s exports declined by a record 32.8% in January.
Kurmanbek Bakiyev announces that he will close the Manas air base used by the United States as a staging area for military forces in Afghanistan.
Barack Obama announces new rules that will cap the salary of top executives in companies receiving government financial assis12 February tance at $500,000 and impose restrictions on bonus and severance pay for such company leaders.
Scientists from Liberia and neighbouring countries announce that they will meet to try to find a way to contain a massive infestation of Achaea catocaloides rena caterpillars that is devastating forests and crops in northern Liberia.
Hu Jintao signs an agreement for the China Railway Corp. to build a monorail system in Mecca for the use of pilgrims making the hajj.
Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe swears in Morgan Tsvangirai as prime minister; the previous day Tsvangirai chose Tendai Biti as finance minister.
Officials in Pakistan acknowledge that the terrorist attacks that took place in Mumbai in 13 February November 2008 were partially planned in Pakistan and announce the arrest of six people in connection with the attack.
Abraham Lincoln wrote the Gettysburg Address, opens as part of nationwide celebrations of the 200th anniversary of Lincoln’s birth.
A suicide bomber kills at least 35 Shi'ite pilgrims who were on their way to Karbala’, Iraq, for a religious observation.
A missile attack from United States drones against Taliban and al-Qaeda targets in Pakistan’s South Waziristan province kills 30 people.
Voters in Venezuela approve a ballot measure that will remove term limits for all elected officials, including Pres.
The government of Pakistan agrees to an accord offered by the Taliban that will allow Shari'ah law in the Swat valley region of the North-West Frontier Province and restrict government military action to responding to attacks, in effect ceding that area to the Taliban.
The Swiss bank UBS agrees to reveal the names of American holders of secret bank accounts whom United States authorities believe culpable of tax evasion.
Barack Obama announces a new $275 billion plan that is intended to help as many as nine million people save their homes from foreclosure or refinance their mortgages.
The International Atomic Energy Agency reports that it has found that Iran has a third more enriched uranium than the country had disclosed and that the amount of uranium would be sufficient to make an atom bomb.
Ivars Godmanis resigns as prime minister of Latvia, as the country’s economy suffers a collapse in the face of the global credit crisis.
Shimon Peres asks Benjamin Netanyahu, leader of the Likud party, to form a government.
United States military offiW I cials concede that an air strike in Afghanistan's Herat province by coalition forces on February 17 killed 13 civilians and 3 militants; the United States military had initially said that all the dead were militants.
Police in Athens say that a leftist militant grouping, the Sect of Rebels, has claimed responsibility for a grenade and gun attack on the headquarters of the Alter private television network that took place on February 18.
An attack by J W Islamist insurgents on an African Union compound in Mogadishu, Som., leaves 11 peacekeepers, all of them from Burundi, dead.
A study published in Nature Structural & Molecular Biology describes the engineering of antibodies that attack a portion of the influenza virus that does not mutate, suggesting the possibility of a single vaccine effective against all strains of flu.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average falls 250.89 points, to 7114.78, while the Nasdaq composite index loses 3.71% of its value, dropping to 1387.72.
The United States government describes its intention to give $900 million to nongovernmental organizations to help rebuilding efforts in the Gaza Strip.
The leader of J the Taliban in the Swat valley region of Pakistan declares an indefinite cease-fire.
Barack Obama makes a nationally televised speech before both houses of Congress in which he lays out his plans and describes the goals of his budget.
At a conference of the Bangladesh Rifles, a paramilitary border guard organization, in Dhaka, Bangladesh, hundreds of troops mutiny, leading to a lengthy gun battle between the mutineers and army troops in which at least 50 people are killed.
Barack Obama proposes a sweeping 10-year budget that would overhaul health care, push back global warming, and reverse a 30-year trend of increasing economic inequality.
The American computer company Dell Inc. reports that its net income in the most recent quarter fell 48% from the same quarter a year earlier.
Scripps Co. since 1926, but Scripps had been unsuccessfully trying to sell it and felt it could not afford to keep publishing.
Two days of milW itary consultations between China and the United States conclude with an agreement that highlevel discussions about military issues between the two countries will be resumed.
Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan orders that presidential elections be held in accordance with the constitution, in April or May, not, as now scheduled, in August; it had been deemed logistically impossible to stage elections earlier than August.
Joao Bernardo Vieira of Guinea-Bissau is killed by army troops; the previous day the army chief of staff had died in a bomb attack.
Omar al-Bashir of The Sudan to face charges relating to atrocities in the Darfur region; Bashir almost immediately expels several international aid groups working in Darfur.
The European Central Bank lowers its key interest rate by half a percentage point, to 1.5%, its lowest level since its inception, and for the first time forecasts that the economy of the 16 eurozone countries is likely to shrink in the coming year.
United States government data show that the unemployment rate in February reached 8.1%, its highest level in 25 years.
Salam Fayad submits his resignation as prime minister of the Fatah-dominated Palestinian Authority.
A suicide bomber detonates his weapon among a group of Iraqi army officers heading toward a reconciliation conference in the town of Abu Ghraib; at least 33 people are killed.
Representatives of Fatah, Hamas, and 11 other Palestinian groups begin reconciliation talks in Cairo.
Turing Award for excellence in computer science is granted to Barbara Liskov for her contributions to the use of data abstraction to make software easier to create, change, and maintain. n Pres.
Nicolas Sarkozy of France announces that the country will once again become a full member of NATO; it had withdrawn from the organization’s military command in 1966.
Madagascar opposition leader Andry Rajoelina backs out of a planned meeting with Pres.
Marc Ravalomanana and other community leaders to seek a solution to the country's political crisis.
Medet Sadyrkulov, a high-ranking politician in Kyrgyzstan who had recently changed camps to join the opposition, is killed in a car accident that his supporters characterize as highly suspicious.
The revelation that executives at the troubled insurer American International Group are to receive large bonuses, particularly in the financial products unit that caused the company’s difficulties. ignites a firestorm of public criticism.
In a closely contested presidential election in El Salvador, Mauricio Funes of the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front emerges as his party’s first victorious presidential candidate.
Hugo Chavez orders the takeover of two key ports in petroleum-exporting states in compliance with a new law shifting control of ports, airports, and highways from the state government to the central government.
Stefanos Kouratzis—AFP/Getty Images 17 March The day after opposition leader Nawaz Sharif broke out of house arrest in Lahore to lead a massive demonstration toward Islamabad, Pakistani Pres.
Asif Ali Zardari agrees to restore Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry as chief justice.
Marc Ravalomanana resigns as president of Madagascar, turning power over to the military, which in turn cedes power to Andry Rajoelina, in spite of the fact that he is too young to legally hold the office of president.
A constitutional amendment to end the limit of two terms of office for the president is approved in a referendum in Azerbaijan.
At a meeting in Tromsp, Nor., representatives of the U.S., Canada, Russia, Denmark, and Norway—all signatories of a 1973 treaty that limited polar bear hunting— issue a joint statement that the greatest long-term threat to the survival of polar bears is climate change.
Brazil’s Supreme Court agrees to the creation of the Raposa Serra do Sol indigenous reserve, first established in 2005 by Pres.
Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva, in Roraima state; this allows for the removal of rice farmers who petitioned to be permitted to remain in the 1. million-ha reserve.
The African Union suspends Madagascar’s membership, saying that the country must restore a constitutional government within the next six months.
Prime Minister Ferenc Gyurcsany of Hungary surprises observers by offering his resignation.
In Oakland, Calif., a man stopped by police opens fire, killing two officers; after a chase followed by a shootout, two more officers and the suspect are dead.
Presidential and local elections are held in Macedonia; they are regarded as largely free and fair, and they result in the need for the holding of a presidential runoff.
Redoubt in Alaska begins erupting, throwing ash on several cities north of Anchorage; it last erupted for a five-month period in 1989-90.
United States Secretary of the Treasury Timothy Geithner unveils a detailed and comprehensive three-part plan to help free banks from bad housing loans and mortgage-related securities; stock markets rise dramatically in response.
In a visit to Mexico, United States Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton acknowledges that United States demand for illegal drugs and its failure to prevent arms from being smuggled from the United States into Mexico are significant contributing factors to the drug trade and the violence attending it in Mexico.
A suicide bomber detonates his weapon in a mosque near Peshawar, Pak., during Friday prayers; the explosion causes the building to collapse, and some 40 people are killed.
Well Armed wins the Dubai World Cup, the world’s richest horse race, by a record 14 lengths.
A gunman invades a nursing home in Carthage, N.C., and kills seven elderly residents and a nurse before being stopped by police.
Omar al-Bashir is among the attendees, and other members express strong support for him.
Barack Obama announces that carmaker Chrysler LLC must complete a merger with Italian automobile company Fiat by April 30 and that General Motors has 60 days in which to greatly restructure itself, requiring major concessions from the United Auto Workers union, in order to remain eligible for government financial assistance.
On a road that leads to a wealthy neighbourhood in Islamabad, Pak., a suicide bomber attacks a post of paramilitary security personnel, killing eight officers; also, a missile attack from a United States drone kills 11 militants in North Waziristan, and shortly thereafter a suicide car bomber kills eight people near the capital of North Waziristan.
North Korea’s test launch of a longrange missile rocket intended to put a satellite into orbit fails, though North Korea declares it a success; on April 13 the UN Security Council responds with a call for sanctions against the country to be strengthened.
In South Africa prosecutors drop corruption charges against African National Congress leader Jacob Zuma.
Jim Douglas's veto and makes same-sex marriage legal in the state; also, the District of Columbia council votes to recognize same-sex marriages performed in other states as valid marriages.
The day after a court ruled that Fiji’s government, installed after a coup in 2006, is illegal, Pres.
Ratu Josefa Iloilo abrogates the constitution, appoints himself head of government, and abolishes the judiciary.
U A summit meeting of leaders of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and other Asian countries gathered to discuss the global economic crisis is abruptly canceled and participants evacuated after antigovemment protesters gain access to the convention centre in the resort town of Pattaya, Thai., where the summit is being held.
Ratu Josefa Iloilo of Fiji appoints Voreque Bainimarama interim prime minister; Bainimarama, who initially became prime minister after a coup in 2006, reappoints most of the previous cabinet.
United States Navy snipers aboard the USS Bainbridge kill three Somalian pirates who were holding Capt.
Richard Phillips of the Maersk Alabama hostage on a lifeboat, rescuing Phillips.
Barack Obama lifts restrictions on travel to Cuba by those with family in that country as well as all restrictions on remittances to ordinary people living in Cuba; in addition, American telecommunications companies are empowered to seek licensing agreements in Cuba.
Fernando Lugo of Paraguay in a televised news conference admits that he is the father of a boy bom in May 2007; his resignation as a priest and bishop was accepted in July 2008.
The United States Department of Justice releases documents that describe in detail the harsh techniques employed by the Central Intelligence Agency in interrogating suspected al-Qaeda operatives in 2002-05.
Leaders of 34 countries in the Western Hemisphere gather for a Summit of the Americas in Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago; at the opening ceremony United States Pres.
Barack Obama declares that the United States seeks a positive change in its relations with Cuba.
A suicide bomber at a military and police checkpoint in Hangu district in Pakistan’s North-West Frontier Province kills 20 people.
Ayad al-Sammaraie is elected speaker of Iraq's legislature; he replaces Mahmoud al-Mashhadani, who resigned in December 2008.
It is reported that 80% of the jobs that have been lost in the ongoing recession in the United States belonged to men.
Mahmoud Ahmadinejad in a speech denounces Israel as a racist regime; in response to his remarks, delegates from 23 European countries walk out.
The IMF releases a report on the global financial crisis in which it estimates the amount of losses faced by financial establishments throughout the world as $4.05 trillion.
The World Digital Library, containing some 1,250 books, maps, and works of art from more than 30 national libraries, is inaugurated in a ceremony at UNESCO headquarters in Paris; the international online library is supported by UNESCO and the United States Library of Congress.
In Iraq a suicide bomber sets off her explosives in a line of women and children receiving food supplies in Baghdad, killing 28 people, and another suicide bomber targets a restaurant crowded with Iranian tourists in Muqdadiyah; at least 89 people die there.
In response to a declaration of a unilateral ceasefire by the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, the government of Sri Lanka calls for the militant organization to surrender.
In an attempt to avoid bankruptcy, the American car company General Motors announces a plan to cut 23,000 jobs in the United States by 2011, drop 40% of its dealers, close out the Pontiac brand, and offer a swap of company stock for unsecured debt to bondholders.
Pakistan’s military mobilizes to reverse the Taliban takeover of Buner district in the North-West Frontier Province; it is also reported that some 6,000 Pakistani troops will be moved from the border with India to the border with Afghanistan.
The United States Department of Commerce releases figures showing that output fell at a 6.1% annual rate in the first quarter of 2009 after having fallen at a 6.3% annual rate the previous quarter, a contraction of a magnitude last seen in 1958, but that consumer spending rose slightly after January.
The automobile manufacturer Chrysler LLC files for bankruptcy protection after some of its smaller creditors refuse to accept a reduced repayment; an agreement may now be reached with Italian car company Fiat that will allow Chrysler to stay in business.
Abdoulaye Wade of Senegal names Souleymane Ndene Ndiaye to replace Cheikh Hadjibou Soumare as prime minister.
Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam spokesman Selvarasa Pathmanathan, on TamilNet, ahead of the Sri Lankan government’s declaration of victory, May 18 1 Fiji’s military regime misses the deadline to return the country to democratic rule; the Pacific Islands Forum formally suspends Fiji’s membership the next day.
Officials in Afghanistan say that United States military air strikes the previous day following heavy fighting against Taliban militants in Bala Baluk district killed at least 30 civilians.
Tolkien in the 1920s and '30s and edited by Christopher Tolkien, is published for the first time.
Pakistani Prime Minister Yousaf Raza Gilani makes a televised speech in which he declares that the military is undertaking to eliminate the Taliban in the country.
Hundreds of women in Kathmandu demonstrate to demand the removal of Nepal’s army chief; riot police officers fight with them.
The Pakistani military offensive against the Taliban in the Swat valley intensifies as some 200,000 civilians flee the area.
Alvaro Colom, among others—excites unrest that leads to a political crisis over the following weeks.
David D McKiernan is being replaced as the top commander of United States forces in Afghanistan by Lieut.
Stanley A McChrystal, who has a stronger background in unconventional warfare.
Mikheil Saakashvili meets with opposition leaders, but no agreement is reached.
In the annual report of the trustees of the United States Medicare and Social Security benefit systems, it is projected that the Medicare fund will run out of money in 2017 and Social Security in 2037; this is two years and four years, respectively, earlier than previous estimates.
A second day of shelling of a field hospital in Sri Lanka’s war zone is said to have killed at least 50 people; satellite images back up reports of destruction in the zone.
In Myanmar , democracy leader Aung San Suu Kyi is arrested for having violated the terms of her house arrest; an uninvited American man had illegally swum across a lake to enter her house.
I United States government officials — 1 ^ announce that some detainees at the military prison at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, will be tried in military tribunals that have been changed in order to allow more rights for the defendants than had been earlier permitted.
Eurostat, the statistical office of the European Union, reports that the economies of both the EU and the euro zone shrank 2.5% in the first quarter of 2009.
The American carmaker General Motors informs some 1,100 dealerships that their franchises will be discontinued after this year.
The Wall Street Journal publishes an article describing a fossil found near Darmstadt, Ger., of an Eocene-era primate that may be ancestral to the anthropoid lineage that produced monkeys, apes, and humans; the species has been designated Darwinius masillae.
In presidential elections in Lithuania, Dalia Grybauskaite, European Union budget director, wins a convincing victory.
The Sri Lankan government reports that Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam leader Velupillai Prabhakaran has been killed, and the LTTE acknowledge defeat.
A spokesman for the UN High Commissioner for Refugees declares that some 1. million people have been displaced by fighting in Pakistan’s North-West Frontier Province since the beginning of the month.
Mahinda Rajapakse of Sri Lanka in a nationally televised speech declares that the government has defeated the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam; the death of the group's leader is confirmed.
The Commission to Inquire into Child Abuse, after nine years of investigation, releases a 2,575-page report detailing sexual and physical abuses routinely perpetrated at hundreds of reform schools and orphanages ran by the Roman Catholic Church in Ireland from the 1930s to the 1990s.
Well-connected multimillionaire Hisham Talaat Moustafa is sentenced to death in Cairo for having hired a man to murder Lebanese pop star Suzanne Tanim.
At a summit meeting between the European Union and Russia in Khabarovsk, Russia, no agreement is reached on how to prevent price disputes between Ukraine and Russia from interrupting natural gas supplies to EU countries.
Former South Korean president Roh MooHyun commits suicide by throwing himself off a cliff in the village of Bongha; he was questioned the previous month in connection with a corruption scandal.
Asif Ali Zardari produces an agreement to work together to fight Islamic extremism and drug smuggling.
North Korea conducts its second underground test of a nuclear weapon; its first was in October 2006.
Pakistan's Supreme Court overturns a judgment made in February and rules that opposition leader Nawaz Sharif is entitled to run for and hold public office.
Mamadou Tandja of Niger, having had his attempts to change the constitution to allow him to run for a third term of office turned down by the Constitutional Court, dissolves the legislature.
Barack Obama names Sonia Sotomayor of the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit as his choice to replace the retiring David Souter on the United States Supreme Court.
Armed men driving an explosives-laden car attempt to attack the Pakistani intelligence agency’s command centre in Lahore; the car hits a police emergency-response station and explodes, killing at least 26 people.
At the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in California, the National Ignition Facility, which will use lasers to create fusion reactions, is officially dedicated.
Pakistan’s military declares that it has achieved full control over Mingora, the biggest city in the Swat valley.
In Georgia’s breakaway region of South Ossetia, a new legislature dominated by followers of its president, Eduard Kokoity, who enjoys the favour of Russia, is elected.
Mir Hossein Mousavi, Iranian opposition presidential candidate, after the government declared the election for Pres.
It is reported in South Korea that North Korean leader Kim Jong II has chosen his youngest son, Kim Jong-Un, as his successor.
Moldova’s legislature fails in its second attempt to elect a new national president; as a result, a general election must be held.
John Lynch of New Hampshire signs legislation making same-sex marriage legal in the state; the law will go into effect on Jan., 2010.
Barack Obama makes a major speech addressing the Muslims of the world, asking for a change in the relationship between the West and the Muslim countries and addressing the conflict between Israel and Palestine.
Violence between riot police in Peru and indigenous Amazonian protesters blocking access to an oil pipeline leaves at least 54 people, among them 14 police officers, dead.
Sucheta Das/AP 28 June A Taliban suicide bomber detonates his weapon in a mosque in the Dir district of Pakistan’s North-West Frontier Province, killing at least 30 people and sparking a local backlash against the Taliban.
Security forces in Indian-administered Kashmir use gunfire to quell a protest by thousands of demonstrators; since the discovery on May 30 of the bodies of two young women who had been raped and murdered, strikes and demonstrations by people who blame Indian soldiers for the assault have been spreading through the region.
Omar Bongo of Gabon dies in Barcelona; he had been in office since 1967 and was Africa’s longestruling head of state.
An attack that includes a massive explosion of a car bomb destroys part of the luxury Pearl Continental Hotel in Peshawar, Pak.; at least 11 people, many of them foreigners, are killed.
The United States government announces that 10 major banks, including JPMorgan Chase, Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley, and United States Bancorp, will be permitted to return bailout funds to the government and exit from the Troubled Asset Relief Program.
The permanent members of the UN Security Council agree on a draft resolution to increase sanctions against North Korea; the full Security Council unanimously approves it on June 12.
An alliance between bankrupt American automaker Chrysler LLC and Italian carmaker Fiat is officially signed; the new Chrysler Group LLC, headed by Fiat CEO Sergio Marchionne, is owned by the United Auto Workers union, Fiat, and the governments of the United States and Canada.
U The United States Senate approves a version of a bill that was earlier passed by the United States House of Representatives; it will give the Food and Drug Administration jurisdiction to regulate the manufacture and marketing of cigarettes and other tobacco products.
Shortly after the polls close for what was expected to be a very close presidential election in Iran, Pres.
Mahmoud Ahmadinejad is declared the winner by a landslide; opposition candidate Mir Hossein Mousavi insists that in fact he has won the election.
Harith al-Obaidi, the head of the Iraqi National Accord, the largest Sunni bloc in the country’s legislature, is assassinated in a mosque in Baghdad; his secretary and three bodyguards are also killed.
Thousands of people take to the streets of Tehran, enraged by what they believe to be fraudulent results in the previous day’s presidential election.
The UN World Food Programme reports that two days earlier a convoy of boats carrying food aid down the Akobo River in the southern part of The Sudan that was escorted by Sudanese soldiers was attacked in an outbreak of interethnic violence; at least 40 people were killed.
I Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah —^ Ali Khamenei, calls for the Revolutionary Guard to review the results of the presidential election; nonetheless, tens of thousands march in Tehran in a silent protest.
The United States Department of State asks the social-networking site Twitter to postpone scheduled maintenance lest it disrupt the flow of information within Iran and from Iran to the West about the political situation there. f The United States Global I Change Research Program posts a report saying that the effects of rapid climate change are already being experienced in the United States and will continue to worsen and that unless steps toward reduction of greenhouse gases are quickly undertaken, very high costs will result.
For the third consecutive day, tens of thousands of people who demand new elections march in silence in Tehran; demonstrations are also taking place in other cities in Iran.
The United States Supreme Court rules that convicted prisoners are not constitutionally entitled to DNA testing that could prove their innocence, noting that many state legislatures have conferred that legal right.
Peru’s legislature overturns presidential decrees that would have opened the jungle to development; indigenous residents of the affected area rejoice.
Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, Iran’s supreme leader, declares the presidential election results valid and orders an end to demonstrations opposing the reported results.
In the largely Turkmen town of Taza in northern Iraq, a suicide truck bomb kills at least 68 people in an explosion that also damages many houses.
Greenland's new self-governing status within Denmark goes into effect amid official ceremony and celebration.
Nicolas Sarkozy becomes the first French president to address the National Assembly and Senate since presidents were barred from Parliament in 1875; in his speech he discusses the economy and also declares that the burka worn by some Muslim women is a sign of subjugation that is not welcome in France.
An air strike, locally attributed to a United States drone, on the funeral of a Taliban commander in Pakistan's South Waziristan region, kills what is said to be at least 60 people.
Kyrgyzstan agrees to allow the United States to keep Manas Air Base open in spite of having ordered it closed in February; the United States will pay a much higher rent, and the base is to be renamed as a transit centre.
A bomb attached to a motorcycle explodes in a market in the Sadr City neighbourhood of Baghdad, killing at least 76 people.
Mark Sanford, whose whereabouts had been unknown since June 18, publicly admits in a televised news conference that he had been in Argentina with a woman with whom he had been having an extramarital affair for the past year.
Israel agrees to allow Palestinian security forces greater authority in the West Bank towns of Ramallah, Qalqilyah, Bethlehem, and Jericho; also, several Israeli checkpoints in the West Bank have been removed.
In Iran, Ayatollah Ahmad Khatami states that leaders of the protests against the presidential election results should be punished, the Guardian Council reiterates the validity of the results, and opposition leader Mir Hossein Mousavi declares that he will not call for more protests without first applying for permits.
Michel Suleiman of Lebanon announces that Saad alHariri has been chosen to serve as prime minister.
Petersburg, becoming the official winner of the 37,000-nautical-mile around-the-world race.
Manuel Zelaya in a coup and deports him to Costa Rica; the country’s legislature replaces him with Roberto Micheletti.
Cristina Fernandez de Kirchner; the following day Nestor Kirchner resigns as head of the party.
Legislative elections in Albania result in a narrow victory for the coalition led by Prime Minister Sali Berisha.
Mamadou Tandja of Niger dissolves the Constitutional Court that had ruled his referendum to extend the period of time that a president may hold office illegal.
In accordance with the terms of a security agreement, United States troops withdraw from Iraq's cities; the milestone is celebrated in Iraq, although a bomb in Kirkuk kills 33 people.
Boyko Borisov, on the Bulgarian election that his party won, July 5 I Ivo Sanader abruptly resigns as prime minister of Croatia; Jadranka Kosor is sworn in to replace him on July 6.
Russian and United States officials say that Russia has agreed to allow United States military flights en route to Afghanistan to fly through Russian airspace.
The Association of Researchers and Teachers of Qum, a group founded by Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, declares that the Iranian election of June 12 and the new government are in its eyes illegitimate.
The Chinese government shuts down the city of Urumqi, imposing a strict curfew and cutting off connections to cell phones and the Internet, and casts blame for the previous day’s violence on the expatriate World Uighur Congress, led by Rebiya Kadeer.
Dmitry Medvedev; they agree to negotiate a treaty on nuclear-arms reduction to replace the START I treaty, which will expire on December 5.
Hu Jintao issues a statement calling for the preservation of security in Xinjiang and for security forces to ""deal a blow"" to those who were responsible for the killings in Urumqi.
Talks in San Jose, Costa Rica, between ousted Honduran president Manuel Zelaya and de facto president Roberto Micheletti are unsuccessful, with neither side willing to compromise, but they agree to further talks.
Barack Obama makes a speech in Accra that is televised throughout Africa in which he enjoins the continent’s people and leaders to take responsibility for their future.
Alan Garcia of Peru names as his new prime minister Javier Velasquez Quesquen.
Denis SassouNguesso is reelected president of the Republic of the Congo in a vote that falls short of international standards for fairness.
In Zimbabwe, the first meeting of a national conference to create a new constitution is disrupted by backers of Pres.
Regina M Benjamin, head of the Alabama Medical Association and of a family clinic in Bayou La Batre, Ala., as surgeon general.
At its triennial convention in Anaheim, Calif., the Episcopal Church USA votes to affirm that any level of the ministry may be filled by openly gay persons; on July 17, the convention votes to allow the blessing of same-sex unions in jurisdictions in which such unions are legal.
Hugo Chavez, national guard troops take over a state police station in Curiepe, an action that ignites fighting between the troops and protesters angered by the move.
At a summit meeting of the Nonaligned Movement in Egypt, the prime ministers of Pakistan and India release a joint statement that they have agreed to cooperate to combat terrorism and will continue to engage in talks to resolve their differences.
Pakistan’s Supreme Court acquits former prime minister Nawaz Sharif of the crime of hijacking, of which he had been convicted following his unsuccessful attempt to prevent Pervez Musharraf from taking over the country in a coup in 1999; the ruling makes Sharif eligible to hold public office.
Some 5,500 Mexican soldiers are deployed to Michoacan state in Mexico after a series of horrific attacks on police by drug cartel members.
Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz, who took power in a coup in 2008, is elected president of Mauritania in a national referendum.
Anthony Wesley, an amateur astronomer in Australia, finds a dark spot the size of the Pacific Ocean in Jupiter’s atmosphere, which suggests that the planet was hit by a comet.
Four United States soldiers are killed by a roadside bomb in eastern Afghanistan, which brings the total number of United States troops killed in the country in July to 30, the highest number in any month since the 2001 invasion; the 56 coalition troops killed in July is also a record.
The Israeli pacifist group Peace Now reports that Israel has declared plans to annex some 14,022 ha of land in the West Bank that has emerged as the Dead Sea has shrunk.
A tribunal at the Permanent Court of Arbitration at The Hague redraws the borders of the disputed Abyei region between northern and southern Sudan; both the government of The Sudan and the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement accept the new borders.
Barack Obama holds a televised news conference to bolster support for his planned overhaul of the health care system in the United States During the presidential election in Kyrgyzstan, the leading opposition candidate, Almazbek Atambayev, announces his withdrawal, citing fraud; the incumbent, Kurmanbek Bakiyev, wins by a landslide in an election that falls short of international standards.
Under strong pressure from Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, Esfandiar Rahim Mashaei resigns as Iran’s deputy president.
In regional elections in Kurdistan in Iraq, the ruling coalition retains power, in spite of a surprisingly strong showing by the opposition coalition.
At the end of two days of violence sparked by attacks on police stations in northern Nigeria by Muslim fundamentalist organization Boko Haram, some 55 people have died.
The Virginia Tech Transportation Institute releases a study of the texting behaviour of long-haul truckers that took place over a period of 18 months which found that texting while driving increases the risk of collision by a factor of 23; talking on the phone while driving increases the risk by only a factor of 4.
The death of Mohammad Yusuf, the leader of the militant Islamist group Boko Haram, in Maiduguri, Nigeria, is confirmed; it is believed that hundreds of people may have died in several days of violence.
James Crowley , a member of the police force in Cambridge, Mass., and scholar Henry Louis Gates, Jr. , in an attempt to calm emotions aroused by the July 16 incident at Gates’s home, which Obama had exacerbated with an answer at a news conference.
At the opening of its new global headquarters in Yokohama, the automobile manufacturer Nissan introduces the Leaf, an all-electric hatchback that is expected to go on sale in the U.S., Japan, and Europe by the end of 2010.
In London, robbers steal 43 pieces of diamond jewelry with an estimated value of $65 million from the Graff jewelry store in one of Britain’s largest-ever diamond heists.
Andry Rajoelina of Madagascar and Marc Ravalomanana, whom Rajoelina ousted as president, sign an accord agreeing on an interim government that will be put in place by September and rule until elections are held within 15 months.
The Iraqi village of Khazna, near Mosul, is largely destroyed by two huge truck bombs, and 28 or more people are killed; also, assorted bombings in Baghdad leave at least 22 people dead.
In Myanmar , opposition figure Aung San Suu Kyi is sentenced to 18 further months of house arrest for having allowed an American intruder into her home; the American, John Yettaw, is sentenced to seven years of imprisonment and hard labour but is released to United States Sen.
Armed forces in Yemen begin an offensive against Shi'ite rebels in Sa'dah province.
The Philippine military begins an offensive against two encampments of the militant Muslim organization Abu Sayyaf on Basilan island; at least 20 insurgents and 23 soldiers are killed.
Barack Obama bestows the Presidential Medal of Freedom on 16 people, among them Sen.
Edward M Kennedy, former Supreme Court justice Sandra Day O’Connor, historian Joseph Medicine Crow, actor Sidney Poitier, tennis star Billie Jean King, and physicist Stephen Hawking.
The government of Taiwan for the first time agrees to accept foreign help in responding to the disaster caused by Typhoon Morakot.
Asif Ali Zardari lifts the ban, in place since the period of British rule, on political organization and activity in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas.
In the city of Rafah in the Gaza Strip, fighting between Hamas security forces and members of the Warriors of God, a radical Islamist group that had taken over a mosque, ends with 22 people, including the leader of the Warriors of God, 'Abd al-Latif Musa, dead.
The bodies of 18 Taliban militants are found in the streets of six towns in Pakistan's Swat valley.
The UN World Food Programme says that in spite of its efforts to provide food to people in Kenya suffering from a lengthy drought, some 1. million people there are still going hungry.
In Baghdad a powerful truck bomb explodes outside the Ministry of Finance, collapsing an elevated highway and killing at least 35 people; within three minutes a stronger explosion from a truck bomb at the Foreign Ministry kills a minimum of 60 people.
The Islamist militant organization al-Shabaab attacks an African Union peacekeeping base in Mogadishu, Som.; at least 24 people die in the ensuing battle.
The government of Greece declares a state of emergency as wildfires that started the previous day near Grammatiko spread to Vamava and Marathon.
On the occasion of the state funeral of former president Kim DaeJung, South Korean Pres.
Lee Myung-Bak meets with a delegation of officials from North Korea who went to Seoul to pay their respects.
The Picasso Museum in Paris closes for an extensive renovation and expansion that is expected to take about two years.
Palestinian Prime Minister Salam Fayad presents a plan that maps out the government of a Palestinian state; it is intended to be in place within two years and is to be pursued in parallel with peace negotiations with Israel.
Edward M Kennedy of Massachusetts dies at his home in Hyannis Port, Mass.
Argentina’s Supreme Court strikes down laws mandating penalties for the private possession and use of marijuana by an adult.
Prime Minister Zinaida Greceanii of Moldova announces the resignation of the country's government.
The United States Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. reports that the country’s banking industry lost $3. billion in the second fiscal quarter of 2009.
The International Atomic Energy Agency reports that Iran has increased its number of centrifuges for enriching uranium but has slowed its production of enriched uranium since June and that it has increased its cooperation with the agency in some but not all areas.
Suicide truck bombers kill 10 people at and near a police garrison in the Iraqi village of Hamad; another truck bomb, in Sinjar, leaves 4 people dead.
Turkey and Armenia announce that they have agreed to take steps toward establishing diplomatic relations.
Thierno Maadjou Sow of the Guinean Organization for Human Rights, on the massacre of pro-democracy demonstrators in Conakry, September 28 I The Afghan Electoral Complaints Commission declares that it has so far received more than 2,600 reports of vote fraud, including vote stealing; close to half of the votes from the August 20 presidential election in Afghanistan have been counted.
A belief that the August 30 presidential election was stolen leads to rioting in Port-Gentil, Gabon; the French embassy is set on fire.
Lee Myung-Bak replaces Prime Minister Han Seung-Soo with Chung Un-Chan as part of a cabinet shake-up.
North Korea unexpectedly releases water from a dam on the Imjin River, which flows through both North and South Korea; the resultant wall of water sweeps away six South Koreans who were camping and fishing on the river.
Felipe Calderon of Mexico replaces Attorney General Eduardo Medina Mora with Arturo Chavez.
As Afghanistan's election commission declares that preliminary results from the August 20 presidential election give a resounding victory to Pres.
Hamid Karzai, the Electoral Complaints Commission calls for a partial recount of votes.
Barack Obama addresses a joint session of Congress with a nationally televised speech laying out his vision of meaningful health care reform, a large undertaking that has roiled both the public and lawmakers wrestling with creating legislation embodying reform.
Hywind, the first full-scale floating wind turbine, opens in Norway; the turbine is attached to the seabed some 10 km from the island of Karmpy.
Saad al-Hariri, who was designated prime minister of Lebanon after elections in June, announces his resignation, frustrated at his inability to form a government.
The carmaker General Motors announces that it plans to sell a majority stake of its European operations, Opel and Vauxhall, to Canadian automobile parts manufacturer Magna International and Magna’s Russian investment partner, Sberbank. n Vladimir Voronin resigns as Moldova’s interim president; he is replaced in that capacity by Mihai Ghimpu.
Salah Ezzedine, a Hezbollah-connected owner of a publishing house and a financial institution, is charged in a pyramid scheme in which many in Lebanon's Shi'ite community lost a total of hundreds of millions of dollars in investments.
United States air strikes near Baraawe, Som., kill Saleh Ali Saleh Nabhan, a top alQaeda operative believed to have been behind the bombing of a hotel in Mombasa, Kenya, in 2002, and to have played a part in the bombings of the United States embassies in Kenya and Tanzania in 1998.
Denis Sassou-Nguesso of the Republic of the Congo abolishes the post of prime minister, which he had created in 2005 in spite of the fact that the country's constitution does not make a provision for such a post.
Election monitors from the European Union state that about one-third of the votes that were tallied for Pres.
Hamid Karzai in Afghanistan’s presidential election on August 20 should be further examined for possible fraud.
Michel Suleiman again designates Saad al-Hariri prime minister, instructing him to try again to form a government.
Barack Obama cancels plans to base components of an antiballistic missile shield, which was intended to protect the United States against attack by long-range missiles, in Poland and the Czech Republic, ordering that a different system to protect against shortand medium-range missiles from Iran be put in place.
Fervently Do We Pray, a dance piece choreographed by Bill T Jones and commissioned by the Ravinia Festival of Highland Park, Ill., to commemorate the bicentennial of the birth of Abraham Lincoln, has its world premiere at Ravinia.
A powerful car bomb explodes in the Shi'ite village of Ustarzai in Pakistan’s North-West Frontier Province; at least 35 people are killed.
The new Liege-Guillemins railway station in Belgium, designed by Santiago Calatrava, officially opens in Liege; it will be a hub in Europe’s high-speed train network, serving some 36,000 people a day.
A statement ostensibly from Taliban leader Mullah Omar, in which he warns Western countries away from Afghanistan, telling them to study the country’s military history, is posted on a Web site used by the Taliban.
Fighters of the Lou Nuer people attack the village of Duk Padiet in the southern part of The Sudan; the violence results in the deaths of 51 villagers, 28 army and security personnel, and 23 attackers.
In a federal district court in Denver, Najibullah Zazi is ordered held without bail on charges of having lied to federal investigators; the Afghanistanborn man is thought to have been planning an attack in the U.S., but the investigation was short-circuited when Zazi learned of it.
The United States EnviW W ronmental Protection Agency issues new rules that from Jan., 2010, will require the biggest emitters of greenhouse gases in the country to track and report to the agency their emissions; some 10,000 industrial sites and fossil-fuel suppliers will have to start reporting their emissions at the beginning of 2011.
In a massive raid, police in Los Angeles arrest 45 suspected members of the violent Avenues street gang.
The heavy rain of the past several days in the southeastern region of the United States begins to taper off; most of the damage has occurred in Georgia, where at least eight people drowned.
A dust storm blankets Sydney and other parts of Australia’s east coast with red dust; it is the worst such event Sydney has experienced since the 1940s.
The United States Federal Reserve decides to scale back two emergency lending programs that it put in place to shore up the faltering economy; the previous day it chose to slow a program intended to push down mortgage rates.
The Group of 20 countries with industrialized and emerging economies agree to coordinate their economic strategies with each other in an effort to prevent future global meltdowns and to attempt to reach a new international trade agreement; it is also decided that global economic issues will now be discussed by the Group of 20 rather than by the Group of 7 industrialized countries.
For the first time since late 2007, reunions of families that had been split up by the Korean War take place in a resort in North Korea.
Film director Roman Polanski is arrested in Switzerland in connection with a 1977 sex-offense conviction in the U.S., from where he fled before being sentenced.
Typhoon Ketsana makes landfall in Vietnam; at least 99 people are killed.
Jose Manuel Barroso, president of the European Commission, on learning that Ireland had approved the Lisbon Treaty, October 3 In a significant constitutional development, the first-ever Supreme Court of the United Kingdom is sworn in; the independent body replaces the Appellate Committee of the House of Lords.
The United States Federal Trade Commission announces that under new rules to go into effect on December 1, people reviewing products in blogs, in social networks on the Internet, or on talk shows must disclose any relationship they have with advertisers, including having received gifts.
At a conference organized by the environmental group Greenpeace in Sao Paulo, four major meat-producing companies agree to eschew the purchase of cattle from deforested areas of Brazil; Greenpeace has documented the link between increased cattle farming and expanded deforestation of the rainforest.
Italy’s Constitutional Court rules that a law shielding Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi and other top officials from prosecution in criminal cases while they hold office violates the constitution.
Militants dressed in military fatigues shoot their way into the Pakistani army headquarters compound in Rawalpindi, killing six people and taking several others hostage; by the time the siege has ended the following day, 23 people have been killed, but 42 hostages have been rescued.
Carlos Osorio/AP ""The Accidental Mummies of Guanajuato,” an exhibition of some 36 bodies that were naturally mummified from about 1850 to 1950 in Guanajuato, Mex., with cultural and scientific information, opens in the Detroit Science Center; the exhibit will move to several other museums over the next two years. n Two car bombs explode outside a building in AlRamadi, Iraq, where a meeting on efforts to achieve reconciliation between the Shi‘ite-led government and the Sunni population is taking place; 23 people are killed.
A suicide car bombing in a crowded market in Shangla district in the Swat valley in Pakistan kills at least 41 people.
A group of government ministers from Turkey and Syria, in meetings held in Aleppo, Syria, and Gaziantep, Tur., sign several agreements on a range of issues, including the removal of visa requirements, the use of water from the Euphrates River, and a pipeline project.
Senior Movement for Democratic Change leader Roy Bennett is arrested and charged with possession of weapons for terrorism in Zimbabwe.
Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki of Iraq and Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan sign pacts on cooperation on oil and gas exports and sharing water from the Euphrates River, among other agreements.
Prime Minister Morgan Tsvangirai of Zimbabwe announces that he and other members of his party will disengage from, but not pull out of, the unity government with Pres.
The Pakistani military begins a long-planned major ground offensive against militants in South Waziristan.
In the Baluchistan region of Iran, a suicide attack on a meeting led by Revolutionary Guards and a roadside attack on a car carrying Revolutionary Guards leaves some 42 people dead, including 5 Revolutionary Guard commanders.
Hamid Karzai short of 50% of legitimate votes cast, which would make a runoff election necessary.
Hamid Karzai announces that he accepts the need for a runoff presidential election, scheduled for November 7.
The president of Nicaragua’s Supreme Court declares that he will not accept a decision by the court’s constitutional commission to overturn laws that prohibit consecutive reelection and the serving of more than two terms of office.
After several days of fruitless negotiations, the speaker of Iraq’s legislature, acknowledging the impasse, adjourns efforts to pass a new election law; the measure was to have been passed by October 15.
Litokwa Tomeing of the Marshall Islands is voted out of office by the legislature; on November 2 he is replaced by Jurelang Zedkaia.
Mahmoud Abbas declares that elections must be held in Jerusalem, the West Bank, and Gaza on Jan., 2010, in spite of the lack of agreement between his party, Fatah, and Hamas, which rules Gaza.
Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany announces a new government with a new coalition partner, the Free Democrats.
The European Union lifts its sanctions against Uzbekistan, imposed in 2005, citing the release of some political prisoners and the abolition of the death penalty in Uzbekistan.
Under pressure from the U.S., Roberto Micheletti, the de facto leader of Honduras, agrees to allow ousted president Manuel Zelaya to complete his term of office as the head of a unity government.
United States Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton meets separately with Palestinian leader Mahmoud Abbas and with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu in an attempt to persuade them to engage in peace negotiations.
Royal Caribbean International—UPI/Landov 47 November I hoped there would he a better process.
Opposition candidate Abdullah Abdullah, announcing his withdrawal from the runoff presidential election in Afghanistan, November 1 I ln Afghanistan, opposition presidential candidate Abdullah Abdullah announces his withdrawal from the runoff election scheduled for November 7, saying that Pres.
Hamid Karzai has failed to make the changes necessary to assure a free and fair election.
Hamid Karzai is officially declared the winner of the Afghan presidential election; United States Pres.
Barack Obama tells him that he must now take action against corruption in the government and against the drug trade in the country.
Vaclav Klaus of the Czech Republic signs the Lisbon Treaty; the Czech Republic is the last of the European Union's member states to ratify the document, which creates a new governing structure for the organization.
The board of directors of the carmaker General Motors decides not to sell its European divisions Opel and Vauxhall; the sale of the units to Canadian auto supplier Magna had been in the works.
Fernando Lugo of Paraguay replaces the leadership of the country’s armed forces for the third time in 15 months.
Nidal Malik Hasan, an army psychiatrist, goes on a rampage, using civilian firearms; 13 people are killed and at least 28 wounded, including the shooter.
Andrews, Scot., of finance ministers of the Group of 20, British Prime Minister Gordon Brown proposes a tax on financial transactions to create a fund for any future financial bailouts of banks.
The Yomiuri Giants defeat the Hokkaido Nippon-Ham Fighters 2-0 in game six to win baseball’s Japan Series.
In Lebanon a new cabinet led by Prime Minister Saad alHariri is appointed; the country had been unable to form a government since elections in June.
Election officials of the Palestinian Authority announce that the presidential and legislative elections scheduled for January 2010 will have to be postponed because of the lack of cooperation on the part of Hamas, which rules Gaza, with election preparations in the territory.
In Kathmandu, Maoist protesters led by former prime minister Pushpa Kamal Dahal surround the seat of government to demand the resignation of Nepal’s president.
Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey announces a plan to allow the use of the Kurdish language in broadcast media and to restore the original Kurdish names of cities that had had their names changed to Turkish ones.
A truck bomb explodes at a police checkpoint in Peshawar, Pak., killing at least 12 people.
Barack Obama attends a summit meeting of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations in Singapore, where he also engages in substantive talks with Russian Pres.
Dmitry Medvedev and attends AsiaPacific Economic Cooperation talks; later he flies to Shanghai to meet with Chinese leaders.
The government of Japan announces that the country’s GDP grew at an annual rate of 4.8% in its third fiscal quarter, its second consecutive quarter of growth.
The legislature of Honduras declares that on December 2 it will vote on whether ousted president Manuel Zelaya should be restored to office until the end of his term in January 2010; a presidential election is scheduled to take place on November 29.
Tariq al-Hashimi, one of Iraq’s two vice presidents, reports that the previous day he vetoed the election law passed by the legislature on November 8; all three members of the country's presidency council are required to approve the law for it to go into effect.
Belgian Prime Minister Herman Van Rompuy is elected to become the first president of the European Council under the Lisbon Treaty when it enters into force on December 1; he will serve a term of office of two and a half years.
In the city of Farah in western Afghanistan, a suicide bomber on a motorcycle kills at least 16 people in a marketplace.
A Sri Lankan government official declares that the 136,000 people still in government-run ethnic Tamil refugee camps will be permitted to leave the camps beginning December 1 and that the camps will be closed by the end of January 2010.
In Maguindanao province on Mindanao island in the Philippines, in 50 November what appears to be part of a feud between clans, members of the entourage of a gubernatorial candidate, consisting of relatives, supporters, and journalists, are abducted and massacred; the dead number at least 57.
Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva in Brasilia, where they agree on cooperation in several areas; Ahmadinejad is the first Iranian leader to visit Brazil since 1965.
The United States Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. declares that as of the end of the third fiscal quarter on September 30, its deposit fund had a negative balance of $8. billion.
The government of Dubai in the United Arab Emirates and the conglomerate Dubai World ask to put off debt repayments for six months; the action causes a shock wave in the world’s stock markets.
Andal Ampatuan, Jr., the mayor of the Philippine city of Datu Unsay, surrenders to authorities in connection with the massacre of supporters of a rival politician three days earlier; 20 others have also been arrested.
Wolfgang Schneiderhan resigns as chief of staff of Germany's armed forces after German media reported that the military had been aware of civilian casualties in an air strike in Afghanistan in September during the time that it had denied that civilians had been killed; the following day Minister of Labour Franz Josef Jung, who had been defense minister at the time, also resigns.
Petersburg, derails when it encounters a homemade bomb on the tracks; the explosion causes the deaths of at least 30 passengers.
Hifikepunye Pohamba of Namibia wins reelection, and his party, the South West Africa People's Organization , gains the majority of seats in the legislature; both victories are landslides.
A presidential election of questionable validity is held in Honduras; the conservative candidate, Porfirio Lobo, wins resoundingly.
A preliminary report is issued that shows the inflation rate in the euro zone in November to have reached 0.6%, its first rise above zero in five months; on November 13 data were released showing that the euro zone is no longer in recession, with 1.6% annualized growth in the third fiscal quarter.
Barack Obama, announcing a limited agreement at the UN conference on climate change in Copenhagen, December 18 1 United States Pres.
Barack Obama in a nationally televised speech at the United States Military Academy in West Point, N.Y., lays out his plan for the war in Afghanistan, saying that he intends to send 30,000 extra troops in the next few months but will begin pulling the United States military out of the country in 2011.
Jacob Zuma addresses his country to describe a new approach to the AIDS epidemic that is in line with recommendations issued the previous day by the World Health Organization, including early treatment for HIV-positive pregnant women, babies, and those with tuberculosis; he urges the consistent use of condoms as well.
At a mosque attended by military officers in a secure area of Rawalpindi, Pak., several attackers make an assault with guns and grenades; at least 38 people, several of them high-ranking officers, are killed.
The United States government announces a tentative settlement of a class-action suit brought in 1996 that accused the government of mismanaging American Indian trust funds; the complex settlement envisions payment from the government of $3. billion.
Lebanon’s legislature approves the new government and its policy platform, one part of which allows the militant group Hezbollah to retain its arms.
Authorities in Bangkok seize a North Korean cargo plane loaded with weapons, including missiles, that had stopped to refuel en route to an unknown destination; the UN forbids the export of such weapons from North Korea.
At a political rally in Milan, Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi is struck in the face by a man wielding a 53 December souvenir model of Milan’s cathedral; Berlusconi suffers a broken nose and broken teeth.
The energy company Exxon Mobil agrees to buy the natural-gas producer XTO Energy.
In the United Arab Emirates, the emirate of Abu Dhabi, where the central government is located, agrees to grant the troubled emirate of Dubai a $10 billion bailout.
Citigroup and Wells Fargo become the last major American banks to exit the federal Troubled Asset Relief Program as both declare that they will repay the money that they received from the fund.
Austria nationalizes the Hypo Group Alpe Adria bank to prevent its collapse, which would have had deleterious effects on the economies of Croatia, Serbia, and Slovenia.
Hu Jintao ceremonially opens a naturalgas pipeline that runs from Turkmenistan through Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan into Chinas autonomous region of Xinjiang.
The members of the Gulf Cooperation Council at a AP summit meeting in Kuwait agree to launch a single currency similar to the euro in the region; the first step will be the creation of a monetary council in 2010.
Pakistan’s Supreme Court rules as unconstitutional an amnesty created in 2007 for politicians charged with corruption; the decision affects some 6,000 people, including Pres.
Mahmoud Abbas as well as that of its currently nonfunctioning legislature.
The Yemeni military conducts strikes against alQaeda bases in the mountainous area of Abyan and in Sanaa; at least 34 militants are reportedly killed.
At international climate talks in Copenhagen, the U.S., China, India, Brazil, and South Africa forge an agreement to be presented to the conference that calls for developed countries to reduce their greenhouse-gas emissions and to provide financial assistance to lessdeveloped countries, for lessdeveloped countries to monitor and report their greenhouse-gas emissions, and for the world to keep the global temperature from rising as far as 2 °C above preindustrial levels by 2050.
Andry Rajoelina of Madagascar dismisses Prime Minister Eugene Mangalaza, replacing him with Cecile Manorohanta; two days later he appoints Albert Camille Vital prime minister and rejects all power-sharing agreements.
The wrought-iron sign reading ""Arbeit Macht Frei” (""Work Makes Free”) at the entrance to the Nazi death camp Auschwitz in Poland is stolen; it is found, cut into three pieces, three days later.
F\ A large protest F I I by Maoists and their sympathizers in Kathmandu, Nepal, is met by riot police, and fighting breaks out; some 70 people are arrested.
Large protests continue for a second day in Nepal, which has been largely shut 54 December down by a general strike called by Maoists.
The UN Security Council imposes sanctions on Eritrea, saying that it supports Islamist militants in Somalia.
Greece’s legislature passes an austerity budget in an attempt to rein in the budget deficit.
During a Shi'ite holiday, clashes take place between antigovemment protesters and government forces in several public squares in Tehran.
On the holiday of ‘Ashura’, police in Iran fire their guns into huge crowds of government protesters; at least 10 people, including a nephew of opposition leader Mir Hossein Moussavi, are killed.
Military officers in Thailand armed with riot shields and clubs begin to forcibly return some 4,000 Hmong refugees seeking asylum to Laos.
In spite of the lack of a new election law deemed necessary for fair balloting by the UN and the U.S., Afghanistan announces that legislative elections will be held in spring 2010.
Lee Myung-Bak of South Korea pardons Lee Kun-Hee, who resigned in 2008 after some 20 years as chairman of the conglomerate Samsung and was later convicted of tax evasion and embezzlement.
A double agent viewed as a valuable informant blows himself up at a meeting with CIA agents at a CIA base in Afghanistan’s Khost province, killing eight CIA employees, a significant loss to intelligence operations working against Taliban and al-Qaeda on the border between Afghanistan and Pakistan.
A twin turboprop plane operated by Manaus Aerotaxi and chartered by a family to fly from Coari to Manaus plunges into the Manacapuru River; 24 of the 28 aboard die.
Continental Connection Flight 3407, a Bombardier Dash 8 Q400 turboprop traveling from Newark, N.J., to Buffalo, goes down on its approach and crashes into a house in Clarence Center, N.Y., killing all 49 on board as well as an occupant of the house; icing on the wings is suspected of being the cause.
A helicopter ferrying workers to offshore oil platforms plummets into the Atlantic Ocean; 17 passengers are lost.
A Super Puma helicopter ferrying workers to Aberdeen from a North Sea oil platform operated by the energy company BP goes down in calm weather 14 nautical miles off Peterhead; all 16 aboard are lost.
A military training flight ends in disaster when the Fokker 27 airplane crashes while attempting to land at an air base in West Java; all 24 military personnel aboard are killed.
A Pakistani military transport helicopter crashes in Chapri Ferozkhel, killing at least 26 and possibly as many as 41 military personnel; it is unclear whether the disaster is due to overloading, bad weather, or insurgent gunfire.
A Russian-made transport helicopter working for the NATO-led military crashes as it attempts to take off from the military base in Kandahar, killing 16 civilians.
At Santika, a nightclub, fireworks set off to celebrate the new year cause a fire, which quickly spreads; the conflagration and resulting stampede result in the deaths of 66 people.
A deadly blaze of unknown origin kills at least 40 people in a shantytown.
Fireworks set off at a birthday celebration in a restaurant in Changle ignite a fire that leaves at least 15 people dead.
A fire quickly spreads through a wooden structure housing a nursing home; at least 23 of the residents expire.
AP 56 Disasters Apichart Weerawong/AP Firefighters in Bangkok finish extinguishing a fire in the nightclub Santika that was started by fireworks and killed 66 partygoers on January 1.
A quickly spreading fire at a three-story building housing the homeless results in the deaths of 23 residents.
A series of explosions as ammunition detonates at the Mbagala military depot flattens hundreds of houses and kills at least 22 people.
A fire that may have started in a neighbouring warehouse sweeps through a day-care centre, killing at least 47 babies and small children.
A quickly moving fire kills at least 39 patients and staff members at a drug-treatment centre with barred windows.
A river ferry capsizes in the Kosi River; two bodies are recovered, and some 20 other people are missing.
An open wooden boat capsizes in the Atlantic Ocean; more than 40 people, among them members of the National Islamic Council, which runs mosques and schools in the country, are missing.
A boat carrying would-be migrants to Italy strikes a rock and capsizes; as many as 30 Tunisian passengers are believed to have drowned.
A greatly overloaded ferry sinks in the Gianh River; at least 42 of the passengers, mostly women and children, drown.
A small fishing boat carrying African migrants capsizes; at least 21 of the occupants drown.
A trawler collides with a small ferry on a river, causing the ferry to capsize; at least 17 people are drowned.
A smuggler’s boat capsizes in the Gulf of Aden, and some 35 would-be migrants from Somalia and Ethiopia drown.
A doublehulled catamaran ferrying passengers from Tarawa to Maiana island sinks; 33 of the 55 passengers lose their lives.
A sailboat grossly overloaded with Haitian wouldbe migrants sinks; 15 bodies are recovered, and a further 67 people are believed to have drowned.
The MV Princess Ashika, an interisland ferry traveling from Nuku'alofa to Ha’afeva island, sinks; some 74 passengers drown.
Italian border police rescue five Eritreans; the Eritreans say that 75 others perished during a three-week trip from Libya, and Italy and Malta blame each other for having failed to prevent the tragedy.
The llinden, a tourist boat plying the waters of Lake Ohrid, sinks; though most of the passengers 57 Disasters are rescued, 15 Bulgarian tourists lose their lives.
An overloaded ferry sinks in darkness in the Congo River near Ankoro; at least 15 passengers die, and some 90 others are missing.
An inflatable dinghy crowded with Africans attempting to migrate sinks off the Spanish islet of Perejil, near Morocco; there are 11 survivors and 8 bodies, and dozens are feared lost.
A sightseeing boat in Periyar Lake capsizes when the passengers flock to one side to see an elephant; at least 41 tourists die.
A boat sinks in open waters in the Indian Ocean; though a merchant ship rescues 17 survivors, it is feared that two dozen people perished.
Shortly after leaving the town of Pathein, a ferry collides with a barge in the Ngawun River; at least 50 people are believed to have lost their lives.
A logging boat illegally carrying passengers sinks on Lake Mai Ndombe, in the northeastern part of the country; at least 73 passengers die, and many more are missing.
An overloaded triple-deck ferry carrying passengers from Dhaka to Nazir Hat capsizes in the Tetulia River as it approaches the dock; at least 77 people perish.
A ferry sinks on the Daira River; at least 46 passengers, most of them women and children, drown.
A cargo ship carrying livestock sinks; the bodies of nine crew members are recovered, and 35 more of those aboard are reported missing.
Soldiers pass the 2,300-year-old Danok pagoda in Yangon , the former capital of Myanmar , on May 31, the day after it collapsed during renovations, reportedly killing at least 20 people.
Khin Maung Win/AP Mining and Construction February 22, Shanxi province, China.
The 2,300-year-old Danok pagoda in Yangon , while undergoing the final stages of renovation, collapses, reportedly killing at least 20 people.
The Harmony Gold Mining Co. in South Africa reports that at least 36 illegal miners were killed in an underground fire in a closed shaft; eventually at least 76 bodies are found.
A landslide buries the Jiwei Mountain iron ore mine and several homes and buildings in Wulong county; at least 26 people, 19 of them miners, are killed, but 27 miners are believed to have survived.
A landslide caused by heavy rains destroys a dam project at a hydropower plant in Kangding county; at least 4 construction workers are killed, with some 50 more missing.
An unfinished iron casting factory building in Shijiazhuang collapses in a thunderstorm; at least 17 people, among them construction workers, lose their lives.
An explosion at a coal mine in Pingdingshan leaves 35 miners dead and a further 44 workers trapped.
In Korba a chimney being built at a power plant collapses into the buildings cafeteria; at least 40 people are crushed to death, with dozens more believed to have been trapped in the rubble.
A gas explosion collapses a shaft and starts a fire in a coal mine in Devecikonagi; 19 miners are killed.
A 50-m section of a 1,100-m cable-stayed bridge that is being built some 50 m above the Chambal River collapses, killing at least 45 people, with many more missing.
A magnitude6. earthquake with its epicentre about 32 km north-northwest of San Jose creates devastation and leaves at least 34 people dead, with more than 60 others missing.
After several days of severe flooding, the country's sugar farms have been decimated, 9,000 people have been evacuated, and at least 11 people have died.
Ferocious winds cause the collapse of the roof of a sports centre in Sant Boi de Llobregat, Spain, killing four children, which brings the death toll from the windstorm in France and Spain over the past two days to at least 15; another casualty of the storm is a weeping beech tree that was planted at Versailles in France in 1786 as a gift to Queen Marie Antoinette.
January 28, United States A winter storm that began the previous day causes power failures and traffic accidents in Texas, Arkansas, Kentucky, Indiana, and Ohio; at least 23 deaths are attributed to the weather system.
Flash flooding on the island of Guadalcanal leaves at least 13 people dead and 7 missing.
A landslide precipitated by heavy rainfall sweeps through a gold-mining camp, leaving at least 13 people dead and 22 others missing.
Hifikepunye Pohamba declares a state of emergency in the northern and northeastern areas of the country, where massive flooding over the past few weeks has left at least 92 people dead and devastated agriculture.
A landslide destroys five houses in a mountain village, leaving at least 16 people dead.
Two earthquakes, of magnitudes 5. and 5.1, in Nangarhar province cause the collapse of houses in four villages and leave at least 21 people dead.
Officials report that a heat wave that has brought temperatures as high as 48 °C has left at least 18 people dead.
Floodwaters fed by two months of heavy rains begin to recede; at least 40 people have died, and some 300,000 have been left homeless.
A landslide buries the Jiwei Mountain iron ore mine and several homes and buildings in Wulong county; at least 26 people, 19 of them miners, are killed, and some 72 people aboveground are missing.
Monsoon rains in Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, and Jharkhand leave at least 15 people dead.
Landslides reportedly caused by the blockage of a river by debris from jade mines kill some 30 people in the Phakant region.
Authorities report that recent mountain storms have caused the death of at least 22 people.
A landslide caused by heavy rains destroys a dam project at a hydropower plant in Kangding; at least 4 construction workers are killed, with some 50 more reported missing.
A landslide sweeps away some 30 prospectors who are panning for gold in a river; five bodies are recovered, while the rest remain missing.
A cloudburst causes a landslide that obliterates three villages, leaving 18 people dead and 48 people missing.
Typhoon Morakot levels more than 6,000 homes in Fujian and Zhejiang provinces, and it is reported that Tropical Storm Goni, which carved a path through southern China beginning on August 4, left 3 mariners dead and at least 26 more missing.
Unusually heavy rains lead to flash flooding that inundates homes, offices, and highways; at least 31 people in the area drown.
Flash flooding submerges homes and sweeps away bridges and roads in Mandailing Natal district; at least 38 people perish, and several more are reported missing.
The landscape in the township of Kinglake, Vic., is left ravaged after wildfires swept through the Australian state in February.
Typhoon Ketsana roars through the country, leaving behind rising floods; at least 99 people expire.
A magnitude-7. undersea earthquake collapses hundreds of buildings and leaves the large city without power or communications; at least 1,100 people are killed.
Near Messina, Italy, mud slides cause the collapse of dozens of buildings, leaving at least 23 people dead and a further 35 people missing.
Typhoon Parma brushes the northeastern area, causing landslides and flooding that leave at least 16 people dead.
Officials report that at least 38 people have died in landslides following heavy rains over the past two days.
Chinese officials say that waves of snowstorms that began on November 9 have left at least 40 people dead and more than 9,000 buildings collapsed.
Three days of unusually severe winter weather have left at least 42 people in Poland and 27 people in Ukraine dead from the cold.
Flooding and landslides in the area of Rio de Janeiro after heavy rains result in the deaths of at least 18 people.
The Coromandel Express train, traveling from Haora to Chennai , derails, and three cars are crushed; at least 9 people are killed, and some 40 people are critically injured.
A Metro public transit train slams into the back of a stopped train so hard that the first car rides up on top of the last car of the stopped train; nine people are killed.
Fires caused by the derailment and explosion of a freight train carrying liquefied petroleum gas lead to the collapse of buildings and the deaths of at least 22 residents.
A Delhibound express train slams into a stopped train, crumpling several cars and killing at least 22 passengers and railroad employees.
Just outside Cairo, a southbound passenger train slams into a second passenger train that had unexpectedly stopped on the tracks; at least 18 passengers are said to have died in the incident.
A bus traveling over wet roads in the Cajamarca region slips off the road and Egyptians rush to rescue the victims of a train crash outside Cairo on October 24 in which 18 passengers perished.
The driver of a truck carrying Hindu and Sikh pilgrims to a temple in the foothills of the Himalayas loses control of his vehicle, and it overturns; at least 20 passengers perish.
A bus carrying 30 passengers crashes into a fuel tanker truck; the ensuing explosion incinerates at least 20 of the bus passengers.
A passenger bus collides head-on with a truck not far from Khartoum; 21 bus passengers perish.
A tanker truck carrying gasoline collides head-on with a passenger bus near Samarskoye; at least 21 people are killed.
On the outskirts of Panama City, a truck trying to overtake another vehicle while crossing a bridge hits a bus head-on; at least 24 bus passengers die.
A fuel tanker on a highway riven with potholes falls over and is then hit by a car, causing an explosion that engulfs six commuter buses; some 70 people are thought to have been killed.
Near the town of Haripur, a crowded bus rolls into a gorge; at least 34 passengers perish.
A head-on collision between two crowded buses in the Faridpur district kills 20 or more people.
A passenger bus in the Andes goes off the road and falls into a ravine; 40 passengers die.
The Ministry of Health reports that at least 84 children in the country have died after ingesting teething medication produced by Barewa Pharmaceuticals that contained the industrial solvent diethylene glycol.
At a World Cup association football qualifying match between the home country’s team and Malawi, a stampede results as crowds try to force their way into the stadium before the start of the game (survivors report that police fired tear gas into the crowd, adding to the panic); at least 22 people are crushed to death.
A shipping container being trucked from Afghanistan to Iran through Pakistan is stopped by Pakistani police; it is found to be packed with would-be migrants from Afghanistan, at least 62 of whom have expired.
At the close of the Mawazine music festival, a stampede erupts in the departing crowd; at least 11 concertgoers perish.
Officials report that the death toll among teenage boys so far this year from ritual circumcisions has reached 31.
A five-story building, evidently undermined by monsoon rains, collapses, crushing to death 23 people, mostly women and children.
At the aging Sayano-Shushenskaya hydroelectric power plant, the largest such facility in Russia, a water conduit bursts, unleashing flooding that leaves 75 workers dead; the cause of the disaster is unclear.
At a location where food is being distributed to the poor, as is traditional during Ramadan, at least 19 women are crushed to death in a stampede to be first in line.
An injured spectator is carried out of a stadium in Abidjan, Cote d’Ivoire, after a stampede at a World Cup association football qualifying match between the host team and Malawi on March 29 in which at least 22 people died.
M i 4, S \ ' lg» ^CT Wj^D^ J^L j 1 1 ^ AjE > ^3 jr ' vWj \\ m sL ' I Brazilians gathered on Copacabana beach on October 2 celebrate followm^l the announcement by the International Olympic Committee that Rio de Jhpeiro has been selected to host the 20T6 Olympic Games.
Sergio Moraes—Reuters/Landov Nobel Prizes Nobels in 2009 were AWARDED to eight men and a RECORDSETTING five women; recipients included a sitting United States PRESIDENT for strengthening INTERNATIONAL DIPLOMACY, a Romanian-born novelist for her depictions of the DISPOSSESSED, two scholars for research in ECONOMIC GOVERNANCE, and scientists for deciphering RIBOSOME STRUCTURE, inventing fibre-optics communication and DIGITAL IMAGING technologies, and revealing how CHROMOSOMES are protected.
PRIZE FOR PEACE he Nobel Prize for Peace for 2009 was awarded to United States Pres.
Obama became the third sitting United States president to receive the prize, after Theodore Roosevelt in 1906 and Woodrow Wilson in 1919.
In addition, former president Jimmy Carter received the prize in 2002, two decades after he had left office.
They subsequently divorced , and for several years the boy lived with his mother and stepfather in Indonesia and then with his maternal grandparents in Hawaii.
Obama was elected to the Illinois Senate in 1996 and to the United States Senate in 2004.
In 2008 he won the Democratic nomination for the presidency, the first African American to be chosen by a major party, and he won a decisive victory in the general election.
The Nobel Prize, which came less than nine months after Obama’s inauguration as president, was a surprise, and many people were puzzled, even shocked, by the committee’s decision, given that not enough time had elapsed for the president’s major policies to come to fruition.
While coping with a severe financial and economic crisis at home, he had nonetheless made a number of dramatic shifts in foreign policy from his immediate predecessor.
Obama indicated that the United States would rejoin international efforts against climate change, reached an agreement with Russia to reduce nuclear weapons, attempted to restart peace talks between Israelis and Palestinians, and showed a willingness to engage in diplomatic discussions with Iran and other previously ostracized countries.
Some observers saw the award as a recognition of this new atmosphere that Obama had created.
PRIZE FOR ECONOMICS The Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences was awarded in 2009 to Americans Elinor Ostrom and Oliver E Williamson, who, through their understanding of human behaviour and transactions not covered by detailed contracts or law, established economic governance as a field of research.
This extended the traditional focus of the theory of the market and market prices.
The results of Ostrom’s work challenged conventional thinking that those common natural resources where use by one person reduces the amount available to others—such as water and fisheries—are badly managed unless regulated by a central authority or privatized.
Williamson’s work offered a new theory to explain why firms exist and why some transactions are kept within firms rather than opened to the marketplace.
She found that societies and people often devised sophisticated methods of governance to ensure that shared natural resources are not overexploited and that these methods were often more appropriate and effective than rules imposed by a less-well-informed government.
The Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action , 01strom used case studies to show that private associations often avoided the “tragedy of commons"" by developing the efficient use of resources.
She found that a flaw in the “tragedy"" was its failure to take account of the often repeated interaction of people sharing a resource, which made credible use of a range of punishments.
Williamson received his share of the award for his analysis of economic governance, especially the boundaries of the firm, which broadened understanding of why large companies evolve in some industries and explained the conditions under which it is more efficient to carry out some transactions associated with buying and selling inside a firm rather than outside by another competing firm or individuals.
This advanced the 1937 theory of British-born economist Ronald Coase, who won the Nobel Prize in 1991 for his work in institutional economics.
Williamson realized that it did not necessarily cost more for a firm with adequate administrative infrastructure in place to expand its boundaries to bring more of its business activities inside the firm.
In papers and books beginning in 1971, notably Markets and Hierarchies , Williamson argued that where transactions were complex, negotiating in the market was more difficult, given the greater scope for haggling and disagreement.
In such cases the high cost of writing and enforcing contracts would make it more competitive to integrate the activity into the firm, where conflicts could be resolved via the use of rules and hierarchy.
The greater the mutual dependence of the two parties, the stronger the likelihood of integration, so a firm with several suppliers in close proximity might opt for the market but would choose greater integration if there was only one.
At the time she was awarded the Nobel Prize, Ostrom was Arthur F Bentley Professor of Political Science and remained a co-director of the Workshop in Political Theory and Policy Analysis, which she had cofounded with her husband and fellow political science professor, Vincent Ostrom.
In 1988 he returned to the faculty in Berkeley, where in 2004 he was named Edgar F Kaiser Professor Emeritus of Business, Economics and Law.
PRIZE FOR LITERATURE The 2009 Nobel Prize for Literature was awarded to Romanian-born German author Herta Muller, a distinct and compelling voice of opposition against political oppression and the anguish of human existence defined by intimidation, fear, and persecution.
Known primarily as a novelist, Muller was also prolific as a short-story writer, poet, and essayist whose works portrayed the harsh reality of life in Romania under the repressive dictatorship of Nicolae Ceausescu as well as the ambiguity and disjuncture of emigration and exile.
Although she was highly regarded by those who read her, Muller for much of her career was limited to a German-speaking audience.
She was the 12th woman to receive the literature prize and the first German writer to win since 1999, when the award was presented to Gunter Grass.
Outspoken in her criticism of all forms of totalitarian rule, she was drawn to those victimized by the abuse of authority, in particular the plight of women traumatized by emotional and sexual exploitation.
Muller was born on Aug., 1953, in the village of Nitchidorf in the Germandominated Banat region of Romania.
Her father served in the Waffen SS during World War II; her mother, like members of other ethnic minorities in postwar Romania, was deported to the Soviet Union and spent five years in a labour camp in present-day Ukraine.
She then worked as a translator of trade materials, and after being dismissed for refusing to cooperate with the Securitate, the Romanian secret police, she found employment as a kindergarten teacher and private tutor.
In 1982 she published her first book, Niederungen, a collection of stories that depicted ethnic intolerance and the hypocrisy of village life governed by corruption and exclusion.
As a result of her public condemnation of the Ceausescu dictatorship, Muller was prohibited from publishing in her native Romania.
In 1987, when Muller was permitted to leave Romania, she immigrated to West Germany.
In her next novel, Reisende auf einem Bein (1989; Traveling on One Leg, 1998), Muller explored the condition of exile and the difficulties of assimilation.
Acknowledged as one of Muller’s most distinctive works, the semiautobiographical novel is narrated by a female protagonist who escapes the brutality and harassment encountered in Romania by starting a new life as an emigre in Germany.
In her next novel, Heute war icli mir lieber nicht begegnet , Muller explored the humiliation and indignity suffered by another female narrator deemed by the state as subversive and parasitic.
In 2009 she published her novel Atemschaukel, a work set against the backdrop of the ethnic deportation to the Soviet Union and inspired in part by the experience of her mother.
The selection and contribution of these three individuals illustrated vividly how the traditional lines between the sciences had blurred and virtually disappeared.
Their research elucidated the structure and function of the ribosome—the biological engine that reads the genetic information stored in DNA and builds the corresponding proteins from amino acids.
The process of building proteins requires cells to translate DNA into an RNA molecule that moves from the cell nucleus to the cytoplasm, where it acts as a messenger (and hence is called mRNA, or messenger RNA), carrying the genetic information to the ribosome.
A second kind of RNA, called transfer RNA retrieves and carries the amino acids needed to build the specific protein to which the mRNA corresponds.
The process of matching the sequence carried from the DNA to mRNA and thence to tRNA is the job of the ribosome.
The first big step toward achieving this understanding was uncovering the structure of the ribosome.
The small subunit is made of one large RNA molecule and roughly 32 proteins.
The large subunit is made of three RNA molecules and about 46 proteins.
Determining the structure of these pieces is accomplished by passing X-rays through a very nearly perfect crystal composed of the ribosome units.
The pattern formed by the scattering of the X-rays when UPI/Landov Thomas A Steitz they travel through the ribosome crystal produces an image that contains information about where every atom in the entire structure lies.
Generating a nearly perfect crystal, however, is by no means an easy task.
After taking a position as a postdoctoral scientist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in the late 1960s, she became interested in deciphering the atomic structure of ribosomes by using X-ray crystallography.
Still, working with ribosomes from a bacterium that survives at high temperatures, she was able to produce her first crystals of the large ribosomal subunit in 1980, and by 2000 she had achieved her goal.
In 1998, using high-resolution Xray crystallography techniques, Steitz revealed the location of the RNA molecules in the large ribosomal subunit.
Finally achieving higher resolution, Steitz determined the full stmcture of the large subunit in 2000.
Ramakrishnan’s background in physics and biology enabled him to study ribosome structure in Escherichia coli, using a technique called neutron scattering.
He later also used X-ray crystallography to elucidate the structure of several different cellular components, including ribosomes.
Steitz's ability to crystallize and determine structures of the large subunit in intermediate stages revealed the pathway for protein growth.
The work of all three scientists also provided insight into the atomic structure of antibiotics and how these agents bind to ribosomes, opening the way to the design of new antibiotics.
PRIZE FOR PHYSICS The 2009 Nobel Prize for Physics was awarded to three physicists who in separate ways made possible the worldwide information explosion.
Half of the prize money went to Charles K Kao for groundbreaking work on the use of optical fibres for information transmission; the other half went jointly to Willard S Boyle and George E Smith for the invention of the charge-coupled device , a vital element in digital photography.
After graduating with a degree in electrical engineering from Woolwich Polytechnic , London, Kao worked as an engineer for Standard Telecommunication Laboratories (STL [later part of Nortel Networks]), Harlow, Eng.
He was awarded the Charles Stark Draper Prize of the United States National Academy of Engineering in 1999.
In 2000 he became chairman and chief executive officer of ITX Services.
At that time, existing telephone cables based on copper wires were reaching the limit of the speed at which they could transfer data.
Systems using light in the visible or near-infrared region of the spectrum would enable data transfer at much higher rates.
At the time, it was generally believed that the intrinsic attenuation losses in optical fibres made it impossible for them to replace copper.
In 1966 Kao and Hockham published a paper demonstrating that these losses were far smaller than expected and that the main sources of loss were impurities in the glass itself.
Presciently, Kao predicted that such fibres could be made into optical waveguides for communications purposes.
Within a few years fibres of ultrapure silica were being produced that confirmed his analysis.
The first fibre-optic telephone cables were installed in 1975, and the first transatlantic fibreoptic cable was laid in 1988.
Modernday global communication is based primarily on fibre-optic transmission systems.
In 1962 he became director of Space Science and Exploratory Studies at the Bell Labs subsidiary Bellcomm, but he returned to Bell Labs in 1964 and was executive director of research from 1975 until his retirement in 1979.
Smith and Boyle played a significant part in the revolution in electronic technology that occurred over the past 50 years.
The first solid-state transistors of the 1950s were soon joined up into ""integrated circuits,” but the major advance came with very large-scale integration when thousands of transistors could be manufactured together on a small sheet of silicon and then connected to make circuits.
An individual transistor comprises a dot of metal on an insulating layer of silicon oxide deposited on a silicon substrate.
In 1969 Smith and Boyle realized that such devices could be used for light detection.
A detector is composed of a matrix of such CCD cells (known as “pixels”), and the intensity of light falling on each cell is recorded and stored.
Their use revolutionized the storage and transmission of photographic images.
PRIZE FOR PHYSIOLOGY OR MEDICINE The 2009 Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine was awarded to three American scientists for their discovery of the enzyme telomerase and of how chromosomes are protected by telomeres.
Telomeres are structures at the ends of chromosomes that help control when cells divide.
Szostak was independently studying telomeres when he met Blackburn at a conference in 1980.
They began a collaborative investigation of telomere function in yeast and Tetrahymena.
In 1983 Greider joined Blackburn’s lab as a graduate student, and Greider and Blackburn jointly discovered telomerase, an enzyme that appeared to control telomere behaviour.
Several of the repeated DNA segments of telomeres are lost each time a cell divides, shortening telomere length.
In this way telomeres play an important role in determining cell life span.
Szostak’s later work connected the loss of telomerase activity and cell death.
This provided the initial link between telomeres and the aging process of cells.
Greider and Blackburn subsequently also confirmed that telomerase was the key to stopping telomeres from overshortening.
Greider suspected that abnormal telomerase regulation contributed to tumour development.
Greider found that blocking telomerase activity in cancer cells forces telomeres to shorten.
This process stops cells from surviving indefinitely and slows tumour growth.
These findings brought a surge of new interest in developing anticancer drugs that target telomerase.
Elizabeth H Blackburn was born on Nov., 1948, in Hobart, Tasmania, Australia, and later obtained United States citizenship.
Blackburn became a fellow of the Royal Society of London in 1992 and a foreign associate of the National Academy of Sciences in 1993.
She received the 1999 Lewis S Rosenstiel Award for distinguished work in basic medical science, which she shared with Greider.
Jack W Szostak was bom on Nov., 1952, in London and later obtained United States citizenship.
He joined the faculty of Harvard Medical School in 1979 as an assistant professor of biological chemistry and gradually advanced to professor of genetics in 1988.
He became a Howard Hughes Medical Institute investigator and a member of the National Academy of Sciences in 1998.
The key to Star Trek's revitalization was the decision to hand the reins of the franchise over to Abrams, the new film’s 42-yearold director, who had already earned a reputation as the ""it boy"" among the “geek set” for his intelligent and stylish television shows.
Jeffrey Jacob Abrams's father was a producer of made-for-television movies, and the younger Abrams followed him into the entertainment industry at an early age by making short Super-8 movies as a boy.
The well-reviewed program was a testament to creator-executive producer (and even theme song composer) Abrams’s drive, but he felt frustrated by the network over the series’ frequent time-slot moves, which he believed contributed to its relatively poor ratings and eventual cancellation.
Lost, the story of a group of plane-crash survivors marooned on a mysterious island, which premiered in September 2004.
The show’s byzantine plots and unique supernatural mythology quickly drew fans in—it averaged more than 15 million viewers per week in its first two seasons—and made it arguably the single-most-discussed television show of its time.
Agassi, Shai In May 2009 in Yokohama, Japan, Israeli entrepreneur Shai Agassi unveiled the prototype for a robot that could quickly remove the depleted battery from an electric car and replace it with a freshly charged battery.
Developed by his start-up company, Better Place, the automated device was designed for battery-exchange stations, a key component in Agassi’s sweeping plan for an infrastructure that would spur the public to adopt more-efficient all-electric vehicles in place of gasoline-powered cars.
Such stations would allow the driver of an electric car to travel long distances without waiting to recharge the battery along the way.
Another key element of his plan was to set up a network of ubiquitous recharging spots in parking lots and other places for recharging electric cars whenever they were not being driven.
Agassi’s business plan positioned Better Place as a service company to provide drivers of electric cars with batteries and an electric-charging infrastructure on a subscription basis.
He also started several other businesses, including software companies Quicksoft and TopManage.
In 2001 TopTier was bought by SAP, a leading German software company, for $400 million.
Agassi served on the SAP executive board and became president of SAP's Products and Technology Group.
Time magazine named him one of the most influential businesspeople in the world in 2003, and he was considered to be in line for the company’s CEO position.
Following an induction meeting in which the participants were entreated to find ways to make the world a better place, Agassi looked into climate change, especially in the area of transportation.
Known as a persuasive visionary with a command of the facts, he soon had more than $200 million lined up from investors.
By 2009 he had also reached governmental agreements to establish Better Place’s open recharging system in a number of countries, including Denmark and the United States (Hawaii and California), and French automaker Renault had begun development on a mass-production electric vehicle that would be suitable for the system.
Prior to that time scientists had produced LEDs that emitted red or green light, but blue LEDs had been considered impossible or impractical to make.
Once blue LEDs became available commercially in 1993, they achieved importance in a range of applications, including electronic displays and indicators, outdoor signage and traffic signals, and vehicle lamps.
Further work led to the development of blue semiconductor lasers, which proved useful for high-capacity optical-media devices, such as Blu-ray disc players.
In addition, the availability of blue LEDs made possible the development of white LED lighting—which combined light from red, green, and blue LEDs— as a promising form of high-efficiency general-purpose lighting.
A major breakthrough was the team’s discovery, reported in 1986, that a materials-forming technique called metalorganic vapour phase epitaxial growth could be used to create highquality GaN crystals on a sapphire substrate.
A second breakthrough in Akasaki’s work in developing blue LEDs, reported in 1989, was the discovery that p-type GaN could be formed by doping GaN crystals with magnesium atoms and then irradiating them with electron beams.
This p-type material was then used with existing ntype material to form GaN diodes.
Akasaki continued research into GaN materials through the 1990s and early 2000s, which helped lead to the development of blue semiconductor lasers and other electronics applications.
Amano, Yukiya In July 2009 Japanese veteran diplomat Yukiya Amano was elected the director Japanese diplomat Yukiya Amano general of the International Atomic Energy Agency , an intergovernmental organization headquartered in Vienna whose role as the United Nations watchdog to safeguard against nuclear proliferation had gained prominence with concerns that Iran might be developing nuclear weapons.
These concerns were heightened by the disclosure in September 2009 that Iran was operating a clandestine nuclear facility.
Amano, an expert in nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation, had worked for more than 36 years in the Japanese foreign service, notably as Japan's envoy to the IAEA and member of the IAEA board of governors, the organization’s policy-making body.
Amano was elected director general on the sixth round of voting with the support of 23 member countries of the board of governors—the minimum twothirds majority required.
The vote was divided between Amano and South Africa's IAEA envoy, Abdul Samad Minty.
The split reflected the multiple mandates of the IAEA, with Western industrialized countries being more concerned about nuclear proliferation and LDCs generally giving higher priority to the sharing of nuclear technology among all countries for the generation of nuclear energy for economic development.
Amano said that he was ""resolute in opposing the spread of nuclear arms because I am from a country that experienced Hiroshima and Nagasaki” and that he supported the IAEA's 70 Biographies mandate of helping countries make safe use of nuclear energy and technology.
On December 1 Amano formally succeeded Mohamed ElBaradei, an Egyptian lawyer who had held the position of director general for three four-year terms, and some observers believed that under Amano’s leadership the organization would be less politicized than it had been under ElBaradei.
He was subsequently appointed director of the publications and information centre of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development in Tokyo and director of the nuclear energy division of the Japanese Foreign Ministry.
As Amano’s expertise on international issues concerning nuclear weapons grew, he participated in arms-control talks that led to the 1995 extension of the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty and the 1996 Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty.
He then held positions in Japan’s Foreign Ministry as director general for arms control and scientific affairs and director general of the disarmament, nonproliferation, and science department.
In 2005 the IAEA and its then director general ElBaradei were jointly awarded the Nobel Prize for Peace.
As chairman of the board of governors at the time, Amano accepted the IAEA's share of the Nobel Prize on behalf of the organization.
Ashton, Baroness (Catherine Margaret Ashton, Baroness Ashton of Upholland, of St.
On Dec., 2009, British politician Baroness Ashton, who had previously served as leader of the House of Lords and as European Union trade commissioner , took office as the EU’s high representative for foreign affairs and security policy.
On assuming her new position, Ashton became one of the most powerful women in the world, acting as the voice of the EU in all matters of foreign policy.
Upon graduating, she worked as a secretary for the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament before taking a job in management consultancy in 1979.
From 1983 to 1989 Ashton was a director of Business in the Community, an organization that encouraged corporate responsibility and facilitated partnerships between the public and private sectors.
She spent the 1990s working as a policy adviser, and in 1998 she was tapped to head the county of Hertfordshire’s health authority.
The following year she was awarded a life peerage by Labour Prime Minister Tony Blair, and she entered the House of Lords.
Throughout her parliamentary career, Ashton focused on education and human rights issues.
She served as a junior education minister and in 2002 assumed leadership of the earlychildhood-development initiative Sure Start.
In 2004 Ashton switched portfolios, becoming a junior minister for constitutional affairs.
She was admitted to the Privy Council in May 2006, and later that year her efforts to promote equality earned her recognition as Politician of the Year by the gay and lesbian rights group Stonewall.
In 2007 Ashton served briefly as a junior justice minister before being promoted to leader of the House of Lords by Prime Minister Gordon Brown.
In that role she was instrumental in easing the passage of the EU’s Lisbon Treaty through the upper house.
Although in that post Ashton lacked the name recognition of her predecessor, British politician Peter Mandelson, she earned the admiration of the European Commission president, Jose Manuel Barroso, for her efficiency.
With the final ratification of the Lisbon Treaty in November 2009, European leaders were faced with the task of filling the newly created roles of president of the European Council and high representative for foreign affairs and security policy.
After support for Blair for the presidency flagged in the face of French and German opposition, Belgian Prime Minister Herman Van Rompuy emerged as the favourite for the presidency, and Barroso and Brown championed Ashton for the high representative office.
When conservative pundit Glenn Beck debuted his self-titled television talk show on Fox News in January 2009, it was to a ready-made audience of nearly two and a half million viewers.
Building upon the popularity of his Cable News Network show , Beck took his trademark blend of sentimentality, theatrics, and unpredictable, divisive commentary to an audience that felt marginalized by the political shifts reflected in the November 2008 election of United States Pres.
He developed a fascination with radio at a young age, and he won an hour-long discjockey debut on a local station when he was 13.
His parents divorced later that year, and he moved with his mother to Puyallup, Wash.
His mother, who had battled depression and substance abuse, died in a boating accident in 1979; Beck would later characterize her death as a suicide.
Beck returned to live with his father, and by age 15 he had a job at a radio station in Seattle.
He later worked at stations in Provo, Utah; Corpus Christi, Texas; and Louisville, Ky.
Beck’s Louisville show, Captain Beck and the A-Team, followed the newly popular ""zoo crew” format, which featured wacky hosts and humorous stunts and skits.
At that time Beck began politicizConservative pundit Glenn Beck Mike Mergen/AP 71 Biographies ing his on-air act, inserting blunt patriotism into a largely lighthearted morning show.
He spent 1987-89 in Phoenix, where he employed increasingly outrageous tactics to drum up publicity.
In one incident Beck sabotaged a free concert sponsored by a rival station, using it as a platform to call further attention to his own show.
Beck was fired from his radio job in Houston in 1990 and later moved to Connecticut, where he cohosted the Glenn and Pat Show with fellow disc jockey Pat Gray.
Around this time Beck’s dependence on drugs and alcohol, long a factor in his life, increased.
He went sober in the mid-1990s with the help of Alcoholics Anonymous, and in 1999 he joined the Mormon church.
The radio show that catapulted Beck to household-name status was The Glenn Beck Program, which began airing in Tampa, Fla., in 2000.
It was Beck’s first foray into talk radio, and it gave him a pulpit from which to air his right-wing political beliefs.
Two years later the show went national, and in 2006 Beck was invited to take an evening television slot on CNN's Headline News.
His flair for the dramatic carried over from radio, and he quickly drew a devoted audience with his showmanship and biting commentary.
Beck’s profile only grew with the ascendance of a Democratic president.
Following the election that brought Obama to power, Beck’s was among the loudest cries of the alienated right.
By late 2009 he was drawing millions of people to his show, podcast, and Web site.
The book Glenn Beck's Common Sense, released in 2009, quickly became a best seller.
Benjamin, Regina In July 2009 Regina M Benjamin, an American physician who had spent most of her medical career serving poor families in a shrimping village on the Gulf Coast of Alabama, was nominated by United States Pres.
Benjamin had achieved distinction for the dedication she had shown in providing health care to her medically underserved community and patients, many of whom were uninsured and unable to pay for their treatment.
Bayou La Batre, and she persevered in running the community's health clinic despite having had to rebuild it three times—in 1998 after it was flooded by Hurricane Georges, in 2005 after it was destroyed by Hurricane Katrina, and again in 2006 after it was extensively damaged by fire.
She mortgaged her house to help finance the clinic’s reconstruction after Hurricane Katrina, and while the clinic was being rebuilt, she made house calls to see her patients.
Benjamin's new highprofile post would give her the opportunity to champion health care for those unable to afford it.
Benjamin attended medical school with the aid of funding from the National Health Service Corps, a United States federal program that paid medicalschool tuition in exchange for a commitment to work for a defined period in an area with few or no doctors.
Throughout her career Benjamin was active in medical organizations and advisory groups.
She served on the American Medical Association’s Women in Medicine Panel, and in 1995 she became the first African American woman and the first person below the age of 40 to be elected to the AMA’s board of trustees.
As president of the Medical Association of the State of Alabama, she was also the first African American woman to preside as president of a state medical society.
She served on the board of Physicians for Human Rights, and in 1998 she received the Nelson Mandela Award for Health and Human Rights.
In 2008 Benjamin was awarded a John D and Catherine T MacArthur Foundation fellowship.
Bird, Andrew After years of playing music in relative obscurity, the eclectic American pop songwriter and multi-instrumentalist Andrew Bird appeared poised to break out in 2009.
A darling of the indie-rock set, Bird was known to fans for his virtuosic skill on the violin, which he often sampled and looped onstage, and for his meticulously crafted songs that combine wistful melodies with hyperliterate lyrics.
Andrew H Walker/Getty Images Multifaceted American musician Andrew Bird Bird was immersed in music from early childhood.
He chafed at the rigid expectations of the classicalmusic world, however, and after graduation supported himself by playing his instrument everywhere from weddings to Renaissance fairs.
Having developed an interest in vintage jazz, he soon fell in with the popular swing-revival band the Squirrel Nut Zippers, appearing on 72 three of their albums in the late 1990s.
The band failed to catch on among audiences, though, and Bird consequently decided to strike out on his own.
After testing the waters with a series of solo gigs, Bird recorded Weather Systems at his family’s rural Illinois farm.
The album marked a turning point in his songwriting; the idiosyncratic pre-rock-and-roll touches were now filtered through a sound that owed more to contemporary folk and poprock music than his previous pastichedriven work had.
Bird expanded his fan base by frequently opening for more famous musicians (he called the 30-minute performances “guerrilla attacks”), and widespread praise for his next record, The Mysterious Production of Eggs , brought him further attention.
The success continued with the sprawling Armchair Apocrypha , which sold more than 100,000 copies—a considerable number for an independent release.
The election, however, was harshly criticized by opposition groups, who claimed that the poll was marred by widespread fraud and voter intimidation.
Bouteflika’s family was from Tlemcen, Alg., and he spent much of his early life living in Algeria.
In 1957, three years into the Algerian war for independence , he joined the National Liberation Front in its fight against French rule.
After Algerian independence in 1962, Bouteflika was appointed minister for youth, sports, and tourism, and a year later he was made foreign minister.
Bouteflika participated in the 1965 coup, led by Houari Boumedienne, that removed Algerian Pres.
Bouteflika continued to serve as foreign minister in the new government, and by the time of Boumedienne’s death in 1978, Bouteflika seemed well positioned to replace him in the presidency.
Nevertheless, the army instead appointed Defense Minister Chadli Bendjedid, and soon afterward Bouteflika lost his position as foreign minister.
Although he won the presidency in 1999, the election was marred by claims of rigging and the subsequent withdrawal of the other candidates.
As president, Bouteflika focused on rebuilding the country and strengthening Algeria's international reputation.
He also granted wide-ranging amnesty to militant Islamist groups within the country in an effort to resolve a longstanding civil conflict.
Though his previous efforts to reduce the country's rebel activity and its attendant violence were somewhat successful, during his second term insurgents re-formed as an arm of al-Qaeda and were responsible for a number of suicide bombings.
In 2005 Bouteflika experienced health problems, which led to continued speculation about his physical well-being.
In November 2008 the Algerian parliament approved a constitutional amendment abolishing presidential term limits.
The arrangement gave Bouteflika the opportunity to run for his third consecutive term.
Boyle, Danny At the 2009 Academy Awards ceremony, Danny Boyle was named best director for Slumdog Millionaire , his unconventional romance that had become an unlikely international sensation.
The film—a modern take on Charles Dickens's Oliver Twist set in India with elements of Bollywood—earned seven other Oscars, including best picture.
Slumdog had almost failed to receive a theatrical release after its initial distributor folded.
It eventually landed at Fox Searchlight, but many questioned whether audiences would see a movie that contained scenes of extreme child abuse and torture, featured extensive dialogue in Hindi with English subtitles, and cast first-time performers who actually lived in Mumbai slums.
Such doubts proved unfounded, however, as Boyle crafted an energetic and ultimately optimistic film that connected with both moviegoers and critics.
In addition to winning the Oscars, he and his film also received BAFTAs, Golden Globes, and a host of other awards.
He served as the artistic director at the Royal Court Theatre Upstairs and as deputy director at the Royal Court Theatre.
The crime thriller was noted for its bold visual imagery, which became a trademark of Boyle’s work, and was written by John Hodge, who became a frequent 73 Ken McKay—Rex USA/Everett Collection Biographies collaborator.
The darkly humorous look at heroin addicts, written by Hodge and featuring Shallow Grave star Ewan MacGregor, became an international hit and one of the U.K.’s highest-grossing films.
MacGregor reteamed with Boyle on the romantic comedy A Life Less Ordinary , but it failed to match the success of their previous efforts.
Boyle next directed his first big-budget Hollywood film, The Beach , which featured a screenplay by Hodge based on Alex Garlands popular novel about a seemingly utopian community on a remote Thai island.
Despite starring Leonardo DiCaprio, it earned mixed reviews and failed to find an audience.
In 2002 Boyle had a sleeper hit with the postapocalyptic zombie film 28 Days Later He continued to show his versatility with Millions , a heartwarming story about a motherless boy who finds the proceeds of a bank robbery.
After directing the science-fiction thriller Sunshine , Boyle received the greatest accolades of his career for Slumdog.
Some charged that it romanticized poverty, and others complained that the child actors were exploited, especially when it was revealed that two of the young stars continued to live in the Mumbai slums.
Boyle subsequently purchased homes for the children’s families and donated over $750,000 to a fund to help other Mumbai children.
On April 11, 2009, the virtually unknown Scottish singer Susan Boyle appeared as a contestant on an episode of the British television talent show Britain’s Got Talent.
Boyle’s unconventional appearance belied her stunning singing voice, and her rendition of the song ""I Dreamed a Dream” from the musical Les Miserables immediately silenced the cynicism of both the judges and the audience, earning her a standing ovation and quickly transforming her into an international media sensation.
Boyle grew up in Blackburn, a small Scottish industrial town, as the youngest of nine children born to two middle-class Irish immigrants.
Owing to complications during her birth, she was briefly deprived of oxygen, which left her with mild brain damage; in school Scottish singer Susan Boyle she was diagnosed with learning disabilities, for which she was frequently teased and bullied.
Boyle was drawn to music and singing as a young child, however, and at age 12 began participating in musical productions at school.
Her talent was quickly recognized by her teachers, who encouraged her to persist.
After high school, Boyle worked briefly as a cook trainee at West Lothian College before beginning studies at the Edinburgh Acting School.
She continued to cultivate her voice, singing in her church choir, at local karaoke bars, and at the Edinburgh Festival Fringe, the largest arts festival in the world.
In 1995 Boyle unsuccessfully auditioned for the British TV talent show My Kind of People.
Four years later her rendition of “Cry Me a River,” which had been featured on a local charity CD, received positive reviews.
She consequently exhausted her monetary savings to record a professional demo tape, which she mailed to record companies, radio and TV networks, and various talent competitions.
Boyle’s career ambitions were put on hold in 2000 after her sister died.
Devastated by the death of her mother in 2007, Boyle completely withdrew from singing for nearly two years.
In late 2008, however, she applied to audition for Britain’s Got Talent to honour the memory of her mother, who had been a fan of the show and had encouraged her to become a contestant.
She placed second in the final competition and then briefly disappeared from the limelight during a period of exhaustion.
Boyle performed during the show's talent stage tour in June and sang on the finale of its counterpart in the U.S., America’s Got Talent, in September.
Her first studio album, I Dreamed a Dream, debuted at number one on the Billboard charts in late November and was the second-best-selling album of 2009 with more than 3. million copies sold.
Early in the 2009-10 season, he racked up the 1,000th game of his professional career, the only goalie other than Roy to have achieved that milestone.
As a boy Brodeur traveled with his father, Denis Brodeur, a member of Canada’s 1956 bronze-medal-winning Olympic team and a longtime photographer for the NHL Montreal Canadiens.
The younger Brodeur was a firstround choice of the 1990 NHL entry draft and signed with the New Jersey Devils.
In 1993-94 he won the Calder Memorial Trophy as the leagues top rookie, having recorded a 2.40 goals against average for the season and a 1.95 GAA during the 17 play-off games.
In 1994-95 Brodeur helped his team win the Stanley Cup championship, compiling a record of 19 wins, 11 losses, and 6 ties.
After that season he became a fixture in goal for the Devils and in the NHL’s All-Star Game; between the 1997-98 and 2007-08 seasons, he played in at least 70 regular-season games each year.
An excellent stickhandler, Brodeur in 1997 became the second goaltender in NHL history to have scored a goal in a play-off game.
Brodeur was a member of Team Canada in the Olympic Winter Games of 1998, 2002, and 2006, and in 2002 he played a significant role in the team’s gold-medal win.
He also represented his home country at the 1996 and 2005 International Ice Hockey Federation world championships, with Canada taking the silver both times.
Bryce, Quentin In 2009 Quentin Bryce enjoyed a lively first full year as Australia’s governorgeneral.
A former governor of the state of Queensland and a noted lawyer, educator, and human rights activist, Bryce was appointed governor-general by Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, and upon being sworn in on Sept., 2008, she became the first woman ever to hold the high-profile post of Queen Elizabeth IPs viceregal representative in Australia.
Bryce’s historic appointment was hailed by numerous Australian media outlets, as well as by many government officials.
Bryce was to serve a fiveyear term, during which time she intended to devote much of her attention to human rights issues; she indicated that she would place “special emphasis” on promoting and protecting the rights of the country’s indigenous peoples.
She married architect and graphic designer Michael Bryce in 1964 (the couple eventually had five children) and was admitted to the Queensland bar the following year.
In the late 1980s and early 1990s, she worked for the Australian Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission, first as the commission’s Queensland director and then as the organization’s federal sex discrimination commissioner.
In 1993 Bryce became the founding chairperson and CEO of the National Childcare Accreditation Council, in which position she led efforts to ensure and improve the quality of child-care services in Australia.
Bryce was appointed governor of Queensland in 2003, the same year that she was made a Companion of the Order of Australia.
Her five-year appointment as Queensland’s governor was extended for an additional two years in January 2008, but it was only three months later that Rudd announced his selection of Bryce for the governor-general’s post.
In her new position, Bryce maintained a busy travel schedule, visiting Australian troops in Afghanistan, addressing the World Future Energy Summit in Abu Dhabi, U.A.E., and undertaking a diplomatic trip to nine African countries in March and April.
After the deadliest bushfires in Australia’s history ravaged much of the state of Victoria early in the year and heavy flooding also occurred across northern Queensland, Bryce toured both states and made a national televised address on February 10, urging her fellow Australians to “do whatever needs to be done” to help survivors of the disasters.
Although Raising Sand boasted impressive sales and near-universal critical acclaim, Burnett was unimpressed with the sound quality of the final recording.
In an era in which many producers were mixing music to be louder and denser for the low-fidelity iPod and ringtone markets, Burnett returned to the basics of audio engineering with his XOAE (rendered in English as “CODE”) technology.
CODE offered a listening experience that replicated the original studio master recording as faithfully as possible, with no additional cost to the consumer—CODE audio DVDs were included in the standard CD package, and listeners could thus compare the two formats side-byside.
CODE was further refined for the 2009 debut album from the psychedelic rock supergroup Moonalice.
Joseph Henry Burnett spent his childhood in Fort Worth, Texas, and it was there that he acquired the nickname “T Bone” and became involved in the local music scene, initially as a guitarist with local blues bands and later as the founder of his own recording studio.
He moved to Los Angeles in the early 1970s and recorded his debut solo album, The B-52 Band & the Fabulous Skylarks , a straightforward collection of bluesy rock tunes.
In 1975 he received his major break into the industry, touring as a guitarist on Bob Dylan’s Rolling Thunder Revue tour.
His second solo album, Truth Decay , showed Burnett’s maturation as an artist, but he found greater success in the production booth than he did as a performer.
He produced the critically acclaimed major label debut from Los Lobos, How Will the Wolf Survive? , and worked with Elvis Costello, whose King of America and Spike featured Burnett as both producer and performer.
Burnett continued to record solo material, with the Grammy-nominated The Criminal Under My Own Hat providing an excellent window into Burnett’s evolving lyrical sensibilities, but he remained outside the mainstream of popular music.
The centre-right Buzek would relinquish power to a socialist candidate halfway through the five-year term in a power-sharing compromise between the conservative and liberal contingents.
While the post was primarily ceremonial, Buzek’s victory was considered a positive, if symbolic, indication that stigmatization of former Soviet bloc countries was on the wane.
He ascended to power rapidly, chairing the union’s first National Congress the following year.
Beginning in 1989, having emerged from Solidarity’s underground years unscathed by communist persecution, Buzek presided over three additional congresses as the union worked to secure political legitimacy.
Continuing his work at the Polish Academy of Sciences, where until 1997 he served as director, Buzek was also appointed representative to the International Energy Agency’s Greenhouse Gas R&D Programme.
Though Buzek, a Protestant, was greeted skeptically in predominately Roman Catholic Poland, he successfully initiated discussions for accession to the EU in 1997 and negotiated Poland’s NATO membership in 1999.
His economic reforms, however, enacted in part to facilitate EU and NATO acceptance, entailed rapid downsizing and privatization and proved to be unpopular as the cost in jobs became apparent.
Compounding matters, in 2000 the UW dissolved the coalition, leaving Buzek with a minority government for the remainder of his term, which ended in 2001.
When Poland formally joined the EU in 2004, Buzek was elected to the European Parliament, where he became vice president of the European Energy Forum.
Castroneves, Helio In May 2009 Brazilian race-car driver Helio Castroneves capped a personally tumultuous year in triumphant fashion by winning the premier auto race in the U.S., the Indianapolis 500, for the third time.
His victory came little more than five weeks after a United States federal jury had acquitted him on six counts of incometax evasion—charges that could have netted him six years in prison—and just two days after prosecutors had dropped a remaining conspiracy charge against him.
Finally able to put his monthslong legal battle behind him, the 34-year-old Castroneves turned in a stirring performance before some 300,000 fans at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway.
Castroneves was involved in motor sports from a young age with the support of his father, an auto dealer in Sao Paulo who owned a stock-car-racing team.
As a teenager, Castroneves won a national go-kart-racing title in Brazil before advancing in 1994 to Formula Three auto racing in Europe.
He attracted the attention of Brazilian racing great Emerson Fittipaldi, who helped him to get started on the Championship Auto Racing Teams IndyCar circuit in 1998.
After signing in 2000 with Penske Racing, one of the powerhouse teams in the IndyCar Series, Castroneves quickly became one of the team’s dominant drivers.
He was also the youngest driver ever to accomplish the back-to-back feat and the first to win the classic race in each of his two initial attempts.
By this time the immensely affable Brazilian had become one of the Indy Racing League's most popular drivers.
In 2007 he broadened his fan base by appearing on the hit American television show Dancing with the Stars, winning the competition with his professional dance partner, Julianne Hough.
A federal indictment handed down in 2008 alleged that he had helped to create a Panama-based shell company with the intention of avoiding paying taxes on some $5 million in income.
Following his acquittal, he tearfully expressed his relief at being able to return to racing.
Since the early 1990s, Cave had been immersed in fashioning the Soundsuits that qualified as fashion, sculpture, and performance art.
These wearable mixedmedia constructions, named for the sounds made when worn by performers, were fabricated through a complex layering of found materials, ranging from manufactured castoffs (such as fabrics, buttons, and old toys) to natuArtist Nick Cave unveils one of his Soundsuits.
Equally reminiscent of African religious ceremonial costumes and high fashion garments, these hybrid objects referenced Cave’s ongoing interest in the construction and concealment of identity.
Simultaneously acting as ornate art objects and as instruments for sound and movement, the Soundsuits had an interdisciplinary and transformative nature that won Cave numerous awards, including the Joan Mitchell Foundation Award in 2008.
During his time there he also studied with Alvin Ailey’s modern dance company, initiating his active interest in constructing a bridge between dance, fashion, and art.
He earned a master’s in fine arts at the Cranbrook Academy of Art, Bloomfield Hills, Mich., and later became chairman of the Fashion Design program at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago.
Throughout his career, Cave made use of found and ready-made materials to reference cultural, political, and autobiographical issues.
He made his first Soundsuit out of twigs in the early 1990s by wiring cut and drilled sticks to a handmade cotton undergarment, realizing its performative potential only once it had been completed.
He later employed a myriad of techniques and traditions to create the Soundsuits, which range from formfitting bodysuits composed of intricately sewn fabrics and beads complete with ceramic headdresses to amorphous suits made of woven hair in vibrant colours.
When worn, the Soundsuits simultaneously conceal and transform the identity, race, and gender of their wearer, encouraging movement and creating sounds that correspond to their chosen materials and construction.
The Soundsuits’ meanings shift and multiply with each exhibition and performance, set in places as varied as the theatre stage, fashion runway, and city street.
Cave used these contexts to emphasize his reliance on community to activate his work—whether the skilled professionals and friends he recruited to assist him in the creation of the suits, the models and trained dancers that performed in them, or the audience that interpreted the combination of form and movement.
With these objects and his Soundsuits, Cave continued to borrow from a wide range of disciplines and cultures in an effort to examine and challenge notions of personal and cultural identity.
In March 2009, Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry resumed his duties as chief justice of the Pakistan Supreme Court more than a year after he was dismissed by Pakistani Pres.
Although demands for Chaudhry’s reinstatement served as the focal point of sustained efforts by Pakistan’s legal community to pressure Musharraf into vacating his role as head of the Pakistan government, the chief justice's entire tenure on the court had been filled with drama and eventdefining moments.
He established a legal practice as an advocate in 1974 and became an advocate for the Balochistan High Court in 1976.
Chaudhry was then named advocate general of the Balochistan High Court, was designated additional judge of the Balochistan High Court, and held several other judiciary positions.
While serving simultaneously as chairman of the Balochistan Local Council Election Authority, he was twice presiding officer of the Balochistan Local Council Bodies Authority.
After being appointed chief justice of the Balochistan High Court, Chaudhry played a key role in the establishment of the Circuit Bench of the Balochistan High Court at Sibi.
He was named to the Pakistan Supreme Court in 2000 and was elevated to chief justice in 2005.
Never one to avoid controversy, Chaudhry presided over the court during much of the military dictatorship headed by Musharraf, who seized power in 1999.
Removed from his post as chief justice in late 2007, ostensibly because he appeared to threaten Musharraf’s political authority, Chaudhry became the lightning rod for sustained efforts by Pakistan's legal community not only to seek his reinstatement but also to drive Musharraf out of office.
Musharraf resigned in August 2008, and after elec77 Pakistani jurist Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry Aamir Qureshi—AFP/Getty Images tions were held, a new central government emerged under Pres.
Asif Ali Zardari, widower of slain former prime minister Benazir Bhutto.
After more than a year of unrelenting demonstrations following Chaudhry’s dismissal—culminating in the declaration of a ""Long March” arranged by the country’s lawyer community but joined by political leaders led by former prime minister Nawaz Sharif, who also had been deposed by Musharraf—in March 2009 the court ordered that the chief justice be reinstated.
Zardari's hesitation in returning Chaudhry to the court caused a rift between himself and Sharif until Zardari finally relented and restored Chaudhry to office.
In May 2009 the court, again led by Chief Justice Chaudhry, lifted the ban on Sharif’s ability to run for political office, which appeared to lay the groundwork for yet another confrontation between Sharif and Zardari.
The decision, however, also reinforced Chaudhry’s authority and the role of the Supreme Court in sustaining an independent Pakistani judiciary.
Contador, Alberto Spanish cyclist Alberto Contador firmly established himself as the greatest stage racer in the world in 2009 as he claimed the second Tour de France victory of his young career on July 26 in Paris at the culmination of the 23-day, 3,460-km race.
Contador, who won the race in 2007, dominated the 2009 Tour’s overall standings, finishing 4 minutes 11 seconds ahead of runner-up Andy Schleck of Luxembourg and 5 minutes 24 seconds ahead of former champion Lance Armstrong of the U.S., who placed third.
Although Contador was just 26 years old, the win was his fourth victory at a major national, or grand, tour; he had also captured both the Tour of Italy (Giro d’ltalia) and the Tour of Spain (Vuelta a Espana) in 2008.
Followers of cycling marveled at the Spaniard’s versatility, regarding him as a ""complete rider”—a peerless climber who was also a formidable competitor in individual time trials—and many believed he had the potential to challenge Armstrong’s record of seven Tour de France titles.
Contador competed as an amateur from his mid-teens and made his professional debut in 2003.
He showed early promise, winning a time trial that year at the Tour of Poland, but in 2004 his future was left in doubt after he suffered a fall during a race and subsequently underwent brain surgery to remove a blood clot.
He made a remarkable recovery, however, and resumed racing in 2005, winning a stage of the Tour Down Under in Australia and earning his first overall victory as a professional rider at the Catalan Cycling Week.
His emergence as one of the elite figures of road cycling came in 2007, but at the close of that season, his Discovery Channel team disbanded.
Although Contador was the defending champion, he was unable to participate in the 2008 Tour de France because his new team, Astana, was excluded from the race for prior doping offenses.
During the 2009 Tour, reports surfaced of a rift between Contador and his teammate Armstrong over the leadership of Astana.
Any doubt as to who was the stronger rider vanished on stage 15, however, when the Spaniard produced the fastest climb in Tour history, making the final ascent to the Alpine village of Verbier, Switz., at an estimated rate of more than 1,850 m per hour.
Contador seized the leader’s yellow jersey on that stage and never relinquished it.
Armstrong left Astana at the end of the Tour, vowing to assemble his own team in 2010.
Contador, meanwhile, celebrated his victory and fielded offers from several other teams eager for his services.
Cruz, Penelope Spanish actress Penelope Cruz solidified her international stardom in 2009, earning rave reviews for her performance as an ill-fated aspiring actress in Los abrazos rotos , directed by Pedro Almodovar.
Cruz, who was known for her classic beauty and her sultry roles, also appeared in the musical film Nine, in which she portrayed the mistress of a movie director played by British actor Daniel Day-Lewis.
In February, Cruz won her first Academy Award—for best supporting actress, for her work in Woody Allen’s Vicky Cristina Barcelona , in which she starred alongside Scarlett Johansson and Javier Bardem.
At age 15 she won a modeling agency competition and began appearing in music videos and on Spanish television.
She came to international attention with Belle epoque , a film about an army deserter taken in by an elderly man and his four enchanting daughters.
She starred alongside Matt Damon in All the Pretty Horses , a film adaptation of Cormac McCarthy’s novel of the same name, and opposite Johnny Depp in Blow , a film based on the life of George Jung, the most prolific cocaine dealer in the United States during the 1970s.
In 2001 Cruz also appeared in Vanilla Sky —a remake of a successful film in which she had earlier starred, Abre los ojos (1997; Open Your Eyes) —and afterward was involved in a highly publicized relationship with costar Tom Cruise.
In the early 21st century, Cruz continued to act in both Englishand Spanish-language productions.
After performing in Head in the Clouds , she appeared as an unhappily married mother in Almodovar’s critically acclaimed Volver (2006; To Return), for which she received an Academy Award nomination.
Daldry, Stephen British film and theatre director Stephen Daldry’s hybrid talent was on full display in 2009 as he propelled both a film, The Reader , and a stage musical, Billy Elliot (opened Nov., 2008), to their respective zeniths of professional acclaim, the 2009 Academy and Tony awards.
The Reader, which was adapted by playwright David Hare from German author Bernhard Schlink’s novel, peers at the spectre of the Holocaust in post-World War II Germany through the lens of an affair between an illiterate woman, played by British actress Kate Winslet, and a teenage boy who, as an adult, agonizes over the revelation that his lover was previously a concentration camp guard.
The film earned 2009 Academy Award nominations for best picture and for Daldry’s direction, as well as an Oscar for Winslet.
Meanwhile, Billy Elliot, the Musical, adapted from Daldry s 2000 film Billy Elliot, about a boy who finds refuge in ballet, duplicated on Broadway the success of his earlier London stage production, garnering the Tony Award for best musical and securing best director honours for Daldry.
Though his screen adaptation of Michael Chabon’s Pulitzer Prizewinning novel The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier and Clay was still stalled as 2009 came to a close, Daldry maintained that the project would prevail.
Daldry’s father—a bank manager who died when Daldry was 15—discouraged his interest in theatre.
Abetted by his cabaret singer mother, however, Daldry joined a theatre troop in Taunton and by age 15 had resolved to direct.
At Sheffield he directed the university theatre company and cultivated his radical bona fides with forays into socialism and a penchant for wearing pillbox hats.
Daldry then further flouted convention as an apprentice clown in Italy.
Priestley’s An Inspector Calls for the National Theatre earned him a Laurence Olivier Award and, when the production traveled to Broadway , a Tony.
He returned to Broadway in 1999 as the director of David Hare’s one-man show Via Dolorosa.
Daldry—at the time credited with one short film—was then unexpectedly tapped to direct Billy Elliot.
The film was nominated for several Academy Awards, including best director.
Daldry then helmed The Hours , Hare's adaptation of Michael Cunningham’s Pulitzer Prize-winning novel.
Dalloway, the film starred Julianne Moore, Meryl Streep, and—as Woolf—Nicole Kidman.
Daldry again received an Oscar nomination for best director, and Kidman claimed best actress honours.
Daniels, David Critics’ enthusiasm for the work of American opera singer David Daniels continued undiminished 15 years after Daniels’s stage debut at Glimmerglass Opera in Cooperstown, N.Y., and his performing schedule remained full.
The planned 2009-10 season included European recitals with his longtime collaborator, pianist Martin Katz; opera productions in Atlanta and Houston; a holiday-season tour of Canada and the United States with Les Violons du Roy; and his debut with the Chicago Symphony Orchestra performing Bach’s St.
As the preeminent countertenor of his generation, Daniels was best known for his lead roles in Handel’s operas, including Giulio Cesare, Rinaldo, and Radamisto.
These and similar parts had been written for the 18th century’s wildly popular castrati, men who had been castrated as boys in order to maintain their soprano voices as they grew.
When the Baroque operas of Handel and others were revived in the 20th century, female mezzo-sopranos played the male roles.
Daniels and other modem countertenors sang the roles by using their trained falsetto voices.
The son of two voice teachers, he became an accomplished boy soprano, and he attended performances by a number of acclaimed singers.
By age 17 he was studying voice as a tenor, and in his senior year of high school he won a major voice competition.
Meanwhile, although he was formally a tenor, he continued to be happiest singing in his higher range.
Nearly at the end of his studies, at age 25 he made the switch to the higher voice.
He studied with countertenor Drew Minter and immersed himself in the performance of 17thand 18th-century music.
Within a few years he made his debut at Glimmerglass Opera and was launched onto the world stage.
In addition to the Handel roles that were the mainstay of his repertoire, Daniels performed regularly in operas by Claudio Monteverdi, Christoph Willibald Gluck, Mozart, and Benjamin Britten.
On the concert stage he sang Bach, Handel, and Hector Berlioz, among others, and in recitals he stretched the countertenor repertoire to sing, with pronouns unchanged, mezzosoprano works by Maurice Ravel, Ralph Vaughn Williams, and other 19thand 20th-century composers.
Daniels won the 1997 Richard Tucker Award, conferred by the Richard Tucker Music Foundation to an emerging American opera singer, and was named Vocalist of the Year by Musical America magazine.
Daniels was praised by music critics and fans alike 79 Biographies for his solid acting and commanding stage presence, as well as for his ""luminous,"" ""flexible and true,” and ""impeccably controlled” voice.
The Decemberists The American indie-rock band the Decemberists scored an unexpected hit when in March 2009 a new album, the uninterrupted hour-long rock opera The Hazards of Love, debuted at number 14 on the Billboard album charts.
Though some questioned the Decemberists’ decision to produce their second record on a major label as a concept album— especially one with a story line featuring a fair maiden, her shape-shifting lover, a forest queen, and a nefarious man called only ""the Rake”—the album was viewed by the Decemberists’ numerous fans as simply a logical step in the quirky band's musical progression.
Oct., 1974, Helena, Mont.), keyboardist and accordionist Jenny Conlee (b.
Sept., 1973, Bellevue, Wash.)—had gained a reputation earlier in the decade for its highly stylized, literate songs.
Formed in 2000 in Portland, Ore., the Decemberists (with drummers Ezra Holbrook to 2002 and Rachel Blumberg from 2002 to 2005) initially hewed to a primarily folk-pop sound built around acoustic guitar melodies.
Their first album, however, Castaways and Cutouts , featured the baroque instrumentation and narrative song structures (as well as Meloy’s idiosyncratically nasal voice) that would become the band’s hallmarks.
In 2003 the group released Her Majesty the Decemberists, which built on the first album's sound to include prominent horn and string sections.
Their EP (a format intermediate in length between a single and an album) The Tain consisted of a single song broken into multiple movements and foreshadowed the Decemberists’ future direction.
As the band grew more successful, its live shows developed a distinct theatrical bent, replete with elaborate stage designs and props, and the Decemberists became one of indie rock’s most popular concert draws.
Their third full record, Picaresque , featured a wide-ranging set of songs that tell the stories of a diverse cast of characters, including a widowed peddler, spies who tragically fall in love, a pair of homeless runaways, and two men trapped inside the belly of a whale.
The latter track, “The Mariners Revenge Song,” was an eightminute epic in the style of a sea shanty, which, when played live in concert with a massive papier-mache whale, became one of the band’s signature numbers.
However, the group’s first album with Capitol, The Crane Wife , assuaged those fears.
It featured elegant ballads about a man falling in love with and marrying a wounded crane alongside sprawling prog-rock-infused jams.
The Crane Wife cracked the Billboard top 50 and was atop many critics’ lists of the year’s best albums.
Dennard was credited with the invention in the late 1960s of the one-transistor cell for dynamic random-access memory and with pioneering in the early 1970s the set of consistent scaling principles that underlie the improved performance of increasingly miniaturized integrated circuits, two pivotal innovations that helped spur more than three decades of growth in the computer industry.
DRAM consists of an array of semiconductor memory cells that are integrated on a silicon chip.
Following its introduction as a commercial product in the 1970s, onetransistor-cell DRAM was extensively used in computers and other electronic devices.
With miniaturization, it was possible to develop DRAM chips that contain billions of memory cells.
He joined IBM Research in 1958 as a staff engineer and first worked on memory and logic circuits and the development of data communication techniques.
John Moen, Chris Funk, Colin Meloy, Jenny Conlee, and Nate Query Autumn de Wilde—HO/AP 80 Biographies computer memory that were then in development (including a memory system consisting of wire mesh and magnetic rings), and in 1968 Dennard was granted a patent for the design.
It was one of more than four dozen patents that he was eventually issued.
Dennard was given the title of IBM fellow in 1979, and he held several positions over the length of his career of more than 50 years with the company.
Dennard was elected to the United States National Academy of Engineering in 1984 and was inducted into the United States National Inventors Hall of Fame in 1997.
Among the other awards and honours that Dennard garnered were the United States National Medal of Technology, which he received from Pres.
April 10, 1950, Katherine, N.Terr., Australia) On Jan., 2009, on the lawn of the Parliament House in Canberra, Australian Prime Minister Kevin Rudd presented the Australian of the Year Award to Mick Dodson, an Aboriginal political activist and scholar, in recognition of Dodson’s work to help better the lives of the country’s indigenous peoples and to promote reconciliation between Australia’s indigenous and nonindigenous residents.
He was also a moving force behind the organization Reconciliation Australia, which had pushed for the historic formal apology that Rudd delivered in February 2008 for wrongs committed by past governments against generations of Aborigines.
In addition, Dodson, who had long campaigned for the establishment of a national indigenous representative body, was appointed at the end of 2008 to be a key adviser to the federal government on the formation of such a body.
He later directed the Northern Land Council and, from 1988 to 1990, served as counsel to the Royal Commission into Aboriginal National Australia Day Council Aboriginal activist Mick Dodson, the 2009 Australian of the Year Deaths in Custody.
In 1993 he was appointed the country’s first Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander social justice commissioner, a post he held until 1998.
In 2003 he became the first indigenous Australian to be named a law professor at the ANU College of Law.
Aside from his work on behalf of Australian Aborigines, Dodson was also involved in advocating for the rights of other indigenous peoples around the world.
Dodson assisted in drafting the Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples that was adopted by the UN General Assembly in September 2007.
He welcomed the greater public visibility that the award afforded him and hoped to use it to raise awareness of problems facing both indigenous and nonindigenous Australians.
He was particularly concerned with the lack of access to quality education in many communities and embarked on a national schools tour in mid-2009 as part of his stated goal of having every Australian child enrolled and adequately equipped for the beginning of the 2010 school year.
Dorsey, Jack; Stone, Christopher Isaac ; and Williams, Evan , , and Twitter—the online messaging service cofounded by social-media entrepreneur Evan Williams, social-networking expert Christopher Isaac Stone, and messaging-software engineer Jack Dorsey—found itself in the media spotlight in 2009 when the application received a Webby Award for Breakout of the Year and moved toward becoming a mainstream means of communication adopted and endorsed by celebrities, news outlets, and corporations.
Although Twitter did not charge a fee for its service and had no discernible income, it was flush with new venture capital, and Williams, Stone, and Dorsey said that the company would eventually introduce a financial plan to generate revenue.
In the mid-1990s he briefly ran a company that he and his father set up to provide instructional material about the World Wide Web.
He then worked as a Web developer for several Californiabased computer companies before cofounding Pyra Labs to make project-management software.
Williams developed a side project at the company into a software tool for publishing personal commentary on the Web.
The software, which he called Blogger, formed the basis of the wave of Web logs, or blogs, that soon swelled over the Internet.
The new company that Williams had formed, Blogger.com, was bought in 2003 by Google.
Williams left Google in 2004 and became a cofounder of Odeo, a podcasting company.
His interest soon turned to an Odeo side project—Twitter, which was launched in 2006.
He formed a new parent company, Obvious, that acquired Odeo and then spun off Twitter, Inc., as a separate entity in 2007.
Williams was initially chairman of the board of Twitter, but he moved to the role of CEO in late 2008.
He was creative director at Xanga, a Weblog community that he had helped 81 Biographies form.
Williams invited him to take a role in developing Blogger, and Stone joined new owner Google in 2003 but then left to join Williams in shaping Odeo.
After cofounding Twitter, he served as creative director for the company.
As a teenager Dorsey created taxi-dispatching software that was adopted by taxicab companies.
In 2006 he approached Williams and Stone with the idea of using text messaging and instant messaging (based on the principles of dispatch software) as a way of keeping in touch with friends.
Together they developed a prototype of what would become the Twitter platform.
Dorsey served as CEO of the new company until October 2008, when he became chairman of the board.
In late 2009 he began beta testing Square, an iPhone device for accepting credit-card payments.
Duffys father was a trade unionist, and her mother was a gifted storyteller, known for her rhymes.
By age 10, encouraged by teachers, she was filling notebooks with poetry.
Duffys verse appeared in pamphlets until 1983, when she won the National Poetry Competition and landed a publishing deal.
Duffy also became an acclaimed playwright {Take My Husband and Little Women, Big Boys ), children's author {Underwater Farmyard and The Tear Thief ), broadcaster, and reviewer, and in the 1990s her poetry was incorporated into school curricula.
Duffy’s at times radical feminism and the occasional controversy her poetry inspired did little to impede her ascent to the ranks of Britain’s best-loved poets.
While her rhymes and everyday language made her a favourite with the public, her literariness and range of styles impressed critics.
Famous for her ""voicings” or dramatic monologues of characters from Mrs.
Faust to a potential killer, she also excelled in using traditional sonnet and ballad forms as vehicles for postmodern themes.
The 1999 publication of The World’s Wife — which won less critical acclaim than some of her earlier volumes—brought her mass appeal and challenged the dominance of men in written history by retelling events from an irreverent female perspective.
Duffy’s volume Rapture , a sequence of poems narrating a love affair from its beginning through its demise, meanwhile, was widely celebrated for its emotive power and extraordinary craftmanship.
Eggers, Dave In 2009 the long-awaited film version of Maurice Sendak’s Where the Wild Things Are was released concurrently with writer Dave Eggers’s novelization of the screenplay, which he had cowritten with director Spike Jonze.
The movie and book were loose adaptations of Sendak’s original, inspired as much by its wistful beauty and loving approach to the child mind as by its story.
In 2009 the prolific Eggers also saw the film Away We Go —which he cowrote with his wife, Vendela Vida—appear on the big screen.
His nonfiction book Zeitoun, an account of a Syrian American man and his experiences in New Orleans following Hurricane Katrina, was also released in 2009.
The two moved to California, where Eggers cofounded the short-lived satiric Might magazine.
The memoir, which was enriched with postmodern writing techniques and fictionalized encounters, detailed Eggers’s experiences raising Toph.
The work earned Eggers instant acclaim and literary stardom, as well as a Pulitzer Prize nomination.
Davide Lanzilao—Contrasto/Redux American writer Dave Eggers In an effort to create a platform for other young writers, Eggers founded McSweeney’s publishing house, which started with the 1998 launch of the literary magazine Timothy McSweeney’s Quarterly Concern.
In 2003 it was joined by fellow publication The Believer, a journal of literary reviews and interviews and other, often esoteric, pop-culture musings.
McSweeney’s also served as a book imprint and in 2005 originated the DVD “magazine” Wholphin, featuring new or underexposed short films.
It was a volunteer-based writing laboratory devoted to developing kids’ creativity and love of books through programs that included free tutoring and writing workshops.
In 2007 the Heinz Family Foundation made Eggers the youngestever recipient of its arts and humanities award, noting his contributions not only to literature but also to the writing community.
The Templeton Foundation saw such a contribution in d’Espagnat’s notion of a ""veiled reality” beyond the reach of science.
D’Espagnat’s research into the philosophical foundations of quantum physics addressed the conflict between the realist and instrumentalist views of the results of quantum mechanics—that is, whether they reflect underlying physical reality or are merely rules for predicting the outcomes of experiments.
D’Espagnat’s work on Bell’s theorem (which indicates that the realist interpretation is not viable and which appears to have received experimental confirmation) led him to reject conventional realism, but the fact that scientific theories remain falsifiable by experiment steered him to the idea that a veiled reality underlies the phenomena of physics.
D’Espagnat was educated at the Lycee Condorcet and the Ecole Polytechnique in Paris.
In fact, these 14 images were ""autoportraits,” as Fosso transformed himself into people and characters drawn from popular culture and politics.
Yet by 2009 Fosso’s work was regularly featured in solo and group exhibitions around the world, including the 2008 edition of the “Festival des rencontres de la photographique d’Arles” in France.
Fosso lived in Nigeria as a child, but in the early 1970s the Biafran war forced his family to flee to Bangui, where he ultimately settled after the war destroyed their Nigerian home.
He discovered photography in his early teens while working as a shoemaker, and by 1975, after a brief apprenticeship with a local photographer, he had opened his own studio.
He lived and worked at the studio, creating portraits of the local residents by using studio lights fashioned from pots and backgrounds made from traditional African fabrics or hand painted by friends.
At the day’s end he would often step in front of the camera to finish a roll of film.
While Fosso used these images to communicate his wellbeing to his grandmother in Nigeria, the staged self-portraits also became agents of transformation and expression for the young artist, who was acutely aware of shifting cultural and political climates.
In many of his early images, Fosso borrowed elements from popular culture that he admired, even having local tailors replicate outfits worn by celebrities.
In 1993 these images were discovered by French photographer Bernard Deschamps, who was looking for photographers to be included in the first edition of ""Rencontres de la photographic africaine” in Bamako, Mali.
That 1994 exhibition launched Fosso’s career as an artist, and he later went on to win the Afrique en Creation award in 1995 and the prestigious Prince Claus Award in 2001.
Fosso evolved and expanded the scope of his autoportraits, using these constructed images to critically narrate and reference cultural and political events.
In the Tati series, commissioned by the Parisian department store Tati in 1997, Fosso depicted himself as characters ranging from an African chief draped in gold jewelry and leopard skins to a glamorous African American woman.
Regardless of his international success, Fosso continued to live and operate his photography studio in Bangui, where the local community remained largely unaware of his achievements as an artist.
Though initially he had been narrowly beaten in the November 2008 election by the incumbent senator.
Coleman contested the result, but on April 13, 2009, Franken was again declared the winner.
Because Coleman’s term had expired on January 3, Minnesota’s Senate seat was left vacant for six months while the matter played out in the courts.
Franken worked for that show as a writer and performer until 1980, again during 1985-95, and briefly in 2008.
He shared four Emmy Awards for writing on the show and an additional nine nominations.
After leaving SNL in 1995, Franken became an outspoken political satirist for the left, publishing a number of books.
George W Bush “unelected,” the program used interviews and commentary to advance Franken’s progressive political views.
The show’s final episode, on Feb., 2007, ended with a bang when Franken announced his candidacy for the Minnesota Senate seat.
It would have been easy to mistake the announcement for a joke in line with comedian Stephen Colbert’s later 2008 presidential bid.
Franken, however, gained respect—if grudging from some quarters—for his tireless campaigning and emerged as a real threat to incumbent Coleman.
Funes, Mauricio On March 15, 2009, Mauricio Funes was elected president of El Salvador, with a five-year term to begin on June 1.
There he was greatly influenced by sociology professor Francis Miguel Hasbun, a leftist activist.
The violent death of his older brother, who was killed by police during a student protest in August 1980, induced Funes to leave the university before completing his degree.
Despite leftist leanings, he did not join a political party or participate in the ongoing guerrilla warfare.
Instead he taught literature in Catholic schools, where he emphasized audiovisual methods of communication.
In 1986 Funes became a reporter for the state educational channel, launching a highly successful career in television journalism.
In 1987 he moved to Channel 12, where he became popular for his analytic coverage of Salvadoran politics, which reflected leftist and working-class interests.
He interviewed leaders of the FMLN and other leftist parties, as well as leftist leaders from abroad.
He also was a longtime correspondent for CNN TV's Spanish-language telecasts.
Funes’s investigative reporting on Channel 12 won him several awards, including the prestigious Maria Moors Cabot Prize in inter-American journalism in 1994.
He was promoted to news director at Channel 12 in 1997, but his harsh criticism of the ARENA government led to censorship and death threats, and in 2005 Channel 12 fired him and several other journalists.
Funes continued to appear on other channels, however, and remained a national celebrity among leftists.
With Hasbun as his adviser, Funes exploited his popularity to become the FMLN candidate for the presidency in September 2007, the first FMLN presidential candidate who had not been a guerrilla fighter in the 1980s.
In the long electoral campaign, Funes criticized ARENA for doing nothing for the Salvadoran people in its nearly 20year reign.
He promised social justice, economic reform, improved standards of living, universal health care, and better access to education, housing, and pensions, as well as policies to stem the rising crime and gang violence.
Once elected, he took a pragmatic and conciliatory tone toward the opposition.
He emphasized that he was not a Marxist, or even a socialist; promised that he had no interest in imposing such ideologies as systems of government in El Salvador; and pledged not to align the country’s foreign relations too closely with either Venezuela or the United States Shortly after his inauguration, however, Funes signed a document that provided for the reestablishment of diplomatic relations with Cuba, which had been severed 50 years earlier.
Geithner, Timothy Having been nominated to serve as secretary of the United States Department of the Treasury in the administration of Pres.
As treasury secretary, he was tasked with leading the administration’s efforts toward financial recovery amid the ongoing global economic crisis.
In March he laid out a comprehensive plan to help free banks from bad housing loans and mortgage-related securities—a move that ignited a stock-market rally.
On December 9, Geithner announced that the $700 billion financial bailout program that Congress had approved in the fall of 2008 would be extended until October 2010.
Although critics had argued for the program to be shut down, Geithner defended the 84 Biographies extension as necessary in order to assist homeowners and small businesses and to ensure that the federal government would be able to respond effectively if financial conditions worsened.
After having completed his education, Geithner took a job as a research assistant at Kissinger Associates, an international consulting firm founded by former United States secretary of state Henry Kissinger.
Geithner joined the Treasury Department in 1988, and he held a number of positions within the agency’s international affairs division.
While there he worked closely with Lawrence H Summers, who identified Geithner as a gifted official with a deft political touch.
In 1999 Geithner was promoted to undersecretary for international affairs, and he represented the Treasury Department at meetings of the Group of Eight.
While not formally trained as an economist, Geithner brought to the position extensive experience with international monetary policy, and he became an advocate for greater transparency and increased government oversight within the financial industry.
As the federal government’s unofficial liaison to Wall Street, Geithner was a key participant in the response to the credit crisis that began in 2007.
He personally oversaw JPMorgan Chase’s federally backed takeover of the failed investment bank Bear Steams in March 2008, and he spent the rest of the year helping to craft the Federal Reserve's response to a series of corporate meltdowns within the banking and insurance industries.
July 11, 1956, Calcutta [now Kolkata], India) In 2009, a year after its publication, Amitav Ghosh’s epic novel Sea of Poppies continued to draw accolades.
Among the books against which Ghosh’s novel was competing was The Enchantress of Florence by Salman Rushdie, another Indian-born writer to whose work Ghosh’s had often been compared.
As a child, Ghosh, whose father was a diplomat, lived in India, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, and Iran.
Ghosh’s ambitious novels use complex narrative strategies to probe the nature of national and personal identity, particularly of the people of India and Southeast Asia.
His first novel, The Circle of Reason , follows an Indian protagonist who, suspected of being a terrorist, leaves India for northern Africa and the Middle East.
Blending elements of fable and picaresque fiction, it is distinctly postcolonial in its marginalization of Europe and postmodern in its nonlinear structure and thick intertextuality.
The Shadow Lines is a sweeping history of two families (one Indian and the other English) that are deeply shaped by events following the departure of the British from India in 1947.
The Circle of Reason and The Shadow Lines, both written in English, were widely translated and gained Ghosh an international readership.
A Novel of Fevers, Delirium, and Discovery represented his foray into science fiction and earned him the Arthur C Clarke Award; this densely layered novel offers an alternate history of the discovery of the parasite that causes malaria.
Ghosh’s subsequent novels include The Glass Palace , a familial history centred on Burma in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, and The Hungry Tide , set in Bengal and featuring American and Indian characters.
Sea of Poppies shows Ghosh turning away from his earlier novels’ formal experimentation and toward a more traditional form of storytelling.
The first book of a projected trilogy, this novel describes individuals who are on a ship in Southeast Asia carrying coolies (indentured labourers) and opium.
Ghosh also wrote In an Antique Land , a book that straddles several genres—travel writing, autobiography memoir—and also blurs fiction and nonfiction.
Known for programming contemporary music along with the traditional repertoire and for his ability to communicate with and engage audiences, he promised to bring new energy to one of the most prominent orchestras in the United States The appointment was also a kind of homecoming for Gilbert, the son of longtime Philharmonic violinists Michael Gilbert, who retired in 2001, and Yoko Takebe, who would now perform under her son’s direction.
He was assistant conductor of the Cleveland Orchestra and in 1997 won the Seaver/National Endowment for the Arts Conductor Award.
In 2000 Gilbert became the chief conductor and artistic adviser of the Royal Stockholm Philharmonic Orchestra, a post he held until 2008.
It was in Stockholm that he developed a reputation for venturesome programming, which included festivals devoted to such living composers as Henri Dutilleux, Hans Werner Henze, and John Adams.
In addition, with that orchestra he recorded music by Daniel BOrtz and Christopher Rouse.
In 2004 Gilbert became the principal guest conductor of the NDR Symphony Orchestra of Hamburg.
During this period he also conducted a number of other major orchestras, including the Berlin Philharmonic, the Royal Concertgebouw of Amsterdam, the Chicago Symphony Orchestra, the Los Angeles Philharmonic, and orchestras in Japan and China.
His debut took place in 2001, when he led the orchestra in music of Charles Ives, part of a festival devoted to the composer.
In 2008 he conducted a concert in Carnegie Hall honouring Leonard Bernstein.
In early 2009 the Juilliard School appointed Gilbert the first holder of the newly created William Schuman Chair in Musical Studies; he was to undertake a number of teaching duties and to serve as guest conductor of the Juilliard Orchestra.
The book cites paragons of success such as the Beatles—who often played eight-hour sets at a Hamburg bar before they achieved international fame—in support of the assertion that ascendancy of the pop star sort is due more to extraordinary circumstance and effort than to extraordinary talent.
Gladwell’s critics dismissed some of his conclusions (for example, that Asian students are good at math because they come from agricultural societies emphasizing hard work) as spurious and found his simplistic rhetorical style patronizing.
A raft of panegyric articles deemed GladPopular-culture journalist Malcolm Gladwell Joe Tabacca/AP well a guru, however, and while the staying power of his ideas remained to be seen, he had already proved himself adept at treading the delicate boundary between popularizer and intellectual.
Having graduated in 1984 with a degree in history, Gladwell moved to the United States and obtained a position at the conservative magazine The American Spectator.
After being fired in 1985, he worked for a conservative think tank in Washington, D.C., while freelancing for several periodicals.
How Little Things Can Make a Big Difference, which contends that social epidemics result from a combination of seemingly arbitrary contextual details and the actions of a few key types of people.
The Power of Thinking Without Thinking , which extols the untold virtues of snap judgment.
The retrospective spanned more than 40 years of Graham's works, including films, videos, installations (often utilizing objects such as mirrors and partitions), photography, writing, and architecture designed to defamiliarize spectators via juxtapositions.
As a teenager he was an avid reader and was heavily influenced by the writings of French nouveau roman (""new novel”) writers, including Alain RobbeGrillet and Michel Butor.
The following year he cofounded and directed the John Daniels Gallery, which exhibited the works of new conceptual and minimalist artists, such as Sol LeWitt, Robert Smithson, and Donald Judd.
Graham closed the gallery in 1965 owing to insolvency and began instead to create his own artworks, which not surprisingly showed heavy literary influence.
During the 1970s Graham delved into film and video performances featuring actors, including himself, in what he termed pavilions —steel, essentially roomlike architectural structures featuring two-way reflective-glass mirrors intended to allow individuals to view themselves as others viewed them—a technique that created a new form of art.
His examination of modern art themes and popular culture—as evidenced in his video documentary Rock My Religion , which focused on rock-and-roll music and culture—gained him somewhat of a cult following among younger artists.
Graham's works were featured in several important exhibitions, including Public/Private , which opened at the Moore College of Art and Design in Philadelphia.
Dan Graham, Works 1965-2000, a major retrospective, opened in 2001 at the Museu Serralves in Porto, Port.
The following year he completed the commissioned Yin/Yang Pavilion at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Among Gromov’s principal results were Gromov’s compactness theorem, the Gromov-Hausdorf convergence, the theorem of almost flat manifolds, Gromov’s Betti number theorem, and the Bishop-Gromov inequality in Riemannian geometry; the theory of pseudoholomorphic curves, the Gromov-Witten invariants, and the Gromov nonsqueezing theorem in symplectic geometry; Gromov’s theorem on groups of polynomial growth and Gromov hyperbolic groups in geometric group theory; and the h-principle and the theory of complex integration in the theory of partial differential equations.
In addition to the Abel Prize, Gromov was the recipient of the Elie Cartan , Wolf , Steele , Lobatchewski , Balzan , and Kyoto prizes.
Following violent protests in the Lithuanian capital of Vilnius in January as the global economic crisis deepened, Grybauskaite announced her decision to leave her EU post to run as an independent candidate in Lithuania’s May 17 presidential election.
Touting her extensive experience in finance and economics, she swept to an overwhelming victory, capturing more than 69% of the vote to just under 12% for her nearest rival— the largest-ever margin of victory for a Lithuanian presidential candidate.
After serving as the plenipotentiary minister at the Lithuanian embassy in the U.S., she returned to Vil87 European Communities, 2009 Lithuanian Pres.
Dalia Grybauskaite nius to assume the office of deputy finance minister and became Lithuania’s chief negotiator with the IMF and the World Bank.
She was named finance minister, in which position she strongly supported privatization and liberalization efforts, among other reform measures.
She also developed a reputation for toughness and blunt talk; numerous media outlets began calling her Lithuania’s “Iron Lady,"" a reference to former British prime minister Margaret Thatcher, for whom Grybauskaite had publicly expressed admiration.
In 2004 Grybauskaite was tapped to serve in Brussels as the European commissioner responsible for financial programming and budget; her stellar performance in this role was recognized when she was selected as the 2005 EU Commissioner of the Year.
As president of Lithuania, Grybauskaite aimed to lift the country’s economic fortunes in part by stimulating exports, cutting public expenditures, working to efficiently implement EU aid, and offering tax relief to owners of small businesses.
On the foreign policy front, she was expected to pursue improved economic relations with Russia as well as to strengthen the country’s alliances with other EU member states.
Grybauskaite also appeared to be eager for Lithuania to take a more visible role on the international stage.
Addressing the UN General Assembly in September, she declared that large and small countries shared equal responsibilities toward global society and pledged Lithuania’s help in promoting UN values and objectives.
Hanna, Jack American zoologist and television personality Jack Hanna continued to exhibit his passion for wildlife and his inexhaustible energy in 2009 as he made personal appearances across the United States with his diverse assortment of animal ambassadors.
Meanwhile, his Emmy Award-winning television series Jack Hanna’s Into the Wild entered its third season, and his newest book, Jungle Jack’s Wackiest, Wildest, Weirdest Animals in the World , was published.
Jack Bushnell Hanna was raised on a farm in Tennessee and showed an early interest in pursuing a career with animals, volunteering to work for his family’s veterinarian at the age of 11.
After he earned a bachelor’s degree from Muskingum College, New Concord, Ohio, Hanna and his wife opened a pet shop in Knoxville.
He began his zoological career in Florida as director of the Central Florida Zoo in Sanford, Fla.
In 1978 Hanna became director of the Columbus Zoo, which he transformed from a small run-down facility into a nationally acclaimed zoological park.
His first order of business was to raise zoo attendance by offering nu“Jungle” Jack Hanna poses with a spectacled bear cub.
Courtesy of Rick A Prebeg of World Class Images merous educational programs and hosting events that also provided entertainment.
In addition, he networked with local business leaders to raise funds to develop larger, more natural habitats to replace the zoo’s antiquated cagelike animal enclosures.
To increase public awareness of the zoo after the birth of twin gorillas there in 1983, he accepted an invitation to appear on the television program Good Morning America.
This engagement led to numerous other TV opportunities for Hanna, including regular visits with his critters on Late Night with David Letterman and Larry King Live and a stint as wildlife correspondent for FOX News, CNN, and other news programs.
Hanna’s likable, easygoing character and the fun and entertaining way in which he showed off the zoo’s animals made him extremely popular.
In 1992 he was named director emeritus of the Columbus Zoo so that he could dedicate more time to his media obligations.
With the addition of a manatee exhibit in 1999, the Columbus Zoo changed its name to the Columbus Zoo and Aquarium; other expansions include the Zoombezi Bay water park, Jungle Jack’s Landing amusement park, and the Safari Golf Club.
In 2008 Hanna was honoured with the Association of Zoos and Aquariums’ R Marlin Perkins Award for Professional Excellence, and in February 2009 the USA Travel Guide named the Columbus Zoo and Aquarium the country's number one zoo.
April 18, 1970, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia) In June 2009 Saudi-born businessman and politician Saad al-Hariri, the son of former Lebanese prime minister Rafiq al-Hariri, was named prime minister of Lebanon.
With relatively little political experience, the younger Hariri, who had entered politics following his father’s assassination in February 2005, was faced with the task of forming a unity government in 88 Biographies one of the world's most complex political environments.
Hariri received his elementary education at the school of Freres Maristes in Rmaila , Leb. (near Sidon), and completed his secondary education in France and Saudi Arabia.
After he gained the position of general manager at age 26, Hariri also worked to extend the business into the telecommunications sector and helped orchestrate Saudi Oger’s acquisition of Turk Telekom.
After his fathers assassination in a Beirut car bombing, Hariri was selected by his family to follow in his father’s political footsteps.
A powerful Sunni bloc, the Future Movement was the largest contingent within the March 14 coalition (named to commemorate the date, in 2005, of massive anti-Syrian protests in Beirut), which opposed Syrian influence in Lebanon’s affairs.
Although the coalition won a clear majority in the 2005 parliamentary elections, Hariri did not consider himself politically mature enough to serve as prime minister; instead, he supported Fouad Siniora, a former finance minister and close ally of his father, for the position.
During the next four years, Hariri worked to forge and refine his own political identity.
Significant political successes included those in January 2007, when his lobbying helped to secure a sizable financial aid package from the United States to assist in Lebanese reconstruction, and in late May 2007, when the United Nations Security Council approved the establishment of a special court in which to try suspects linked to his father's assassination.
In May 2008—with Lebanon in the midst of a dangerous political stalemate that had followed the departure of Pres.
Emile Lahoud from office in November 2007—Hariri helped to negotiate a unity government and navigate the country away from violent confrontation.
In elections in June 2009, Hariri again led the March 14 coalition to victory.
Michel Suleiman to take on the complex task of forming a new government.
Despite setbacks that threatened to derail the negotiations, in early November Hariri announced that a unity government had been successfully formed.
Although the LDP had dominated political life in the country since the mid-1950s for all but a brief period in the 1990s, its public standing had faltered since the popular Junichiro Koizumi stepped down as prime minister in 2006.
By July 2009, when Prime Minister Taro Aso announced the date on which the general election was to be held, it had become clear that the LDP was in trouble.
As the DPJ candidate, Hatoyama promised to end wasteful spending and move toward government decentralization.
Predictions of a landslide DPJ victory came true as scores of LDP lawmakers were swept from office.
His great-grandfather Kazuo Hatoyama served in the Imperial Diet in the 1890s.
His grandfather Ichiro Hatoyama founded the LDP and served as the prime minister.
In addition, Hatoyama’s maternal grandfather, Shojiro Ishibashi, was the founder of the tire manufacturer Bridgestone Corp.
He began his own political career as a member of the LDP, winning election in 1986 to the lower house as a representative from Hokkaido.
Hatoyama held his seat in the Diet through consecutive elections thereafter.
Hatoyama served under Hosokawa until the coalition government collapsed in 1994.
Over the next few years, Hatoyama became a founding member of the DPJ and rose through the party’s ranks.
From September 1999 to December 2002, he served as president of the party.
He was elected again to that position in May 2009, only days after the resignation of powerful DPJ leader Ichiro Ozawa amid a financial corruption scandal.
In February 2009 British comedian Lenny Henry made his stage debut in the lead role of Shakespeare’s Othello at the West Yorkshire Playhouse in Leeds.
His performance won rave reviews (one critic called it “one of the most astonishing debuts in Shakespeare ever seen”), and the production was transferred to London’s celebrated West End theatre district in September.
As a teenager, he performed a comedy act in local nightclubs, which led to a successful British actor-comedian Lenny Henry promotes the charity organization Comic Relief’s Red Nose Day.
Suzan—PA Photos/Landov 89 Biographies appearance on the television talent program New Faces when he was 16 years old.
The national exposure he gained from that show helped to secure him a role in The Fosters , the first British situation comedy with an allblack cast.
That same year he was given his own series on the BBC, The Lenny Henry Show.
The program consisted of a mix of stand-up comedy and sketches that featured him playing a number of offbeat, catchphrasespouting characters, routines that quickly became his comedic calling card.
The popular show went through a series of cancellations and relaunches, including a short-lived format change to a pseudositcom during 1987-88.
That same year he attempted to break into Hollywood by starring in the film True Identity, which was both a critical and a commercial flop.
Henry rebounded by returning to the BBC to star in the sitcom Chef! , in which he played against type as the imperious perfectionist chef-restaurateur Gareth Blackstock.
He was given the Radio and Television Industry Club Award for BBC Personality of the Year in 1993.
In 1988 Henry began hosting the annual charity telethon Comic Relief, and he soon became one of the most public faces of that organization’s annual fundraising Red Nose Day.
In 1999 he was made CBE in honour of his entertainment and charity work.
Protect Protect highlighted her ongoing practice of utilizing original and borrowed text as a primary medium to create works that were alternately soothing and unsettling, meditative and confrontational, and seductive and frightening.
Holzer emerged in the early 1980s as part of a generation of artists who gained recognition for employing and appropriating various aspects of mass culture in an effort to explore and question contemporary issues.
While her critical texts take form as objects ranging from ephemeral posters to stone benches, she is best known for her flashing electronic LED sign sculptures that display carefully composed yet fleeting phrases that act as verbal meditations on power, trauma, knowledge, and hope.
The works, composed of seemingly familiar slogans such as “Abuse of power comes as no surprise,” were originally presented by Holzer as phrases on anonymous posters and later on T-shirts, billboards, and electronic signs.
These texts, fraught with cynicism and political implications, were followed by the more structured and complex Inflammatory Essays , the Living series , and the Survival series , which were seamlessly integrated into various urban landscapes as plaques and signs.
In the mid-1980s, during a period in which she produced a series of introspective and mournful works, including Under a Rock and Laments , Holzer began inscribing her texts on stone benches, sarcophagi, and floor tiles.
These accompanied her LED signs in numerous exhibitions and were installed independently as site-specific works.
Holzer’s installation for the United States Pavilion at the 1990 Venice Biennale, which won the Golden Lion Award, exemplified the tension inherent in her chosen words through the juxtaposition of texts set in austere marble tiles and benches and aggressively flashing across commercial LED signs.
From 1996 Holzer expanded her installations to include large-scale outdoor light projections, choosing public locations that demanded viewer attention.
Beginning in 2001 she started incorporating borrowed texts in her work, including poetry, literature, and bureaucratic documents.
Similar to her original texts, these paintings underscore the impossibility of fixed meaning and the multiple viewpoints always present in her work.
With these projects and others, Holzer continued to utilize words to question the relationship between the private and the public.
Huffington, Arianna When Forbes magazine named Arianna Huffington to its list of the most influential women in media in 2009, citizen journalism was at its height, as dozens of bloggers and small news outlets contended with the mass of information and misinformation disseminated before and after the 2008 United States presidential election.
Huffington—editor in chief and cofounder of The Huffington Post, a blog turned respected online news outlet—led the charge, printing posts written by personalities outside the traditional news cycle and opening every article on HuffingtonPost.com to reader comments.
In a politically contentious time, Huffington’s left-wing Web site served as a forum for discussion and, frequently, vociferous disagreement.
While at Cambridge she served as president of the esteemed debate society, the Cambridge Union, becoming the first foreign-bom student to do so.
After graduation she lived for a time in London before relocating in 1980 to the United States She started her political and journalistic career as a Republican and a proponent of small government and limited welfare.
For a time Huffington wrote for the TV show Politically Incorrect, and she also tried her hand in front of the camera, as when she took a bit part in the film Edtv.
There she presided over frequent salons and hosted the television talk show Critical Mass.
She also worked on her husband’s 1994 campaign for a Senate seat, which he failed to gain.
Huffington’s place on the political spectrum had already begun to shift in the 1990s, starting with her opposition to United States intervention in the civil wars in former Yugoslavia.
In 2003 she ran in California’s gubernatorial race as an independent, but she later withdrew her candidacy.
It was structured as a ""group blog,"" which published the words of hundreds of guest contributors.
The next year HuffingtonPost.com received its first Webby Award, for best political blog.
In August 2008 the blog's first local outpost, HuffPost Chicago, was introduced, and Huffington announced her intention to roll out cityspecific ""HuffPosts"" all over the United States.
Jackman, Hugh As host of the 2009 Academy Awards, Australian actor Hugh Jackman demonstrated that he was far more than just another pretty face.
He had been chosen as People magazine’s Sexiest Man Alive the previous November, but in a ceremony that drew rave reviews, he showcased his skills as a premiere songand-dance man.
The show opened with an elaborately choreographed musical number that paid tribute to each of the best picture nominees.
Wolverine, was one of the most hotly anticipated action films of the year.
Hugh Michael Jackman grew up in Sydney, and he made his acting debut as King Arthur in a production of Camelot when he was just five years old.
Though offered a role in the long-running television soap opera Neighbours, Jackman chose to further refine his acting skills at the Western Australian Academy of Performing Arts in suburban Perth.
Cast as an inmate who begins a dangerous flirtation with his psychologist (played by Deborra-Lee Furness), Jackman won fans as attractive bad boy Kevin Jones.
Jackman and Furness continued their relationship offscreen, and the two were married in 1996.
That same year he took to the stage, scoring the lead in the Australian premiere of Andrew Lloyd Webber's musical adaptation of Billy Wilder’s noir classic Sunset Boulevard.
Jackman next turned to film, making his Hollywood debut in X-Men , in which his portrayal of the tortured antihero Wolverine established him as a bankable action star.
Jackman made his Broadway debut in 2003 as singer-songwriter Peter Allen in the biographical musical The Boy from Oz.
For American filmgoers who were unfamiliar with his work in Oklahoma!, Jackman’s flamboyantly spot-on performance was a revelation, and it won him a Tony Award in 2004.
In 2008 he starred opposite Nicole Kidman in Baz Luhrmann’s lush historical epic Australia.
While the film itself met with mixed reviews, Jackman's performance was widely praised.
James, LeBron Raymone During the 2008-09 basketball season, LeBron James of the National Basketball Association Cleveland Cavaliers piloted his team to a franchise record 66 wins and a place in the playoffs, which helped to earn him the league’s Most Valuable Player award.
He also published a memoir in 2009, Shooting Stars (co-written with Buzz Bissinger), that chronicles his years as a high-school standout.
A locally known basketball prodigy in Akron since elementary school, James was named Ohio’s high-school player of the year three times while leading his school to three Ohio state championships in four years.
James was the consensus national high-school Player of the Year in his senior season, and he was selected directly out of high school by the Cavaliers with the first overall selection of the 2003 NBA draft.
Additionally, he signed an unprecedented $90 million endorsement contract with the Nike shoe company before he ever played a professional game.
Despite the pressures brought on by these singular circumstances, James led the Cavaliers in scoring, steals, and minutes played over the course of the 2003-04 season, in the process becoming the youngest player ever to be named the league’s Rookie of the Year.
A 2.03-m “point forward” who was as adept at taking the ball down the court as at playing near the basket, James had an unmatched athleticism and well-muscled body that presented a strong challenge to opposing teams.
After the season ended, he was a member of the United States men’s Olympic basketball team that won the bronze medal at the 2004 Athens Games.
He was voted one of the starting forwards on the Eastern Conference All-Star team during his second season, and in his third season he led Basketball star LeBron James in action Gregory Shamus/Getty Images the Cavaliers to their first play-off berth in nine years.
These accomplishments were exceeded during the 2006-07 season, when he guided Cleveland to the franchise’s first berth in the NBA finals; the Cavaliers were swept by the San Antonio Spurs, but James’s impressive postseason play led many observers to place him among the very best players in the league.
He led the NBA in scoring during the 2007-08 season and in February 2008 became the youngest player to have scored 10,000 career points.
He also earned first team All-NBA honours, but the Cavaliers lost to the eventual-champion Boston Celtics in a dramatic seven-game series in the Eastern Conference semifinals.
Before the start of the 2008-09 season, James again joined the United States men’s Olympic basketball team, which this time won the gold medal at the 2008 Beijing Games.
Johnson, Randy On June 4, 2009, Randy Johnson recorded the 300th victory in his career as a Major League Baseball pitcher.
Randall David Johnson excelled in basketball as a youth, but he soon began to focus on his first love, baseball.
The MLB National League Montreal Expos drafted him after his junior season, and he made his major league debut on Sept., 1988.
The physically imposing 2.08-m (6-ft 10-in) Johnson quickly built a reputation as the pitcher major leaguers most feared facing.
The novelty of his height at first overshadowed Johnson’s work on the mound, but as his pitching improved, the accolades increased.
He was named to the first of his 10 All-Star games in 1990 as a member of the American League Seattle Mariners, who had acquired him from the Expos the previous season.
Johnson led the AL in strikeouts for four consecutive years , and in 1995 he won the AL Cy Young Award as the league’s best pitcher.
Johnson and the Mariners management began to have contract disagreements on a regular basis, and he was traded to the Houston Astros at the 1998 trading deadline.
A free agent at the end of the 1998 season, Johnson signed with the NL Arizona Diamondbacks, where he led the NL in earned run average, innings pitched, and strikeouts on his way to the 1999 NL Cy Young.
Johnson won Cy Youngs in each of the following three seasons, but his most impressive feat took place at the 2001 World Series, where he tied a record with three wins in a single World Series and earned coMost Valuable Player honours while guiding the Diamondbacks to their first championship.
Junko Kimura/Getty Images Uighur activist Rebiya Kadeer Kadeer was born near the Altai Mountains of far northwestern China, where her father worked as a gold miner.
She married at the age of 15 and subsequently helped support her growing family by sewing undergarments and shoes and selling them on the black market.
When she was 28, her marriage ended in divorce, and, motivated by her separation from her children, Kadeer founded a laundry business out of her home.
After several months she closed that thriving business and invested some of her earnings in trading commodities, modestly at first and eventually on a larger and larger scale.
In July 1978 she married Sidik Rouzi, an intellectual and activist who had been jailed for leading a Uighur resistance movement against the Chinese authorities in the late 1960s.
Kadeer continued to develop her trading enterprise, and in the 1980s she expanded into real estate.
In March 1987 she opened a women's bazaar in Urumqi, and in the 1990s she followed with a department store and an accompanying apartment complex.
Soon she had enlarged her operations to include subsidiaries throughout Central Asia, and by 1993 she had become the wealthiest woman in China.
Long concerned with aiding and advancing her people, Kadeer capitalized on her business by employing and mentoring Uighur individuals.
She was lauded by the Chinese government as an example of Uighur success and was appointed to influential organizations and committees, including the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) and the National People's Congress.
In 1995 she served as a delegate to the UN Fourth World Conference on Women, held in Beijing.
Kadeer utilized her increased financial means and social stature to continue campaigning on behalf of the Uighur population.
She was detained in August 1999 en route to meeting a congressional delegation from the United States and was imprisoned.
Although she was sentenced to eight years in prison, pressure from the international community helped to achieve a reduced sentence, and she was freed in March 2005.
After her release Kadeer left China for the U.S., where she continued her vocal campaign for human rights and Uighur self-determination at the head of both the World Uyghur Congress and the Uyghur American Association.
While imprisoned, Kadeer was awarded the 2004 Rafto Prize by Norway’s Rafto Foundation for Human Rights, and she was nominated for the 2006 Nobel Prize for Peace.
Kim Yu-Na In March 2009 at the world figure skating championships in Los Angeles, South Korean figure skater Kim Yu-Na was in a class by herself with a recordsetting performance to give her homeland its first senior-level world figure skating title.
Kim was a stunning 16. points ahead of silver medalist Joannie Rochette of Canada and nearly 20 points ahead of Asada, the defending champion, who finished fourth behind the 2007 winner, Miki Ando of Japan.
Kim began skating at age six and gained her first international experience six years later, when she won the novice competition at the Triglav Trophy in Jesenice, Slvn.
In 2003 she captured her first South Korean national title and won the novice competition at the Golden Bear of Zagreb in Croatia before reaching the age requirement for skating internationally at the junior level the following season.
In the 2004-05 season, Kim won the gold medal at the Junior Grand Prix in Hungary and silvers at the Junior Grand Prix in China and Junior Grand Prix Final, which was won by Asada.
At the 2005 junior world championships, Kim completed her first triple-triple combination jump in competition but again finished second to Asada.
Kim remained on the Junior Grand Prix circuit in 2005-06 and won events in Slovakia and Bulgaria before taking her second Junior Grand Prix Final.
Competing against defending champion Asada in the 2006 world junior championships, Kim won the gold medal.
Kim moved up to the senior level in 2006-07, taking the bronze medal at Skate Canada and winning gold at the Trophee Eric Bompard to qualify for the Grand Prix Final, where she won the overall title and Asada took the silver.
Soon thereafter she began training in Canada under twotime Olympic silver medalist Brian Orser.
The following season saw Kim capture both the Cup of China and the Cup of Russia, which gave her a chance to defend her Grand Prix title.
She did just that, edging second-place finisher Asada, before securing another bronze medal at the 2008 world championships.
In the 2008-09 season, Kim dominated with victories at Skate America and the Cup of China but failed to win her third straight Grand Prix title, finishing second to Asada.
Kim, though, went on to win the Four Continents event in February 2009 before her amazing performance at the world championships.
By the summer of 2009, the economic strategy pursued by Mervyn King, governor of the Bank of 93 Biographies Oli Scarff/Getty Images Bank of England governor Mervyn King England , seemed to have been vindicated, as evidence was mounting that the U.K. might be the first of the world’s major economies to start emerging from the global recession.
After he became governor in 2003, King had insisted that his ambition was to make monetary policy boring.
In 2007 and 2008, however, as banks collapsed and the world recession started to affect the U.K., this low-profile approach was thwarted, and King, with his wry humour and perfectly formed sentences, became a familiar fixture on British television.
His intelligence and drive took him via Wolverhampton Grammar School to King's College, Cambridge, where he emerged as one of the brightest economists of his generation.
Through the 1970s and '80s, his academic career blossomed on both sides of the Atlantic.
King's special area of interest was taxation; he coauthored a lucid and trenchant book on the British tax system, and as professor of economics at the London School of Economics from 1984, he wrote a series of papers that analyzed the system’s weaknesses.
In 1990 King was appointed one of the BOE’s nonexecutive directors; the following year he became the bank’s chief economist.
This gave him a platform for preaching in favour of placing the fight against inflation at the heart of economic policy.
Thus, no one was surprised when he became the BOE’s deputy governor in 1998 and governor in 2003.
At first the U.K.’s economy grew steadily, and inflation remained under control.
In September 2007, however, one of Britain’s main mortgage lenders, the Northern Rock Bank, collapsed.
Initially, King (and Chancellor of the Exchequer Alistair Darling) seemed to hesitate, and for the first time in more than a century, there was a run on a major British bank as anxious savers formed long lines to withdraw their money Eventually, the government nationalized the bank.
A year later King faced criticism for keeping interest rates too high for too long as the economy started to contract.
In response, King and his colleagues on the BOE’s Monetary Policy Committee acted boldly, expanding the money supply sharply and cutting interest rates in successive months from 5% in October 2008 to 0.5% by March 2009, by far the lowest in the BOE’s 300year history.
Petersburg], Russia) Following his election in January 2009, Kirill I was enthroned on February 1 as the Russian Orthodox patriarch of Moscow and all Russia; he became the first head of the Russian Orthodox Church to be elected after the fall of the Soviet Union.
He inherited from his predecessor, Aleksey II , a church that had experienced revitalization and tremendous growth following the end in Russia of official state atheism.
Kirill shared with Aleksey an outspoken belief that the church should play a dynamic role in Russian life.
A popular figure, Kirill for more than a decade hosted his own weekly television show on religious topics; he also enjoyed a reputation as a modernizer.
He graduated from Leningrad Theological Academy, where he served for one year as lecturer in dogmatic theology.
In 1971 Kirill was appointed representative of the Russian Orthodox Church to the World Council of Churches in Geneva.
Returning to Russia in 1974, he became rector of Leningrad Theological Academy, a post he held until 1984.
He was named archbishop of Smolensk and Kaliningrad in 1988 and was elevated to metropolitan of that province in 1991.
Upon assuming the partriarchate, he expressed his long-standing desire for increased dialogue to end the church’s millenniumold rift with the Roman Catholic Church.
By 2009 German American model and savvy businesswoman Heidi Klum had become a television megastar as the hostess of the reality programs Germany’s Next Topmodel (launched in 2006), in which players competed for a chance to win a contract with the IMG Models agency, and Project Runway, a design competition between contestants vying for the chance to create their own fashion line, with a top prize of $100,000.
The inaugural 2009 episode of Project Runway, for which Klum served as a judge and executive producer, reportedly drew 4. million viewers, which represented a 45% increase over the initial show of the 2005 season.
Models of the Runway, also Fashion diva Heidi Klum Alexander Tamargo/Getty Images 94 Biographies hosted by Klum, profiled the women who donned the designers' creations and offered their behind-the-scenes impressions of the competition.
In 1992, when 18-year-old Klum entered the “Model 92“ German beauty contest, she was living near Cologne with her parents Gunther, a cosmetics company executive, and Erna, a hairdresser.
Her breakthrough came when in 1994 she appeared on the cover of Mirabella magazine.
In the mid-1990s Klum achieved increased visibility as a cover model for Vogue, ELLE, and Marie Claire magazines, but her star shone even brighter when she graced the Feb. 20, 1998, swimsuit cover of Sports Illustrated.
She eclipsed that feat in 1999 by achieving global recognition as one of the original “Angels,” the troupe of Victoria’s Secret lingerie models who appeared in annual televised runway shows and at other promotional activities.
Klum continued to work as an Angel and also designed an eponymous lingerie and cosmetics collection for the retailer.
According to Forbes magazine, she reigned as one of the world’s highest-paid models, and Klum increased her wealth by pursuing a host of other lucrative business ventures.
She launched her own swimsuit calendars and a signature scent in Europe, which achieved sales totaling €1 million in July 2002, its first month of sales.
The following month the Caribbean island of Grenada issued a set of six $1.50 stamps emblazoned with an image of Klum.
By the spring of 2003, Klum had simultaneously launched a diamond and coloured gemstone collection with the fine jeweler Mouawad for the TV home shopping network QVC as well as three exotic styles of casual Birkenstock shoes.
Klum went on to host an adventure program for the Discovery channel and landed some small film roles as well as spots in video games.
The 1.77-m (5-ft 91/2-in) blonde, renowned for her sunny disposition, also continued to work as a model.
On May 10, 2005, Klum married British soul singer Seal, with whom she had several children, including one born in October 2009, shortly before Klum legally took Seal’s surname, Samuel.
Though a daughter resulted from an earlier liaison with an Italian businessman, Klum considered Seal her father.
Klum also took a turn as a singer; in 2007 she recorded with her husband the romantic duet Wedding Day.
Sept., 1967, Amritsar, Punjab, India) Akshay Kumar's star in the Bollywood pantheon showed no sign of dimming in 2009, as he was slated to appear in seven films, a feat for even this wildly prolific actor.
The year also marked his receipt of one of the Indian government’s highest civilian honours, the Padma Shri, in recognition of his contribution to India’s cultural life.
Alberto E Rodriguez/Getty Images Bollywood actor Akshay Kumar In a country in which acting often runs in the family, Kumar (born Rajiv Hari Om Bhatia) was the son of a government worker.
Kumar worked at a Bangkok food stall, tried his hand at modeling, and appeared in several films before being offered a starring role in Deedar by director Pramod Chakravarthy.
It was in these early stages of his career that he took the professional name Akshay Kumar.
Kumar played in a steady stream of thrillers and fast-paced dramas, including Kduladi , which attracted considerable attention to the handsome young newcomer.
His athleticism and daredevil nature were well displayed in action films such as Main khiladi tu anari , in which Kumar played a police inspector protecting a star witness.
He again portrayed a conflicted policeman in Mohra, one of the most popular Indian films of 1994.
Despite his success in these high-intensity roles, Kumar's good looks also led him to star in romantic comedies such as Yeh dillagi , a loose adaptation of the American film Sabrina, and Dhadkan , a story of arranged marriage in which Kumar’s character must win over his reluctant bride.
Ajnabee was a change of pace for the usually charming actor, and his turn as a philandering husband and murderer won him his first Filmfare award, for best villain.
Kumar continued to appear in comedies, and Garam masala garnered him a second Filmfare award, for best actor in a comedic role.
Pixar’s pioneering use of computer animation created memorable images for films such as Toy Story , Monsters, Inc. , and Finding Nemo , but perhaps even more remarkable—and indicative of Pixar’s success—was a film such as Up, which was marketed to a youth-obsessed culture yet featured a septuagenarian as its hero.
Lasseter was the driving force behind Pixar’s lucrative formula, a combination of cuttingedge computer animation and classic Disney-style storytelling that appealed to children and adults.
In October 2009 the Producers Guild of America announced that in recognition of his body of work, Lasseter would receive the 2010 David O Selznick Achievement Award in Motion Pictures, the first time a producer of animated films had been so honoured.
Lasseter—who was encouraged by his mother, an art teacher—won a drawing contest at the age of five.
In high school he read a book about the making of Disney’s animated film Sleeping Beauty and was inspired to pursue a career as an animator.
He attended col95 Biographies Fred Prouser—Reuters/Landov Up executive producer John Lasseter poses with characters from the film. lege at the California Institute of the Arts, which had just begun offering animation courses taught by veteran Disney artists.
His growing enthusiasm for nascent computer animation technology put Lasseter at odds with some of his superiors, however, and he was fired in 1983.
Later that year Lasseter was hired to work in the computer graphics division at Lucasfilm.
His first assignment was to direct an animated short film, The Adventures of Andre and Wally B , which was the first movie to feature computer-generated characters.
In 1986 the division was sold to Apple Computer Inc. cofounder Steve Jobs and became an independent company called Pixar that focused primarily on developing and selling animation software.
Pixar also produced television commercials and short films, with Lasseter serving as director.
In 1991 Lasseter got a second chance to show Disney executives the value of computerized animation when Pixar struck a deal with the entertainment giant to produce movies.
The initial effort, Toy Story, was directed by Lasseter and was the first fully computer-animated feature film in history.
Toy Story was the highest-grossing film of 1995, selling $362 million in tickets worldwide, and it resulted in a second Academy Award for Lasseter, this time for special achievement.
Pixar continued to generate hits for Disney, including A Bug's Life and Toy Story 2 , both directed by Lasseter.
When Disney purchased Pixar in 2006, Lasseter made a triumphant return to the company that had fired him more than 20 years earlier, becoming chief creative officer of both Pixar s and Disney’s animation operations.
The next day he renounced the peace process adopted at the Annapolis conference in 2007.
His prominence in the new government, as well as his often provocative pronouncements, earned Lieberman international attention and a place on Time magazine’s list of the year’s most influential people.
Evet Lvovich Lieberman (or Liberman) immigrated to Israel with his parents when he was 20, taking the new name Avigdor.
In 1988 he moved with his wife to the Jewish West Bank settlement of Nokdim.
That same year he allied himself with Benjamin Netanyahu, and in 1993 he masterminded Netanyahu’s successful campaign for the Likud party leadership.
When Netanyahu first became prime minister three years later, he appointed Lieberman director general of the prime minister’s office.
After a falling out with Netanyahu, Lieberman left Likud to found the nationalist party Yisrael Beiteinu.
The party, which drew its membership mainly from Russian immigrants, won four Knesset seats in the 1999 national election.
In late May 2004 Lieberman outlined his ""Populated Area Exchange Plan,” under which Israeli Arab towns bordering the West Bank would be ceded to Palestine and West Bank Jewish settlements bordering the 1967 Green Line would be part of Israel.
Everyone remaining in Israel, including Arabs, would be required to take a loyalty oath or lose the right to vote.
In October 2006 Prime Minister Ehud Olmert brought Lieberman, whose party had won 11 seats in the March election, into his new coalition as minister for strategic threats, focusing on the Iranian nuclear program.
Although Lieberman resigned in January 2008 over the Annapolis process with the Palestinians, his service in a top security portfolio gave him national leadership credibility.
Israeli politician Avigdor Lieberman Filippo Monteforte—AFP/Getty Images 96 Biographies In the run-up to the 2009 election, Lieberman sharpened his questions about Israel’s Arab minority, expressing doubts about their loyalty to the Jewish state and threatening to make their right to citizenship dependent on an oath of allegiance.
In May 2009 Yisrael Beiteinu introduced such a citizenship law and other legislation perceived as anti-Arab.
Soon after taking over as foreign minister, Lieberman also was interrogated by police on suspicion of money laundering, bribery, and obstructing justice in a scandal that threatened to end his controversial political career.
Feb., 1974, Haguenau, Bas Rhin, France) French automobile road rally driver Sebastien Loeb continued his remarkable run at the top of his sport in 2009.
After finishing 2008 with a record fifth consecutive World Rally Championship driver’s title, he did not miss a beat in early 2009, winning the first five WRC races to start his push for a sixth world championship.
Loeb accomplished his goal in dramatic fashion on October 25, taking first place in the final race of the season, the Wales Rally of Great Britain, to narrowly edge Mikko Hirvonen of Finland for yet another WRC title.
After having won five gold medals at the French national gymnastics championships by the time he was 15, Loeb discovered a new love—auto racing.
In 1995 he took up rally driving, and in 1998, with co-driver Daniel Elena of Monaco, he started racing in the French Citroen Saxo Trophy Series, winning twice that season before taking the title the following year.
The 2002 season was Loeb’s first as a WRC driver with the Citroen Total World Rally Team, and he was runnerup in his first race and won his second, the Rally of Germany.
During his first full season in 2003, he captured three events to finish just one point behind Subaru’s Petter Solberg of Norway.
He won the first of his five straight world driver’s championships in 2004 by tying the WRC season record with six victories, which enabled him to easily beat Solberg for the title.
The next season proved to be even more dominant, as Loeb had a record-setting run to the title.
He posted 10 victories—becoming the first driver to win 6 in a row—and took the title by 56 points to break a 25-year-old record.
In 2006 Loeb raced for the private team Citroen Xsara WRC and beat the record of 26 career victories set by Carlos Sainz of Spain, scoring 8 more wins to register 28 in his career.
He took a third consecutive drivers' title, despite missing the last four rounds of the championship owing to a broken shoulder that he suffered in a biking accident.
Loeb returned to Citroen Sport and drove the new C4 WRC in 2007, but learning to handle a new car did not prevent him from winning eight events and his fourth consecutive crown.
Loeb—with Elena still at his side after a decade’s partnership—took his dominance to another level in 2008, setting a record with 11 wins in one season to give him 47 career victories and his fifth consecutive WRC title.
In May 2009 Loeb suffered a disappointing loss in the sixth race of the season, but he had some consolation a few days later when he was awarded the Legion of Honour by French Pres.
May 1, 1946, Srinagar, Kashmir, British India) In early 2009 Joanna Lumley, a tall, blonde British comedic actress, accomplished something that is achieved by very few people—including individual MPs.
She pressured the U.K. government to abandon a specific policy and change course.
Her cause was that of supporting the Gurkha soldiers from Nepal who had fought for the British army and were seeking to settle in Britain, and with a tenacity that impressed many, she got her way.
During fierce fighting in Burma in June 1944, his life was saved by a Gurkha during a battle that saw a number of Gurkhas earn awards for bravery.
Lumley’s family returned to Britain, where she was educated at private schools, culminating in the Lucie Clayton finishing school, from which she emerged with a posh accent and upperclass bearing.
Nevertheless, she escaped the social restrictions of her upbringing, becoming an unmarried mother at 21.
Though she failed an exam at 16 to enter the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, she appeared in a series of small roles, including one in the James Bond film On Her Majesty’s Secret Sen’ice , and enjoyed a stint on the television drama Coronation Street.
In Ab Fab, as it came to be known, she played Patsy, an aging, sexually aggressive, chain-smoking, heavy-drinking, drugtaking fashionista with a distinctive beehive hairdo.
For Lumley, it was a gloriously outrageous, show-stealing, award-winning performance.
Lumley’s celebrity status helped power the campaign to persuade the British government to give all Gurkhas who had fought for the British army the right to settle in Britain.
Prior to 1997, none had that right, but the Labour government that won power that year granted permission to all future Gurkha soldiers.
Lumley’s trenchant support for the lifting of all restrictions led to a rare government defeat in the House of Commons on April 29, 2009, and on May 21 the government announced that the right of settlement would be extended to all Gurkhas with more than four years' military service.
The thousands of people and numerous charitable foundations who invested with Madoff, directly or indirectly through “feeder funds,” thus spent the early months of 97 Biographies 2009 assessing their often-huge financial losses.
United States federal investigators continued to pursue other suspects, including Madoff’s accountant and some other members of the Madoff family.
Estimates of losses ranged from $50 billion to $65 billion, but investigators acknowledged that locating the missing funds might prove to be impossible.
On June 26 a federal court ordered that Madoff forfeit more than $170 billion in assets.
He studied law briefly at Brooklyn Law School before founding Bernard L Madoff Investment Securities with his wife.
He also burnished his reputation by developing relationships with financial regulators.
He exploited an air of exclusivity to attract serious, moneyed investors; not everyone was accepted into his funds, and it became a mark of prestige to be admitted as a Madoff investor.
Investigators later posited that Madoff’s pyramid, or Ponzi, scheme, originated in the early 1980s.
As more investors joined, their money was used to fund payouts to existing investors—as well as fee payments to Madoff’s firm and, allegedly, to his family and friends.
Some skeptical individuals concluded that his promised investment returns (10% annually, in both up and down markets) were not credible and questioned why the firm’s auditor was a small storefront operation with few employees.
In 2001 Barron’s financial magazine published an article that cast doubt on Madoff's integrity, and financial analyst Harry Markopolos repeatedly presented the Securities and Exchange Commission with evidence, notably a detailed investigation, “The World's Largest Hedge Fund Is a Fraud,” in 2005.
Still, the SEC took no actions against Madoff; large accounting firms such as PricewaterhouseCoopers, KPMG, and BDO Seidman reported no red flags in their financial reviews; and JPMorgan Chase bank ignored possible signs of moneylaundering activities in Madoff’s multimillion-dollar Chase bank account.
When Madoff's operations collapsed in December 2008 amid the global economic crisis, he reportedly admitted the dimensions of the scam to members of his family.
Later he acknowledged his guilt in court and issued a public apology to the many victims of his massive swindle.
Fiat had gained control of the American car company following its emergence from Chapter 11 bankruptcy, and Marchionne, owing to his tremendous success in turning around the formerly troubled Fiat, was placed at the helm in hopes that he could produce a similar transformation at Chrysler.
Marchionne was bom into a Italian military family, but when he was 14, his family immigrated to Toronto.
After completing his law degree, Marchionne immediately began working as a tax specialist and chartered accountant for the professional-services firm Deloitte & Touche LLP in Toronto.
From 1985 to 1988 he served as group controller and then director of corporate development for the global packaging company Lawson Mardon Group Ltd. in Toronto.
The following year Marchionne became the executive vice president of the conglomerate Glenex Industries Inc.
He served as vice president of finance and chief financial officer for the accounting firm Acklands Ltd. from 1990 to 1992.
Marchionne quickly moved up through the ranks at the new company, and in 1997 he became the CEO and managing director of Algroup.
Following the firm’s merger with the Montreal-based production company Alcan Inc. in 2000, he was appointed CEO and then chairman of the spin-off company Lonza Group Ltd.
In 2002 Marchionne was named CEO of the Swiss testing, verification, and certification company Societe Generale de Surveillance Group.
He quickly returned the troubled car company to profitability, however, by downsizing and restructuring management as well as by speeding the introduction of new models, notably the retro-styled minicar sensation Fiat 500.
Marchionne was appointed chairman of SGS in 2006, the same year that he was named a Knight of the Order of Merit for Labour, an Italian honour bestowed upon entrepreneurs who had excelled in their given fields.
In 2008 he was among the winners of the CNBC Europe European Business Leaders Awards.
Martinelli, Ricardo Boosted by a campaign that promised 98 Biographies ""real change,” conservative business tycoon Ricardo Martinelli of the opposition Democratic Change party prevailed in the May 3, 2009, Panamanian presidential election.
Martinelli’s triumph went against the recent trend gaining momentum across Latin America that saw voters showing a preference for leftist antiUnited States candidates.
He went on to study finance at the Central American Institute of Business Administration in San Jose, Costa Rica.
Martinelli owned Super 99, Panama's largest chain of supermarkets, which he joined in 1981 following a stint at Citibank.
He was director of the Chamber of Commerce of Panama before serving as the country’s director of social security.
Martinelli made his first bid for the five-year, one-term presidency in 2004 and finished last among four candidates, receiving only 5.3% of the vote.
For his 2009 run, he led a coalition of right-wing parties and contributed significant funding to his own cause, financing a media campaign in which he presented himself as an outsider vying for an office that had been held by traditional political powers since 1989, when dictator Manuel Noriega was deposed in a United States invasion.
Early in the campaign, PRDP candidate Balbina Herrera was considered the favourite, but Martinelli already had the support of many of Panama's business leaders, and his message of change resonated among poor voters in a country in which 40% of the population lived in poverty.
The early challenges of Martinelli’s presidency included fighting an escalating crime rate and stabilizing an economy that in 2008 had grown at a 9.2% annual rate but was forecast to rise only 3.2% in 2009.
He aimed to influence the initiation of a free-trade agreement that had already been signed with the United States but had stalled in the United States Congress.
Martinelli was also relying on a $5.25 billion project to expand the Panama Canal to provide some short-term benefits to the economy through the thousands of jobs the enterprise was expected to create.
McGuinness, Martin For anyone with memories of the campaign conducted in the latter decades of the 20th century by the paramilitary Provisional Irish Republican Army , few sights in 2009 could be more startling—or encouraging—than that of Northern Ireland Deputy First Minister Martin McGuinness of Sinn Fein (the IRA’s political wing), a former IRA commander, working harmoniously with his former enemies to run the province.
Though McGuinness himself was now considered a possible assassination target, he turned down offers of special police protection.
In 1973 a Special Criminal Court in the Irish Republic sentenced him to six months in prison after he had been caught in a car containing large quantities of explosives and ammunition.
Although the IRA kept secret the membership of its seven-man Army Council, few doubted that McGuinness was one of its most important members during the 1970s, '80s, and '90s.
Indeed, even while reportedly planning attacks on civilians in Northern Ireland and the British mainland, McGuinness was involved in spasmodic secret talks with British government ministers and officials to end the conflict.
In 1972 McGuinness, with fellow IRA leader Gerry Adams, privately negotiated with British Secretary of State for Northern Ireland William Whitelaw, but these and other talks over the next two decades came to nothing.
McGuinness was the IRA's chief negotiator in the deliberations, also secret at first, that culminated in 1998 in the Good Friday Agreement.
This pact finally ended the conflict and brought Sinn Fein into a coalition government to rule Northern Ireland.
McGuinness was elected to the new Assembly and was appointed minister of education.
Disagreements over such issues as policing and the decommissioning of arms caused Northern Ireland’s Executive and Assembly to be suspended for some years, but a fresh agreement in 2006 paved the way for them to be revived.
When Paisley retired in 2008, he was succeeded by the DUP’s Peter Robinson, who was considered to be even more militantly anti-Republican.
Once again, however, a shared need to rebuild the province’s economy and attract international investment led to cooperation between former opponents.
Showing Pre-Algebra Who’s Boss , which was issued in a paperback edition in June 2009.
In her senior year she took advanced course work in mathematical analysis, and with the encouragement and supervision of Lincoln Chayes, McKellar and fellow undergraduate math student Brandy Winn conducted research into the statistical mechanics of magnetic fields.
Although McKellar chose not to pursue postgraduate studies, she found a voice in advocating math education and testified in 2000 before a United States congressional subcommittee on ways of increasing the number of women in mathematics-related fields.
How to Survive Middle-School Math Without Losing Your Mind or Breaking a Nail to help girls grasp such topics as fractions, decimals, and percentages.
She soon followed with Kiss My Math, providing insight into more advanced middle-school math topics, such as exponents, inequalities, and solving for a variable.
McKellar attributed some of the motivation for writing the books to her own early difficulties with math, and she argued that it could be sexy as well as empowering for women to be smart and good at math.
From about age seven McKellar lived in Los Angeles, where she studied at the Diane Hill Flardin Young Actors Space, a performing-arts academy.
Before landing her role in The Wonder Years, McKellar appeared in commercials and in two episodes oiThe Twilight Zone.
Of special interest to McKellar was the lead role she played in the 2003 San Diego Repertory Theater production of Proof, David Auburn’s Pulitzer Prize-winning play about a mathematically gifted but troubled young woman.
Messi, Lionel Andres In early 2009 Argentine association football star Lionel Messi capped off a spectacular 2008-09 season with FC Barcelona, helping his team to a treble of trophies by scoring 38 goals in 51 appearances in winning the Spanish La Liga championship, the Copa del Rey, and, finally, on May 27 the 2009 Union des Associations Europeennes de Football Champions League final in Rome, where he scored with an athletically judged header to clinch Barcelona's 2-0 victory over Manchester United.
Going into that game, he was already runner-up to Manchester’s Cristiano Ronaldo {q.v. ) in the balloting for both the Federation Internationale de Football Association World Player of the Year and France Football magazines Golden Ball as best European player of the year for 2008.
For the third year in succession, Messi was also voted Federation Internationale des Associations de Footballeurs Professionels Young Player of the Year, an outstanding accolade from his fellow professionals.
In December 2009 Messi wrapped up a near-perfect year by winning the Golden Ball and FIFA Player of the Year honours.
By age 21 Messi had achieved fame on two continents that had seemed impossible 10 years earlier.
He started playing soccer as a boy and in 1995 joined Newell’s Old Boys.
Messi attracted the attention of the club River Plate, but he was diagnosed with growth hormone deficiency, and for his working-class family it was impossible to find the money for his expensive High-flying Argentine soccer star Lionel Messi Lluis Gene—AFP/Getty Images medical treatment.
On a scouting mission in South America, Carles Rexach, then the sporting director of FC Barcelona, recognized Messi’s potential and arranged for him to receive treatment if the family was prepared to move him to Europe.
At the age of 13, Messi arrived in Barcelona and began playing for the club’s Under-14 team.
He scored 21 goals in 14 games for the junior team, and he quickly graduated through the C and B teams until given his informal debut with FC Barcelona at age 16 in a friendly match against Porto.
In the 2004-05 season, Messi, then 17, became the youngest official player and goal scorer in the Spanish La Liga.
Though only 1.69 m tall and weighing 67 kg , he was strong, well balanced, and versatile on the field.
Naturally left-footed, quick, and precise in control of the ball, Messi displayed distribution and could thread his way through packed defenses.
In 2005 he was granted Spanish citizenship, an honour greeted with mixed feelings by the fiercely Catalan supporters of Barcelona.
Messi’s ties with his homeland remained strong, however, and he established himself as a full Argentine international with 36 appearances, beginning in 2005.
He distinguished himself as a member of Argentina's victorious 2005 FIFA World Youth Championship squad, represented his country in the 2006 FIFA World Cup finals, and scored two goals in five matches as Argentina swept to the gold medal at the 2008 Beijing Olympic Games.
As the Tamil insurgency ground to a bloody halt in Sri Lanka in 2009, singer Maya Arulpragasam—better known by her stage name M.I.A.—brought awareness of the conflict to dance floors around the world.
Her efforts to support humanitarian aid for civilians in the Tamil region of Sri Lanka were opposed by the Sri Lankan army, to the extent that she was specifically named on the army’s Web site, and critics claimed that her lyrics and music videos betrayed a veiled sympathy for the Tamil separatist movement.
Although Arulpragasam was born in London, she spent much of her childhood in northern Sri Lanka.
When the civil war between the Tamil minority in the north and the Sinhalese government in the south intensified in the 1980s, her father joined the militant Tamil Tigers and the rest of her family fled the country, eventually returning to London.
There Arulpragasam studied visual art, often creating works that were influenced by the conflict she had witnessed as a child.
She received her first exposure to the music industry as the graphic designer for British pop punk group Elastica, and she familiarized herself with the recording equipment used by dance music producers.
Anticipation of a full-length album intensified among her fans with the release of Piracy Funds Terrorism, a 2004 mix tape produced with American songwriter DJ Diplo.
Although segments of M.I.A.'s 2005 debut album had been circulating on the Internet for almost a year, its release was still greeted with much critical interest.
The album title, Arular, was the name her father adopted while a Tamil Tiger, and the album cover featured Arulpragasam’s face surrounded by a collage of cartoon tanks and AK47s.
The compilation was a huge success on the club circuit, based on the strength of singles such as ""Galang” and ""Bucky Done Gun,” and M.I.A.’s politics lent a new gravity to the dance music genre.
M.I.A.’s second album, Kala, was released in 2007, and it featured guest production appearances by Diplo and American hip-hop icon Timbaland.
Mills, John Evans Atta On Jan., 2009, John Evans Atta Mills was officially sworn in to succeed John Agyekum Kufuor as president of Ghana.
The election marked the second time in Ghana’s history that one legitimately elected leader had handed over power to another.
It demonstrated that after an era of coups and dictatorship , democracy had been established and reinforced in the West African country, despite occasional eruptions of ethnic conflict and political tension.
On his return to Ghana, he taught law at his alma mater, where he remained for some 25 years.
Mills eventually left academia to establish a distinguished career in public service.
Appointed in 1988 as acting commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service, he eventually became substantive commissioner.
Jerry Rawlings's running mate in the 1996 elections and took office on Jan., 1997, as vice president, a post he held until 2001.
During subsequent presidential campaigns, Mills was roundly criticized for statements that if elected he would consult with Rawlings, but in 2008 Mills distanced himself from his former mentor.
Self-described as a social democrat who believed in the concept of social welfare espoused by Kwame Nkrumah , Mills embraced a political platform that was more comprehensive and less divisive than that of either Nkrumah or Rawlings.
After his inauguration, he set about to improve the socioeconomic situation of ordinary Ghanaians, who ranked among the world’s poorest people, with an average daily income of $2.32, a 60% literacy rate, and 10% unemployment despite the country’s potentially valuable natural resources.
In his first state of the nation address on February 19, Mills announced an austerity program, promising steep cuts in government spending, beginning with cutbacks in wages and the use of two presidential jets.
He also instituted policies to eliminate four cabinet ministries and reduced the size of the presidential convoy.
Aug., 1939, Serowe, Bechuanaland Protectorate ) In 2009 former Botswanan president Festus Mogae continued to have an impact on politics but on a global scale as he took centre stage as a speaker or panelist at various international conferences, lending his expertise to a range of topics, notably discussions about achieving growth in Africa and halting the AIDS scourge affecting that continent.
His father was a headman of the Talaote, a Kalanga clan among the Ngwato.
He then joined the Development Planning (later the Finance and Development Planning) Ministry of newly independent Botswana, under Vice Pres.
Ketumile Masire, and became a key figure in Botswana's remarkable rise to economic prosperity, heading the ministry’s permanent staff.
In 1976 Mogae was recruited by the International Monetary Fund in Washington, D.C., as alternate executive and then executive director for Anglophone Africa.
He returned home to serve as governor of the central bank of Botswana and as permanent secretary to Masire, who had become president in 1980.
He subsequently stood as an MP for Palapye, where his father had been headman, and was appointed Masire’s vice president in 1992 after the resignation of Peter Mmusi.
After succeeding Masire as president in April 1998, Mogae made the controversial move of recruiting as his vice president Ian Khama, substantive chief of the Ngwato, and appointing BDP faction leader Ponatshego Kedikilwe as minister of finance and development planning.
In other respects Mogae continued the policies of his predecessor and successfully steered the BDP through the 1999 elections.
He made himself internationally distinctive among the African leaders by acknowledging the international scientific consensus surrounding the HIV/AIDS epidemic.
President Mogae invited international assistance and, in a June 2001 speech before the UN General Assembly, described the epidemic as a national crisis that threatened the very survival of his people.
Mogae was viewed as a shy but principled technocrat who did not shrink from the highest responsibilities.
His background at the IMF and his criticism of the repressive regime of Robert Mugabe in Zimbabwe, however, left him open to being seen as too pro-Western.
After relinquishing the presidency to Khama in April 2008, Mogae was elevated to the status of elder statesman.
Moore, Alan When the highly anticipated film Watchmen debuted in theatres in March 2009, conspicuously absent from its credits was the name Alan Moore.
Moore, who collaborated with artist Dave Gibbons to create what was widely regarded to be the most influential graphic novel of all time, took legal steps to ensure that his name would not appear in any press materials related to the project.
Moore was committed to the idea that his creations could best be served by remaining on the printed page.
This opinion was reinforced by his previous ill-fated dealings with Hollywood.
Moore’s From Hell , an atmospheric commentary on the decline of the British Empire as seen through the Jack the Ripper killings, was turned into a straightforward action film with an unlikely happy ending, and his The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen (first published in 1999) was stripped of its literary sensibility, and new characters—including a crime-fighting Tom Sawyer—were added to the film to appeal to an American audience.
While disinterested in Watchmen, Moore celebrated the July settlement of one of the longest-running legal disputes in the comics world.
Marvelman, a character revived by Moore in the early 1980s, had languished in intellectual property limbo for more than a decade as various parties fought over who owned the rights to the original stories, as well as the later tales by Moore and fellow writer Neil Gaiman.
Marvel Comics inked an agreement with Marvelman’s 93-year-old original creator, Mick Anglo, and it appeared that Britain’s greatest superhero was set to return to the page.
Moore entered the publishing industry in the early 1970s, working as a writer and artist for a number of independent magazines.
He broke into the mainstream with stories for Doctor Who Weekly and the science-fiction anthology series 2000 AD, but his gift for deconstructing the superhero genre first appeared in 1982, when he resurrected Marvelman for the magazine Warrior.
Moore imagined Marvelman as a middle-aged reporter who had forgotten his role as the world’s preeminent superhero, and later stories examined how an individual with godlike powers would interact with human society.
Moore’s next project, V for Vendetta , turned the Marvelman narrative on its head, placing near-infinite power in the hands of a ruling political party (modeled on Britain’s National Front) and casting an erudite terrorist in a Guy Fawkes mask as the protagonist.
In 1983 DC Comics hired Moore to write Swamp Thing, a straightforward monster comic that Moore transformed into a monthly meditation on life and death.
It pushed the boundaries of what could be done in a mainstream book, and his success with it led to Watchmen.
Published serially from 1986 to 1987, Watchmen helped define the term graphic novel to many readers, and its mature story line, which sampled from the dystopian visions of both Marvelman and V for Vendetta, was unlike anything that had previously been seen in the superhero genre.
Moore’s later work continued to examine the psychology of the superhero, most notably in the Image Comics title Supreme.
He launched his own publishing imprint, America’s Best Comics, in 1999.
There Moss set a number of I-AA receiving records in his freshman season and helped lead Marshall to a national championship.
During his sophomore year, Marshall moved up to Division I-A (later the Football Bowl Subdivision), and Moss set a I-A record by catching 25 touchdown passes.
Although Moss was widely considered to be one of the most talented players available in the 1998 NFL draft, he was not selected until the 21st pick of the first round (by the Minnesota Vikings), because of concerns about his character.
Moss’s mix of incredible speed and outstanding leaping ability in a 1.93-m (6-ft 4-in) frame made him a sensation in his first year with the Vikings.
He set an NFL rookie record with 17 receiving touchdowns, was named NFL Offensive Rookie of the Year, and earned first-team All-Pro honours.
Minnesota scored the most points in NFL history that season and posted a 15-1 regular-season record before losing in the National Football Conference championship game.
In 2005 the Vikings traded Moss to the Oakland Raiders, but he scored only 11 total touchdowns in his two seasons with the Raiders, and he was traded to the New England Patriots in 2007.
In 2007-08 he teamed with quarterback Tom Brady to form the core of a high-powered offense that broke the Vikings’ singleseason scoring mark while posting the first 16-0 regular-season record in NFL history.
In addition, Moss broke Rice’s 20-year-old NFL single-season record by catching 23 touchdown passes.
Mousavi, Mir Hossein After a hiatus of some 20 years, former Iranian prime minister Mir Hossein Mousavi returned to the political fore in 2009 with his entry into Iran's presidential election.
Mahmoud Ahmadinejad and his policies, and he argued that the president’s controversial behaviour and rhetoric had damaged Iran's image abroad.
Economic concerns, increased personal freedoms, and the confrontation of corruption were also focal points of Mousavi’s campaign.
Soon after the polls closed, Mousavi announced that he had won the election outright by a large margin; shortly thereafter, Hadi Tabrizi/Getty Images Iranian presidential candidate Mir Hossein Mousavi appears during a campaign rally in Tehran on May 24. however, officials made a similar announcement in favour of Ahmadinejad.
Although Ahmadinejad insisted that the election had been fair, his opponents alleged electoral fraud.
Mousavi urged his supporters to protest the results, and in the days following the election, demonstrations unfolded in the capital and elsewhere.
On June 19 Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, publicly backed Ahmadinejad’s victory.
Mousavi continued to urge supporters to demonstrate peacefully, but subsequent protests were greeted with increasing brutality as well as threats of further confrontation.
Following the completion of a partial vote recount, the election results were confirmed, and Ahmadinejad was sworn in for his second term on August 5.
During his tenure there, Mousavi participated in the underground resistance movement that challenged the regime of Mohammad Reza Shah Pahlavi.
He briefly served as foreign minister during the hostage crisis with the United States , in which militants seized 66 American citizens at the United States embassy in Tehran, holding 52 of them hostage for more than a year.
Although Mousavi was favoured for the position by Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, his tenure as prime minister was coloured by competition with Ali Khamenei, then president of Iran, who had strongly opposed his appointment.
Following the abolition of the premiership in the late 1980s, Mousavi largely receded from the political spotlight.
He dedicated himself to the arts and held several lower-profile positions within the government, including that of presidential adviser to both Hashemi Rafsanjani and Mohammed Khatami.
In 1998 he cofounded the Iranian Academy of the Arts in Tehran, and he subsequently served as its president and the editorial director of Kliiyal , the organization’s quarterly publication.
These included the 2008 United Nations Human Rights Prize, the 2008 Olof Palme Prize for outstanding achievement in promoting peace, and selection by the Nigerian newspaper Daily Trust as its 2008 African of the Year.
The awards helped to bring global attention to what Mukwege and others had described as an “epidemic"" of sexual violence in the eastern DRC, where combatants in the war-tom region were using the systematic rape of women and girls as a means of terrorizing and displacing the civilian population.
As many as 27,000 sexual assaults were reported in just one of the eastern provinces, South Kivu, in 2006, and experts noted that the vast majority of attacks were likely to go unreported.
The Panzi Hospital of Bukavu, which Mukwege founded and where he served as director and chief surgeon, represented the “front line” in the treatment of rape victims in the region.
Mukwege grew up in Bukavu, where he first became aware of the need for better medical care in the region while visiting sick parishioners with his father, a Pentecostal minister.
After studying medicine in Burundi, Mukwege returned to the Congo and worked at a hospital in the village of Lemera.
Though initially interested in pediatric care, he switched his focus to obstetrics and gynecology after observing the harsh circumstances that many rural women faced while giving birth.
He pursued further study in Angers, France, and in 1989 established an obstetrics and gynecology service in Lemera.
After the hospital in Lemera was destroyed during the civil war that erupted in the country in late 1996, Mukwege resettled in Bukavu.
His original goal in founding the Panzi Hospital was to provide maternity care that was lacking in the area, but soon the hospital began to receive large numbers of sexual-assault victims, some as young as three years old and many with extreme injuries and mutilations.
Among the perpetrators of the violence were Rwandan Hutu rebels based in the eastern DRC, Congolese government soldiers, and various armed gangs.
He urged greater involvement on the part of the international community, including a stronger UN mandate in the DRC, as a means of ending the violence.
Mukwege hoped to use prize money that he had received to establish services aimed at helping survivors of sexual violence rejoin society.
Obama, Michelle On Jan., 2009, Michelle Obama became the first African American first lady of the United States as her husband, Barack Obama, formally took office as the country’s 44th president.
The new first lady generated headlines seemingly with her every move, sharing an extraordinary embrace with Queen Elizabeth II in April (the two reportedly struck up a warm friendship) and making a highly publicized speech in Copenhagen in October as part of the final— though ultimately unsuccessful—pitch to bring the 2016 Olympics to Chicago.
The first lady also earned high praise for her fashion sense and appeared during the year on the covers of such magazines as Vogue and Glamour.
She used her public visibility to attract attention to a number of causes that were important to her; notable among these was her wish to improve the lives of the families of United States military personnel.
On several occasions she visited with the spouses of soldiers who were serving overseas, and in November she helped launch Mission Serve, a military-oriented community service organization.
Returning to Chicago, she took a job as a junior associate at Sidley & Austin , where she specialized in intellectual property law.
In 1989, while at the firm, she met Barack Obama, who had been hired as a summer associate.
Seeking a more public-service-oriented career path, in 1991 she became an assistant to Chicago Mayor Richard M Daley.
In 1993 she founded the Chicago branch of Public Allies, a leadership-training program for young adults.
Shortly after her husband announced his candidacy for the 2008 Democratic presidential nomination, Michelle scaled back her professional career to devote herself to the campaign.
At the same time, she won many admirers for her dedication to her and Barack’s two young daughters, Malia and Sasha.
Michelle’s openness on the campaign trail and in interviews endeared her to many.
Michelle later clarified her statement—saying that she meant to say that she was proud that Americans were eagerly engaging in the political process during the 2008 election—and she continued to have an active role in her husband's campaign.
Indeed, aides referred to her as ""the closer,” for her persuasiveness on the stump among uncommitted voters who attended rallies.
Her personal popularity remained high in 2009, with one poll conducted in April finding that 76% of Americans had a favourable opinion of the first lady.
At age 13 he dropped his given name, Gideon, in favour of George (and added it officially to his name by deed poll), in what he subsequently described as a rare act of rebellion.
In 1994 he joined the Conservative Research Department, which had served for many years as a kind of '‘nursery” for leading politicians.
The following year he was appointed special adviser to Douglas Hogg, agriculture secretary in the then Conservative government.
In 1997 the Conservatives lost power and chose a new leader, William Hague, who hired Osborne as his political secretary.
Osborne entered Parliament in 2001, and he was quickly seen as a rising star.
Michael Howard, the party’s leader from 2003 to 2005, appointed Osborne to the shadow cabinet in 2004 and to the senior post of shadow chancellor in 2005.
When Osborne’s friend David Cameron was elected Conservative leader later that year, one of Cameron’s first acts was to confirm Osborne as shadow chancellor.
They wanted to rid the party of its right-wing image and its reputation for not caring about public services or people with average and below-average incomes.
Osborne promised to stick to the Labour government’s spending plans on health and education and to delay tax cuts until they could be afforded.
In 2007 he did commit the party to reducing the inheritance taxes, but this was to be offset by a levy on wealthy foreigners living in Britain.
Many people warmed to his message, while others disliked what they felt was his strident, youthful arrogance.
For a while, Labour Prime Minister Gordon Brown and his chancellor of the Exchequer, Alistair Darling, regained their lead in the opinion polls as the team best able to run the U.K. economy, but by the spring of 2009, Osborne and Cameron were once again ahead, despite being deliberately vague (because of the uncertain outlook for the economy) about what they would do if they came to power.
The charismatic ""PacMan” was the idol of his people and a unifying force in the Philippines, where his unprecedented popularity led to commercial endorsements, movies, TV shows, CDs, a postage stamp, and a failed bid for a congressional seat in 2007.
The fight sold approximately 1.25 millions buys, generating roughly $70 million in PPV revenue, the third largest PPV gross in nonheavyweight history.
He won his first major title on Dec., 1998, knocking out Thailand’s Chatchai Sasakul to capture the World Boxing Council flyweight title.
After failing to make weight, however, he lost the title to Medgoen Singsurat (or Lukchaopormasak) of Thailand in September 1999.
Pacquiao moved up in weight class, and on June 23, 2001, in his first fight in the U.S., he scored a sixth-round knockout of Lehlo Ledwaba to win the International Boxing Federation junior featherweight title.
Following four successful defenses, he knocked out Mexico’s Marco Antonio Barrera on Nov., 2003, to win The Ring magazine featherweight championship.
Over the next several years, Pacquiao engaged in a series of high-profile fights, winning the World Boxing Association and IBF featherweight titles, the WBC and The Ring junior lightweight titles, and the WBC lightweight title.
He was the Boxing Writers Association of America and The Ring’s Fighter of the Year in 2006 and 2008.
A few days later he formed a new ""local” political party, the Peoples’ Champ Movement, back in the Philippines.
The victory brought Pacquiao’s record to 50 wins , 3 losses, and 2 draws.
Persson, Stefan At a time of falling stock prices and global economic recession, Swedish retailing executive Stefan Persson held his position in 2009 as one of the wealthiest individuals in the world.
Persson learned fashion retailing from his father, Erling Persson, who founded a women’s clothing store, Hennes in Vasteras, Swed., in 1947.
The company added a store in Stockholm and soon became a fixture of fashion in the Swedish market, eventually extending its reach to other European countries.
Persson, who joined the family firm in 1972, helped lead its European expansion and was present when the first British store opened in London in 1976.
He assumed leadership as H&M’s managing director and CEO in 1982 when his father became chairman of the board.
By the late 1990s, H&M had become Europe’s largest retail clothing chain.
As it grew, H&M built its reputation on “fast fashion”—inexpensive trendy designs with wide appeal, all of which were initially created by in-house designers, whose concepts were rapidly transformed into mass-market garments through a network of manufacturers in such low-cost countries as Turkey, Bangladesh, and China.
Persson recognized the business potential of—as well as the cultural interest in— global fashion; consequently, H&M did not alter garment designs for specific national or regional markets.
By 2009 H&M operated more than 1,800 stores in 34 countries, with some 73,000 employees.
Most of the brands sold through H&M were in-house labels, but Persson tapped star appeal by soliciting design lines from fashion designers Karl Lagerfeld, Stella McCartney, Matthew Williamson, and Jimmy Choo, as well as pop singers Kylie Minogue and Madonna.
In July 2009 Persson’s son Karl-Johan was named H&M’s CEO, but Persson remained chairman.
Ramos, Maria On March 1, 2009, economist and businesswoman Maria Ramos took charge as the new CEO of the South African financial group Absa.
In taking the post, she stepped down from the chief executive position with South Africa’s Transnet Ltd., where she had served since 2004.
Her move to Absa Group, one of South Africa’s “big four” banks, occurred at a challenging time when Absa’s majority owner, Barclays, was said to be considering a reduction of its 57% stake in the South African retail bank.
In July Ramos was named outstanding businesswoman of the year in the African Business Awards granted by the Commonwealth Business Council and African Business magazine.
Maria Da Conceicao Das N C Ramos moved to South Africa with her parents when she was a child and later became a citizen.
In her early career Ramos worked in banking and finance (in both privateand public-sector jobs), taught economics , and served as an economist for the African National Congress’s Department of Economic Planning.
In 1996 she was appointed as the country’s director general of finance.
In that position she worked closely with Finance Minister Trevor Manuel to strengthen the country’s economy by increasing exports and cutting debt; the two effectively guided South Africa toward a free-market economic model.
Since she had devoted most of her career to fiscal policy and economic planning, her move in 2004 to Transnet—an operator of ports and shipping operations, bus and other passenger transit systems, rail systems, and fuel-transport lines—appeared to be an unlikely choice.
Given the size of the state-controlled firm, however, with more than 75,000 employees and a near monopoly on transportation within South Africa, the CEO position offered Ramos an opportunity to transform the country’s economy by reorganizing one of its most inefficient and debt-ridden companies.
Unions resisted by demanding job guarantees, and strikes in 2006 forced changes in some of Transnet’s restructuring plans.
Although Ramos was unable to restructure South Africa Airways , she strengthened Transnet’s balance sheet by transferring the money-losing SAA division to a different government entity.
Roberts, Nora In 2009 best-selling American romance novelist Nora Roberts demonstrated her penchant for creating charming settings not only for the characters in her stories but also for real-life couples; just in time for Valentine’s Day, she opened the Inn BoonsBoro, a cozy boutique hotel-bed and breakfast, in her home state of Maryland.
During renovations in 2008 to restore the structure to its former grandeur, a fire broke out in the hotel, which forced Roberts and her contractors to start from scratch.
Hoping to attract literary fans to her inn, Roberts outfitted each room with furnishings theme-related to characters in great love stories with happy endings, including the Shakespeare room based on the lovers Oberon and Titania from A Midsummer Night’s Dream and the Pride and Prejudice suite, based on the characters Elizabeth and Darcy in the Jane Austen novel.
As a child, Roberts was an avid reader and frequently formulated her own stories.
Her passion for creating fiction resulted in her extremely disciplined practice of writing up to eight hours, five days per week.
Confined to her home with her two young sons during a blizzard in 1979, she penned her first novel, Irish Thoroughbred, published in 1981 by Silhouette.
Following that debut, Roberts enjoyed phenomenal success as she continued to whet her audience’s appetite with dozens of enthralling romance novels.
Robb to differentiate her romance books from these new suspense titles.
Many, such as Sanctuary , The Reef , and Midnight Bayou , were adapted as made-for-television movies.
Roberts showed no sign of slowing down in 2009, releasing several new titles, including Bed of Roses, Black Hills, Kindred in Death, Promises in Death, and Vision in White.
She was the first inductee into the Romance Writers of America Hall of Fame and, for her 100th novel, Montana Sky , the first recipient of its Centennial Award.
Roberts also received lifetime achievement awards from Waldenbooks and the Romance Writers of America.
He began the year with a starring role as a mall cop in the dark comedy Observe and Report and followed it with Funny People, his latest in a string of collaborations with writer-director-producer Judd Apatow, about a friendship that blossoms between two comedians.
At age 13 he began doing standup on the local comedy-club circuit alongside performers more than twice his age, and three years later he auditioned for the American high-school television dramedy Freaks and Geeks, winning the role of the sardonic Ken.
The series proved to be short-lived, but producer Apatow was impressed by Rogen’s ease in front of the camera and talent for improvisation and in 2001 hired him as both an actor and a writer on a new college-themed sitcom, Undeclared.
When that show met a similar fate, Rogen, along with childhood friend Evan Goldberg, landed jobs writing for the Sacha Baron Cohen showcase Da Ali G Show.
Rogen also surfaced in an episode of the teen-centred drama Dawson’s Creek.
The Legend of Ron Burgundy and The 40-Year-Old Virgin , stealing scenes in the latter from lead Steve Carell.
Rogen put in another supporting performance in You, Me, and Dupree , but it was his next film that made him a household name.
In Knocked Up , which Apatow wrote and directed, Rogen starred as an oafish pot-smoking slacker whose one-night stand with an attractive career woman inadvertently results in her pregnancy.
The crude yet heartwarming movie grossed more than $200 million worldwide, and Rogen’s appealing performance established his A-list credentials.
Rogen had long desired to make his own movies, however, and finally got the chance with Superbad , a raunchy comedy of teenage misadventures that he and Goldberg had originally scripted when they were teenagers themselves.
The writing duo returned the following year with Pineapple Express , an action-oriented farce starring Rogen opposite his Freaks and Geeks costar James Franco.
At the same time, Rogen kept busy with a lead role in Zack and Miri Make a Pomo and a handful of animated features, which utilized his distinctive voice.
Though Rogen was beginning to flirt with overexposure, fans anticipated his turn as the Green Hornet in a Rogenand-Goldberg-penned adaptation of the comic-book franchise scheduled for release in 2010.
By year's end it was apparent that Rogen had become not only one of Hollywood’s premier goofballs but a major creative force as well.
In January 2009 Portuguese association football player Cristiano Ronaldo was voted the Federation Internationale de Football Association Player of the Year for 2008.
The deal represented a substantial profit for United, which had paid £12.24 million when in 2003 it signed him from the Lisbon-based team Sporting Club.
Rumours had persisted since 2006 that Ronaldo wanted to play for Real Madrid, and he adjusted to his new team immediately, scoring a penalty goal on his La Liga debut against Deportivo de La Coruna in August.
Ronaldo's father, Jose Dinis Aveiro, was the equipment manager for the local club Andorinha.
At age 15 Ronaldo had a heart condition that necessitated surgery, but he was sidelined only briefly and made a full recovery.
He played for Clube Desportivo Nacional of Madeira and then transferred to Lisbon, where he debuted for Sporting in 2002.
Although Ronaldo was an unusually tall player—at 1.85 m and 84. kg , given a football he became transformed into a formidable athlete.
Originally a right-winger, he developed into a foraging forward with a freereined attack.
He became famous for his triple step-over technique and dragbacks, and he was able to mesmerize opponents with a ""sleight of foot’’ that made sufficient space to provide openings in opposing defenses.
During Ronaldo’s first season with Manchester United, he made 39 appearances and scored eight goals, including one in the team's triumphant FA Cup final.
Without doubt, however, his finest season with United came in 2007-08 when he scored 42 League and Cup goals and earned the Golden Boot as Europe’s leading marksman, with 31 League goals.
United went on to win the Champions League, but the team lost in the 2009 final to Barcelona.
He subsequently became the captain, and by late 2009 he had made 65 appearances and scored 22 goals for Portugal.
Roubini, Nouriel In early 2009 the business periodical Institutional Investor named Turkishborn American economist Nouriel Roubini to its “Power 50” list of influential people in finance.
By then, Roubini’s subscription Web site, RGE Monitor (which began in 1997 as a single page of Web links), had become known as a central source for economic analysis of the ongoing global credit crisis, and Roubini, who had earned the nickname ""Dr.
Doom” in 2006 for his dire economic predictions, convinced even those economists and pundits who had dismissed his pessimistic outlook that he had been right.
Born to Iranian Jewish parents, Roubini moved with his family to Iran and Israel before they settled in Italy in 1962.
Out of curiosity, Roubini began looking for the next national economy most likely to collapse.
Many in the audience laughed when he predicted a deep, painful recession marked by the tumultuous burst of a housing bubble, mortgage defaults, a collapse in real-estate values, and economic repercussions that would shock financial markets around the world.
When his predictions came true beginning in 2007, some critics asserted that it was a lucky call; they portrayed Roubini as a chronic pessimist who used any number of reasons over the years to predict and explain a market collapse.
Meanwhile, Roubini, his successful consulting firm, Roubini Global Economics, and his Web site benefited from the publicity.
By mid-2009 he had softened his worst-case scenario—that the recovery would be L-shaped (i.e., not a recovery)—but he still criticized those who were predicting a recovery later in the year.
Roubini expected more financial shocks, especially from bank insolvencies, to persist through 2009.
More optimistically, he predicted that a somewhat normal, U-shaped economic recovery would begin in 2010.
Shawn, Wallace In the spring of 2009, London’s Royal Court Theatre staged a three-month festival featuring the works of American playwright Wallace Shawn, which included the premiere of his first new play in more than 10 years, Grasses of a Thousand Colors.
While arguably best known in his home country for his lengthy career as a character actor in films and television shows, Shawn had long been a critical darling in the British theatre, where his oft-surreal, probing plays led some critics to call him America’s leading contemporary dramatist.
His first produced work was Our Late Night, which premiered in 1975 and won an Obie Award for playwriting.
In 1979 he made his on-screen acting debut with a small role in director Woody Allen’s Manhattan, and his “second career” soon led to his first brush with international fame.
Shawn and fellow actor-writer Andre Gregory starred in the film My Dinner with Andre , which was an art-house sensation upon its release and became a cult classic in later years.
Aunt Dan and Lemon won Shawn a second Obie Award, and he took a third in 1991 for The Fever, a caustic 90-minute monologue that dissects the power relations between the world’s poor and elite classes and finds a pervasive moral deficiency in the latter.
The Designated Mourner touched on similar ground, telling the story— through actionless narrations by the three characters—of educated and privileged people who grapple with their humanity during a chaotic civil war in an unnamed country.
Sigurdardottir was the country’s first female prime minister as well as the world’s first openly gay head of government.
After graduating from the Commercial College of Iceland in Reykjavik, Sigurdardottir worked as a flight attendant for Loftleidir Icelandic Airlines, becoming active as a labour union organizer.
She twice served as chairman of the board of the Icelandic Cabin Crew Association.
She took an office job with a packaging company in Reykjavik in 1971 and later sat on the board of the Commercial Workers’ Union.
She quickly gained a reputation as an advocate for social justice, and she called for the strengthening of Iceland’s welfare system.
She was named minister of social affairs in 1987, a position she held until 1994, when she unsuccessfully campaigned for leadership of the Social Democrats.
Sigurdardottir responded to this setback by forming her own party, Icelandic Ministry of Social Affairs and Social Security Icelandic Prime Minister Johanna Sigurdardottir National Movement, which captured four seats in the subsequent parliamentary election.
The two parties eventually reconciled in 1999, when they joined with the Women’s Alliance and the People's Alliance to contest that year’s election; in 2000 the coalition formally became the Social Democratic Alliance.
In 2002 Sigurdardottir established a civil partnership with her companion, Jonina Leosdottir, a noted playwright and journalist.
In public opinion surveys, she was consistently rated as Iceland's most popular politician.
After she was sworn in as prime minister, her interim government called for new parliamentary elections to be held, and on April 25 the Social Democrats and the Left-Greens won 34 seats, capturing a slim majority in the 63-seat legislature.
Shortly thereafter Sigurdardottir announced that one of her top priorities as prime minister would be securing Iceland’s membership in the EU, and on July 17 the country submitted its formal bid for EU entry.
Barack Obama nominated federal appeals court judge Sonia Sotomayor to the Supreme Court in order to fill the vacancy left by departing justice David Souter.
Sotomayor’s confirmation hearings before the Senate Judiciary Committee in July went smoothly, and the following month she was confirmed by the Senate.
Sotomayor was the first Hispanic and the third woman to serve on the Supreme Court.
After the death of her father, her mother worked long hours as a nurse to support the family.
Sotomayor credited the episodes of the television crime show Perry Mason that she watched as a child with influencing her decision to become a lawyer.
As a federal judge, Sotomayor received national attention in 1995 when she ruled in favour of Major League Baseball players, then on strike, who were suing because of changes to the free agent system and salary arbitration rules.
Sotomayor issued an injunction against the team owners, effectively bringing the eightmonth strike to an end.
Bill Clinton nominated Sotomayor to be a judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in 1997, Republican senators delayed her appointment for more than a year because of their concerns that the position might lead to a Supreme Court nomination.
After her appointment to the appeals court in 1998, Sotomayor became known for her candid, direct speaking style and for her carefully reasoned decisions.
In 2001 she ruled in favour of a woman with dyslexia who wanted more accommodations under the Americans with Disabilities Act in order to take the bar exam.
In 2003 in Ricci DeStefano, a group of white firefighters from New Haven, Conn., sued the city for having discarded a test, the results of which had in effect barred all African American firefighters from promotion.
Svindal, Aksel Lund Norwegian skier Aksel Lund Svindal won his second overall Federation International de Ski Alpine World Cup title in March 2009, narrowly defeating his closest rival, Benjamin Raich of Austria, in the final event of the season at Are, Swed.
Svindal won the title by a record-low two-point margin, with a record-low winning-point total.
The narrow victory completed a triumphant comeback from a devastating crash in 2007 that had left him seriously injured and inactive for nearly a year.
Svindal’s parents, both skiers, bought him his first pair of skis for his third birthday, and by age nine he was racing competitively.
He attended high school in Oppdal, a ski resort that hosted World Cup slalom skiing events, which enabled him to study and work on his technique on the slopes at the same time.
He won the national under16 slalom title and was chosen to ski for the Norwegian junior national team.
At the FIS junior world ski championships in 2002, Svindal collected four medals, including a gold in the combined event, and later that year he posted his first European Cup win, taking the gold in the KO giant slalom at San Vigilio, Italy.
In March 2005 he earned his first world Alpine ski championship medal at Bormio, Italy, when he won the silver in the combined.
Svindal’s first trip to the Olympic Games, in February 2006, did not result in any medals.
His performance the following month, however, hinted at what was to come as he finished second overall in the World Cup behind Raich.
A promising start to the 2007-08 season had Svindal thinking about a World Cup repeat, but his hopes ended in November when he crashed during a downhill training run at Beaver Creek, Colo.
He suffered a severe abdominal injury and fractures to his face and did not ski competitively for 11 months.
In December 2008 Svindal returned to Beaver Creek, and in a courageous performance he won the downhill and the super G At the 2009 world championships in Val disere, France, Svindal took the gold in the super combined and the bronze in the super G; he then completed his remarkable comeback season at Are the following month, barely winning the overall World Cup title after Raich was disqualified in his final race for straddling a gate.
Svindal’s 1,009 points for the season beat out Raichs 1,007 to end the tightest World Cup race in history.
Swift, Taylor Teen country music sensation Taylor Swift dominated the industry award circuit in 2009.
Her sophomore album Fearless was recognized as album of the year by the Academy of Country Music in April, and she topped the best female video category for “You Belong with Me” at the MTV Video Music Awards in September.
At the Country Music Associations CMA Awards that November, Swift won all four categories in which she was nominated.
Her recognition as CMA entertainer of the year made her the youngest-ever winner of that award, as well as the first female solo artist to triumph since 1999.
Swift showed an interest in music at an early age, and she progressed quickly from roles in childrens theatre to her first appearance before a crowd of thousands.
She was just 11 years old when she sang “The Star-Spangled Banner” before a Philadelphia 76ers National Basketball Association game; the following year she picked up the guitar and began to write songs.
Taking her inspiration from artists such as Shania Twain and the Dixie Chicks, Swift crafted original material that reflected her experiences of ""tween"" (preteen) alienation.
When she was 13, Swift’s parents sold their farm in Pennsylvania to move to Hendersonville, Tenn., so that Taylor could devote more of her time to courting country labels in nearby Nashville.
She performed many of the songs that she wrote at venues in the Nashville area.
It was at one such performance that she was noticed by record executive Scott Borchetta, who signed Swift to his fledgling Big Machine label.
Her first single, ""Tim McGraw,” was released in the summer of 2006, and the song was an immediate success; it spent eight months on the Billboard country singles chart.
The 16-year-old Swift followed with a self-titled debut album, and she went on tour, opening for Rascal Flatts.
Taylor Swift was certified platinum in 2007, having sold more than one million copies, and Swift continued a rigorous touring schedule, opening for artists such as George Strait, Kenny Chesney, Tim McGraw, and Faith Hill.
On Fearless she demonstrated a refined pop sensibility, managing to court the mainstream pop audience without losing sight of her country roots.
Van Rompuy, Herman In November 2009 Belgian Prime Minister Herman Van Rompuy was appointed the first permanent president of the European Council, the EU’s chief decision-making body.
His twoand-a-half-year term of office (which could be renewed once) would officially begin on Jan., 2010.
In 1972 he began his career as an economist at the National Bank of Belgium.
The following year he entered politics, serving as the vice president of the youth section of the centre-right Flemish Christian Democrat party.
Van Rompuy left banking in 1975, and within three years he was working in the Christian Democrats’ national office.
He left office after the Christian Democrats’ defeat in the 1999 general election.
That year he entered the legislature as a member of the Chamber of Representatives, and in 2004 he was named minister of state.
With the return of the Christian Democrats to the majority in July 2007, Van Rompuy was named leader of the Chamber of Representatives.
When Prime Minister Yves Leterme, a Christian Democrat, resigned in December 2008 amid allegations of improper conduct in the disposition of Belgian-owned shares in the failed Fortis bank, King Albert II designated a reluctant Van Rompuy to replace him.
Albert had previously entrusted Van Rompuy with brokering deals between Belgium's estranged Walloon (Frenchspeaking) and Flemish communities, and Van Rompuy’s term as prime minister saw a lessening of tension between the regions.
Van Rompuy's light diplomatic touch was noticed by other European leaders.
After the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty in November 2009, he became the compromise choice for the European Council presidency, earning the appointment despite bids for the post by several higher-profile candidates, including former British prime minister Tony Blair, former Spanish prime minister Felipe Gonzalez, and Dutch Prime Minister Jan Peter Balkenende.
In 2004 he had openly declared his opposition to the possible EU membership of Turkey, a country that gained EU candidate status in 1999, on the basis of what he perceived to be religious differences.
Waters, Alice In 2009 chef, restaurateur, and food activist Alice Waters intensified her efforts to bring seasonal, organically grown food to the American mainstream; in particular she championed an overhaul of the public-school lunch system.
As co-owner and chef of the famed Berkeley, Calif., restaurant Chez Panisse, Waters had long fought to overturn the elitist stereotypes surrounding the ""slow food” movement, which billed itself as the healthy antithesis to fast food.
She participated in the 1960s Free Speech Movement, and the idealism that was then prevalent at Berkeley was reflected in her ideology throughout her career.
She studied abroad for a time in France, and it was there that her love of farm-to-plate dining took hold.
Following graduation, she spent a year at the International Montessori School in London before returning to California to teach.
In the 1970s the United States was still years away from the “foodie revolution,"" which by 2009 had brought farmers’ markets and organic foods to a larger audience.
Waters’s prescient passion for whole foods, however, inspired her and her friend Lindsey Shere to found a market-inspired restaurant, despite having little capital and no experience as restaurateurs.
Waters wanted to create meals by using only locally grown seasonal ingredients, and she wanted to forge relationships with the producers and suppliers.
These exacting tenets kept the restaurant in debt for its first eight years of business; it was frequently saved from bankruptcy by loans from Waters's friends.
When Chez Panisse finally starting turning a profit, Waters had time to devote herself to other facets of food activism, such as the Garden Project, which provided produce to the San Francisco county jail and work opportunities to its former inmates.
In 1996, to celebrate the restaurant’s 25th anniversary, Waters founded the Chez Panisse Foundation, which funded programs that educated young people on responsible agriculture.
The advocacy venture for which she became best known was the Edible Schoolyard, originally established in 1995.
Waters began the program by planting a garden in the yard of Berkeley’s Martin Luther King Jr.
A cooking classroom was installed a few years later, and by 2009 the Edible Schoolyard was a thriving educational tool, though not a source of lunchroom produce.
From these small beginnings grew Waters's new cause, that of persuading the government to increase funding to improve school lunch programs.
Her indomitable dedication to providing schoolchildren with more healthful-eating options earned Waters a fair share of detractors, who argued that seasonal food was a dispensable luxury for already underfunded schools.
Watson, Paul In 2009 Canadian environmental warrior Paul Watson and his crew sailed into the second season of their popular program Whale Wars on the Animal Planet cable television network.
The Canadian environmental warrior Paul Watson Chantal Henderson/Sea Shepherd Conservation Society in Bebeto Matthews/AP Biographies show featured the dangerous exploits of the Sea Shepherd Conservation Society’s expeditions to protect and defend marine wildlife from illegal poaching.
Watson's direct-action approach to saving the whales, which caused some whalers to label him as an ecoterrorist, included positioning his ship, the Steve Irwin, between the whalers and a targeted pod of whales, entangling ropes in their propellers, throwing stink bombs onto the offending vessel, and even ramming up against the whaling ship.
At the age of nine he would seek out and destroy leghold traps that were set by beaver hunters, interfere with deer and duck hunters, and foil the attempts of other young boys to shoot birds.
During the late 1960s he joined the Canadian Coast Guard and gained sailing experience with the British, Canadian, Norwegian, and Swedish merchant marines.
During his years with the organization, Watson often employed daring and innovative tactics to defend wildlife from hunters, such as positioning his inflatable Zodiac boat in between a pod of sperm whales and the harpoon of a large Soviet whaling vessel or forcing sealing ships to a halt by standing on the ice in their path.
He was also known to handcuff himself to a pile of seal pelts being hoisted up onto a sealing vessel.
Owing to conflicts concerning such unconventional protest methods, Watson left Greenpeace and established the Sea Shepherd Conservation Society.
Bush Daily Point of Light Award , and enrollment in the United States Animal Rights Hall of Fame, and in 2000 Time magazine named him one of the environmental heroes of the 20th century.
Wu claimed that his upbringing in Vancouver, B.C.—where his family settled in the early 1990s after leaving Taipei—was instrumental to his success.
His mother hired a fashion student there to teach her young son, who was “always sketching and drawing,"" the art of pattern cutting and sewing.
Wu’s parents knew that boys in Taiwan were expected to study business, and they believed that Canada would offer a more relaxed environment for him to explore his interests.
Once he established his own eponymous label in 2006, Wu operated his business in a Seventh Avenue studio near one run by Rodriguez.
Manhattan socialites, including Vogue contributing editor Marina Rust and business tycoon Ivanka Trump, were early fans of the polished feminine ready-to-wear line Wu had produced even before he designed Obama's gown.
Wu was commissioned to create the inauguration gown by Ikram Goldman, a Chicago high-fashion retailer from whom Obama purchased most of her clothing and who sold Wu’s designs.
Wu recollected that he was asked to sketch three formal looks and that even though he was unaware that the designs were intended for inauguration day, he presumed that he was being Fashion designer Jason Wu commissioned for a major occasion.
Handmade organza flowers enhanced by sparkling Swarovski crystals embellished the floorlength white silk chiffon column.
Following the inauguration festivities, Michelle Obama further raised Wu’s profile by appearing in his designs at a series of historic occasions.
The March 2009 cover of Vogue magazine featured Obama clad in another sleeveless Wu dress.
At Wu’s spring-summer 2010 show, his line attracted a fashion “executive elite,” including top buyers from Saks Fifth Avenue and Bergdorf Goodman, where Wu sold his work.
His collection ran the gamut from sharp-tailored separates in lush materials, such as tweed and satin, to flirty cocktail frocks and languorous long chiffon evening gowns.
The pages below RECAPTURE the lives and ACCOMPLISHMENTS of those we remember best.
May 15, 2009, Rome, Italy), served as the first female foreign minister of Italy.
The granddaughter of Giovanni Agnelli, the founder of the carmaker Fiat, she combined her elegant upbringing—detailed in her 1975 memoir Vestivamo alia marinara (We Always Wore Sailor Suits) —and a forceful personality to become a vibrant force in Italian politics.
Her philanthropy centred on education and the environment, and she was responsible in 1990 for establishing Italy’s annual research-funding charity telethon.
Agnelli was also known for her years as an advice columnist for Oggi, a weekly magazine.
Aksyonov, Vasily Pavlovich (VASILY Pavlovich Aksenov), Russian novelist and short-story writer (b.
The son of parents who spent many years in Soviet prisons, Aksyonov was raised in a state home.
He graduated from medical school in 1956 and worked as a doctor for a few years.
He also turned to writing, and in the cultural thaw of the late 1950s and early ’60s, he published a number of short stories and novels.
Aksyonov excelled in fast-moving narratives dealing with youthful rebels who are attracted to Western culture even though they share the collectivist ideals of the previous generation.
Because of his reputation and his involvement in the attempted publication of Metropol, an uncensored literary journal, in 1980 he was forced into exile in the West.
Aksyonov’s citizenship was restored by decree in 1990, and he later lived in Moscow. al-Hafez, Amin, Syrian military leader and head of state (b.21?, Aleppo, Syria—d.
Hafez graduated from military school and fought in the Arab-Israeli war of 1948-49.
In the late 1950s, inspired by the fervent pan-Arab nationalism of Egyptian Pres.
After Nasser outlawed Syrian political parties from the union, however, the Ba'thists grew disillusioned with the arrangement, and in 1961 the U.A.R. collapsed.
Overthrown in a coup three years later, he eventually took refuge in Iraq, where he remained until Saddam Hussein's Ba'thist regime was toppled in 2003.
Alfonsln, Raul (RAUL RICARDO AlFONSlN Foulkes), Argentine politician (b.
Alfonsln ran unsuccessfully for the UCR nomination in the 1973 presidential election, which was won by a candidate from the rival Daniel Luna—AFP/Getty Images Argentine politician Raul Alfonsln Peronist party, which was later overthrown by the military.
In response to human rights abuses perpetrated by state security forces during the ensuing regime, Alfonsln wrote La cuestion Argentina and cofounded the Permanent Assembly for Human Rights.
After the U.K. defeated Argentina in the Falkland Islands War , the discredited military allowed a freely contested presidential election.
June 22, 2009, Valhalla, N.Y.), was part of the post-World War II wave of African American singers on the international stage.
She completed her vocal training at Hartford School of Music and made her City Opera debut in 1954 as Queenie in Jerome Kern’s Show Boat.
As a lowerrange mezzo-soprano, Allen was more often cast as the brooding or matronly character than the dainty heroine; she was Jocasta in Igor Stravinsky's Oedipus Rex, Mistress Quickly in Giuseppe Verdis Falstaff, and the raving gypsy Azucena in Verdi’s II trovatore, one of her favourite roles.
Oct., 2009, Rhinebeck, N.Y.), produced experimental electronic musical works that incorporated multiple aspects of acoustics and hearing on a large scale.
Amit, Meir , Israeli military leader, intelligence chief, and politician (b.
July 17, 2009, Israel), was the only person in Israel’s history to lead the foreign intelligence agency Mossad and military intelligence simultaneously; he was credited with modernizing Mossad's intelligence gathering.
Amit fought during Israel’s 1947-49 war of independence and was wounded while leading an attack; he eventually rose to the military rank of major general.
April 1, 2009, Vanersborg, Swed.), set world records in both the 1,500-m and mile distances, especially in races against his rival and countryman Gunder Hagg; between 1941 and 1945, in the run-up to the famed one-mile time of 3 min 59. sec run by Britain’s Roger Bannister on May 6, 1954, Andersson and Hagg were considered the worlds best middle-distance runners, with 19 world records between them.
Andersson’s world-record 1,500-m time, 3 min 44. sec, was set on Aug., 1943, and held for 11 months until broken by Hagg.
In 1946 both men were stripped of their amateur status for having accepted payments from race promoters.
Aquino, Corazon (MARIA CORAZON Cojuangco Aquino), Philippine political leader (b.
Jan., 1933, Tarlac Philippine political leader Corazon Aquino Val Rodriguez/AP province, Phil.—d.
Aug., 2009, Makati, Phil.), as president of the Philippines, restored democratic rule in that country after the long dictatorship of Ferdinand Marcos.
She was born into a wealthy, politically prominent family and graduated from the College of Mount St.
She remained in the background during her husband’s subsequent career, rearing their five children at home.
Her husband, who had become a prominent opposition leader, was jailed by Marcos for eight years , and in 1980 Aquino accompanied him into exile in the United States Her husband’s assassination upon his return to the Philippines in 1983 galvanized opposition to the Marcos government.
When Marcos called for presidential elections in February 1986, Aquino became the unified opposition’s candidate.
Though she was officially reported to have lost to Marcos, Aquino and her supporters challenged the results, charging widespread voting fraud.
High officials in the military publicly renounced Marcos and proclaimed Aquino the rightful president.
On Feb., 1986, both Aquino and Marcos were inaugurated as president, but that same day Marcos fled the country.
Aquino appointed a commission to write a new constitution, which restored the bicameral Congress.
She then held elections to the new Congress and broke up the monopolies held by Marcos’s allies over the economy, which experienced steady growth for several years.
Aquino failed to undertake fundamental economic or social reforms, however, and her popularity steadily declined as she faced continual outcries over economic injustice and political corruption.
She followed it with three more novels that established her as a literary star in Quebec and in France.
Like her first book, her second, Folle , was semiautobiographical and scandalous, and her own fragile beauty contributed to the public fascination with her.
April 25, 2009, Los Angeles, Calif.), portrayed an outspoken, acerbic-tongued feminist in the television sitcom Maude and a sharp-witted divorcee who shares a home with her mother (played by Estelle Getty) and two other middle-aged women (Betty White and Rue McClanahan) in The Golden Girls , which, like Maude, often explored such hot-button issues as abortion, homosexuality, infidelity, gun control, and aging.
Arthur, who garnered 11 Emmy Award nominations, won an Emmy in 1977 for her role as Maude Findley, and in 1988 she was awarded the statuette for her portrayal of Dorothy Zbornak in The Golden Girls.
Ayala went into exile during the Spanish Civil War and then moved to Argentina, where he taught and published a sociology textbook.
In 1949 he published two collections of short stories, Los usurpadores (The Usurpers, 1987) and La cabeza del cordero.
The Francisco Ayala Foundation was established in 2006 in honour of his 100th birthday.
Export U.S.A.; film 2000), Ballard began writing of dehumanized sex and technology at their most extreme.
The Kindness of Women follows the alternately dissipated and transcendent later life of the protagonist of Empire of the Sun.
April 21, 2009, Lahore, Pak.), excelled at performing classical and semiclassical South Asian vocal music, especially ghazals, thumris, and dadras.
Although Bano sang in both Urdu and Persian, she was especially admired for her renditions of Urdu poet Faiz Ahmed Faiz’s verse.
In 1974 Prime Minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto's government granted Bano the national Pride of Performance award.
June 5, 2009, Miami, Fla.), was one of five men arrested for breaking into the Democratic National Committee headquarters in the Watergate complex, Washington, D.C.; the ensuing scandal prompted the investigation of United States Pres.
Barker was found crouching under a desk in the Watergate complex the night of June 17, 1972, and in January 1973 he pleaded guilty to seven charges of conspiracy, burglary, and wire-tapping.
He was sentenced to up to six years in prison by Judge John Sirica, but he was allowed to appeal in 1974 and was released less than a year later.
Dec., 2009, Woodland Hills, Calif.), glamorized the role of the lawman as the debonair star of the television series Bat Masterson , in which he sported a derby hat and clobbered villains in the old West with his goldhandled cane, and as a millionaire who luxuriated in chauffeurdriven rides in his Rolls-Royce as he solved crimes in Los Angeles as a police captain and chief of detectives in Burke’s Law.
For his role as Amos Burke, he won the 1965 Golden Globe best actor award.
In the TV series The Name of the Game , he donned another suave persona, publishing tycoon Glenn Howard.
Bashung, Alain (ALAIN CLAUDE BASCHUNG), French singer, songwriter, and actor (b.
March 14, 2009, Paris), was known as ""the gentleman rocker of French chanson” for his distinctive French-language take on rock music.
Gaby” and the album Play blessures , co-written and recorded with Serge Gainsbourg.
He also acted in the 1973 stage musical La Revolution franpaise and in a score of movies and television shows.
He continued to perform after being diagnosed with lung cancer in 2007 and released his last album, Bleu petrole, in 2008.
Bashung received the Legion of Honour in January 2009, and on February 28, just two weeks before his death, he performed live at the Victoires de la Musique ceremony, where he won 3 awards, bringing his career total to a record 11.
July 27, 1940, Solingen, Ger.— June 30, 2009, Wuppertal, Ger.), broke down the boundaries between ballet and theatre with her dramatic choreographed works incorporating dance, speech, music, and fantastical sets.
Her best-known works include Cafe Muller , inspired by her childhood at her parents’ hotel and restaurant; a version of Igor Stravinsky’s ballet Le Sacre du printemps , performed on an earth-covered stage; and Nelken , which included a field of flowers and four large dogs.
There she began to choreograph and in 1969 became the company director.
In 1973 she took charge of the Wuppertal Dance Theatre, where her first choreographed piece there, Fritz, was poorly received by those who disliked its intensely bleak subject matter.
Bausch’s avant-garde dance theatre later earned acclaim, however, and the company toured to India, Japan, and Britain.
Begg, Dame Heather (ISOLEEN Heather Begg), New Zealand opera singer (b.
May 12, 2009, Sydney, Australia), delighted international audiences with her rich mezzo-soprano voice and dramatic talent for playing matrons, confidants, and spinsters.
She made her singing debut in 1954 as Azucena in Verdi’s II trovatore with the National Opera of Australia, where she was a principal mezzo-soprano.
Begg was especially known for her humour and often appeared in Gilbert and Sullivan's works, notably as Lady Jane in Patience, Katisha in The Mikado, and the Duchess of Plaza Toro in The Gondoliers, all which she reprised on television.
Begg became a principal at the Opera Australia in 1976, and her 53year career ended in 2006.
She was made OBE and became a Distinguished Companion of the New Zealand Order of Merit , which in 2009 was redesignated Dame Companion.
Aug., 2009, Tokyo, Japan), performed Johan Elbers—Time Life Pictures/Getty Images German opera singer Hildegarde Behrens powerfully in dark soprano roles, most notably as Briinnhilde in Richard Wagner’s The Ring of die Nibelung.
She made her debut as the Countess Almaviva in Mozart’s Le nozze di Figaro and in 1972 joined the Deutsche Oper am Rhein in Dusseldorf.
She made her debut at London’s Covent Garden as Leonore in Beethoven’s Fidelio.
She received international recognition at the 1977 Salzburg Festival in the title role of Richard Strauss’s tragic opera Salome.
Her performances in passionate lead roles in Wagners Tristan und Isolde and Strauss’s Elektra were similarly distinguished by the dramatic fervour of her acting and stage presence as well as her voice.
Bellson, Louie (LUIGI PAULINO ALFREDO Francesco Antonio BalasSONl), American musician (b.
Feb., 2009, Los Angeles, Calif.), was an extraordinary drummer who electrified audiences with his solos and, while still a teenager, was the inventor of the double-bass drum kit that became his trademark.
Bellson’s playing was characterized more by restraint than flamboyance and rendered him a tasteful accompanist for popular singers such as Tony Bennett and Ella Fitzgerald and for musicians such as Count Basie, Art Tatum, and Oscar Peterson.
Benedetti, Mario (MARIO ORLANDO Hamlet Hardy Brenno Beneditti FARUGIA), Uruguayan novelist and poet (b.
May 17, 2009, Montevideo, Uruguay), explored themes of love, daily life, and political unrest in more than 40 years of literary work.
Benedetti was best known for his poetry and novels, including La treuga and Gracias por el fuego , but he also wrote short stories (his most accomplished tales appeared in the collection Montevideanos ), essays, and plays and edited several literary journals, including the political Marcha.
Many of Benedetti’s Uruguayan novelist and poet Mario Benedetti Pablo Bielli—AFP/Getty Images poems were set to music, notably El sur tambein existe , which was featured on an album by Catalan singersongwriter Joan Manuel Serrat.
On the political front, Benedetti was active in leftist politics; he staunchly supported the Cuban Revolution and Cuban Pres.
Fidel Castro, advocated independence for Puerto Rico, and criticized the United States for its foreign policy and consumer-driven society.
In Uruguay he helped to organize the Broad Front, a coalition of leftist groups, and was exiled for his politics following the military coup in 1973.
The group's biggest hits were characterized by Spector’s reverberant “wall of sound” technique, which relied on layered vocals and elaborate orchestral arrangements.
The Ronettes were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2007.
Nov., 1963, Rolling Meadows, Ill.—found dead May 24, 2009, Urbana, Ill.), was best known for his role in shaping the sound of the alternative rock band Wilco.
After recording with a number of bands, most notably the alternative rock quartet Titanic Love Affair, Bennett was recruited in 1994 by Jeff Tweedy to join Wilco.
With the addition of Bennett, a multi-instrumentalist and gifted producer, Wilco's sound expanded.
The apex of Bennetts influence on the bands sound was the 2002 release Yankee Hotel Foxtrot, but the relationship between Bennett and Tweedy was strained, and Bennett was asked to leave the group just prior to the album's release.
Bennett released a string of solo albums that showcased his skills as a producer, but he rarely toured.
His first directing job was Le Poulet (1962; The Chicken), which won the Academy Award for best live-action short film.
May 2, 2009, Rio de Janeiro), created the Theatre of the Oppressed, a form of interactive theatre intended to transform lives as spectators become performers, acting out solutions to social problems.
Boal began his career with the Arena Theatre in Sao Paulo in 1956; he was its director until 1971, during which time he developed his theories.
He was arrested in 1971 by the military junta then ruling Brazil and spent the next 15 years in exile.
During this period he published Teatro del oprimido y otras poeticas politicas , set up a centre for the practice of his theory in Paris, and organized international Theatre of the Oppressed festivals in the early to mid-1980s.
Boal returned to Brazil in 1986 and established a Centre for the Theatre of the Oppressed in Rio de Janeiro as well as several community theatres.
June 14, 2009, Vancouver, Wash.), cofounded (with fellow guitarist Don Wilson) the Ventures, the most successful instrumental band in rock history.
The group was founded in the Seattle area and toured throughout the Pacific Northwest.
Unsuccessful in their efforts to secure a record contract, Bogle and Wilson created their own label.
In 1960 the Ventures’ single “Walk—Don't Run” reached number two on the pop charts, and the band went on to record some of the most recognizable songs of the surf rock genre.
Although the band’s popularity in the United States faded in the 1970s, the Ventures remained hugely popular in Japan, and they sold some 40 million albums in that country alone.
Bogle and the Ventures were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2008.
Sept., 2009, Copenhagen), shared the 1975 Nobel Prize for Physics with American James Rainwater and American-born Ben R Mottelson for their work in determining the asymmetrical shapes of certain atomic nuclei.
He gained international recognition while working in Ghana, where he designed the Bolgatanga Regional Library.
Bongo, Omar (EL Hadj Omar BONGO Ondimba; Albert-Bernard Bongo), Gabonese political leader (b.
Leon M'ba in February 1967, and when M'ba died on November 28, the presidency passed uneventfully to Bongo.
He took the name El Hadj Omar Bongo when he converted to Islam in 1973 and added Ondimba in 2003.
He also maintained relative staDesirey Minkoh—AFP/Getty Images Long-serving Gabonese head of state Omar Bongo bility in Gabon despite periodic accusations of corruption, money laundering, election rigging, and intimidation of political opponents.
Borlaug, Norman Ernest, American agricultural scientist and plant pathologist (b.
Sept., 2009, Dallas, Texas), won the Nobel Prize for Peace in 1970 for his contributions in laying the groundwork of the so-called Green Revolution, the agricultural technological advance that promised to alleviate world hunger.
His work was founded on earlier discoveries of ways to induce genetic mutations in plants.
These methods led to modern plant breeding, with momentous results that included the tailoring of crop varieties for regions prone to climatic extremes.
At a research station at Campo Atizapan, he developed strains of grain that dramatically increased crop yields.
Borlaug ultimately developed short-stemmed wheat, a key element in the Green Revolution in less-developed countries.
He then served as director of the Inter-American Food Crop Program and as director of the International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center, Mexico City.
In 1986 Borlaug created the World Food Prize as a way to honour individuals who had contributed to improving the availability and quality of food worldwide.
Aug., 2009, Burbank, Ill.), enjoyed a career in tap that spanned more than 80 years; he performed in early vaudeville circuits with Charles Cook in the dance duo Cook and Brown and as a member of the Original Copasetics.
By age 12 Brown was appearing with the traveling vaudeville group Mammy and Her Picks, and he soon teamed up with Cook.
Their comedic routine featured acrobatic choreography, with the impish Brown (standing at about 1. m [4 ft 9 in] tall) often being tossed around the stage by Cook.
In 1949 Brown became one of the founding members of the Original Copasetics dance group, which formed upon the death of Bill Robinson.
The troupe John Sundlof/Alamy American tap dancer Ernest ""Brownie” Brown brought the raw energy of improvisation to its engagements, often in small theatres, and showcased the individual styles of its star ensemble.
Brown and Cook were inducted into the American Tap Dance Foundation’s International Tap Dance Hall of Fame.
Owing in part to Brutus’s continued pressure on the International Olympic Committee, South Africa was suspended from the 1964 Olympic Games and later was officially expelled from the Olympics; the country did not compete again until 1992.
In 1963 his refusal to abide by the ban resulted in an 18-month prison term.
In 1983, after a protracted legal struggle, he won the right to remain in the United States as a political refugee.
Brutus’s first collection of poetry, Sirens, Knuckles, Boots , was published in Nigeria while he was in prison.
He assumed leadership of the Bissau branch of the PAIGC after his brother’s assassination in 1973 and became president when Guinea-Bissau gained independence a year later.
Deposed in 1980 in a coup d’etat led by Prime Minister Joao Bernardo Vieira , Cabral was briefly imprisoned before going into exile, first in Cuba and then in Portugal.
Dec., 2009, Caracas, Venez.), served as president of Venezuela and helped to establish democratic stability.
As COPEI's candidate for the presidency in 1947, Caldera made the first of four unsuccessful bids for the office.
Following the fall of a military dictatorship in 1958, he was one of the signatories to an agreement between the three largest political parties intended to ensure the soundness of the country’s democracy, in part by having the electoral victor share government positions with the other two parties.
During Caldera’s first term as president, he restored ties with the Soviet Union, Cuba, and Latin American military dictatorships (Argentina, Panama, and Peru) and granted amnesty to leftist revolutionaries, encouraging them to enter politics peacefully.
Calisher, the recipient of numerous O Henry shortstory awards, excelled in producing well-plotted, psychologically perceptive short fiction.
In 1993 Cardiff received the International Award from the American Society of Cinematographers, and two years later he was given a lifetime achievement award from the British Society of Cinematographers.
In 2001 he was granted an honorary Oscar for his artistic achievements in cinematography.
Carradine studied music and earned a living as a painter before following his father, John Carradine, into an acting career.
Following a stint in the army, he performed on Broadway and television before landing the role of Kwai Chang Caine in the surprise hit Rung Fu.
Carroll, Jim (JAMES DENNIS CARROLL), American author and rock musician (b.
Sept., 2009, Wilmington, N.C.), helped to curb the presence of the white supremacist Ku Klux Klan in the Carolinas through a series of truculent articles and editorials in the newspaper he published, the Tabor City Tribune.
For its efforts the Tabor City Tribune in 1953 earned a Pulitzer Prize for public service.
After leaving the newspaper in the 1970s, Carter wrote 22 books and scores of articles about the outdoors.
He was posthumously awarded the Orden del Sol, Peru’s highest honour for achievement.
Chambers, Marilyn (MARILYN ANN BRIGGS), American adult-film actress (b.
The hard-core film, for which she negotiated a payment of $25,000 and a percentage of the profits, was credited with establishing a mainstream market for pornography.
She went on to become a softand hard-core pornography star on film and video.
Nov., 2009, Washington, D.C.), was imprisoned for more than six years during China's Cultural Revolution.
In Life and Death in Shanghai , she bore eloquent witness to both her continued defiance and the severe hardships she had endured.
She was a widow when she was arrested, and upon her release she discovered that her only child had been killed by the Red Guards.
Chessex gained early recognition for his work, publishing a poetry collection at the age of 18, but he came to be known primarily for his prose, which he wrote in French.
He was also a painter, and his works were prominently exhibited in Switzerland.
Jan., 2009, Copenhagen, Den.), crafted linguistically sophisticated work that explores the interconnections of language, fiction, and reality.
She graduated from Vejle Gymnasium in 1954 and studied at Teachers’ College in Arhus.
While a student she began publishing poems and met the poet and critic Poul Borum, who was her mentor and husband.
She taught briefly at the College for Arts in Holbaek before devoting herself exclusively to writing.
Christensen’s early collections include Lys and Grces —translated within the same volume as Light and Grass —both of which explore the relationship of language to the natural world.
The publication of her long poem Det brought Christensen international acclaim.
Alfabet builds on her earlier analogies between language and physical reality by applying alphabetic and numeric structures, such as the Fibonacci numbers, as principles of creative order.
Christensen also wrote novels, short stories, essays, children’s stories, radio and stage plays, and opera librettos.
Clancy originally immigrated to the United States to become an actor, but instead he began performing in folk clubs with two of his brothers—Tom and Paddy—along with Makem.
Irish Songs of Rebellion and Come Fill Your Glass with Us, before reaching a wider audience with a television appearance in 1961 on The Ed Sullivan Show.
From 1973 Clancy pursued a solo career, starred in a Canadian TV program, and reunited as a duo with Makem.
Clancy made a comeback in 2005 and released his last album, The Wheels of Life, in 2008.
He served as a chaplain in the United States Navy, as dean of the Episcopal Theological School (now the Episcopal Divinity School) in Cambridge, Mass., and taught high-school dropouts in Harlem before taking the high-profile position of rector of St.
Coburn subsequently served as the 13th bishop of the Episcopal Diocese of Massachusetts until his retirement.
Crawford, Hank (BENNIE ROSS CRAWFORD, JR.), American jazz and blues musician (b.
Jan., 2009, Memphis), played alto saxophone with a fervently emotional sound and phrasing that fused gospel music with blues and also improvised fluently on standard material in a Charlie Parker-influenced style.
Crawford often worked with tenor saxophonist David Newman and coled combos with organist Jimmy McGriff.
Nov., 2009, Edinburgh, Scot.), became the first tuberculosis researcher to use a three-drug approach to the disease, which initially had proved resistant to drug treatment.
Crofton earned a bachelor’s degree and a doctorate in medicine from Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, before receiving further training at London’s St.
His tuberculosis studies began in 1946, when he joined a team conducting trials on the use of an antibiotic against the then often-fatal disease.
Cronkite, Walter (WALTER LELAND CRONKITE, Jr.), American journalist (b.
When the United States entered World War II in 1941, UP elevated Cronkite to overseas war correspondent, assigning him to cover fighting in the North Atlantic.
He was soon reassigned to London, where he reported on German bombing raids on the city.
He flew in bombing raids over Germany and in 1944 reported on the Allied landing on the beaches of Normandy, France, on D-Day.
After the war's conclusion, he remained in Europe, covering the Niirnberg trials and helping to set up numerous UP bureaus.
Throughout the 1950s Cronkite hosted the CBS shows You Are There, an imaginary broadcast of historical events; The Morning Show, which he cohosted with a puppet named Charlemagne; and a documentary series, The Twentieth Century.
Shortly after Cronkite took over the CBS Evening News from his predecessor, Douglas Edwards, the 15-minute broadcast was expanded to 30 minutes and became the first half-hour nightly news show on American network television.
From the CBS anchor chair, he reported on the assassination of United States Pres.
John F Kennedy, the Apollo 11 Moon landing , the Watergate Scandal , the resignation of United States Pres.
Richard M Nixon, the historic peace negotiations between Egyptian Pres.
Anwar el-Sadat and Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin, and the Vietnam War, which he famously denounced as unwinnable in 1968.
He won several Emmy and Peabody awards, and in 1981 United States Pres.
Cunningham, Merce (MERCIER Philip CUNNINGHAM), American dancer and choreographer (b.
Cunningham, who began instruction in dance at age 12, later studied for two years at the Cornish School in Seattle (there he met composer John Cage, who later became his collaborator and life partner); with Lester Horton at Mills College, Oakland, Calif. ; and at the Bennington School of the Dance , where Martha Graham invited him to join her group.
He also had already started collaborating with Cage and in 1944 had presented his first solo concert, with music by Cage.
Cunningham developed ""choreography by chance,” a technique in which selected isolated movements are assigned sequence by such random methods as tossing a coin.
The sequential arrangement of the component dances in Sixteen Dances for Soloist and Company of Three was thus determined, and in Suite by Chance the movement patterns themselves were so constructed.
Many of Cunningham's works were associated with Dadaist, Surrealist, and existentialist motifs.
In 1974 he abandoned the repertory that had been built over a 20year period for what he called ""Events,"" excerpts from old or new dances, sometimes two or more simultaneously.
Though he left the performance stage soon after Cage’s death in 1992, Cunningham continued to lead his dance company.
Dec., 2009, Belfast, N.Ire.), was the archbishop of Armagh and primate of all Ireland from 1990 until he retired as archbishop emeritus in 1996.
He publicly denounced as ""sinful” the violence advanced by the Irish Republican Army and censured Sinn Fein, the IRA's political wing, while he advocated peace and ecumenical dialogue with Protestants.
Daly, the son of a rural schoolteacher, studied classics and philosophy at St.
After his ordination , he studied scholastic philosophy at the Catholic Institute in Paris and in Connecticut before returning to the faculty at St.
He was appointed archbishop of Armagh in November 1990 and was elevated to cardinal the following June.
Although Daly was credited as a strong voice for peace, he was criticized for not being sufficiently proactive when the church faced a series of sex scandals.
In 1960 Dannenberg joined NASA, where he contributed to the development of the Saturn launch vehicle, which proved to be the mainstay of the Apollo and Skylab space programs.
Dannenberg retired from NASA in 1973; that same year he was awarded the NASA Exceptional Service Medal.
May 31, 2009, Pune, India), inspired women struggling against domestic and sexual oppression with her honest assessments of sexual desire and marital problems in more than 20 books.
Das was part of a generation of English-language Indian writers whose work centred on personal rather than colonial experiences, and her short stories, poetry, memoirs, and essays brought her both respect and notoriety.
She grew up primarily in Calcutta in a family of artists, where she felt ignored and unloved.
Das wrote in English and, under the pen name Madhavikutty, in the Malayalam language of southern India.
Dausset, Jean (JEAN-BAPTISTEGabriel-Joachim Dausset), French hematologist and immunologist (b.
Keystone/Getty Images French hematologist and immunologist Jean Dausset Oct., 1916, Toulouse, France—d.
June 6, 2009, Palma, Majorca, Spain), earned a share (with George Snell and Baruj Benacerraf) of the 1980 Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine for his studies on the genetic basis of the immunological reaction.
In 1984 Dausset cofounded the Human Polymorphism Study Center (CEPH; renamed the Fondation Jean Dausset-CEPH in 1993), from which he retired as president in 2003.
Davis excelled in track for Barberton High School, often scoring more points individually than entire opposing teams.
At the 1956 Olympic Games in Melbourne, he pulled away from teammates Eddie Southern and Josh Culbreath after the seventh hurdle to take the gold medal in the first United States sweep of the event since 1920.
In 1958 Davis won the James E Sullivan award as the country’s top amateur athlete.
Sept., 2009, Barcelona), was known for her elegant, focused, and subtle performances, especially of works by Mozart and by Spanish composers.
Her appearance onstage was often remarked upon because the unassuming and unusually petite pianist (well under 1. m tall) at times played virtuosic repertory that demanded a large reach; the shape of her hand and her assiduous stretching exercises, however, allowed her to span a 10th (for example, C to the next octaves E) and thus to master virtually any piano music.
De Larrocha, began taking piano lessons at age three when, at her own insistence, Frank Marshall, director of the Academia Marshall, reluctantly accepted her as a pupil.
Bach and Mozart at the International Exhibition in Barcelona in May 1929, made her first recording at age 9, and at age 11 was soloist in a Mozart concerto with the Madrid Symphony Orchestra.
Because she could not easily travel during the Spanish Civil War and World War II, de Larrocha did not make her first European tour until 1947.
She returned to Spain in 1959 to succeed her mentor as director of the Academia Marshall.
De Larrocha won four Grammy Awards (1974, 1975, 1988, and 1991), and in 1995 she was awarded the International Music Council/UNESCO Prize, the only Spanish artist to be so honoured.
Though Dearie was initially trained as a classical pianist, she gravitated to jazz while performing with a high-school band.
After embarking on a solo career, Dearie insisted that her nightclub audiences refrain from smoking during her performances so that she could preserve her tender voice.
DeCarava initially took up photography to record images he would use in his painting, but he came to prefer the camera to the brush.
In 1952 DeCarava was awarded a Guggenheim fellowship, the first African American photographer to receive the grant.
The monetary award allowed him to devote himself to photographing Harlem full time, and many of these images were compiled in the book The Sweet Flypaper of Life (1955; reissued 1988), with text written by Hughes.
He also taught at the Cooper Union School of Art and at Hunter College from 1975.
May 4, 2009, Santa Monica, Calif.), stole the show with broad and funny characterizations in dozens of movies, especially in association with director Mel Brooks and actor Burt Reynolds.
DeLuise began his career on the stage and in children’s television shows in the 1950s and became a staple on TV variety shows in the 1960s.
DeLuise also wrote two cookbooks as well as several books for children.
Des Forges, Alison (ALISON B LlEBHAFSKY), American human rights activist and historian (b.
Genocide in Rwanda ; she also sharply criticized the failure of leading countries to intervene in the tragedy.
Jan., 2009, Dakar, Senegal), was a protege of Leopold Sedar Senghor and served as the first prime minister of Senegal.
Dia, a Muslim, studied at the William Ponty School and worked as a teacher and journalist before entering politics in the early 1940s.
He represented Senegal in the French Senate and then served as vice president and president of Senegal’s Government Council before becoming prime minister in April 1959.
He retained the latter post after Senegal gained independence in 1960, but he was ousted in December 1962 by then president Senghor in a power struggle that Senghor denounced as an attempted constitutional coup.
In 1976 Dia, who had obtained an M.B.A. in 1969, took a post with the World Bank.
DiMaggio, Dom (DOMINIC PAUL DiMaggio; “The Little Professor”), American baseball player (b.
Feb., AP Boston Red Sox centrefielder Dom DiMaggio 1917, San Francisco, Calif.—d.
The following year DiMaggio batted safely in 34 consecutive games, establishing a franchise record; it remained unbroken at the time of his death.
July 5, 2009, Tokyo), broke ground with his best-selling book Amae no kozo (1971; The Anatomy of Dependence, 1973), as perhaps the first Japanese expert to analyze the Japanese idea of amae (""indulgent dependency"") and the first to exert wide influence on Western psychiatric thought.
In 1950 he traveled to the United States to study psychiatry, and the culture shock he experienced prompted his investigation of the Japanese psyche.
Doi’s groundbreaking theory centred on the concept of amae, which he defined as a culturally ingrained dependence on authority figures that retained a pervasive influence on all Japanese social structures.
July 10, 2009, Zurich, Switz.), was a leading figure for decades at opera houses around the world.
He also served as music director of the Australian Opera, where he conducted the first performance at the iconic Sydney Opera House.
Druon, Maurice-Samuel-RogerCharles French author, politician, and man of letters (b.
April 14, 2009, Paris), wrote plays, essays, and novels, including Les Grandes Families , which won the 1948 Prix Goncourt.
For many years, however, he was best known for co-writing (with his uncle novelist Joseph Kessel) the lyrics to “Chant des Mehdi Fedouach—AFP/Getty Images French man of letters Maurice Druon partisans,” the stirring unofficial anthem of France’s World War II Resistance movement.
In 1966 he was elected to the 40-member French Academy, of which he was perpetual secretary from 1985 to 1999.
Oct., 2009, Chicago, Ill.), created abstract works in clay and bronze that ranged from small ceramic pieces to large-scale public installations and murals.
Duckworth moved from Germany to England to study at the Liverpool School of Art; she spent her early years as an artist carving decorations on tombstones.
After enrolling at London’s Central School of Arts and Crafts in 1956, however, she turned her attention to ceramics and soon won recognition for pieces that abandoned the potter’s traditional utilitarian techniques for a Modernist-inspired sculptural approach.
Dunne entered show business as a stage manager and associate director of television shows in the 1950s.
He went on to become a film producer in the 1970s; his credits include The Boys in the Band ; The Panic in Needle Park , the screenplay of which was written by his brother, John Gregory Dunne, and his sister-in-law, Joan Didion; and Play It as It Lays , adapted from a novel by Didion.
By the mid-1970s, however, excessive drinking had extinguished his career.
Grenvilles , based on a 1955 murder, as well as People like Us , An Inconvenient Woman , and Another City, Not My Own , based on the Simpson trial.
A Father’s Account of the Trial of his Daughter’s Killer,"" was a highly personal narrative of the trial of the man who had in 1982 murdered Dunne's daughter, actress Dominique Dunne.
Founders and Sons , which broke ground by criticizing Israel’s founders for discounting the wishes of Arab residents; the work was considered the first critique of its kind written by an Israeli.
Elon moved to Palestine with his family in 1933 and grew up in Tel Aviv, learning English and Hebrew while speaking German at home.
He was well known for his criticism of Israel’s militancy, extremism, and relations with both Palestinians and poorer Middle Eastern Jews.
Elon published nine books on both Israeli and German history and social criticism.
Sept., 2009, Panama City), served as Panama’s president after the United States deposed the military strongman Manuel Noriega; he was credited with leading the country back to democracy.
Endara, as the candidate of a coalition opposed to the rule of Noriega, was elected president in May 1989, but Noriega annulled the election and installed his own candidate.
Endara led a protest demonstration during which he and his vice presidential candidates were beaten by Noriegas Dignity Battalions.
The United States invaded in December 1989, and Endara was sworn in as president.
Within two months he dissolved the armed forces and replaced them with a civilian police force.
Endara joined the political party of three-time president Arnulfo Arias in 1961 and took the post of minister of planning and economic policy in Arias’s third presidency in October 1968; 11 days later, however, Arias was overthrown for the third time by the military.
Endara was briefly imprisoned in 1971 before going into exile; he returned to Panama and politics in 1977.
March 25, 2009, Tokyo, Japan), attained a legendary reputation in gymnastics during the 1960s by winning seven Olympic medals, including five golds, as well as 10 world championship medals; the element on the high bar known as the “Endo roll” was named after him.
Endo led the Japanese teams that claimed the Olympic men’s gymnastics team titles in'1960, 1964, and 1968.
At the 1964 Games, held in his home country, he also won the individual all-around title and took gold on the parallel bars and silver in the floor exercise.
Endo returned to the Olympics in 1972 as coach of the Japanese men’s squad, which earned the country’s fourth consecutive team gold.
He was inducted into the International Gymnastics Hall of Fame in 1999.
May 20, 2009, Vancouver), was internationally recognized for his original and varied designs, which were characterized by his use of concrete, glass, and neutral colours and by the harmonious blending of buildings with their surroundings.
Erickson's design for Robson Square , a large civic centre in Vancouver, incorporated waterfalls, a roof garden, plazas, and stairs with integrated ramps.
Among his other notable works were the Canadian embassy in Washington, D.C., and the Museum of Glass in Tacoma, Wash.
He also designed the prizewinning Canadian pavilion at the Expo ’70 fair in Osaka, Japan.
May 13, 2009, Bogota, Colom.), was celebrated in Colombia as “el maestro” of the vallenato, an accordion-based folk music that originated in the country's Caribbean coastal region and that Escalona helped to make internationally popular; many of his songs were regarded as classics of the genre, including ""La casa en el aire” and “El manantial” , and were recorded by numerous singers and musicians.
July 15, 2009, near Nazaran, InRussian human rights activist Natalya Estemirova Dylan Martinez—Reuters/Landov gushetiya, Russia), documented illegal torture, kidnappings, and murders to give a voice and publicity to victims of political violence in the Russian republic of Chechnya.
Estemirova was born to a Chechen father and Russian mother and moved to Chechnya at age 19.
In 2000 she started officially working with the human rights group Memorial, investigating civilian deaths and kidnappings and presenting documentation to try to hold the Chechen and Russian governments accountable for violence in Chechnya.
Estemirova was very critical of the Chechen and Russian authorities and was personally threatened by Chechen Pres.
She recently had contributed to the 2009 Human Rights Watch report accusing the Chechen government of having burned the homes of more than two dozen families of suspected rebels.
Her murder came just hours after she had been kidnapped, and her death prompted Memorial to withdraw its services from Chechnya.
Evdokimova was the daughter of an American UN employee (through whom she qualified for United States citizenship) and her Bulgarian husband.
As a child growing up in Munich, Evdokimova studied ballet at the Bavarian State Opera before training at the Royal Ballet School in London under the direction of Maria Fay and in Copenhagen with Vera Volkova while dancing with the Royal Danish Ballet.
Known for her graceful refinement, Evdokimova excelled in coveted leading roles in such ballets as Giselle and La Sylphide and often partnered with Rudolf Nureyev.
Some of her greatest roles included the Gardener’s Daughter in Scarecrows, the title role in Cinderella, and the lead role in Verklarte Nacht.
April 28, 2009, Gloucester, Eng.), created verse based to a large extent on her everyday experiences as assistant instructor and head of English at Cheltenham Ladies’ College in Gloucestershire and then as a hospital receptionist in Bristol.
Her collections issued by the small publisher Peterloo Poets received widespread recognition.
Fanthorpe was the first woman nominee for the post of Oxford Professor of Poetry and in 1999 was considered a contender for poet laureate.
Fanthorpe was made CBE in 2001, and in 2003 she was awarded the Queen’s Gold Medal for Poetry.
Fawcett, Farrah (MARY FARRAH Leni Fawcett; Farrah Fawcett-Majors), American actress (b.
June 25, 2009, Santa Monica, Calif.), was a glamorous pinup girl whose feathered blond hair inspired the style adopted by legions of fans in the 1970s; her beguiling look vaulted her to superstardom in the hit television series Charlie’s Angels, in which she appeared , together with Kate Jackson and Jaclyn Smith, as a sexy private investigator.
There, under the guidance of actor Lee Majors, to whom she was married , Fawcett launched her career.
A poster of her clad in a wet onepiece red bathing suit and flashing her dazzling smile became iconic and sold some six million copies.
Following her string of 1980s films for TV, Fawcett gained kudos for her serious role in the big-screen film The Apostle , opposite Robert Duvall.
Fawehinmi, Gani (GANIYU OYESOLA FAWEHINMl), Nigerian human rights lawyer (b.
Sept., 2009, Lagos, Nigeria), devoted his life to fighting for the rights of the Nigerian people; as a tireless advocate for justice, he made many enemies among Nigeria’s military and civilian regimes.
He began practicing law in Lagos in 1965 and quickly became known as ""the people’s lawyer,” taking on such cases as the mysterious killing in 1986 of a newspaper editor (for which Fawehinmi blamed the military junta in power at that time) and often representing those who could not afford to pay for his services.
He also published several books and founded the Nigerian Weekly Law Reports.
Fawehinmi was awarded the Bruno Kreisky Prize in 1993 in honour of his work in advancing human rights.
In 2001 he was made a senior advocate of Nigeria, the country’s highest title in the legal profession.
Fehn’s corpus of completed works reflects the influence of such modernists as Mies van der Rohe, Le Corbusier, Louis I Kahn, and Frank Lloyd Wright but also particularizes the Scandinavian setting.
One of his first ongoing projects was the Handicraft Museum in Lillehammer, Nor. , but he first gained international acclaim in 1958 at the World Exhibition in Brussels, where his Norwegian Pavilion captured first prize in the design competition.
Fehn’s Nordic Pavilion at the 1962 Venice Biennale won the Golden Lion Award for national pavilions.
Feoktistov, Konstantin Petrovich, Russian spacecraft designer and cosmonaut (b.
When Voronezh was occupied in World War II, Feoktistov, who was then only 16 years old, worked as a scout for the Soviet army.
Shot through the neck, he feigned death and escaped from a burial trench.
He later attended Bauman Moscow Higher Technical School and worked as a factory engineer.
In 1955 he earned the equivalent of a Ph.D., and from that time he worked in the Soviet space program designing spacecraft and equipment.
During the flight of Voskhod 1 , Feoktistov carried out extensive scientific experiments and observations beyond the capability of previous cosmonauts.
After the flight he returned to engineering and played a major role in designing the Salyut and Mir space stations.
Sept., 2009, Longboat Key, Fla.), performed with Lou Teicher (who died in 2008) in the popular two-piano act Ferrante & Teicher.
April 13, 2009, Northborough, Mass.), had a phenomenal rookie year as a pitcher for Major League Baseball’s Detroit Tigers in 1976 and a quirky approach to the game that endeared him to fans.
His won-lost record that season was 19-9, and he had an earned run average of 2.34 and 97 strikeouts.
Fidrych was named the American League Rookie of the Year and was the starting pitcher for the All-Star game.
His career was cut short, however, by a knee injury in spring training in 1977, followed by a rotator cuff injury in an early season game that was not diagnosed until 1985.
Flindt, Flemming, Danish ballet dancer, choreographer, and company director (b.
March 3, 2009, Sarasota, Fla.), shocked audiences with his audacious stagings, dark themes, and startling choreography; his first and best-known ballet, The Lesson (1963; first performed on television as Enetime), was an adaptation of a Eugene Ionesco story and depicts a power-crazed ballet teacher as he abuses and murders female students who fail to meet his exacting standards.
Several of Flindt’s other ballets featured nudity, notably the Ionesco-inspired The Triumph of Death and Salome ; he later created such characterbased ballets as The Overcoat and Death in Venice for the aging Rudolf Nureyev.
Flindt studied with the Royal Danish Ballet and in 1955 joined the RDB as a soloist.
He excelled at demanding virtuoso leading roles with the RDB and other ballet troupes, including the Paris Opera Ballet , before turning to choreography.
As RDB artistic director , he introduced modern new productions to the repertoire and worked to broaden the company’s appeal.
Flindt and his ballerina wife , Vivi Flindt , formed their own short-lived ballet company before settling in Texas, where he was artistic director of the Dallas Ballet.
Foote, Horton (ALBERT HORTON Foote, Jr.), American playwright and screenwriter (b.
March 4, 2009, Hartford, Michael Rougier—Time Life Pictures/Getty Images American playwright Horton Foote Conn.), evoked American life in beautifully observed minimal stories frequently set in the early 20th century in the fictional small town of Harrison, Texas.
Foote’s best-known work, The Trip to Bountiful, was written as a television play and broadcast in 1953; later that year it was staged on Broadway, and in 1985 it was produced as a film, for which Foote also wrote the Oscar-nominated screenplay.
His 1954 play The Travelling Lady, with his screenplay, became the film Baby, the Rain Must Fall in 1965.
He wrote an acclaimed nine-play cycle called The Orphan's Home , and he was honoured with a Pulitzer Prize for drama in 1995 for The Young Man from Atlanta.
Foss published his first work at age 15, and in 1945 he became the youngest composer to have won a Guggenheim fellowship.
Foss’s early works, which include symphonic music (Ode; first performed in 1945), cantatas, and chamber music, as well as a ballet score ( Gift of the Magi, 1945), were neoclassical— tonal and well-organized in harmony and counterpoint.
An opera, Griffelkin , was commissioned by the National Broadcasting Company and first performed on television.
His later chamber pieces, including Echoi and Elytres , were considered avant-garde, ordering musical events by means of chance operations and leaving many decisions about the performance to the performers.
March 25, 2009, Durham, N.C.), was noted for his scholarly reappraisal of the American Civil War era and the importance of the black struggle in shaping modern American identity.
He also helped to fashion the legal brief that led to the historic Supreme Court decision outlawing public school segregation, Brown Board of Education of Topeka , and was instrumental in the development of African American studies programs at colleges and universities.
Bill Clinton honoured Franklin with the Presidential Medal of Freedom; two years later Clinton appointed the scholar to the seven-member Race Initiative Advisory Board.
While completing her studies in philosophy and English literature at Hofstra College, Hempstead, Long Island, N.Y., she married Robert French, whom she supported while he completed his law degree.
The following year French received a B.A. from Hofstra, and she later went on to earn an M.A. there.
As French pursued a writing career, her marriage failed, and the couple divorced in 1967.
After the release of The Women’s Room, which sold more than 20 million copies and was translated into 20 languages, an eponymous television movie based on the novel debuted in 1980.
A History of Women and a number of essays and articles written under the pseudonym Mara Solwoska.
The principle of the organization was based on sweat equity—involving future homeowners in the construction of their own homes.
Manual labour was provided by thousands of support volunteers, including celebrities and United States Presidents Jimmy Carter and Bill Clinton; the latter awarded Fuller the Presidential Medal of Freedom.
In 2005 Fuller resigned from Habitat’s board of directors to launch a new organization, the Fuller Center for Housing.
May 19, 2009, Seattle, Wash.), shared, with Louis J Ignarro and Ferid Murad, the 1998 Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine for the discovery that nitric oxide acts as a signaling molecule in the cardiovascular system.
Their combined work uncovered an entirely new mechanism by which blood vessels in the body relax and widen.
In the work for which he shared the Nobel Prize, Furchgott demonstrated that cells in the endothelium, or inner lining, of blood vessels produce an unknown signaling molecule.
The molecule, which he named endothelium-derived relaxing factor , signals smooth muscle cells in blood vessel walls to relax, dilating the vessels.
Furchgott also received the Albert Lasker Basic Medical Research Award.
Gaidar, Yegor Timurovich, Russian economist and government official (b.
Dec., 2009, Odintsovo, Russia), instituted sweeping economic reforms in the early days of post-Soviet Russia that aided the country’s transition from communism to capitalism.
Shortly before the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991, he was appointed deputy prime minister and economics minister under Pres.
In June 1992 Gaidar was named acting prime minister, though he was never approved by the legislature and was eventually ousted.
Sept., 2009, Beverly Hills, Calif.), wrote comedy hits for the stage, screen, and television but was best known for creating the pilot for the enormously influential TV smash hit program M*A*S*H, which he adapted from Robert Altman’s 1970 blockbuster film.
During M*A*S*H’ s 11-year TV run (Gelbart remained involved for 4), the show blended comedy and tragedy while following the lives of staff working in a Korean War military field hospital.
Gelbart’s credits as a screenwriter include The Notorious Landlady , Oh, God! , and Tootsie ; the latter two garnered him Academy Award nominations.
Oct., 2009, New Brunswick, N.J.), was a pioneer in several fields of mathematics; his work in integral geometry provided the mathematical foundations for computed tomography , and his representation theory became the foundation used by physicists working with quantum mechanics.
Among his most important results are the Gelfand representation of a Banach algebra, the Gelfand-Naimark theorem on C*-algebras, and the BernsteinGelfand-Gelfand resolution for representation of simple Lie groups.
Tudy in the County of Cornwall; “Steady Eddie”), British economist and central banker (b.
Tudy, Cornwall, Eng.), as the outspoken inflation-fighting governor of the Bank of England , guided the U.K. central bank to independence and thus full control over the country’s monetary policy without undue political influence from the elected government.
After studying economics at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, George served briefly in the Royal Air Force.
He joined the BOE in 1962 and worked mainly in its international section.
He was seconded to the Bank of International Settlements in the mid-1960s and the International Monetary Fund in the early 1970s.
George was promoted to BOE executive director in 1982 and to deputy governor in 1990.
In 1991 George faced criticism for his role in the collapse of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International when an official inquiry uncovered a series of failures in the BOE’s systems of supervision and communication.
He reestablished his reputation by his adept handling of the U.K.’s embarrassing withdrawal from the European exchange-rate mechanism in September 1992.
Sept., 2009, Malibu, Calif.), won audiences over with his sly deadpan delivery as a placid reciter of ridiculous self-penned poetry in the 1960s television variety show Rowan & Martin’s Laugh-in.
Nov., 2009, Moscow), won the Nobel Prize for Physics in 2003 for his pioneering work in the 1950s on superconductivity.
He shared the award with Alexey A Abrikosov of Russia and Anthony J Leggett of Great Britain.
Ginzburg was also noted for his work on theories of radio wave propagation, radio astronomy, and the origin of cosmic rays.
In addition, he was a member of the team that worked under physicist Igor Tamm to develop the first Soviet thermonuclear bomb; the bomb's design, first proposed by Andrey Sakharov in 1948 and refined by Ginzburg in 1949, was tested on Aug.
Ginzburg received the State Prize of the Soviet Union in 1953 and the Lenin Prize in 1966.
March 22, 2009, Upshire, Essex, Eng.), turned a stint in 2002 on the British reality TV show Big Brother into a lucrative highprofile public life, which was abruptly cut short by her equally public struggle with cervical cancer.
As a Jewish child in Nazi Germany, Gottschalk was witness to pervasive anti-Semitic intimidation, and in 1939 he fled with his family to the United States He studied at Brooklyn College and Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion, which, two years after his rabbinical ordination , assigned him to direct its Los Angeles branch.
Six years later he was named president of Hebrew Union, where he preserved its reputation as the intellectual locus of Judaism’s liberal Reform movement until his retirement in 2000.
May 27, 2009, San Diego, Calif.), was corecipient (with the American economist Robert F Engle) of the Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences in 2003 for his development of techniques for analyzing time series data with common trends.
Granger’s books cover such subjects as time series analysis and forecasting, statistical theory, and applied statistics.
In his seminal work, conducted in the 1970s and '80s, he developed concepts and analytic methods to establish meaningful relationships between nonstationary variables, such as exchange rates and inflation rates.
Fundamental to his methods was his discovery that a specific combination of two or more nonstationary time series could be stationary, a combination for which he invented the term cointegration.
Through his cointegration analysis, Granger showed that the dynamics in exchange rates and prices, for example, are driven by a tendency to smooth out deviations from the long-run equilibrium exchange rate and short-run fluctuations around the adjustment path.
Despite spending most of his career in the U.S., Granger retained his British citizenship and was granted a knighthood in 2005.
March 22, 2009, San Francisco, Calif.), spent most of his lifetime gathering and preserving the songs, customs, beliefs, rituals, craft, and stories associated with union labourers, what he coined ""laborlore,” and successfully lobbied the United States Congress in the passage of the American Folklife Preservation Act, which resulted in the creation of the American Folklife Center at the Library of Congress.
Grene was known for her innovative theories on the nature of the scientific study of life and was one of the first to offer an interpretation of the philosophical meaning of random events that occur in the course of evolution.
She also addressed the philosophical impacts of the inevitable increase in the understanding of evolutionary science and contributed to new ideas in epistemology—the philosophy of the nature of knowledge.
Grene received a degree in zoology from Wellesley College and a Ph.D. in philosophy from Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Mass.
His meteoric rise to prominence began with the construction of his parents' home in Amagansett, N.Y., completed in 1966.
Gwathmey Siegel & Associates, the firm that he founded in 1968 with fellow architect Robert Siegel, was noted for bridging the divide between small and large projects, creating massive public buildings (especially museums) as well as private homes for exclusive clients.
Hakim, ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-, Iraqi political leader (b.50, Al-Najaf, Iraq—d.
Aug., 2009, Tehran, Iran), became head of Iraq’s largest Shi'ite political party after years of opposing the regime of Saddam Hussein.
In Iran, Hakim and his brother Ayatollah Muhammad Baqir alHakim established the Supreme Council for the Islamic Revolution in Iraq.
While his brother chaired the organization, Hakim commanded its military arm, the Badr Organization, which fought with Iran in the Iran-Iraq War.
Both brothers returned to Iraq shortly after the U.S.-led invasion in 2003.
In July of that year, Hakim became a member of the Iraqi Governing Behrouz Mehri—AFP/Getty Images Iraqi political leader Abd al-Aziz al-Hakim Council appointed by the Coalition Provisional Authority.
When his brother was killed by a car bomb in August, Hakim took over the leadership of the Supreme Council for the Islamic Revolution in Iraq (from 2007, the Islamic Supreme Council of Iraq) and built the Shi'ite political coalition the United Iraqi Alliance, which came to power in the December 2005 elections for the Transitional National Assembly.
Harmel, Pierre (PIERRE-CHARLESJose-Marie Harmel), Belgian statesman (b.
March 16, 1911, Uccle, Belg.— Nov., 2009, Brussels, Belg.), was briefly prime minister of Belgium , but he was best known for promoting NATO as a peacekeeping organization in a document that became known as the Harmel doctrine.
The influence of this doctrine was felt in the introduction of the 1975 Helsinki Accords, which aided in the easing of relations between the Communist bloc and the West.
Harmel began his career as a lawyer and professor before entering the political realm as a UN delegate in 1949.
He held a number of governmental posts before serving an eightmonth term as prime minister.
It was in his role as Belgium’s foreign minister that he began to examine NATO and its objectives.
His career also included stints as speaker of the Belgian Senate and minister of state.
Harvey’s no-nonsense approach to news and editorials, laced with long pauses for suspense, along with the genuine warmth and humour that he brought to human-interest stories, created a personal connection with listeners.
By 1976 Harvey had begun producing a new show, The Rest of the Story, which featured short biographical accounts of famous people whose identities were not revealed until the end of the program.
Aside from a brief hiatus in 2001 due to a throat malady, he continued to broadcast until shortly before his death.
Dec., 2009, Oslo, Nor.), played a prominent role in the Norwegian resistance during World War II and later captured the public's imagination as a member of the fabled Kon-Tiki expedition.
Haugland’s feats of bravado earned him numerous decorations, including Norway’s War Cross with Sword and Britain's Distinguished Service Order.
Following the war, he was a radio operator on the Kon-Tiki, a balsa-wood raft that sailed from Peru to French Polynesia to test a theory about pre-Columbian migration patterns.
May 16, 2009, Tokyo, Japan), as governor of the Bank of Japan , introduced striking reform to the Japanese banking system in a bid to revive the country’s slumping economy.
He left the bank in 1981 and assumed a position as senior managing director at Nissho Iwai Corp., a Japanese trading firm, becoming president of the corporation three years later and then presiding as chairman.
In his term as governor of the BOJ, Hayami cut interest rates to zero and led the bank to buy $24 billion in stock holdings from large commercial banks in Japan.
He directed its first televised evening news broadcast, with Douglas Edwards , and Edward R Murrow’s See It Now news show.
He also served as the first executive producer of the CBS Evening News featuring Walter Cronkite , and he produced the first-ever televised United States presidential debate—a forum for Richard M Nixon and John F Kennedy.
Other credits include screenplays written under the pseudonym Edmond Dantes.
His style was marked by legible letters filled with colourful designs and often an inclusion of rock music lyrics.
He began spray painting, or tagging, at age 14, and in 1975 a poster for the Broadway musical The Wiz inspired his name and trademark tag.
In the mid-1980s Iz retired to Florida, where he suffered from financial troubles and drug abuse, but in the 1990s he resumed work in spaces approved for graffiti.
June 25, 2009, Los Angeles, Calif.), was the most popular entertainer in the world in the early and mid-1980s.
Jackson began his lifelong performance career as the youngest and most talented of five brothers known as the Jackson 5.
Michael also topped the pop charts as a solo performer with “Ben,” and “Rockin’ Robin” reached number two on the charts.
As Michael matured, his voice changed, family tensions arose, and a contract standoff ensued.
Michael’s first solo effort with Epic, Off the Wall , exceeded all expectations and became the best-selling album of the year (it had since sold more than 20 million copies) and yielded the international hit singles ""Don’t Stop 'til You Get Enough” and ""Rock with You,” both of which showcased Jackson’s energetic style and capitalized on the contemporary disco dance fad.
Three years later he returned with Thriller, a tour de force that featured an array of guest stars and elevated him to a worldwide superstar.
The album’s second single, ""Billie Jean,” an electrifying dance track and the vehicle for Jackson’s trademark ""moonwalk” dance, topped the pop charts, as did ""Beat It,” which featured a raucous solo from famed guitarist Eddie Van Halen.
Moreover, “Beat It” helped to break down the artificial barriers between black and white artists on the radio and in the emerging format of television music videos, while the electrifying 14-minute “Thriller” video became a cultural icon and set a new standard for production values in the genre.
His much-anticipated Victory reunion tour with his brothers was one of the most popular concert events of 1984.
Further solo albums—notably Bad and Dangerous —solidified ""Jacko’s” dominance in pop music.
In 2001 he was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame; the Jackson 5 had been inducted in 1997.
Despite his professional success, Jackson’s eccentric, secluded lifestyle grew increasingly controversial in later years, clouded by allegations of child molestation in 1993, two brief marriages (one to Lisa Marie Presley and the other to Debbie Rowe , the mother of two of his three children), an arrest on child molestation charges in 2003, and finally, a financial collapse that nearly resulted in the loss of his lavish Neverland ranch.
Jagan, Janet (Janet Rosalie Rosenberg), American-born Guyanese politician (b.
March 28, 2009, Georgetown, Guyana), as president of Guyana from Dec., 1997, to Aug., 1999, was the country’s first white president and the first elected female president in South America.
She was born into a middleclass Jewish family and attended college in Michigan.
In 1942, while working as a student nurse in Chicago, she met Cheddi Jagan, a dentistry student from what was then British Guiana.
The following year they were married and moved to Georgetown, British Guiana, where he set up a dental practice.
She officially became a citizen of Guyana that year, having been stripped of her United States citizenship more than 20 years earlier because of her Marxist political views.
While her husband served as prime minister and president , Jagan held several cabinet posts and served in the parliament.
After her husband died in office, Jagan, although hesitant at first to run for the presidency, accepted the PPP's nomination.
Despite criticisms of her ethnicity and age, she defeated People’s National Congress leader Desmond Hoyte in the election on Dec., 1997.
Hoyte’s supporters protested the result so vehemently that, in an effort to quell the unrest, Jagan and Hoyte reached an agreement in January 1998 to hold new elections in 2000, two years earlier than required.
In July 1999 Jagan suffered a mild heart attack, and the following month she stepped down.
Three years later she was one of the 13 founding members of the Ladies Professional Golf Association ; she went on to compete in LPGA events until 1970.
As a professional, Jameson won a total of 12 tournaments; she also won 14 amateur titles, including United States amateur championships in 1939 and 1940.
In 1951 she was inducted into the Hall of Fame of Women’s Golf, and in 1967 she was one of the six original inductees of the LPGA Tour Hall of Fame.
In addition, in 1999 Jameson was named to the Women’s Sports Foundation Hall of Fame.
For many people, however, his best-known work was the balalaika-infused song “Lara’s Theme,” which was drawn from the Doctor Zhivago score.
Jarre studied engineering at the Sorbonne before transferring to the Paris Conservatory, and he served as music director for the Theatre National Populaire for more than a decade.
His first movie sound track was for the short documentary Hotel des Invalides , and he was soon in demand by filmmakers on both sides of the Atlantic.
Although Jarre was especially known for his lush melodies, he was sensitive to the needs of the script and often incorporated exotic motifs, ethnic instruments, and electronic effects to enhance the drama onscreen.
Jarre was an officer of the Legion of Honour, and in February 2009 he was awarded the Berlin Film Festival’s Golden Bear for Lifetime Achievement.
Jeanne-Claude (JEANNE-CLAUDE DeNAT DE GUILLEBON), French environmental artist (b.
JeanneClaude was born in Morocco, where her father was a general in the French army.
In 1958 she met Christo Javacheff, who was already working in Paris as an artist; the next year she left her then husband to marry Christo.
In an ambitious 1991 project, the couple installed 1,340 giant blue umbrellas across the Sato River valley in Japan and 1,760 giant yellow ones in Tejon Pass, California.
He won the European heavyweight title in 1956 against Francesco Cavicchi, and in 1958 he scored a one-round knockout over Eddie Machen, a leading American heavyweight, before facing Patterson the next year.
Johansson won the European heavyweight championship again in 1962 against Dick Richardson, forfeited the title in 1963 for failing to defend it, and then retired in 1963 with a record of 26 wins and 2 losses—to Patterson, the only defeats in his professional career.
April 21, 2009, London, Eng.), as general secretary of the Transport and General Workers' Union and thus a central figure in the Trade Unions Congress , guided one of the world’s largest trade unions, which in 1978 had a membership of some two million workers.
Jones's power was so great, especially during Labour Prime Minister Harold Wilson’s second government , that he earned the nickname ""Emperor Jones” for his extraordinary control of pro-labour regulations and parliamentary legislation.
In the 1970s Jones supported the controversial Social Contract, which proffered wage restraints in partnership with the government, and he deplored the widespread strikes during the socalled Winter of Discontent that led to the election in 1979 of Conservative Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher.
Jones was made MBE in 1950 and appointed a Companion of Honour in 1978.
Dec., 2009, Malibu, Calif.), lit up movie screens in the 1940s and ’50s with her luminous performances in roles that alternated between fresh-faced naifs and tempestuous vixens.
March 24, 2009, Dearborn, Mich.), provided his characteristic hard-driving beat for numerous Motown hits while playing as a member of the label’s house studio band, the Funk Brothers.
Jones’s interest in music began during his troubled teenage years while at the Moore School for Boys, where he first experimented with the trombone until he found his true calling as a drummer.
During the early 1960s Jones toured with Marvin Gaye’s band, but his biggest success came when he was recruited by Motown to play drums for the Funk Brothers.
Although the studio musicians were not originally credited for their work, Jones and others were finally recognized for their contributions in the documentary film Standing in the Shadows of Motown and were honoured in 2004 with a Grammy Award for lifetime achievement.
Jan., 2009, Prague), created futuristic organically inspired designs that challenged some of the most basic ideas of modern architecture.
His best-known designs were for the spaceshiplike semimonocoque Media Centre at Lord’s Cricket Ground in London, which in 1999 won the Royal Institute of British Architects Stirling Prize, and the aluminum-covered, virtually windowless Selfridges department store in Birmingham, Eng., which won a RIBA Award in 2004.
In 2007 Kaplicky’s undulating “blob"" design won the international competition to build a Czech National Library, but the Czech government refused to fund the project.
Katzir, Ephraim (EPHRAIM KATCHALSKl), Russian-born Israeli scientist and politician (b.
May 30, 2009, Rehovot, Israel), as the fourth president of Israel , attempted to close the wide Ya’akov Sa'ar—GPO/Getty Images Israeli scientist and politician Ephraim Katzir gap that existed in education and social welfare between Sephardic and Oriental Jews and Ashkenazic Jews and to promote understanding between Israeli Jews and their Arab neighbours.
In 1949 Katzir was appointed acting head of the department of biophysics in the Weizmann Institute of Science at Rehovot, and he later became its director.
A recognized authority on proteins, he was the first Israeli elected to the United States National Academy of Sciences.
From 1966 to 1968 he was chief scientific adviser to the Israeli Ministry of Defense.
March 24, 2009, Swifton), was a slugging third baseman who played for 15 seasons for a succession of teams in the American League , including the Philadelphia Athletics, the Detroit Tigers, the Boston Red Sox, the Chicago White Sox, and the Baltimore Orioles, and amassed a career batting average of .306; in each year from 1946 to 1953 he topped .300, and in 1949 he edged out Ted Williams for the AL batting title.
Kell, who also was named to 10 AL All-Star teams, was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1983.
After he retired as a player, he served (1959-96, with the exception of 1964) as the easygoing radio and television announcer for the Tigers.
The son of a cowman, he marked his debut as a fiction writer with Hot Iron , about cattle ranching in Texas, and his many subsequent novels earned him numerous prizes, including the National Cowboy Hall of Fame’s Western Heritage Award and the Western Writers of America’s Spur Award ; in 1995 the latter group also voted him the best western author of all time.
May 2, 2009, Bethesda, Md.), after an illustrious career with the American Football League , became one of the country’s leading conservative politicians following his election in 1970 to the United States House of Representatives; he represented suburban Buffalo, N.Y., for nine terms and was the Republican nominee for vice president in 1996.
He led the Bills to the AFL championship in 1964 and again in 1965, when he also won the league’s most valuable player award.
He was named seven times to the AFL All-Star team and retired from the game in 1969 as the AFL's all-time leader in passing yards with 21,130.
He lost his job when he was arrested on suspicion of planning to assassinate a government minister who was promoting a ban on driving on the Sabbath.
Kenan was acquitted and in 1954 moved to Paris, where he worked as a sculptor, wrote plays, and contributed articles to French, Israeli, and American publications.
Returning to Israel in 1962, he composed a column for the newspaper Yedioth Aharonoth and wrote more than a dozen volumes of Hebrew-language fiction, poetry, and essays.
Kenan was a longtime supporter of the so-called two-state solution and in 1970 cofounded the Israeli-Palestinian Council.
Kennedy, the youngest child of Rose and Joseph P Kennedy and the last surviving brother of Pres.
John F Kennedy, was also a noteworthy spokesman for the policies that had come to be associated with his family name—i.e., support for social welfare legislation and active participation in world affairs.
He campaigned for his brother John in the 1960 presidential race and two years later was elected to the president's former Senate seat representing Massachusetts.
Although an injury prevented him from campaigning actively for reelection in 1964, Kennedy was swept back into office for a full six-year term by a landslide vote.
Early in 1969 he was elected Senate majority whip, and he became an early front-runner for the next Democratic presidential nomination.
Then, on the night of July 18, 1969, he accidentally drove his car off an unmarked bridge on Chappaquiddick IsOffice of United States Senator Edward M Kennedy American political icon Ted Kennedy land, near Martha’s Vineyard, Massachusetts, and his companion in the car, 28-year-old Mary Jo Kopechne, was drowned.
Although he was reelected to the Senate in 1970, he announced that he would not seek the presidency in 1972.
He was a serious contender for the presidential nomination again in 1980 but withdrew from the race during the convention.
Kennedy won reelection to eight full terms as senator, the last time in 2006, and became known as the “lion of the Senate,” serving as a leading advocate for many liberal causes, including voting rights, fair housing, consumer protection, and national health insurance.
On March 4, 2009, he was granted an honorary British knighthood , and on August 12 he was awarded the United States Presidential Medal of Freedom.
Kennedy, Sir Ludovic Henry Coverley, Scottish broadcaster and investigative journalist (b.
Oct., 2009, Salisbury, Eng.), campaigned tirelessly against injustice, most notably in the areas of state-ordered execution and wrongful imprisonment.
His efforts in several high-profile cases contributed to the governments abolishment of capital punishment in Britain.
Kennedy, Ted (THEODORE KENNEDY; ""Teeder”), Canadian ice hockey player (b.
He made the AllStar team five times and in 1955 was awarded the Hart Memorial Trophy as the NHL’s most valuable player.
April 14, 1922, Shibpur, East Bengal, British India [now in Bangladesh]—d.
June 18, 2009, San Anselmo, Calif.), brought classical Indian music to Western audiences as one of the world’s most honoured sarod players and composers.
Khan began serious study of music at age three and became an ustad of the fretless 25-stringed sarod.
He was the music director of All-India Radio in Lucknow, broadcasting as a solo artist and composing for orchestras, before becoming a maharaja’s court musician in 1943.
As a composer he was known for his film scores—notably for Satyajit Ray’s Devi and the Ismail Merchant-James Ivory production The Householder —and as the creator of many ragas.
April 27, 2009, Bangalore, India), was a distinguished character actor, but he was best remembered as a heroic action star in a series of Bollywood “curry westerns” that earned him comparisons to American actor Clint Eastwood.
Khan, the son of a Pathan Afghani immigrant and his Iranian wife, moved to Bombay as a youth to pursue an acting career.
Khan also served as producer and director on some of his most accomplished films, notably the Godfatherinspired hit Dhannatma , the first Hindi-language movie filmed on location in Afghanistan; Qurbani ; Janbaaz ; Dayavan ; and Janasheen , which garnered his third Filmfare acting nomination.
Khatibi, Abdelkebir, Moroccan educator, literary critic, and novelist (b.38, El Jadida, Mor.—d.
March 16, 2009, Rabat, Mor.), was a member of the angry young generation of the 1960s.
The abstruse prose employed by this young generation of Maghribian authors reflected the desire to reject French culture by destroying and re-creating the French language, thus attacking the heart of the culture from within, with what Khatibi called a litterature sauvage.
After completing his secondary education in Morocco, Khatibi pursued a degree in sociology at the Sorbonne in Paris.
In his doctoral dissertation, Le Roman maghrebin , he raised the question of how the committed writer can avoid becoming a propagandist, especially in a postrevolutionary society.
His first novel, La Memoire tatouee , deals semiautobiographically with the typically Maghribian themes of acculturation and decolonization.
Two plays, La Mort des artistes and Le Prophete voile , and the novel Le Livre du sang , demonstrate his theoretical approach to literature.
Jan., 1924?, Mokp'o, Haeui Island, Korea [now in South Cholla province, S.Kor.]—d.
Aug., 2009, Seoul, S.Kor.), was a charismatic political opposition leader for more than three decades before serving as South Korean president , becoming the first opposition leader to win election to that office; Kim had lost three previous presidential bids.
During his administration he was awarded the Nobel Prize for Peace for his efforts to restore democracy in South Korea and to improve relations with North Korea.
Kim’s ""sunshine” policy allowed South Koreans to visit relatives in the North and eased rules governing South Korean investment in the country.
Kim became a wealthy businessman after taking over a Japanese-owned shipping company.
During the Korean War (though he did not serve in the military and confessed to having adjusted his birthdate to Dec. 3, 1925, to avoid conscription), he was captured by communist forces but managed to escape.
After five attempts to win elective office, Kim finally won a seat in the National Assembly, but the election was nullified following a military coup led by Major Gen.
In 1973 he was kidnapped from his hotel in Tokyo by agents of the Korean Central Intelligence Agency and was returned forcibly to South Korea, where he was placed under house arrest.
In 1976 Kim was again arrested, but he was released from house arrest in 1979 only to be arrested in May 1980 on charges of sedition and conspiracy; he was sentenced to death, but Pres.
Chun DooHwan commuted the sentence to life imprisonment and later to 20 years.
He was allowed in 1982 to seek medical treatment in the U.S., but on his return home in 1985, he was placed under house arrest.
Kim called for democracy and denounced members of the government who trampled on the rights of citizens.
In 1987 he allowed student demonstrators to take refuge in Seoul’s main cathedral and refused to allow military authorities to seize the students.
Kim was ordained a priest in 1951, became bishop of Masan in 1966 and archbishop of Seoul in 1968, and was elevated to cardinal in 1969.
July 4, 2009, Budapest, Hung.), led freedom fighters in the brief 1956 Hungarian uprising against Soviet forces.
He was captured by the Soviet army, but he escaped and walked back to Hungary.
After having been promoted to general in 1950, he was arrested and given a death sentence on charges of subversion, which were widely believed to have been fabricated by the Hungarian Stalinist government.
His sentence was changed to hard labour for life, but in 1956 he was one of many prisoners granted parole in an attempt to stem rising popular unrest regarding Soviet influence.
Still weak from prison, Kiraly was appointed commander in chief of the National Guard and chairman of the Revolutionary Council for National Defense by Prime Minister Imre Nagy, who was negotiating for Soviet withdrawal from Hungary.
Kiraly organized civilians into a fighting force, an act of political significance in spite of the inadequacy of Hungarian weaponry.
The resistance lasted approximately two weeks; Soviet tanks surrounded Budapest on Nov., 1956, and Kiraly and his forces fled over the Austrian border.
Kiraly spent the next 33 years in the United States After the collapse of the communist government, he returned to Hungary, where he served in the National Assembly.
He studied philosophy at the Universities of Lodz and Warsaw (Ph.D., 1953), where he taught and served as chair of the department of the history of philosophy until 1968.
When he was sent to Moscow for a course for promising intellectuals, however, he became disenchanted with the Soviet Marxist system.
Upon his return home, he joined the movement for democratization that led to the Polish workers’ uprising of 1956.
His revisionist critique of Joseph Stalin, What Is Socialism? , was officially banned in Poland but was widely circulated nonetheless.
A speech given by Kolakowski on the 10th anniversary of the uprising led to his expulsion from the PUWP; he also was dismissed from his professorship and soon afterward left Poland.
In 1970 he accepted a senior research fellowship at All Souls College, Oxford, where he remained until his retirement in 1995.
He also wrote on religion and the spiritual basis of culture and was the author of three plays and three volumes of stories.
Among Kolakowski’s many honours were the Erasmus Prize , the Order of the White Eagle (Poland’s highest honour; 1998), and the first John W Kluge Prize for Lifetime Achievement in the Humanities and Social Sciences, awarded by the United States Library of Congress in 2003.
Feb., 2009, Newtown Square, Pa.), was a pioneering biomedical engineer who invented the kidney dialysis machine and led the medical team that on Dec., 1982, implanted the first artificial human heart in Barney Clark.
His first artificial heart was implanted in a dog in 1957 and kept the animal alive for 90 minutes.
In addition, Kolff designed other artificial organs, including eyes, ears, and limbs, until his retirement in 1997.
Sept., 2009, Los Angeles, Calif.), won the AllEngland singles and men’s doubles , captured the United States singles , men’s doubles , and mixed doubles titles, and in 1946 and 1947 was on the victorious American Davis Cup teams.
Bothered by an arthritic back from 1952, Kramer eventually ceased competing and became a tennis promoter.
He was instrumental in the organization of the Association of Tennis Professionals, a union for men players, and became its first executive director.
Dec., 2009, Seattle, Wash.), was awarded (with Edmond H Fischer) the 1992 Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine.
Krebs and Fischer discovered reversible protein phosphorylation, which is a biochemical process that regulates the activities of proteins in cells and thus governs countless processes that are necessary for life.
Louis, Mo., before conducting research there under the biochemists Carl and Gerty Cori.
Krebs and Fischer also showed that phosphorylase is inactivated by the removal of a phosphate group; this process is catalyzed by enzymes called phosphatases.
Sept., 2009, Arlington, Va.), was best known as an intellectual founder and leader of the neoconservative movement in the United States.
He married Gertrude Himmelfarb, later a distinguished historian, in 1942.
He was most closely identiNeoconservative leader Irving Kristol fied with the journal The Public Interest, which he cofounded with sociologist Daniel Bell.
Kristol was an avowed enemy of secular liberalism, which he blamed for causing alienation and moral degeneracy among American youth during the 1960s.
Sept., 2009, Bar Harbor, Maine), brought orchestral music to national audiences with a showman's flair.
He led the much-recorded Cincinnati Pops Orchestra from its founding in 1977, and he conducted the National Symphony Orchestra in annual televised patriotic concerts from the lawn of the United States Capitol on Memorial Day and July 4.
His sold-out concerts were renowned as variety shows featuring arrangements of show tunes and movie themes with costumed performers and theatrical lighting effects.
Petersburg), danced as lead soubrette for the Kirov Ballet for more than three decades.
After Kurgapkina graduated from the Vaganova Ballet Academy, she joined the Kirov Ballet, where she quickly became a featured soloist.
She was the first partner of ballet stars Mikhail Baryshnikov and Rudolf Nureyev.
With Nureyev she danced as Kitri in Don Quixote, as Princess Aurora in The Sleeping Beauty, and as Odette-Odile in Swan Lake.
Throughout her career Kurgapkina was known for her vivacious charm and stunning technical precision, especially in leaps.
Lang displayed her dancing talent at an early age and created her own dance when she was 10 years old.
By the time she reached 16, she had choreographed and danced to Mozart’s serenade Eine kleine Nachtmusik.
His election in March 1974 was accompanied by violence, political assassinations, and accusations of fraud.
Upon being inaugurated on July 1, he announced an economic austerity program.
He launched a colonization program to settle landless peasants in the Peten region.
Throughout his administration he conducted a vigorous campaign to reestablish Guatemalan sovereignty over neighbouring Belize but was hindered by international opposition.
Following the disastrous earthquake of 1976, Laugerud obtained international loans, managed the distribution of relief supplies, and maintained order with efficiency.
The political unrest that accompanied his election, however, continued to grow during the next four years.
Amnesty International repeatedly condemned the actions of the White Hand, a right-wing civilian death squad with some paramilitary elements, and charged that Laugerud tacitly condoned the terrorism.
April 19, 1932, Rutland, Vt.— March 31, 2009, Mammoth Lakes, Calif.), was the first American Alpine skier to win two gold medals in a single Winter Olympics.
At the 1952 Games in Oslo, she easily won the giant slalom for her first gold medal; the second she captured in the slalom with a comeback performance.
Her Olympic victories, coupled with her United States championship titles in the downhill, slalom, and Alpine combined in 1950, 1952, and 1955 and the giant slalom in 1953, led to her induction into the International Women’s Sports Hall of Fame.
Leonard, Hugh (JOHN JOSEPH Byrne; John Keyes Byrne), Irish dramatist (b.
The play, which was first produced in 1973 in an amateur theatre in Maryland, triumphed on Broadway for almost two years and won the Drama Desk Award for outstanding new play and four Tony Awards, including best play.
In addition, two of his other plays earned Tony nominations, the twohander The Au Pair Man (produced 1973-74) and A Life (produced 1980-81), which featured some of the minor characters from Da.
While working for more than a decade in the Irish civil service, he took the pen name Hugh Leonard to prevent his employer from learning about his literary aspirations.
He was able to quit his job, however, after the Abbey Theatre’s 1956 mounting of The Big Birthday.
Leonard also wrote 16 plays for the Dublin Theatre Festival, notably A Walk on the Water ; contributed a regular column to Ireland’s Sunday Independent newspaper; adapted dozens of television scripts, including several miniseries based on Dickens novels; and wrote two volumes of autobiography.
Oct., 2009, Paris, France), was one of the preeminent ethnologists of his time and a leading exponent of structuralism, the analysis of cultural systems (e.g., kinship and mythical systems) in terms of the structural relations between their elements.
Levi-Strauss viewed cultures as systems of communication, and he constructed models based on structural linguistics, information theory, and cybernetics to interpret them.
He attained popular recognition with Tristes tropiques (1955; A World on the Wane, 1961), a literary intellectual autobiography.
His massive Mythologiques appeared in four volumes between 1964 and 1971.
Prior to working for NYRB, he created drawings for Esquire , Time (some 100, including a notable 1967 ""Man of the Year” cover featuring Pres.
His work was in the permanent collections of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, the Library of Congress, and the National Portrait Gallery, London.
Levitt began her career in photography at age 18 with work in a portrait studio in the Bronx.
She struck up friendships with the two men, occasionally accompanying the former on his photo shoots in the city.
Included in this show were images from her visit in 1941 to Mexico City, where she photographed the city’s street life.
In the mid-1940s Levitt collaborated with Agee, filmmaker Sidney Meyers, and painter Janice Loeb on The Quiet One, a prizewinning documentary about a young African American boy, and with Agee and Loeb on the film In the Street, which captured everyday life in East Harlem.
In 1959 and 1960 she received Guggenheim fellowships to investigate techniques using colour photography.
The slides that resulted from the project, shown in 1963 at MoMA, were stolen from her apartment before they could be duplicated.
Levitt focused for the rest of the 1960s on film work and resumed photography in the 1970s, with a major MoMA show in 1974.
Locklin, Hank (LAWRENCE HANKINS LOCKLIN), American country and western singer (b.
March 8, 2009, Brewton, Ala.), was known for his tremulous tenor voice on such chart-topping hit singles as ""Send Me the Pillow You Dream On” and ""Please Help Me, I’m Falling” ; he also helped to establish the classic Nashville Sound of the 1950s and '60s.
During a career that spanned some five decades, Locklin recorded 65 albums, sold 15 million records, and produced 70 charted singles, of which 6 reached number one on the Billboard country singles chart.
June 10, 2009, Houston, Texas), who played with the influential Ink Spots in a musical career that lasted more than seven decades.
Long began performing professionally when he filled in as banjo player for the Frank Davis Louisiana Jazz Band.
During the 1930s he moved to Chicago, where he played big band music and jazz, performed at the 1933-34 Century of Progress world’s fair, and recorded several albums.
He played alongside innovative jazz and bebop musicians Charlie Parker and Dizzy Gillespie in Earl Hines’s band and as the leader of his own trio.
In 1945 Long became a member of the Ink Spots, replacing their second guitarist for nine months until his predecessor returned.
He played professionally in big bands and orchestras from his teenage years.
Lopez became a bassist with the Cuban national symphony in the 1950s and later taught for many years at the Guillermo Tomas Music Conservatory in Havana.
He was prominently featured in the film Buena Vista Social Club , which documented the group and the making of its 1997 album.
Lopez also achieved notable success with his 2001 solo album, Cachaito, which in 2002 earned a BBC Radio 3 World Music Award.
Oct., 2009, China), was a hero of the Sino-Japanese War and was one of the 57 first generals designated in 1955 by the People’s Republic of China.
Though he was purged in 1967 during the Cultural Revolution, he was fully rehabilitated in 1974.
He began to work in radio, notably with comic Rich Little, but in 1961 he joined an Ottawa television station as a freelance writer and performer.
Lye’s international break came when You Can’t Do That on Television was picked up by the American cable network Nickelodeon; it became one of that network’s most popular shows and continued in reruns until 1994.
In 2003 Lye, with Luxton, was awarded a lifetime achievement award by the Alliance of Canadian Cinema, Television and Radio Artists.
Aug., 2009, Athens, Greece), as a leading member of the right-wing military junta that took over Greece in 1967, held the posts of deputy prime minister and minister for coordination.
Makarezos served in the Greek army artillery during World War II, but after the Nazis invaded the country in 1941, he escaped to Egypt with the Greek government-in-exile.
In April 1967 he and two fellow officers, Georgios Papadopoulos and Stylianos Pattakos, seized power after leading a coup in Greece, forcing the king out of the country by year's end.
The ensuing dictatorship, led by Papadopoulos, imposed strict martial law on the country and was responsible for the jailing, torture, and exile of thousands until a second military coup in late 1973 removed Papadopoulos and his cohorts from power.
After democracy was restored in 1974, Makarezos was sentenced to death for mutiny, but this sentence was later commuted to life imprisonment.
Malden acknowledged that his looks, especially his bulbous twice-broken nose, would prevent him from being cast as a handsome leading man.
Malden was presented with the 2003 Screen Actors Guild’s Life Achievement Award.
Manahan joined the local Waterford Dramatic Society as a girl and worked in the professional theatre almost continuously thereafter, becoming one of Ireland's most respected stage actresses; John B Keane reportedly wrote his 1969 play Big Maggie specifically for her.
Manahan received a Tony nomination for her 1968 Broadway debut in Brian Friel’s Lovers, and in 1977 she won the Evening Standard award for most promising newcomer for her performance in a revival of Sean O’Casey's The Plough and the Stars at Britain’s National Theatre.
Feb., 2009, Paris), created the role of Lucky (a characterization he claimed to have based on Parkinson disease sufferers) in the original 1953 production of Samuel Beckett’s En attendant Godot at the Theatre de Babylone in Paris; four years later Martin was the original Clov in Beckett’s Fin de partie at the play’s world premiere in London.
His other stage appearances included the French premiere of Harold Pinter’s The Caretaker and a 1970 revival of Beckett’s one-man play Krapp’s Last Tape, directed by Beckett himself.
More hits followed, notably “Spanish Eyes” , one of nine songs of his that reached the United States top 40 between 1963 and 1967 even as rock and roll had begun to dominate the radio airwaves.
Jan., 2009, Kilkenny, Ire.), incorporated folk, jazz, blues, rock and roll, reggae, electronic effects, and avant-garde elements into his music while developing a distinctive slurred vocal style.
Despite ongoing struggles with alcoholism and drug abuse, Martyn released more than 20 albums, the best of which, Solid Air , was named one of the all-time best British albums by Q Magazine.
May 19, 2009, Takoma Park, Md.), embraced Romantic styles in defiance of contemporary musical trends.
He was perhaps best known for the longest continual symphonic piece of music, his 96minute Odyssey , which took 14 years to write, and for his 2002 opera adaptation of William Styron’s 1979 novel Sophie’s Choice.
Maw began composing at the age of 15 and studied at the Royal Academy of Music in London and then in Paris with French composer Nadia Boulanger and Austrian-French composer Max Deutsch.
Maw’s first major success was Scenes and Arias , a passionate piece for three female vocalists singing love poems.
His vibrancy as a composer came from the blending of 20th-century atonality and serial techniques that he studied at school with a revival of Romantic style influenced by German Romantic composer Richard Strauss.
He continued composing operas, symphonies, and shorter pieces, and a recording of his Violin Concerto , written for and performed by American virtuoso Joshua Bell, received a Grammy Award in 2001.
Maximova, Ekaterina (YEKATERINA Sergeyevna Maximova), Russian ballerina (b.
April 28, 2009, Moscow, Russia), awed audiences the world over with her spirited dancing.
Maximova began ballet school at age 10, and in 1958 she joined the Bolshoi Theatres ballet company as the lead dancer in Yury Grigorovich’s The Stone Flower.
Maximova excelled in varied roles, ranging from the tragic title character in Giselle to the exuberant female lead Kitri in Don Quixote to Princess Aurora in the classically styled Tire Sleeping Beauty.
The beautiful, petite, and charismatic Maximova enjoyed one of the longest-running dance partnerships with her husband, Vladimir Vasilyev; they performed with the Bolshoi, most notably in Spartacus , and later in their own company.
Maximova left the Bolshoi in 1988 to serve as a coach at other companies, but when she retired in 1994, she returned to Moscow, where Vasilyev directed the Bolshoi Theatre.
In 1941 his father left for England, but the family never received the money he had promised to send.
In Danger Man, McGoohan put a new spin on the secret agent formula by refusing to allow his character, John Drake, to carry a gun or indulge in sexual dalliances.
It also provided the leverage he needed to produce The Prisoner, an allegorical Kafkaesque series in which he portrayed Number Six, an unnamed agent who angrily resigns and is then held captive in a superficially banal place called the Village, where the mysterious unseen Number One, the ever-changing Number Two, and others try to overcome the fiercely individualistic Number Six’s escape attempts and pry information from him.
McGoohan’s later work included the short-lived medical mystery series Rafferty ; such films as Ice Station Zebra , Escape from Alcatraz , and Braveheart ; the Broadway spy drama Pack of Lies ; and a record four guest-villain appearances on the American detective series Columbo, two of which earned him Emmy Awards.
McMahon, Ed (EDWARD PETER LEO McMahon, Jr.), American television personality and actor (b.
In the 1980s McMahon joined Dick Clark as a host of TV’s Bloopers & Practical Jokes and began a long run as the emcee on the TV talent show Star Search.
McNair grew up in Mississippi and chose to attend the rural Alcorn State, a nearby historically black Division I-AA school where he could play quarterback, rather than serve as defensive back at a major university.
He led the Titans in 2000 to Super Bowl XXXIV, where the team came back from a 16-point deficit and McNair evaded a number of defenders before completing a pass that took the Titans within a yard of the tying touchdown, only to lose to the St.
In the NFL McNair passed for 31,304 yd, rushed for 3,590 yd, played in three Pro Bowls, and was named joint Most Valuable Player in 2003, along with Indianapolis Colts quarterback Peyton Manning.
The married McNair was found dead in a condominium alongside a woman who police believed killed him and then herself.
McNamara, Robert Strange, United States government official and businessman (b.
July 6, 2009, Washington, D.C.), served as United States secretary of defense and played a major role in the country's military involvement in Vietnam.
McNamara served in the Army Air Corps during World War II, but poor vision disqualified him from combat duty; instead he developed logistic systems for bomber raids and statistical systems for monitoring troops and supplies.
After the war McNamara was one of the “Whiz Kids” hired to revitalize the Ford Motor Co.
His plans, inCBS Photo Archive/Getty Images United States Secretary of Defense Robert S McNamara eluding the institution of strict cost-accounting methods and the development of both compact and luxury models, met with success, and McNamara rose rapidly in the corporate ranks.
In 1960 he became the first person outside the Ford family to assume the presidency of the company.
After just one month as Ford’s president, however, McNamara resigned to join the incoming administration of Pres.
In his new post McNamara successfully gained control of Pentagon operations and the military bureaucracy, encouraged the modernization of the armed forces, restructured budget procedures, and cut costs by refusing to spend money on what he believed were unnecessary or obsolete weapons systems.
McNamara was also at the centre of a drive to alter United States military strategy from the “massive retaliation” of the Dwight D Eisenhower years to a “flexible response,” emphasizing counterinsurgency techniques and second-strike nuclear-missile capability.
Though McNamara initially advocated the deepening military involvement of the United States in Vietnam, as early as 1965 he secretly began to question the wisdom of United States military escalation, and by 1967 he was openly seeking a way to launch peace negotiations.
He became the government’s chief spokesman for the day-to-day operations of the war and acted as Pres.
He left the Pentagon on Feb., 1968, to serve as president of the World Bank.
July 25, 2009, Nottingham, Nottinghamshire, Eng.), was a prolific and award-winning author celebrated for his attention to minutiae.
Nearly all the settings in Middleton’s novels were modeled on his native Nottingham (the fictional Beechnail) and told of the intricate lives of ordinary people.
Though his no-frills style of writing fell out of literary style, his large body of work—he published a book nearly every year from the 1960s through the '90s—attracted critical acclaim; in 1998 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature.
Aug., 2009, Moscow), cowrote and then twice rewrote his country’s national anthem; he also composed popular verses for children.
In the early 1940s Mikhalkov and poet Gabriel El-Registan devised lyrics praising Joseph Stalin, then Soviet prime minister, and entered them into a contest for a new national anthem; their submission was chosen.
In 1977 he was asked to revise the lyrics, which he did, removing references to Stalin and adding praise for Lenin.
Vladimir Putin asked for another revision, and Mikhalkov once again obliged, this time purging Lenin and adding religious overtones.
Mikhalkov was equally known in Russia for his children’s literature, in particular the 1935 poem Dyadya Styopa , about a tall policeman who always does good deeds.
Mikhalkov, who also wrote plays, won several state awards for his work.
Oct., 2009, Steinhagen, Ger.), reversed the fortunes of his family’s ailing publishing house, Bertelsmann, making it into one of the worlds leading media empires.
At the time of Mohn’s death, Bertelsmann’s holdings included magazines, television channels, and other publishing companies, including Random House and Doubleday.
During World War II, Mohn served in the Wehrmacht Afrika Korps until his capture by American forces in 1943.
He was held in a prisoner-of-war camp in Kansas., where he acquired Englishlanguage skills as well as knowledge of American business practices.
Upon his Bertelsmann—AFP/Getty Images German media mogul Reinhard Mohn release , he returned home to Gutersloh and the war-damaged buildings of Bertelsmann, until then a provincial publisher primarily of religious books.
Mohn in 1950 applied the American model of book clubs to the German market, offering discounted books to customers who committed to serial purchases.
By the mid-1950s membership numbers of Bertelsmann’s book clubs topped seven figures.
He received many honours, notably Spain's Prince of Asturias Prize in 1998, the same year that he was named Entrepreneur of the Century by Die Zeit magazine.
Sept., 2009, Las Vegas, Nev.), was an award-winning black performer most closely associated with the white antiapartheid playwright Athol Fugard.
Mokae, who began his career as a jazz musician, was invited by Fugard to join his interracial drama group, and in 1960 the two men appeared onstage together in the first interracial production of a play in South Africa, Fugard's The Blood Knot.
Mokae left South Africa in 1961 after having been banned for his appearance in The Blood Knot.
He eventually settled in the United States and made his Off-Broadway debut in 1970 in Fugard's Boesman and Lena.
Mokae earned a Tony Award in 1982 as best featured actor in a play for his Broadway performance as Sam in the world premiere of Fugard’s Master Harold . . . and the Boys.
Mokae received another Tony nomination in 1993 for Tug Yourgrau’s The Song of Jacob Zulu.
Montalban, Ricardo (RICARDO Gonzalo Pedro MontalbAn y Merino), Mexican actor (b.
He appeared as a Native American in Across the Wide Missouri , but he was more often typecast as the stereotypical Latin lover, most notably in the 1953 films Sombrero and Latin Lovers.
In 1970 he established the nonprofit organization Nosotros to help aspiring Hispanic actors.
Montazeri, Hossein Ali (HUSAYN-'ALI MUNTAZIRl), Iranian cleric (b.22, Najafabad, Iran—d.
Dec., 2009, Qom, Iran), became one of the highestranking authorities in Shi'ite Islam; Ayatollah Montazeri (grand ayatollah after 1984) was emphatic in his defense of human rights in Iran, however, and he spent long periods under arrest during both the regime of Mohammad Reza Shah Pahlavi and the Islamic republic that he himself helped to establish.
Montazeri, the son of a farmer who taught the Qur’an, began studying Arabic grammar and Persian literature at age 7, and at 12 he enrolled in theological school in nearby Esfahan.
At 19 he moved to Qom, were he studied under the future Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini.
After the shah exiled Khomeini from Iran, Montazeri helped maintain his mentor’s antiregime message and campaigned for Khomeini's return.
Montazeri was arrested a number of times and was often exiled within Iran.
After his arrest in 1974, he was imprisoned in solitary confinement for several months and tortured.
Released in 1978, he traveled to Paris, where Khomeini named him his deputy in Iran.
Following the overthrow of the shah, Montazeri was instrumental in the drafting of a new constitution, and in 1985 he was designated as Khomeini's successor.
Montazeri contended that human rights abuses persisted in Iran, however, and when Ali Khamenei—a junior cleric—succeeded Khomeini upon his death in 1989, Montazeri denounced Khamenei’s relatively low status.
Sept., 2009, Rotorua), was one of New Zealand’s most beloved vocalists as the leader of the often humorous Howard Morrison Quartet and then as a solo crooner.
Morrison was the son of Temuera Morrison of the All Black national rugby team and was of mixed Te Arawa Maori, Scottish, and Irish ancestry.
He sang with local Maori cul147 Obituaries tural groups before founding his quartet, which recorded its first single, “There’s Only One of You”/""Big Man,” in 1958.
The group became hugely popular, performing live across the region and releasing more than a dozen singles and two albums in 1960 alone.
After the quartet disbanded in 1964, Morrison established a solo career as a cabaret singer and on tour in Australia, New Zealand, and parts of Asia.
He was also active in Maori affairs and was the founder of the Sir Howard Morrison Education Foundation, which provided help for college-bound Te Arawa youth.
Morrison was made OBE in 1976, named New Zealand's Entertainer of the Decade in 1989, and awarded a knighthood in 1990.
Jan., 2009, near Henley-on-Thames, Oxfordshire, Eng.), wrote plays for the stage, television, radio, and motion pictures, as well as novels and autobiographical works; he was best known, however, as the creator of the crusty old British barrister Horace Rumpole, whom he featured in numerous stories and on the long-running TV series Rumpole of the Bailey.
Mortimer was educated at Harrow and at Brasenose College, Oxford, and published his first novel, Charade , before he was called to the bar in 1948.
Many of his short stories and novels drew on his legal experience, and the 1962 television production of his play The Dock Brief established his reputation.
One of his finest works is A Voyage Round My Father , an autobiographical play about his relationship with his blind father.
Mountford, Ces (CECIL MOUNTFORD; “the Blackball Bullet”), New Zealand rugby player and coach (b.
July 19, 2009, Gold Coast, Queens., Australia), was considered to be one of the best stand-off halves in the sport of rugby league.
As Warrington’s manager , Mountford steered the team to seven trophies, including a Challenge Cup and a Lancashire Cup.
After a brief sojourn back in New Zealand, he returned to England to coach Blackpool Borough.
Mountford was made MBE in 1987 and in 1990 was one of the inaugural inductees into the New Zealand Sports Hall of Fame.
Naess’s philosophical views evolved from an early pragmatist-inflected logical empiricism, through a pluralistic view of the history of philosophy, to a version of skepticism that has been referred to as sympathetic metaskepticism.
In 2005 he was knighted and made a Commander with Star of the Royal Norwegian order of St.
The latter work, which debuted in 1977, was discontinued by Neuhaus in 1992 owing to lack of funding, but it was reinstated in the early 2000s after being acquired by the DIA Foundation.
George W Bush on a range of issues, including abortion, same-sex marriage, and stem cell research, and as one of the guiding forces behind a conservative coalition of evangelical Protestants and Roman Catholics.
He was actively involved in the United States civil rights movement, marching alongside the Rev.
Neuhaus later became a noted peace activist and helped found the antiwar group Clergy and Laity Concerned About Vietnam.
In the 1970s, however, Neuhaus began increasingly to shift his political activism to conservative causes.
He denounced the United States Supreme Court’s 1973 ruling in Roe Wade that legalized abortion, supported the presidential candidacy of Ronald Reagan in 1980, and attacked the secularization of American life in his 1984 book The Naked Public Square.
Neuhaus eventually converted to Roman Catholicism and was ordained a priest in 1991.
Toward a Common Mission , which was credited with helping to establish a politically powerful alliance of churchgoers of differing faith traditions.
Jan., 2009, Kingston, N.Y.), wedded the harmonic and rhythmic sophistication of bop to blues melody as the tenor-saxophone soloist in Ray Charles’s small and big bands and in subsequent reunions with Charles’s bands.
Ray Charles Presents David Newman , with Charles on piano and saxophonist Hank Crawford , was the first of many albums that Newman led.
Nimeiri, Gaafar Mohamed el(JaTar Muhammad al-Numayri, or Nimeiry, OR NlMEYRl), Sudanese military leader and politician (b.
May 30, 2009, Omdurman), governed The Sudan from 1969, when he overthrew the civilian regime of Isma'il al-Azhari, until he was himself ousted in a bloodless coup in 1985.
Nimeiri was credited with the negotiations that led to a settlement of a 10-year conflict in the southern Sudan region, to which he granted autonomy in 1972, but his atReuters/Landov Sudanese military leader and politician Gaafar Mohamed el-Nimeiri tempts to promulgate measures of Islamic law in The Sudan alienated many in the predominantly Christian southern region.
After graduating from the Sudan Military College, Nimeiri acted as commander of the Khartoum garrison and led campaigns against rebels in southern Sudan.
In 1966 he graduated from the United States Army Command College at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas.
He put down a right-wing revolt in March 1970 but was briefly overthrown by a communist coup in July 1971.
Two months later he was elected president in a plebiscite, with 98.6% of the vote.
Nimeiri dissolved the RCC and established the Sudanese Socialist Union party, of which he became president.
In April 1985, while he was in the U.S., Nimeiri was overthrown by his defense minister.
This autobiographical novel, written in the third person, tells the story of Joseph Meehan, whose life closely resembles Nolan's.
During childhood Nolan began taking a drug that permitted him some control over his head and neck.
At the suggestion of a physical therapist, Nolan’s family made him a “unicorn stick,” which they strapped to his forehead.
In 1981 a collection of Nolan’s plays, stories, poems, and autobiographical material was published as Dam-Burst of Dreams.
After the success of Under the Eye of the Clock, he wrote the novel The Banyan Tree , which took him 12 years to complete.
A departure from his previous autobiographical work, the novel chronicles the life of Minnie O’Brien, a rural Irish woman born at the beginning of the 20th century.
As in his previous work, Nolan’s mesmerizing and melodious prose displayed his linguistic agility and his genius for coining new words and innovative turns of phrase.
Novak, Robert (ROBERT DAVID SANDERS Novak), American political journalist and commentator (b.
Aug., 2009, Washington, D.C.), wrote the influential syndicated newspaper column “Inside Report” for more than 40 years and from 1980 pugnaciously espoused a conservative viewpoint on a number of political television talk shows, notably CNN’s Crossfire.
In 2003 Novak ignited a firestorm of controversy with a column in which he identified Valerie Plame as a CIA operative after her husband, Joseph Wilson, had publicly asserted that the administration of Pres.
George W Bush had distorted intelligence to justify the 2003 invasion of Iraq.
Novak was known for his combative demeanour on political talk shows, including The Capital Gang, The McLaughlin Group, and Face the Nation; after he stormed off the set of Crossfire in 2005, his television career continued on the Fox News Network.
June 1, 2009, Straffan, County Kildare, Ire.), was the trainer of numerous winners of top European hurdle and flat races between 1943 and 1994 and was the founder of the famed Coolmore Stud breeding empire.
His record boasted victories spanning a remarkably broad range of prestigious events, including four Cheltenham Gold Cups, three Champion Hurdles, three Grand Nationals, and Thoroughbred achievements encompassing wins at 16 English classics and 27 Irish classics.
In 1951 O’Brien purchased Ballydoyle House, a farm in County Tipperary, and transformed it into a training ground at which he lived and trained horses for 45 years.
He became known for his attention to detail, knowledge of bloodlines, and astounding ability to handpick champions, becoming a national hero.
One of his finest achievements was in 1970, when Nijinsky won the English Triple Crown.
O’Briens Coolmore Stud breeding operation, which he founded in 1975, was credited with infusing European breeding with the pedigree of Northern Dancer, a Canadian-bred Thoroughbred whose bloodline was among the most famous in the racing world.
A 2003 poll by the Racing Post ranked O’Brien as the single most important figure in horse racing.
Parkinson later spent more than 30 years as ballet mistress with American Ballet Theatre and performed occasional character roles with the company.
Parkinson’s talent was discovered by the nuns at her convent school, and after taking classes locally, she studied at the Sadler’s Wells Ballet School.
Paul, Les (LESTER WILLIAM POLSFUSS), American musician and inventor (b.
Aug., 2009, White Plains, N.Y.), designed a solid-body electric guitar in 1941, but by the time the Les Paul model was produced by the Gibson Guitar Co. in 1952, Leo Fender had already mass-produced the Fender Broadcaster four years earlier and had thus beaten Paul to popular credit for the invention.
Nonetheless, the Gibson Les Paul acquired a devoted following, and its versatility and balance made it the favoured instrument of such guitarists as Eric Clapton, Jimmy Page, and Peter Frampton.
Before focusing his attention on electric guitar design, Paul was a working country and jazz musician—performing with his own trio in the 1930s and with singers such as Bing Crosby and the Andrews Sisters in the 1940s—and for a time had his own radio program.
In the 1950s, while continuing to perform—mostly with his wife, Mary Ford—Paul pioneered the development of multitrack recording and is credited with having invented the first eight-track tape recorder and the technique of overdubbing.
After Paul and Ford divorced , his recording output tapered off, but in 1977 he earned a Grammy Award for Chester & Lester , an instrumental duet album with country legend Chet Atkins.
Nov., 2009, Belgrade, Serb.), as archbishop of Pec, metropolitan of Belgrade and Karlovci, and the patriarch of the Serbian Orthodox Church , led some seven million adherents during the difficult and often violent breakup of Yugoslavia and Serbia's subsequent loss of Kosovo.
Although Pavle never publicly opposed Serbian ultranationalism, he denounced the ethnic violence between Orthodox Serbs, Catholic Croatians, and Muslim Bosnians, and in 2000 he called for the resignation of Serbian Pres.
After studying both medicine and theology, he adopted the name Pavle and entered monastic orders in the late 1940s.
Pavle continued his studies, however, and received a doctorate from the Theological Academy in Athens in 1957, the same year he was named bishop of Raska and Prizren.
He continued in this bishopric, which included Kosovo, until he was named patriarch.
Penn initially intended to become a painter, but at age 26 he took a job designing photographic covers for the fashion magazine Vogue.
He began photographing his own ideas for covers and soon established himself as a fashion photographer.
He also developed an array of colour techniques used in Vogue advertising to highlight various beauty products and fashion accessories, including diamonds.
In 1950 he married Swedish model Lisa Fonssagrives, whom he photographed for much of his best work.
This project eventually extended to places such as Nepal, New Guinea, Dahomey , and Morocco.
Penn’s later platinum prints of female nudes and of cigarette butts are characterized by the same tonal subtlety, compositional virtuosity, and serenity that mark his fashion photography and portraiture.
An Introduction to the Music of Schoenberg, Berg, and Webern , presented Perle’s groundbreaking analysis and became the standard in the field.
Perle’s writings on Berg were seminal, and his work on the opera Lulu led to the first complete performances of that masterpiece.
Although his body of musical work was relatively small, he was well regarded for his expressive, lyrical, and apparently uncomplicated pieces.
Four of their joint screenplays— I vitelloni , La strada, La dolce vita, and 8 V 2 —earned Academy Award nominations, with La strada, Le notti de Cabiria, and 8 V 2 winning the Oscar for best foreign language film.
May 12, 2009, Paris, France), spearheaded postWorld War II French theatre, finding new meanings in classical texts for more than 50 years with his groundbreaking theatre company.
Inspired by German dramatist Bertolt Brecht and a belief that classical texts should be challenged, Planchon staged daring productions, notably Shakespeare's Henry IV and Moliere’s George Dandin and Tartuffe , that drew both great criticism and praise.
Planchon’s strong directing choices of light, movement, staging, and costume elicited interpretations outside, and often unrelated to, the playwright’s original message.
He began his theatre company, Theatre de la Comedie, in Lyon in 1950 but moved to Villeurbanne in 1957 for better funding and renamed the company Theatre de la Cite.
Planchon refused to move to Paris, but by 1959 the company was touring abroad and presenting a regular season in Paris.
When the French government abolished the Theatre National Populaire in Paris, they transferred its title, attributes, and funding to Planchon’s company.
Planchon was also a producer, actor (starring in many of his own productions), and playwright, although he was criticized for staging his own plays too often.
Pnueli received a bachelor’s degree in mathematics from the Israel Institute of Technology and a doctorate in mathematics from the Weizmann Institute of Science.
Pnueli returned to Israel as a senior researcher in the department of applied mathematics at the Weizmann Institute.
Pnueli also cofounded the software company MiniSystems in 1971 and AdCad, a developer of computer-aided engineering software, in 1984.
Pokrovsky joined the Bolshoi in 1943 and became its artistic director in 1952.
His productions, notably of Tchaikovsky’s Eugene Onegin and Sergey Prokofievs War and Peace, reflected the traditional style of the company, with grand scale and realistic stagings.
In 1972 he founded the Moscow Chamber Opera Theatre, where he mounted less-lavish productions of new and more obscure Russian works, notably a revival of Dmitry Shostakovich’s The Nose.
He and Andriyan G Nikolayev, who was launched on August 11 in Vostok 3, were the first two men to be in space simultaneously; the two spacecraft came within five kilometres (three miles) of each other.
Popovich, a herdsman in his early youth, graduated from a technical school in Magnitogorsk, Russia, U.S.S.R., in 1951, when he entered the army.
After transferring to the air force, he graduated from military aviation training and became a pilot.
Popovich was also the commander of the Soyuz 14 mission (July 3-19, 1974), on which he and flight engineer Yury P Artyukhin docked their craft with Salyut 3, a military space station that had been placed in orbit on June 25, and engaged in a 15-day program of reconnaissance of the Earth’s surface.
From 1980 to 1989 Popovich was the deputy chief of the Yury Gagarin Cosmonauts Training Centre in Star City, near Moscow.
At the RIA Novosti/Alamy Soviet cosmonaut Pavel Popovich time of his death, Popovich was chairman of the board of the All-Russia Institute of Agricultural Aero-Photo-Geodesic Studies.
March 6, 2009, Brussels, Belg.), created works that encompass a variety of 20thcentury musical styles, particularly serial music, in which various musical elements are rigidly controlled, and aleatory music, involving many types of highly unpredictable events.
Pousseur studied at the Liege Conservatory and the Brussels Conservatory and composed his first piece, Sonatine for piano, in 1949.
Many of his best-known works reflect his aleatory style, notably Repons mobile pour sept musiciens , in which the course of the composition is partly determined by lottery and by the players' free choice based on moves on a checkerboard.
In the operalike Le Miroire de votre Faust (1961-68; also called Votre Faust) an audience vote determines which one of the four possible denouements will be presented at a particular performance.
Pousseur’s later compositions include Couleurs croisees , a series of variations on the civil rights song “We Shall Overcome”; its sequel, Croisees des couleurs croisees , for female voice, pianos, tape recorders, and two radio receivers; Liege a Paris ; Traverser la foret , a cantata for speaker, two vocal soloists, chorus, and 12 instruments; and Le Village planetaire vu de Nivelles , a 16-hour multimedia program of music, poetry, and visual imagery.
Powell’s work on the piano and Hammond organ underpinned the guitar work that was the band’s signature sound on five subsequent albums.
In 1977 Powell survived a crash of a tour plane that killed several members of the band.
The remaining members, including Powell, regrouped in 1987 and continued touring and recording.
Lynyrd Skynyrd was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2006.
Powell, Jody (Joseph Lester Powell, Jr.), American presidential adviser (b.
Sept., 2009, Cambridge, Md.), served as press secretary to United States Pres.
Jimmy Carter and became known for his easy drawl and quick temper as well as his powerful loyalty to the president.
Powell entered the United States Air Force Academy after graduation but was expelled for cheating in his senior year.
Powell, formerly Carter’s chauffeur, became his friend and most trusted adviser, beginning with Carter’s gubernatorial campaign.
After he left the White House, Powell headed two public relations firms.
Prabhakaran dedicated his life to the dream of establishing an independent homeland for the Tamil ethnic minority in northern Sri Lanka.
The LTTE eventually became a formidable force and between 1990 and 1995 controlled the far-north Jaffna Peninsula.
Over a 30-year period, Prabhakaran’s forces were held responsible for thousands of deaths, and Tiger suicide bombers killed numerous high-profile victims, notably former Indian prime minister Rajiv Gandhi in 1991 and Sri Lankan Pres.
After months of heavy fighting against government troops in early 2009, the Tigers were crushed, and Prabhakaran was killed in action.
June 30, 2009, Santa Monica, Calif.), enchanted stage and screen audiences with his leading-man looks and rich baritone voice before becoming an austere character actor decades later.
His acting career took off in 1960 with the Broadway opening of The Unsinkable Molly Brown, with Presnell as the male lead.
Film musicals were on the decline by the 1960s, however, and after Paint Your Wagon , Presnell returned to the stage in such shows as Annie Get Your Gun and the short-lived 1972 musical adaptation of Gone with the Wind.
March 13, 2009, Englewood, N.J.), explored the American way of life in works that presented a vision of human alienation, indifference, and cruelty.
Dream Palace, a novella —were rejected by a number of American publishing houses and were first offered by Purdy through a subsidy publisher.
These books won the support of British poet Dame Edith Sitwell and, following their publication in England, met with critical acclaim in the United States Purdy’s fiction examines the relationships between individuals and the effects of family life.
Malcolm tells the story of the experiences of a 15-yearold boy in a fruitless search for his identity.
In Purdy’s later works, such as The Nephew and Cabot Wright Begins , he further developed the bleak worldview that he first propounded in Malcolm.
In his continuous novel cycle, Sleepers in Moon-Crowned Valleys —comprising Jeremy’s Version , The House of the Solitary Maggot , Mourners Below , and On Glory’s Course —Purdy explores small-town American life and destructive family relationships.
Qian Xuesen , Chinese rocket scientist (b.11, Hangzhou, Zhejiang province, China— Oct., 2009, Beijing, China), was known as the father of China’s missile and space programs because of his leadership in the development of the country’s first ballistic missiles and first satellite.
Qian in 1935 immigrated to the United States, where he became involved in the study and development of rocketry and was a founding member of what became the Jet Propulsion Laboratory at the California Institute of Technology.
During World War II he served on the United States government’s Science Advisory Board.
In 1955 he was sent back to China, where he established the Institute of Mechanics in Beijing and worked within the Chinese Academy of Sciences.
Jan., 1943, Akron, Ohio— June 10, 2009, Austin, Texas), led numerous American swimmers to collegiate and Olympic victory in a career of more than 30 years.
As an Olympic coach he worked with swimmers Matt Biondi, who won eight gold medals, and Janet Evans, who won four.
Quick was also a successful college coach with 13 National Collegiate Athletic Association titles, more than any other Division I swimming coach.
The College Swimming Coaches Association named Quick the NCAA Coach of the Year six times and in 2009 honoured him with its first Lifetime Achievement Award.
Jan., 2009, Beirut), collaborated with his older brother, Assi, on hundreds of songs and more than 20 musical theatre productions, many of which they created as a showcase for Assi's wife, the vocalist and widely feted cultural icon Fairuz.
The Rahbanis both worked as police officers while studying music and trying to establish a joint theatrical career.
In contrast to the Arab tradition of long, complex, epic songpoems, the brothers began to compose European-influenced three-minute songs about everyday life and love, usu153 Obituaries ally with Assi providing the music and Mansour adding the lyrics.
The Greek Orthodox Rahbani Brothers were often associated with Lebanon’s Christian community, but they were largely successful in writing nonreligious pan-Arabic music that appealed to all segments of Arab society.
One of their plays, Biya el-khawatim , was made into a 1965 motion picture, directed by Egyptian filmmaker Youssef Chahine and starring Fairuz.
After Assi’s death in 1986, Mansour maintained a successful solo career; the last of his dozen musical plays.
The Return of the Phoenix, was being produced in Beirut at the time of his death.
After studying in London at the Rose Bruford Training College of Speech and Drama, Rhone returned to Jamaica in the mid1960s and helped to found the Barn Theatre in Kingston, where he staged many productions.
In 1976 he directed the film version of Smile Orange, and in 1988 his screenplay for the film Milk and Honey received the Canadian Genie award for best original screenplay at the Toronto International Film Festival.
The Jamaican government named him a Commander of the Order of Distinction in 1980.
Reverend Ike (FREDERICK Prosperity preacher Reverend Ike Joseph Eikerenkoetter II), American clergyman (b.
July 28, 2009, Los Angeles, Calif.), built his ministry on the concepts of self-motivated prosperity and material satisfaction.
There he set up the Christ Community United Church in an old movie theatre in Harlem.
Then he founded the United Church Science of Living Institute in another old movie theatre, which he purchased for more than $500,000 and decorated luxuriously.
Ike’s nontraditional philosophy—which encouraged his congregation to channel the “God in you” in the pursuit of happiness, success, and wealth—drew criticism from traditional clergy and civil rights activists.
He built a congregation of about 5,000 parishioners, however, and during his peak popularity in the 1970s, Rev.
His sermons were broadcast on television and some 1,770 radio stations, and he sold motivational books, tapes, magazines, and videos, such as The Master of Money and How to Get out and Stay out of the Hell of Poverty, Sickness, and Suffering.
Ike became a multimillionaire, and he spent liberally on flashy clothing, expensive cars, and luxury goods.
His business was investigated by the United States Postal Service and the Internal Revenue Service.
Rhone, Trevor, Jamaican playwright, screenwriter, actor, and director (b.
Rhone’s works were noted for their keen explorations of racial, social, and Richard, Wendy (WENDY Emerton), British actress (b.
Richard left school at age 15, worked as a department store assistant, and studied acting at the Italia Conti Stage Academy.
She played a series of small roles, notably in such hit sitcoms as Up Pompeii!, Please, Sir!, On the Buses, and Dad’s Army, as well as in several film comedies before getting her break as Miss Brahms.
She was the elder daughter of director Tony Richardson and actress Vanessa Redgrave—herself the daughter of actors Sir Michael Redgrave and Rachel Kempson, the sister of actors Corin Redgrave and Lynn Redgrave, and the granddaughter of silent-film actor Roy Redgrave.
Richardson made her debut (along with her younger sister, actress Joely Richardson) at age four in her parents’ film The Charge of the Light Brigade.
After training at the Central School of Speech and Drama in London and at the West Yorkshire Playhouse in Leeds, she appeared on television before making her West End debut in 1985 opposite her mother in Anton Chekhov’s The Seagull, winning a London Drama Critics’ Award as most promising newcomer.
Later films include the comedies The Parent Trap and Maid in Manhattan ; The White Countess , with her mother and her aunt in supporting roles; and the drama Evening , again opposite her mother.
In 1993 Richardson captured a Tony nomination for her performance in the revival of Eugene O'Neill’s Anna Christie costarring Irish actor Liam Neeson, who became her second husband soon after.
Richardson died of a head trauma sustained on March 16 in what initially appeared to be a minor fall at a ski resort outside Montreal.
Dec., 2009, Newport Beach, Calif.), was widely recognized as one of the leading figures in Christianity in the United States during the latter half of the 20th century, bringing Pentecostal theology and practice into the mainstream by means of a vast business empire and a pervasive media presence.
The son of a Pentecostal minister, Roberts initially rejected his father’s faith but underwent a conversion experience at the age of 17 and thereafter served as a pastor in several towns in the South while studying at Oklahoma Baptist College.
In the late 1940s, claiming divine inspiration, he began the Oral Roberts Evangelistic Association and became an itinerant preacher at revival meetings, where he gave fiery sermons and practiced faith healing.
As his wealth grew, Roberts was frequently criticized for his luxurious jet-set lifestyle, and in 1987, while his City of Faith medical centre was struggling financially, he was subject to public ridicule for having told his supporters that ""God could call Oral Roberts home"" if he did not raise $4. million within two months.
The facility closed two years later, and Roberts assumed the chancellorship of ORU in 1993.
Robson, Sir Bobby (SIR ROBERT William Robson), British association football player and manager (b.
July 31, 2009, Durham county), was one of England’s most respected players and managers.
After leading the previously little-known Ipswich club to the FA Cup and the Union des Associations Europeennes de Football Cup titles, he was appointed England's manager.
He left England after eight years in that position to manage PSV Eindhoven , leading that club to the Dutch league championship for two straight years.
Thereafter he worked in Portugal at Sporting Lisbon and FC Porto , where he secured the Portuguese Cup and league championships, and in Barcelona , where in 1997 the club captured both the Spanish Cup and the UEFA Cup Winners' Cup.
After a brief stint back with PSV Eindhoven, he returned to England in 1999 to manage Newcastle United; he was forced to retire in 2004.
Robson was knighted in 2002 and was inducted into the English Football Hall of Fame in 2003.
Dec., 2009, Paris, France), founded a cosmetics line that grew into a beauty empire, with some 2,000 stores worldwide.
He was an early advocate of using botanicals in cosmetics, and the Yves Rocher lines—which included makeup, skinand hair-care products, and perfumes— were known for their use of natural ingredients and for their reasonable prices.
Rocher’s company began as a mail-order service in his hometown of La Gacilly, where he also served as mayor from 1962 to 2008.
May 23, 2009, Pusan), served as president of South Korea during a time in which he faced labour unrest and a faltering economy and found himself in the midst of a financial scandal after several of his aides were accused of having accepted illegal campaign donations.
Although he did not attend college, he passed the bar exam and was appointed a judge and later became a highly respected human rights lawyer.
In the late 1980s Roh entered politics at the invitation of then opposition leader Kim Young-Sam.
Roh won a seat in the National Assembly and gained notice for criticizing the military regime of Pres.
In 1990 Roh split with his party when Kim made an alliance with the general-turned-president, Roh TaeWoo.
That alliance led to Kim’s election as president, and Roh MooHyun’s political fortunes seemed to crumble.
He lost his seat in the National Assembly in 1992 and failed to regain it in 1996.
Roh eventually led a small opposition party into an alliance with Kim Dae-Jung , and when Kim came to power in 1998, Roh served in his cabinet.
In December 2002 Roh was successful in defeating Lee Hoi-Chang in a tightly contested presidential race.
In March 2004, however, Roh was impeached by the parliament following allegations of election law violations and economic mismanagement.
Though forced to temporarily step down, he was reinstated as president in May after the Constitutional Court overturned the impeachment, and he completed his five-year term.
Roh was later investigated over allegations of bribery, and in May 2009 he jumped off a cliff to his death.
Ronis moved away from formal portraits to work as a photojournalist until 1940, when he escaped to the south from the advancing German troops and took a job with a touring theatrical company.
After liberation , he and his wife, artist MarieAnne Lansiaux, returned to Paris, where in 1946 he joined the Rapho photo agency.
May 29, 2009, Chamonix, France), was the most decorated female snowboarder in the world, with two Olympic medals, six Federation Internationale de Ski world championship gold medals, and 67 FIS Snowboard World Cup victories.
Ruby became the first woman to win an Olympic medal in the sport of French snowboarder Karine Ruby snowboarding (which became an event at the 1998 Nagano Games) when she took the gold medal in the giant slalom.
After a disappointing Olympic quarterfinal elimination in 2006, she retired to train as a mountain climbing guide.
Ruby, who grew up in the French Alps and had a lifelong passion for mountaineering, was killed in a climbing accident weeks before finishing her training.
July 27, 2009, Boston, Mass.), composed works teeming with melodic and rhythmic vitality and created the Lydian Chromatic Concept of Tonal Organization , an influential theory of musical structure that he first unveiled in a 1953 pamphlet.
In the 1950s Russell’s LCCOTO began to influence Miles Davis and other modaljazz pioneers.
He led a noted sextet that played his songs in the United States and Europe, composed Othello Ballet Suite , and experimented with electronic music while living in Scandinavia.
He then taught at the New England Conservatory of Music and formed big bands to play new compositions that often included electronic and rock elements.
Safire won a Pulitzer Prize for commentary in 1978 and was a member of the Pulitzer Board.
Sailer, Anton Engelbert (TONI; “THE Black Blitz from Kitz”), Austrian Alpine skier (b.
Aug., 2009, Innsbruck, Austria), in the 1956 Olympic Winter Games held in Cortina d’Ampezzo, Italy, was the first skier to sweep the gold medals in the Alpine competition, which at that time consisted of the slalom, giant slalom, and downhill events.
Sailer, a 20-year-old plumber, was at the time the youngest skier ever to capture a gold medal in men's Olympic Alpine skiing, and his 6.2-second margin of victory in the giant slalom set an Olympic record that still stood in 2009.
Winning the gold medals also meant that Sailer received three world championship titles and a world champion classification for the combined event.
By the end of the 1958 season, he had secured an additional three world titles and one second-place finish.
In 1959 Sailer announced his retirement from amateur competition and said that he would not be participating in the 1960 Winter Games.
He rejoined the Austrian Alpine ski team as manager in the early 1970s.
Sales was especially known for his pie-throwing routines, and he once estimated that 20,000 pies had been hurled at him or his guests during the show’s run.
Salih, al-Tayyib , Sudanese novelist and short-story writer (b.29, Al-Shamaliyah province, Sudan—d.
Feb., 2009, London, Eng.), crafted polyrhythmic and haunting Arabic-language prose in works that explore the intersections of traditional and modern life in Africa.
Salih attended universities in Khartoum, Sudan, and in London and devoted much of his professional life to radio broadcasting, for many years as head of drama for the BBC Arabic Service.
Coming from a rural background of small farmers and orthodox religious teachers, he attempted in his work to harmonize the traditions of the past with the worldliness of the “traveled man,” the African who has returned from schooling abroad.
His novel Mawsim al-hijrah ila al-shamal (1966; Season of Migration to the North, 1969), often referred to as a prose poem, reflects the conflicts of modern Africa, while the tales collected in ' Urs al-Zayn (1967; The Wedding of Zein and Other Stories, 1968) evoke the warmth, compassion, humour, and sadness of traditional Sudanese Arabic life through beautifully structured narrative rhythms.
In the 1970s Salih wrote two short volumes, translated into English as Bandarshah.
Nov., 2009, Bangkok), served as prime minister of Thailand during Jan.-Sept., 2008.
Samak was the first Thai prime minister to be democratically elected since the ousting of Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra in a September 2006 military coup, but he was forced to step down after less than nine months in office after the Constitutional Court found him guilty of having illegally accepted payment for television cooking show appearances that he had made while serving as prime minister.
In 1992, after a military junta had toppled the government, Samak was appointed deputy prime minister, and in May of that year he conspicuously supported a bloody suppression of pro-democracy demonstrators.
In 2000 Samak won the Bangkok mayoral race, but his four-year term ended amid allegations of corruption.
He went on to host political talk TV shows as well as a popular cooking program, returning to politics in 2006 with a run for the Senate, where he briefly served until Thaksin's overthrow.
Dec., 2009, Belmont, Mass.), was awarded the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences in 1970 for his fundamental contributions to nearly all branches of economic theory.
He became a professor of economics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1940 and built MIT into a world-class centre of graduate studies in economics.
Samuelson contributed to many areas of economic theory through powerful mathematical techniques that he employed essentially as puzzle-solving devices.
His Foundations of Economic Analysis provides the basic theme of his work, with the universal nature of consumer behaviour seen as the key to economic theory.
Saxon, Sky (RICHARD Elvern Marsh; Sky Sunlight Saxon), American musician (b.
June 25, 2009, Austin, Texas), melded British pop style, freelove ideals, and abrasive rock rhythms to form the Seeds, a hallmark protopunk band.
Saxon's musical career began when he moved to Los Angeles after high school, originally performing as Little Richie Marsh.
The Seeds formed in 1965 and quickly became one of the most popular bands on the Los Angeles scene, with Saxon singing, writing, and playing electric bass.
Their single “Pushin’ Too Hard” reached the American Top 40 and endured as a rock-and-roll standard.
The group's first two albums, Tl'ie Seeds and A Web of Sound , were both successes, but by 1968 the band could not commercially compete with rivals such as Love and the Doors.
Schulberg, Budd (SEYMOUR WILSON SCHULBERG), American novelist, screenwriter, and journalist (b.
Aug., 2009, Westhampton Beach, N.Y.), published to great acclaim his first novel, What Makes Sammy Run? , about an unprincipled motion-picture studio mogul, and earned a 1954 Academy Award for his story and screenplay for the classic film On the Waterfront, which garnered a total of eight Oscars.
He was the son of motion-picture producer Benjamin Percival Schulberg and grew up in Hollywood.
In 1950 his novel The Disenchanted won an American Library Award for fiction.
Scott-James, Anne (ANNE ELEANOR Scott-James; Lady Lancaster), British journalist and writer (b.
May 13, 2009, Berkshire, Eng.), defied gender roles as one of the first female career journalists and columnists on Fleet Street, the hub of the British press until the 1980s.
Scott-James left Somerville College, Oxford, two years before graduating because she was impatient to pursue a career.
She was hired at age 20 by Vogue magazine, where she later became beauty editor.
She left Vogue during World War II to become the women's editor at Picture Post photojournalism magazine.
After the war she was the editor of the magazine Harper’s Bazaar and then an editor and columnist for the Sunday Express (London) in the 1950s and for the Daily Mail during the 1960s.
ScottJames’s columns were widely read by both men and women, and her articles ranged from social critique to interviews to investigations abroad.
An Illustrated History of British Gardening , which was illustrated by her third husband, Sir Osbert Lancaster.
She theorized that those who subscribed to the latter understanding were in favour of strong state injunctions against same-sex marriage.
Aug., 2009, Lexington, Va.), collected and performed traditional American music from the 1920s and ’30s and was a major influence in the folk music revival of the 1960s and later.
Seeger was a member of a prominent family in American folk music; his sister Peggy Seeger and half brother Pete Seeger were also renowned musicians.
He mastered several string instruments—including guitar, banjo, fiddle, and mandolin—and in 1958 was a founding member (with Tom Paley and John Cohen) of the New Lost City Ramblers, who performed traditional music in its original manner.
April 2, 2009, Tucson, Ariz.), was a leading figure in 1950s West Coast jazz as an alto saxophonist with a bright, singing sound and as a pioneering modem-jazz flutist.
Shank played in Stan Kenton’s Innovations in Modern Music orchestra before becoming noted as a fluent Art Pepper-influenced altoist in the Lighthouse All-Stars, in which he also was showcased improvising on flute in duets with oboist Bob Cooper.
Four , with Indian sitarist Ravi Shankar, and later as saxophone soloist with symphony orchestras.
June 30, 2009, Paris, France), AP Chinese opera singer and spy Shi Pei Pu engaged in a bizarre love affair and in espionage work with French embassy clerk Bernard Boursicot that became the basis for a Tony Award-winning play.
Shi worked as an opera singer and as a librettist in Beijing, where he met Boursicot in 1964 while teaching Chinese to diplomats’ families.
Shi convinced Boursicot that he was actually a woman disguised as a man, and the two began a love affair that continued for 20 years, during which time Shi also told Boursicot that he had become pregnant and had a son.
Shi and his “son,” whom he had purchased from a doctor in China, joined Boursicot in Paris, where Shi won acceptance in the French community with his cultural performances, even appearing on television.
They were each sentenced to six years in prison, but since the documents passed were of minimal political significance, after 11 months both were pardoned and released.
Shi’s story inspired the Tony Award-winning Broadway play M Butterfly (1988; film adaptation 1993) by Chinese-American David Henry Hwang and was recounted in the book Liaison by American author Joyce Wadler.
Shriver, Eunice Kennedy (Eunice Mary Kennedy), American social activist (b.
Aug., 2009, Hyannis, Mass.), worked tirelessly to improve the lives of the mentally disabled and, in an effort to provide a forum for them to compete athletically, founded the Special Olympics.
John F Kennedy and Senators Robert F Kennedy and Edward M Kennedy , was close to her developmentally disabled sister, Rosemary.
In 1957 she became director of the Joseph P Kennedy, Jr., Foundation, the goals of which were to seek the causes of mental retardation and improve the social treatment of the mentally challenged.
The concept of the Special Olympics was bom in 1962 while Shriver hosted a summer day camp for intellectually disabled children at her farm in Maryland.
The first Special Olympics were held in Chicago, sponsored by the Chicago Park District and the Kennedy Foundation, and saw the participation of 1,000 contestants from 26 states and Canada.
John F Kennedy of the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, now the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development.
Shriver was granted the 1966 Albert Lasker Public Service Award, and in 1984 she received the Presidential Medal of Freedom.
Jan., 2009, Zug, Switz.), penned some 35 sociopolitical novels, as well as novellas, short stories, and a score of film screenplays.
Simmel's carefully researched novels— many of them rousing tales of espionage and intrigue set during World War II and the subsequent Cold War— were best sellers in Germany and Austria, with more than 70 million copies sold, and were translated into 33 other languages.
His first publication was the story collection Begegnungen im Nebel , but it was his wartime spy novel Es muss nicht immer Kaviar sein (1960; “It Can’t Always Be Caviar""; filmed 1961) that finally brought him wider recognition.
Aug., 2009, Newark, N.J.), shattered the barrier that had prevented black models from achieving supermodel status when she appeared on the cover of Ladies’ Home Journal, becoming the first black model to adorn the cover of that mainstream magazine.
A counselor there encouraged the statuesque Sims, with her heart-shaped face and long limbs, to pursue a modeling career.
Sims then made an agreement with former model Wilhelmina Cooper, who was forming her own agency, to send copies of that supplement to various advertising agencies, with the caveat that Cooper would earn a commission if agencies called her in response.
Her star rose steadily; in addition to Ladies’ Home Journal, she appeared on the cover of Life and Cosmopolitan magazines and did runway modeling for several top designers.
After ending her modeling career she developed a synthetic fibre that resembled straightened black hair, and she launched the Naomi Sims Collection of wigs.
The business thrived, and in 1981 Sims introduced her signature fragrance.
In 1985 she launched Naomi Sims Beauty Products Ltd., which by 1989 was grossing $5 million annually.
Jan., 2009, Erieville, N.Y.), composed verse that was distinguished by a careful attention to form and by a relentless yet delicate examination of personal experiences.
His first collection, Heart's Needle , which won the Pulitzer Prize, is marked by careful formal control and a sensitive and solemn delineation of his experience of losing access to his daughter through divorce; that work was credited with ushering in the confessional poetry that became the hallmark of the 1970s and ’80s.
The collection After Experience continued these formal and thematic concerns.
In W.D.’s Midnight Carnival and The Death of Cock Robin , each poem is paired with a painting by DeLoss McGraw.
Other writing by Snodgrass includes numerous translations of European ballads and In Radical Pursuit , a volume of criticism.
A Cycle of Poems in Progress is a collection of poems written as dramatic monologues by various Nazis who shared Adolf Hitler’s last days.
Soderstrom was known for her superb acting and her rich creamy voice, notably in Claudio Monteverdi and Mozart roles early in her career and later in operas by Tchaikovsky, Richard Strauss, and Leos Janacek.
Soderstrom studied at the Royal Academy of Music in Stockholm and made her professional debut in 1947 at the nearby Drottningholm Court Theatre, where she returned as artistic director after retiring from the stage.
Oct., 2009, Port Washington, N.Y.), served as the chief interpreter and sometime interrogator for American prosecutors at the post-World War II Niirnberg trials of accused Nazi war criminals.
Sonnenfeldt’s Jewish parents sent him to England to be educated, but in 1940 he was deported to Australia as an enemy alien.
He was allowed to leave Australia, and after a harrowing journey across the ocean and three continents, he managed to reunite with his family in 1941 in Baltimore, Md., where he became a United States citizen and worked as an electrician.
While serving as a private in the army, Sonnenfeldt was a member of the American forces that liberated the Dachau concentration camp in 1945.
His bilingual fluency led to his recruitment for the trials after the war.
July 9, 1935, San Miguel de Tucuman, Arg.— Oct., 2009, Buenos Aires, Arg.), was known as “the voice of the voiceless” for her songs that spoke of the struggle for economic and political justice.
She was a leading proponent of the nueva cancion movement of the 1960s, which used traditional music to express political themes.
Sosa, who possessed a powerful and dramatic alto voice, was known as a peerless interpreter of songs written by others.
Her first album, La voz de la zafra, appeared in 1959, but it was her 1965 performance at Argentina’s national folklore festival in Cosquin that brought her national attention and increasing popularity.
After the military took power in 1976, she was subject to official harassment that culminated in the public arrest of Sosa, her band, and much of her audience at a concert in 1979.
Sosa went into exile, during which time she began to expand her repertoire to include other forms of popular music; she returned to Argentina in 1982.
Storm, Gale (JOSEPHINE OWAISSA COTTLE), American actress and singer (b.
Storm, who broke into show business as the winner of the Gateway to Hollywood national talent contest, also appeared in a number of films, including three with Roy Rogers, notably Red River Valley / Sugden, Mollie (Mary ISOBEL SUGden), British actress (b.
July 1, 2009, Guildford, Surrey, Eng.), gained cult status on both sides of the Atlantic as ladies’ wear department head Mrs.
Sugden also had continuing roles on Hugh and I , The Liver Birds , Come Back Mrs.
Noah , That’s My Boy , and My Husband and I , the latter opposite her reallife husband, actor William Moore.
Suzman, Helen , South African legislator and antiapartheid activist (b.
Jan., 2009, Johannesburg, S.Af.), as a longtime member of the South African Parliament, was an outspoken advocate for the country’s nonwhite majority.
Serving as an advocate for the disenfranchised, Suzman was in constant conflict with her conservative colleagues and often cast the lone vote against apartheid measures.
South African antiapartheid activist Helen Suzman Sarie—Gallo Images/Alamy After retiring from Parliament in 1989, Suzman was president of the South African Institute of Race Relations, served on the Independent Electoral Commission that oversaw the country's first multiracial election in 1994, and was a member of the Human Rights Commission.
Her dedication to human rights and democracy garnered many honours and led to the establishment of the Helen Suzman Foundation, which promoted liberal democracy.
Such films as The Outsiders , Red Dawn , Road House , Next of Kin , and Point Break followed.
People magazine in 1991 selected him as one of the 50 Most Beautiful People in the World.
On television Swayze appeared as the rebel soldier Orry Main in the two-part miniseries North and South, and in 2009, despite battling pancreatic cancer , he starred in the series The Beast.
In the early 1950s, she moved to Chicago with Robert Taylor, whom she later married.
She worked as a housekeeper during the day and frequented blues clubs at night.
TayJames F Quinn—MCT/Landov “Queen of the Blues"" Koko Taylor lor was soon recording with such blues legends as Buddy Guy, Big Walter Horton, and Robert Nighthawk.
That song, which thrust Taylor into the mainstream, sold more than a million copies and reached the top five on the Billboard rhythm-and-blues chart.
She garnered eight Grammy Award nominations and collected more than two dozen Blues Music Awards.
Health issues slowed her recording output in the 2000s, but Taylors final album, Old School , featured vocals as robust and brassy as ever.
Tellado, Conn (MARIA DEL SOCORRO TELLADO Lopez), Spanish romance novelist (b.
April 11, 2009, Gijon, Spain), produced more than 4,000 popular romance novellas that were widely read in both Spain and Latin America; many were turned into radio and television serials.
She published her first novella in 1946, and the following year the Bruguera publishing house engaged her to write one short novel each week.
In 1951, Tellado contracted with the Hispanic women’s magazine Vanidades to contribute two novellas a month.
After Franco's death in 1975, she published several erotic novels under pseudonyms.
Dec., 2009, Moscow, Russia), appeared in dozens of films, most famously as a Soviet war hero or spy.
The aristocratically handsome, quintessentially Russian actor gained international renown for his turn as Prince Andrey Bolkonsky in Sergey Bondarchuk’s monumental film adaptation of Leo Tolstoy's novel War and Peace, which won the Academy Award for best foreign-language film in 1968.
He left his job as a metalworker in 1945 to attend a state film school and made his screen debut in Molodaya gvardiya while still a student.
Tikhonov continued to win parts in various wartime dramas, including Zhazhda , which marked his first appearance in the oft-repeated role of a spy.
In the television series Semnadtsat mgnoveniy vesny (1973; “Seventeen Moments of Spring”), adapted from Yulian Semyonov’s novel of the same name, Tikhonov achieved cult status playing a spy masquerading as a high-ranking German officer.
Dec., 2009, Little Humby, Lincolnshire, Eng.), earned a reputation for his intensity and force playing military men and dashing heroes in such films as Rob Roy, the Highland Rogue , The Dam Busters , and The Hasty Heart , for which he received an Academy Award nomination for best actor.
Todd, the son of an army officer, had a childhood that was split between England, India, and his native Ireland.
He enrolled in drama school in the hopes of becoming a playwright but soon switched his focus to performing.
Caught in the Act , Todd, a genuine war hero, compared his experiences parachuting into Normandy on D-Day to preparing for a role onstage.
After the war he won the part of the dying Scotsman in the 1945 Broadway production of The Hasty Heart, the same role that he would later immortalize on-screen.
Jan., 2009, Ponce), reigned as world light heavyweight champion after knocking out American Wilfred Pastrano in the ninth round on March 30, 1965; he defended his title four times before losing the last bout on Dec., 1966, in a 15-round decision to Dick Tiger of Nigeria.
On May 16, 1967, Torres lost a championship rematch with Tiger on another 15-round decision.
He was president of the World Boxing Organization and was inducted into the International Boxing Hall of Fame in 1997.
Dec., 2009, Los Angeles, Calif.), was particularly noted for his study of the history of ideas.
In his work on ethics, Toulmin was concerned with describing prescriptive language—that is, imperative sentences and value judgments used for ethical statements—while holding that ethics, or the logical study of moral language, cannot be reduced to subjective or objective facts but is a unique expression of duty or right.
Toulmin studied mathematics and physics at Kings College, Cambridge , and then returned to Cambridge after his World War II military service to study philosophy under Ludwig Wittgenstein and John Wisdom.
Nov., 1936, Louisville, Ky.— Sept., 2009, Danbury, Conn.), performed as part of the popular folk music trio Peter, Paul, and Mary, which was known for smooth harmonies and earnest, often politically tinged anthems.
Despite the group’s soft-edged sound, their lyrics addressed the issues of the civil rights movement, and in 1963 the trio performed at the Rev.
It was her central role in the burgeoning Greenwich Village folk scene, however, that ensured her a place in musical history.
Though quite shy, she began performing folk arrangements in 1961 with fellow singers Peter Yarrow and Noel Paul Stookey.
The following year the group released its first album, the selftitled Peter, Paul, and Mary.
Though the group disbanded in 1970, and Travers embarked on a solo career, the trio often reunited for concerts.
Tshabalala-Msimang, Manto (Mantombazana Edmie Tshabalala-Msimang), South African physician and politician (b.
Dec., 2009, Johannesburg, S.Af.), as South Africa’s health minister , earned the epithet Dr.
Beetroot for her insistence that AIDS could be treated with vitamins and a diet rich in such vegetables as garlic, potatoes, and beets.
Tshabalala-Msimang denied that HIV caused AIDS and actively prevented the distribution in South Africa of antiretroviral drugs, which she denounced as poison.
Tshabalala-Msimang was active from an early age in the African National Congress and spent many years living in exile.
Returning to South Africa in 1990, she was elected to Parliament in 1994 and joined the government as deputy justice minister in 1996 before being named health minister.
At the time of her death, due to complications from a liver transplant in 2007, she was reportedly preparing a presentation modifying her earlier stand on AIDS and denying that she had ever opposed the use of antiretroviral drugs.
Jan., 2009, Danvers, Mass.), was renowned for his careful craftsmanship and realistic but subtle depiction of “American, Protestant, small-town, middle-class” life.
Rabbit, Run , considered to be one of Updike’s best novels, concerns a former star athlete who is unable to recapture success when bound by marriage and small-town life and flees responsibility.
Three novels, Rabbit Redux , Rabbit Is Rich , and Rabbit at Rest —the latter two of which won Pulitzer Prizes—follow the same character during later periods of his life.
Rabbit Remembered returns to characters from those books in the wake of Rabbit’s death.
In addition to Harry (“Rabbit”) Angstrom, Updike often expounded upon other characters from earlier novels, omitting decades of their lives only to place them in the middle of new adventures.
The Witches of Eastwick (1984; filmed 1987), a black comedy about a coven of modern witches, was followed by The Widows of Eastwick , which trails the women into old age.
Essays on American Art examines both art and its cultural presentation, and Due Considerations collects later commentary spanning art, sexuality, and literature.
Auden and Stephen Spender— credited Upward as a key influence on their own development.
While attending Cambridge together, Upward and Isherwood crafted a series of fantastic stories set in a fictional English village called Mortmere.
The often outrageous tales were widely circulated in manuscript among the pair's friends but were not published until The Mortmere Stories appeared in 1994.
Valenzuela raced quarter horses as a child and won his first Thoroughbred race at age 16.
In 1958 he rode Tim Tam to victories in the Kentucky Derby and the Preakness Stakes, and he matched the feat 10 years later aboard Forward Pass.
Valenzuela experienced his greatest success, however, with fivetime Horse of the Year honoree Kelso, which he guided to 22 wins in 35 races between 1962 and 1964.
Jan., 2009, Los Angeles, Calif.), worked closely for more than three decades with her Swedish-born husband, Pop artist Claes Oldenburg, on more than 40 Large-Scale Projects, giant sculptures of everyday items, including the iconic Batcolumn in Chicago, Spoonbridge and Cherry at the Walker Art Center in Minneapolis, Minn., Shuttlecocks at the Nelson-Atkins Museum of Art in Kansas City, Mo., and Flying Pins , which was commissioned by the city of Eindhoven, Neth.
She first met Oldenburg in 1970, but it was not until 1976, when she was teaching at the Academy of Fine Arts in Enschede, that the couple reconnected.
May 15, 2009, Hong Kong, China), was a war photographer whose work spanned decades and included coverage of such conflicts as the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and the Moro rebellion in the Philippines, but he was most famous for his 1975 image of evacuees lining up on a Saigon rooftop to board a helicopter at the frenzied close of the Vietnam War.
Often erroneously said to show the American embassy in Saigon—in reality, it depicts an apartment building that housed the CIA station chief and his staff—the photograph came to have iconic status as an encapsulation of the futility of the United States war effort.
From 1972 to 1975 he documented the Vietnam War for United Press International, after which he returned to Hong Kong, where he spent the rest of his life as a photojournalist in Asia.
Oct., 2009, Saly, Senegal), had an unsteady career marked by early success but marred by drugs and instability that overshadowed his celebrated skill as a cyclist.
Following a rural upbringing in a Belgian village— and despite a childhood injury that led to several surgeries—Vandenbroucke won his first race at the age of 17.
He emerged onto the professional scene in 1994 and dominated in more than 50 races, including the Paris-Nice and Ghent-Wevelgem in 1998 and the Liege-Bastogne-Liege in 1999.
Additional drug arrests, suicide attempts, and his wife’s claims of domestic violence continually clouded Vandenbroucke’s life, and his numerous attempts at making a comeback were repeatedly derailed.
Varennikov, Valentin Ivanovich, Russian military officer and politician (b.
May 6, 2009, Moscow, Russia), was an ardent nationalist who helped lead the failed 1991 coup against Soviet Pres.
Varennikov was a veteran of the Battles of Stalingrad and Berlin and rose to prominence during the Cold War.
He was seconded to oversee the cleanup of Chernobyl following the 1986 nuclear accident and then returned to Afghanistan, where he remained until Soviet forces withdrew in 1989.
He was awarded the Hero of the Soviet Union and promoted to deputy defense minister.
Following the 1991 coup attempt, he refused a proffered amnesty and was subsequently acquitted of any wrongdoing.
Jan., 2009, New Delhi, India), was president of India from July 25, 1987, to July 25, 1992; in this largely ceremonial post, he provided relative stability amid a politically turbulent period during which he appointed three prime ministers.
He became involved in India’s independence struggle and was consequently jailed by the British.
After his release he practiced law, founded the Labour Law Journal, and helped draft newly independent India’s constitution, which was adopted in 1950.
Venkataraman was elected to the Provisional Parliament as a member of the Indian National Congress party.
He subsequently was a member of the Lok Sabha (lower house of Parliament) during 1952-57 and from 1977 onward.
From 1957 to 1967 he was minister of industry and labour for the state of Madras.
Venkataraman eventually joined the central government, serving as minister of finance and industry , minister of defense , and vice president before being elected president by an electoral college.
Vieira, a member of the minority Papel ethnic community, trained as an electrician before joining PAIGC and fighting in the liberation war against the colonial power, Portugal.
After independence in 1974, he served as Guinea-Bissau's minister of defense and prime minister , and in 1980 he took control in a bloodless coup against Pres.
Having achieved a modicum of economic and political stabil164 Obituaries ity, Vieira won the country’s first multiparty presidential vote in 1994 and was reelected four years later.
He was overthrown in 1999, but another coup in 2003 expedited his return from exile in Portugal.
Running as an independent, Vieira was unexpectedly returned to power in the 2005 presidential poll.
He survived an assassination attempt in November 2008, but on March 2, 2009, one day after the army chief of staff died in a bomb attack, Vieira was shot dead by government soldiers.
Wahid, Abdurrahman , Indonesian Muslim religious leader and politician (b.
Sept., 1940, Denanyar, Paula Bronstein—Newsmakers/Getty Images Indonesian Muslim scholar and political leader Abdurrahman Wahid East Java, Dutch East Indies [now Indonesia]—d.
Dec., 2009, Jakarta, Indon.), was the first president of Indonesia to be elected through a vote by the People’s Consultative Assembly, as opposed to the earlier, consensus-seeking process.
He was a wellknown scholar who opposed radical Islamism and encouraged interfaith dialogue for the promotion of world peace.
He studied the Qur’an intensively at a religious boarding school founded by his paternal grandfather and in Jakarta when his father was Indonesia’s first cabinet minister for religion.
Leaving without a degree, he moved to Baghdad, where his religious writings attracted attention.
After returning to Indonesia in the early 1970s, Wahid became a scholar.
He also headed the political discussion group Forum Demokrasi, which welcomed dissidents and human rights advocates.
Wahid was honoured with the Magsaysay Award and was subsequently elected to lead the World Council on Religion and Peace.
In 1994 President Suharto loyalists within the NU tried in vain to end Wahid’s chairmanship.
In the wake of the forced resignations of Suharto and his successor, Bacharuddin Jusuf Habibie , Wahid was elected president, but economic and political instability, coupled with a corruption crisis in which he was implicated, led to his impeachment and removal from office in 2001.
July 17, 2009, Norwich, Conn.), was the lanky lower-voiced member of the pop-singing duo Peter and Gordon during the so-called musical British Invasion of the 1960s.
Between 1964 and 1968, Waller and his red-haired school chum and singing partner, Peter Asher, racked up nine top 20 hit records.
Their debut single, “A World Without Love"" (written by Beatle Paul McCartney, as were several of their later records), reached number one on the charts in both the U.K. and the United States After Peter and Gordon amicably split in 1968, Asher became a successful record producer and manager, while Waller pursued a solo singing career, which included the 1972 album Gordon ( United States title, . . . and Gordon) and a stint onstage in Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat.
Walters, Sir Alan Arthur, British economist, government adviser, and educator (b.
June 17, 1926, Leicester, Eng.— Jan., 2009, London, Eng.), as Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher’s chief economic adviser—both unofficially and officially —formulated the monetarist economic policies that characterized Thatcher’s government; he was particularly noted for his endorsement of tax increases and spending cuts in the recession budget of 1981 and for his strong opposition to Britain’s joining a common European currency.
Prime Minister Edward Heath in 1970 offered Walters a part-time advisory position, which ultimately led to his job with Thatcher.
In 1989 Chancellor of the Exchequer Nigel Lawson, who supported a common European currency, accused Walters of interfering with his department.
When Thatcher refused to dismiss Walters, Lawson resigned, as did Walters; the scandal contributed to Thatcher’s fall from power a year later.
In 1972 Wasserstein joined the law firm Cravath, Swaine & Moore, but in 1976 Joseph Perella lured him to the corporate acquisitions department of First Boston.
The two men became dominant players in mergers and acquisitions at First Boston and later through Wasserstein Perella, a private equity firm they founded in 1988.
Perella quit in 1993, and Wasserstein sold the firm for a total of $1.56 billion in 2001.
After moving in 2002 to Lazard Ltd., one of Wall Street’s most timehonoured investment banks, he wrested control of the firm from Michel DavidWeill (whose ancestors had founded Lazard in 1848), assumed the title of CEO, and in 2005 took the firm public.
At the time of his death, Wasserstein was chairman of private investment firm Wasserstein & Co.
Crime Scene Investigation, and The Practice, for which he won an Emmy Award as outstanding guest actor in a drama series.
Dec., 2009, Vence, France), specialized in creating portraits that captured Hollywood stars in unguarded moments, especially when they were involved in film rehearsals or relaxing backstage.
His candid shots were a departure from the glamour photos that were popular during the 1950s.
Early in his career Willoughby compiled a portfolio that profiled dancers and jazz performers.
Audrey: An Intimate Collection and Remembering Audrey 15 Years Later ), Marilyn Monroe, Frank Sinatra, Dustin Hoffman, and Anne Bancroft.
He lived in Ireland from 1972 until 1989 and then moved to the south of France.
Woods also was known for his pioneering research into the use of equines as models for better understanding of human disease.
He had previously shot to fame in his native Britain playing another embittered spy on television’s Cattail , for which he won a BAFTA in 1970.
Woodward studied acting at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, making his stage debut in 1946.
He performed Shakespeare in London and made his first appearance on Broadway in 1963, which led to his being cast in Noel Coward’s long-running musical High Spirits.
Jan., 2009, Chadds Ford), was a watercolourist and worker in tempera noted primarily for his realistic depictions of the buildings, fields, hills, and people of his personal world.
Wyeth, was a wellknown illustrator who had studied under Howard Pyle and who, starting in 1932, served as his son’s only teacher.
The subject matter of Andrew Wyeth's works came almost entirely from two localities, the Brandywine Valley around Chadds Ford and the area near his summer home in Cushing, Maine.
His work displays a strong linear quality, and within his limited palette—consisting mostly of earth tones—he achieved a subtly extensive range of colour.
His paintings are precise and detailed, yet he moved them beyond photographic naturalism by imbuing them with a sense of subjective emotion.
Christina’s World , his best-known painting, achieves a note of melancholy in its depiction of a disabled woman whom Wyeth knew seemingly trying to crawl up a hill.
This work also exemplifies his use of unusual angles and his mastery of light.
Between 1971 and 1985 Wyeth secretly painted Helga Testorf, his neighbour in Chadds Ford, creating hundreds of images of her, including nudes.
Other important exhibitions included a 1987 show of his “Helga pictures,"" organized by the National Gallery of American Art in Washington, D.C., and a 2006 retrospective at the Philadelphia Museum of Art.
Feb., 2009, Boston, Mass.), was a pioneer in cloning research who in 1999 succeeded in producing the first cloned farm animal in the U.S.—a Holstein calf named Amy.
He was able to show that cloned animals could have a normal life span and also helped to determine that meat and dairy products from cloned animals would be safe for human consumption.
Nov., 2009, Beijing, China), together with his wife, Gladys—the daughter of a British missionary to China—made a number of classical and modem Chinese works available in English.
He also translated the works of such writers as Homer, Aristophanes, Jules Verne, and George Bernard Shaw into Chinese and was considered the foremost Chinese literary translator.
In 1940 Yang returned to China with his wife, and together they began working as translators, joining the Foreign Languages Press in 1952.
Yang was instrumental in founding the periodical Chinese Literature, a leading source of translations from the Chinese.
Chinese Stories of the Xth to XVIIth Centuries, Poetry and Prose of the Tang and Song, and A Dream of Red Mansions), as well as a number of 20th-century works, including many by Lu Xun, Ding Ling, Guo Moruo, and Liu E Yang’s autobiography, White Tiger, was published in 2002.
May 20, 2009, Moscow, Russia), won critical and commercial acclaim as one of the U.S.S.R.'s most popular figures of stage and screen.
Yankovsky was admired for his ability to elicit complex emotions and to inhabit characters; his handsome features made him something of a sex symbol, a label he found insulting.
He graduated from the Solonov Actors Studio in 1965 and joined the Saratov Theatre Company.
In his final film, Tsar , he played Metropolitan Philip, the saintly adversary of the first Russian tsar, Ivan the Terrible.
In 1991 Yankovsky was the last actor named a People’s Artist of the Soviet Union.
Aside Robert Willett—Raleigh News & Observer/MCT/Landov American college basketball coach Kay Yow from leading North Carolina State to 20 appearances in the NCAA tournament—including a berth in the Final Four in 1998—Yow was the head coach of the United States women’s team that captured a gold medal at the 1988 Olympic Games in Seoul.
She was inducted into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame in 2002.
Yow, who waged a long battle with breast cancer, was known for her efforts to promote research and awareness of the disease, which included helping to establish the Kay Yow/WBCA Cancer Fund in 2007.
Oct., 2009, Boston, Mass.), co-discovered tRNA , a molecule essential for protein synthesis, and pioneered research into antisense DNA, which selectively inhibits the activity of genes.
In 1990 he cofounded Hybridon, Inc. (now Idera Pharmaceuticals), a company that specialized in the development of antisense therapeutics; he served as a member of Idera’s board of directors until 2006.
Cotton-top tamarin monkeys are shown at the Drayton Manor Theme Park and Zoo in Tamworth, Eng.
On the outskirts of Peshawar, Pak., local boys walk over the rubble of a girls' school that was destroyed in a bombing carried out by suspected Islamist militants.
Shutterstock; Finbarr O'Reilly—Reuters/Landov; David Jones/AP; Mohammad Sajjad/AP United States Marines monitor the flight of an unmanned aerial vehicle in remote southwestern Afghanistan.
John Moore—Getty Images; Jason DeCrow/AP Photos: Gregory Bull/AP; ON Scarff—Getty Images Dressed as a mariachi, a police officer wears a surgical mask as a precaution against the H1N1 virus as he monitors a tourist area in Mexico City.
A G-Wiz electric vehicle sits parked at a charging bay in London's Berkeley Square.
Twelve months later, what many called the Great Recession showed signs of coming to an end, and the worst appeared to have been averted.
On the whole, private economists applauded the United States governments response to the crisis at hand, but some of the remedies enacted there and in other countries seemed poised to haunt the world economy in years to come.
Even if the financial crisis did not send the world back to the 1930s, it turned economic growth into contraction in many countries and slowed expansion practically everywhere else.
The ripple effects of the financial crisis ranged far beyond the financial.
The Chinese brushed aside pleas for more accommodating human rights and currency valuation policies.
Most of the major industrial democracies adopted domestic government programs designed to awaken their slumbering economies; the United States package, at $787 billion, was the biggest.
The worlds economic outlook brightened as the year proceeded, however, and most countries began growing again in mid-2009 after recessions that were, for most, the deepest since the Great Depression.
In a rare exception, China escaped the slump; if anything, the global recession burnished 1/8/2009 1/26/2009 The Bank of England cuts its interest rate from 2% to 1.5%, the lowest since the bank's founding in 1694.
Iceland's government falls owing to the collapse of the country's economy.
It is reported that 3. million jobs have been lost in the United States since the recession began in December 2007.
Bill Ritter and other officials use jackhammers during the ceremonial groundbreaking for a bicycle trail and highway reconstruction project in Lakewood, Colo., on June 30.
The project was funded by the $787 billion fiscal stimulus package passed by the United States Congress in February.
China’s apparent ambition to challenge United States dominance in the global economy.
The United States housing market was the domino that, when it fell, toppled many of the worlds major economies and led the world into recession.
For the first half of the decade, aggressive investing by homebuyers, mortgage lenders.
Wall Street investment houses, and insurers had driven up the median price of a single-family home by almost 10% a year, with housing in some parts of the country escalating even faster.
When home prices headed back down in 2007, large numbers of homeowners faced rising adjustable-rate mortgage payments and/or could no longer borrow against a rising home value to finance other expenses.
By the middle of 2009, the median home price had fallen close to its 2000 level.
Those with heavy investments in housing, including risky mortgage-backed securities, found them all but worthless.
The government stepped in with a massively expensive bailout program in late 2008 and continuing into 2009.
The devastation to the United States economy spread far beyond housing.
Even financially secure banks, not trusting potential borrowers to pay them back, stopped lending.
Businesses—especially small and new businesses—could not find the credit that they needed to pay creditors or buy inventory or to pay their own workers, much less to hire new ones.
Even short-term interest rates close to zero did not fully thaw credit markets.
Businesses that relied on their customers’ ability to secure loans had a rough time.
Automakers General Motors and Chrysler, both of which reorganized after brief trips through bankruptcy in 2009, qualified for bailout money.
The overall economic slowdown sent stock prices reeling, with the benchmark Dow Jones Industrial Average sinking by about 54% in the 17 months from the market high in October 2007 to the trough in March 2009.
In the 1930s, national leaders generally pledged allegiance to fiscal policies based on balanced budgets.
With tax revenue falling in tandem with economic growth, balancing budgets meant cutting spending just when economies needed to stimulate business expansion and job growth.
This time around, however, political leaders poured money into such projects as road construction and schools.
Although some governments were more aggressive than others, just about all countries joined the stimulus parade.
In 1929 the United States Federal Reserve Board , seeking to restrain a speculative rise in stock prices, instituted a monetary policy of tight money and high interest rates.
The economy predictably contracted, and the Depression officially began that August.
Nevertheless, the Fed further tightened its grip on the money supply in 1931, adding to the squeeze on the domestic economy.
The Fed and many of its foreign counterparts also injected capital into banks and bought their shaky loans.
When economies go haywire, there is a natural tendency to close ranks by tightening trade policy and refraining from buying foreign goods.
In 1930 the United States Congress enacted the Smoot-Hawley import tariffs.
The result was a decline in world trade volume estimated in late 1932 at about 30% and still growing, an outcome almost universally seen as having fueled the Great Depression.
This time there was no such rush to protect industry at home, although worldwide trade actually dropped even more sharply in the current financial crisis than during the beginning of the Depression.
This was not the result of new trade barriers; rather, the faltering global economy sapped The Dow Jones Industrial Average closes at 6547.05, its lowest level of the year.
Chrysler LLC files for bankruptcy protection; after a merger with Italy's Fiat, it emerges on June 10.
General Motors, once the world's largest corporation, files for bankruptcy; it emerges on July 10.
Japan reports that its econ omy grew by 0.9% in the second quarter; thus, the country is no longer in recession.
Enlightened decision making may have blocked another Depression, but it could not prevent a great deal of misery.
Most of the developed countries had close financial and trade relations with the United States.
Of the 33 countries that the International Monetary Fund considered to have “advanced economies,” only Australia seemed likely to avoid a period of contraction.
The dynamic economies of Asia were well positioned, and three large Asian countries—India, Indonesia, and China—escaped relatively unscathed.
At least in the short run, India benefited from having isolated itself from the crosscurrents of the global economy.
Japans economy, the largest in the world after the U.S., was fused to the West’s, and Japan marched alongside the West into recession.
With a large economic stimulus package in place, however, Japan pulled out of recession in the third quarter of 2009.
Fearful that strict limits on greenhouse gas emissions could cripple the economic rebound, the Japanese government proposed weaker limits than those under discussion in Europe and the United States Europe, with its close financial and trade ties to the U.S., stood in sharp contrast to Asia.
Even Norway, which had virtuously invested its North Sea oil revenue with considerable prudence while the U.K. was spending its windfall on government programs, could not escape recession.
Norway slipped into a mild slump in late 2008 and emerged early in 2009.
Many countries approved economic stimulus packages to extricate themselves from recession, and many resumed economic growth, although the U.K., Spain, and others remained in recession for the first nine months of 2009.
Reflecting fears of future inflation, the stimulus programs in Europe were smaller than those in the United States Perhaps more significant, the largesse stopped at national borders.
Germany, France, and other wealthy European Union countries defeated Hungary’s request that the EU’s Western European members give $240 billion to members in Eastern Europe to combat the slump.
Iceland became the first country to lose its government over the financial crisis.
Iceland’s three largest banks, privatized in the early 1990s, had grown fat on securities trading, but they failed in 2008 when the financial crisis left them unable to pay a mountain of foreign obligations.
The conservative prime minister resigned in January 2009 and was replaced by a leftist, Johanna Sigurdardottir (see BIOGRAPHIES), who promptly recapitalized the banks.
Latvia had boasted Europe’s strongest economic growth rate as recently as 2007.
Then the tables turned, and the Latvian economy shrank at doubledigit rates in 2009—possibly the worst performance in Europe, although its Baltic neighbours, Lithuania and Estonia, were not far behind.
In the Latvian capital of Riga, a street demonstration in January to protest economic decline turned violent, and a month later the prime minister resigned.
In Greece, where the budget deficit reached nearly 13% of annual economic output (even greater than the 11% in the U.S.), the three credit-rating services—Fitch, Moody's, and Standard and Poor’s—downgraded the country's debt.
At year's end Greece had the lowest credit rating of the 16 countries in the euro zone.
That made it more expensive for Greece to finance its debt, which at 130% of economic output was nearly the highest in Europe.
Spain, whose budget deficit was rocketing toward 11%, was on the same path as Greece, although less far along.
Standard and Poor’s also downgraded Spain, which started at a much higher level.
The fiscal problems that put Greece and Spain on a slippery slope were common across Europe, especially among economies that had grown the most during the heady early years of the decade.
The Irish government, determined not to let the budget deficit reach 13%, proposed to raise taxes, cut benefits, and trim government workers’ pay.
What emerged from the bailout was an extraordinary degree of government involvement in—and sometimes even majority ownership of—the private sector.
Altogether, the government by late 2009 had provided an estimated $4 trillion to keep the financial sector afloat.
Many of the biggest bailout beneficiaries quickly paid the government back, and the ultimate cost of the bailout to taxpayers was estimated at “only"" $1. trillion.
Barack Obama the first legislative triumph of his month-old presidency when it enacted a $787 billion fiscal stimulus bill that comprised $288 billion in tax cuts and $499 billion in spending, most of it for public-works programs such as school construction and highway repair.
Although Republicans groused that checks for much of the $499 billion would be issued too late to do any good, the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office said that thanks to the tax measures, about three-quarters of the full $787 billion would be spent in 18 months.
Obama claimed that the bill would create or preserve 3. million jobs, a figure that many of his opponents called far too optimistic.
It is reported that the United States economy grew 3.5% in the third quarter and has emerged from recession.
United States unemployment figures show an increase to 10.2% in October, the high for the year and the first doubledigit rate since 1983.
The euro zone is no longer in recession, with a reported 1.6% annualized growth in the third quarter.
Congress also played a role in the bailout of failing financial institutions.
At the end of 2008, Congress enacted the Troubled Asset Relief Program authorizing the Department of the Treasury to invest up to $700 billion by buying unproductive real-estate investments or even becoming part owners by purchasing financial company stock.
The Fed, using authority that it already had, played an even bigger role.
Printing more money when not enough was available, the central bank invested heavily in foundering institutions and guaranteed the value of their shaky assets.
By the end of 2009, the government owned almost 80% of American International Group , the country’s biggest insurer, at a cost of more than $150 billion.
It initially spent $111 billion to prop up Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, the companies sponsored by Congress to buy mortgages from their issuers.
The government promised to play no role in managing these companies and to sell its ownership stakes as soon as practical.
TARP provided the Treasury with only a fraction of the funds used for the bailout, however.
The Fed was responsible for the lion’s share, and even the massive AIG rescue was engineered entirely outside the legislated Treasury Department program.
Reflecting public views, members of the government expressed outrage that some of the same executives who helped precipitate the financial crisis should make millions of dollars a year in salaries and bonuses.
Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner appointed a ""special master for executive compensation” to review the compensation packages of top financial executives at firms that received bailouts.
Many of the biggest bailout beneficiaries balked at the proposed salary limits and strove to get out from under them by paying the government back.
More ominously for the financial institutions, many members of Congress marched into 2010 with a determination to regulate them more closely.
The House passed a bill in 2009 that for the first time would bring exotic financial instruments under review by federal regulators.
The bill would also establish a single agency to protect financial consumers and guarantee shareholders a chance to vote on the compensation packages of corporate executives.
Despite the yearend sighs of relief over the improving economy, the economic destruction had not necessarily run its course.
Many banks that survived the crisis were badly bruised by the collapse of the housing market and remained less willing than before to provide the credit that greases all capitalist economies.
Huge government budget deficits, designed to facilitate economic growth in the short term, loomed like dark clouds on the horizon, threatening inflation and currency devaluations.
Low interest rates encouraged immediate business activity, but, like budget deficits, they could ultimately feed inflation.
International trade, which suffered as countries hunkered down and adopted ""me-first” policies, held below precrisis levels.
Nearly one house in four was worth less than what the occupants owed on the mortgage, and similar problems in commercial real estate were mounting.
Stock markets turned robustly upward, with the DJIA making up half of its losses by year-end 2009.
Although unemployment in the United States reached a peak of 10.2%, its highest level since 1983, it declined to 10%, and the 2.2% annual growth rate that the economy registered in the third quarter suggested future job growth.
Economists even took heart from the plight of Dubai World, a governmentowned developer in Dubai, U.A.E., that could not pay back $3. billion in loans by a December 14 deadline.
Just in the nick of time, fellow emirate Abu Dhabi bailed out Dubai with $10 billion.
Not only was that enough to get Dubai World well beyond its immediate default date, but it also proved that not every financial cough would mean pneumonia for the global economy.
Joel Havemann is a Former Editor and National and European Economics Correspondent for the Washington, D.C., and Brussels bureaus of the Los Angeles Times.
Citigroup and Wells Fargo become the last major American banks to exit the Troubled Asset Relief Program.
The DJIA closes 2009 at 10,428.05, up 18.8% for the year and 59.3% from the March low; the Nasdaq composite is up 43.9% for the year.
These technical advances—combined with China’s booming economy during a worldwide downturn and its increasing visibility on the international diplomatic stage— attested to the country’s strong progress toward superpower status.
In contrast to much of the world, China’s economy in 2009 demonstrated extraordinary resilience with a return to rapid economic growth—expected to exceed 8.5%—which the government attributed to its version of communism in contrast to laissez-faire capitalism.
Early in the year the closure of exportproducing factories in the south and east coastal areas resulted in a flow of millions of workers back to rural areas.
In 2008 the high cost of food and fuel had squeezed household budgets, and tight monetary and credit policies were adopted to prevent inflation and overheating.
This caused a slump in Chinas construction industry and property markets.
Nearly half of the package was designated for development of the country’s infrastructure, much of it in the rural areas, including airports and railways, with another 25% for reconstruction of Sichuan province, which had been devastated by an earthquake in May 2008.
This resulted in a 164% surge in renminbi/yuan loans in the first eight months of 2009, which allowed the economy to rebound quickly in comparison with other large economies.
Exports were recovering well in the second half of the year, and China looked to be on target to surpass Germany as the world’s top exporter.
There was growing speculation as to whether China could return to the dominant position that it held until the early 19th century, when it accounted for a third of the world’s manufactured output, compared with less than a quarter in the West.
A year-end free-trade deal with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations made this outcome even more likely.
China, as the world’s biggest creditor, had a mutually advantageous relationship with the United States, the world’s largest debtor, that had become crucial in the rebalancing of the world economy.
On March 23 a statement released by Zhou Xiaochuan, governor of the Peoples Bank of China , called for the United States dollar to be replaced as the dominant world currency by an international currency that would be unconnected with individual countries and would remain stable over the long term.
The PBOC suggested that Special Drawing Rights, created by the IMF in 1969 for use between governments and international institutions, could be used much more widely and adopted for payment in international trade and financial transactions, thereby reducing price fluctuations and the associated risks.
This bold initiative was repeated in July in Italy at the annual summit of the Group of Eight advanced countries.
Members of the so-called Group of Five (China, India, Brazil, Mexico, and South Africa) emerging economies were invited to attend, and China, with India and G-8 member Russia, called for an end to dollar domination of the international monetary system.
World Bank president Robert Zoellick warned that the United States dollar was under threat from the growing strength of the Chinese yuan and the euro.
China had overtaken Japan as the U.S.’s main creditor, and Beijing expressed concern that United States indebtedness and falling confidence in the dollar would undermine the value of its $800. billion of United States Treasury securities and other dollar assets, which together accounted for twothirds of Chinas $2. trillion foreign-exchange reserves and one-third of total world foreign-exchange reserves.
China’s investments in some oppressive regimes there evoked criticism in the West, but its reputation as Africa’s “best friend’’ was reflected in the November Forum on ChinaAfrica Cooperation meeting in Egypt, where Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao was warmly welcomed by more than 50 African leaders and government ministers.
The World Bank welcomed China’s involvement in Africa, especially when many other aid donors were in financial difficulty.
Trade between China and Africa exceeded $106 billion in 2008, and nearly 10% of China’s overseas direct investment was destined for Africa.
In early November 2009 alone, several multibillion-dollar deals were made in swaps of minerals for infrastructure aid, and China promised $10 billion in cheap loans.
It had given loans of up to $20 billion by 2009 to fund Angola’s post-civil war reconstruction and in return had benefited from millions of barrels of oil.
China's financial strength enabled it to take a more benign view of investments that were more risky or in hostile environments than could many other heavily indebted countries.
In early November the state-owned China National Petroleum Corporation , jointly with the U.K.’s BP, signed the largest oil deal with Iraq since the 2003 U.S.-led invasion of that country.
More significant was Beijing's willingness to invest in war-torn Afghanistan, where the state-owned China Metallurgical Group had begun development of the Aynak copper field, believed to be one of the world’s largest undeveloped copper reserves, located south of Kabul in a former al-Qaeda stronghold.
MCC won the concession with a $3 billion bid because of its promise to build a coal-based power plant and construct Afghanistan's first freight railway.
In August economic ties with Myanmar were strengthened through a $5. billion gas project in the Bay of Bengal.
The Shwe gas project was to supply the CNPC with gas for 30 years via a $2 billion pipeline to China’s Yunnan province border with Myanmar.
Although it had experienced impressive economic performance, China remained a low-income country, a factor that could hinder its progress toward superpower status.
Despite the rapid growth of China’s middle class, the gap between rich and poor continued to widen, and regional disparities continued.
Badly needed improvements to the infrastructure were being accelerated in 2009, but job shortages persisted both in the rural areas and for the rapidly growing urban college-graduate workforce.
A demographic time bomb also was looming as a result of China’s one-child policy.
The working-age population was expected to start to shrink by 2015, and it was projected that in 2050 there would be only 1. working-age adults to support each person over age 60, compared with 7. in 1975.
In July the government took the first steps toward relaxing the one-child policy, but it could prove to be too little too late.
Meanwhile, China’s preoccupation with its 55 official minorities was costly in time and money.
These peoples accounted for only 8.5% of the 1. billion population but inhabited sparsely populated regions encompassing twothirds of the land, much of it rich in natural resources, and many were located on the borders and represented a strategic threat.
In July the simmering problem of the minorities was drawn to international attention by the plight of the mainly Muslim Uighur people in Xinjiang region, which was home to 20 million people from 13 major ethnic groups.
China’s inability to fully integrate the Tibetans also remained an ongoing concern.
While 2009 marked a watershed for China's global influence, it was difficult to judge the country's longer-term aspirations.
While the reputation of the United States was tarnished in the wake of the Iraq invasion and the collapse of many American banks, that of China had been enhanced by its rapid economic progress.
For the vast majority of China’s population, the willingness of the communist government to develop an increasingly capitalist economic system was not incompatible, and most Chinese citizens lived comfortably in a society that was once again being encouraged to adopt the fundamental values of Confucianism, a philosophy that demands a hierarchy and respect for authority.
Janet H Clark is an editor, independent analyst, and writer on international economic and financial topics.
Despite China’s booming economy and growing middle class, the economic gap between the rich and the poor, including these migrant workers in Beijing, grew wider in 2009.
T hough drug trafficking flourished in Mexico throughout much of the 20th century, the ever-increasing brutal violence associated with the production and trafficking of illicit drugs had by 2009 sparked the dispersal of 45,000 Mexican soldiers and 5,000 policemen across the country and attracted worldwide attention as images of beheaded corpses were featured in the international media.
From December 2006 (when Felipe Calderon succeeded Vicente Fox as president of Mexico) to October 2009, some 14,000 people in the country were executed by drug traffickers, and more than 3,000 of those deaths occurred during the first half of 2009 alone.
These statistics underscored the enormity of the situation and the fact that the Mexican government was at war with a very powerful enemy.
Another factor was the dramatic increase since the late 1990s in the consumption of illegal drugs in Mexico; as domestic consumption grew, fights between drug cartels erupted over new territories.
As part of their preparations for war against other cartels, many drug-trafficking organizations hired trained mercenaries.
The Gulf cartel based in the border city of Matamoros, for example, recruited a group of former Mexican army commandos called the Zetas, who became known for their efficient use of violence.
Other cartels recruited members of Central American street gangs, or maras, as well as former Guatemalan elite troops known as the Kaibiles.
Most of the recent killings resulted from confrontations between the cartels.
The remainder were policemen and soldiers—some of them probably involved in drug trafficking—and a small number of civilians.
The spike in violence between the cartels was one sign of the accelerating fragmentation of these organizations.
The big cartels that appeared in the mid-1990s in Mexico— such as the Tijuana, Juarez, Sinaloa, and Gulf cartels—by 2009 did not exist in the same configuration.
Splits occurred in all of them, with new groups emerging to challenge for control over the drug trade.
This fragmentation along with the growth in the domestic market for illegal drugs led not only to more executions but also to the increasing brutality with which killings were carried out.
Many bodies of those executed had been found with messages intended for other drug-trafficking organizations as well as for the Mexican authorities.
The cartels also posted messages in public places accusing the government of having engaged in corruption or of having favoured one cartel over the others; in addition, they were said to sponsor popular protests against the presence of the army in some parts of the country.
Over the past three years, criticism of the extreme violence and the government’s use of military forces in combating drug trafficking increased.
This argument was based on the fact that during those years there were lower levels of drug-related violence.
It was tolerance, however, that allowed the cartels to grow to the point that they became a serious national security threat.
This policy was possible in an authoritarian system in which the rule of law did not exist.
A negotiation or even a simple indifference to the activities of drug traffickers would be impossible in a truly democratic system.
Consequently, the Mexican government in the short term decided to combat drag trafficking with the few resources it had.
Unfortunately, the Mexican state historically had very poor law-enforcement tools; institutions were weak, corruption was rampant, legal culture was virtually nonexistent, and human and material resources were insufficient.
It was precisely the weakness of the Mexican state that precipitated the high levels of violence seen during recent years.
If the cost of tolerance is corruption and the aggravation of the problem, the cost of confrontation is violence.
Calderon made the fight against drug trafficking a priority of his government.
Some argued that this was an easy way to secure domestic legitimacy, given his close and contested victory in the presidential elections of 2006.
When he became president, however, drug traffickers controlled significant parts of the country, and there was a clear demand With Mexican army soldiers standing guard, Eduardo Morquecho , a United States citizen with suspected links to the Arellano Felix cartel, is displayed to the press along with drugs, guns, and equipment seized during his arrest in Tijuana in July. from the public for a harder stance against this phenomenon.
In a poll conducted at the end of 2008, 72% of Mexicans considered the government’s attempts to combat drug trafficking to be adequate.
Another poll taken in July 2009, after the country’s midterm elections, revealed that 51% of Mexicans believed that the government was going to win the war in the long run; only 31% thought that the drug traffickers would win.
This high level of domestic support allowed Calderon to promote significant reforms of the police force and judicial system— reforms that were supported by all political parties.
The proposed changes, which included the establishment of oral trials (rather than those conducted secretively through written briefs) and the strengthening of the federal police force in the hope that it could replace the army in the war on drug trafficking, promised to give the government more resources to fight organized crime.
If the security reforms approved over the past three years are successful, the Mexican government may be able to control the pervasive effects of drug trafficking.
The goal is to transform the problem of drug trafficking into a public security issue rather than a national security threat.
If the government is unable to control corruption, the Mexican war on drugs will be lost, and the temptation to go back to the policy of tolerance—despite the fact that it will likely worsen the problem—will be tremendous.
Although in August Mexico decriminalized smallscale drug possession, this move only suggested that the government considers it pointless to prosecute small-time users; it does not mean that the legalization of drugs is imminent—a still very distant scenario.
Meanwhile, the only choice that the Mexican government has is to continue to fight drug trafficking and have faith that when the judicial and police-related reforms are put into place, they will be successful.
Jorge Chabat is Professor at the Department of International Studies of the Center for Research and Teaching in Economics in Mexico City.
Some 80 people were killed. by Lawrence Ziring T he year 2009 was a pivotal one in the history of Pakistan.
Violent events were shaking Pakistani society at its roots and occurring with increasing frequency in ever more numerous settings.
A consequence of both internal and foreign circumstances, the nuclear weapons-owning country found itself struggling to cope with forces that it set in train as well as those imposed from afar.
An interested observer would thus need a historical perspective to understand Pakistan’s long and thus far failed attempts to achieve a modicum of stability.
By the start of the 21st century, Pakistan had never known true security, which many thought might account for its long tryst with military dictatorships and the resulting stunting of its political process.
Established as a predominantly Muslim but supposedly secular state in the wake of the United Kingdom’s retreat from empire, Pakistan, like India, was the consequence of an outstanding South Asian personality.
Mohammed Ali Jinnah shared the spotlight with Mohandas K Gandhi in the days leading up to the partition of British India in August 1947, but unlike the Mahatma, who chose not to participate in the political process following British dispensation, Jinnah assumed the role as Pakistan's first head of state, and it was around him that the government took form.
Gandhi’s assassination soon after the transfer of power therefore did not have the impact on India’s governance as Jinnah’s death hardly a year after Pakistan’s independence.
Moreover, his vision of a progressive state could not be institutionalized, and the country drifted from its intended objective to a series of arbitrary maneuvers that eventually opened the way for the Pakistan army to dominate the political scene.
From the moment of independence, Pakistan found itself locked in a violent contest with India.
Immediately following the transfer of power, India and Pakistan went to war over the northern Kashmir territory, and their conflict set the scene for a bitter relationship in the decades that followed.
The two countries waged war again in 1965 and most significantly in 1971.
Although the latter struggle was largely played out in Pakistan’s Bengal province, it could not be kept from spilling over into Kashmir.
Moreover, the loss of East Bengal (East Pakistan ), as a consequence of New Delhi’s intervention in the Pakistan civil war, ended the original Pakistan.
Humiliated by the success of Indian arms, the Pakistan army fell back on a substitute strategy that emphasized avoiding direct conflict with its larger, more powerful neighbour but nevertheless aimed at sustaining the struggle for Kashmir through clandestine means.
The Pakistan army’s role in raising, equipping, and deploying jihadists for operations in Kashmir brought an end to the country’s precivil war secular objectives.
Islamist organizations, practicing obscurantist versions of religious expression and marginalized in the original Pakistan, came to assume mainstream roles in the army and throughout the country.
Still another dimension of Pakistan’s security dilemma was its ties to the United States.
Pakistan's membership in the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization in 1954 and the Baghdad Pact in 1955 (subsequently the Central Treaty Organization in 1958) brought the country American military assistance, ostensibly to defend the region against communist forces but in actuality to balance the threat posed by India.
Just as Pakistan straddled both sides in the Cold War, however, its American ally also practiced inconsistencies, most notably during the 1965 war with India, when the United States refused to support Pakistan.
More significant, however, was Pakistan’s role as a frontline state when the Soviet Union invaded neighbouring Afghanistan in 1979, and Washington, after some hesitation, judged Pakistan a proxy in its contest with Moscow.
Washington’s decision to abandon the region following the Soviet army’s withdrawal in 1989, however, left the Pakistanis to shape their future free of United States interference.
The consequence of this was the Pakistan army’s determination not only to sustain the struggle for Kashmir but also to establish a sphere of influence over Afghanistan.
Islamabad, which continued to perceive New Delhi as its number one enemy, sought to bolster Pakistan’s defenses by developing more significant capabilities along the Pakistan/ Afghanistan frontier.
Thus any attempt by the multiethnic and tribal Afghans to rebuild their country following the Soviet retreat was sabotaged by Pakistani military maneuvers.
Moreover, the sustained chaos in Afghanistan allowed Pakistan to introduce a third force into the region, a still more virile jihadist array known as the Taliban.
With the aid of substantial Pakistani resources in men and weapons, the Taliban gained control over most of Afghanistan.
After seizing Kabul in 1996, the Taliban declared Afghanistan an Islamic Emirate guided by ultraconservative Islamic law; Islamabad quickly recognized the new order.
Pakistan appeared to have achieved its most immediate national security objective, and most important, it seemed to gain control over the Pashtun peoples domiciled on both sides of their shared border with Afghanistan.
The success of the austere Islamists and the formation of a chaste Islamic state in Central Asia drew the attention of Muslims from other parts of the world, among them Osama bin Laden and his al-Qaeda organization.
The latter, bent on forcing American influence from Islamic countries, saw in the resurrected Afghan emirate a base of operations ideally suited to press al-Qaeda's worldwide strategy.
The terrorist attacks in the United States on Sept., 2001, were quickly traced to Afghanistan, where bin Laden and the Taliban emir had entered into cooperative and intimate association.
Washington's decision to destroy the al-Qaeda/ Taliban combination, however, could not be implemented without logistic support from the military government in Pakistan.
Islamabad’s strategy—its quest for security—therefore again ended in failure when the U.S.-promoted “war on terrorism"" enveloped the very region that Pakistan had endeavoured to bring under its influence.
The first decade of the 21st century found Pakistan immersed in protracted and indecisive conflict not only on all its frontiers but also throughout the country.
Pakistan achieved nuclear weapons status in 1998 but weapons of mass destruction are of little value in multidimensional struggle.
Meanwhile, the loss of East Pakistan in 1971 had done nothing to improve relations between Pakistan’s remaining ethnic groups.
Internal conflict remained intense and unyielding in Balochistan, while the Pashtuns of the NWFP and adjoining FATA formed the bulk of the by-now rebellious Taliban.
Moreover, the dominant role played by the Punjabis in Pakistani life and government remained a continuing source of enmity in Sind province as well as among the Mohajir community of Karachi.
Successive failures at deeper national integration, coupled with ineffective and corrupt government and repeated military coups, left the attentive public disenchanted and prompted the vast semiliterate and undereducated population to seek salvation in spiritual experience mentored by opponents to anything resembling cosmopolitan culture.
Pakistan's economy—like its political and social institutions—was in shambles.
Unable to cope with multiple domestic needs Pakistan became ever more dependent on external assistance, notably from the United States, but foreign aid does little to address a dilemma within.
With many people fearful that the United States dependency diminished Pakistan’s sovereignty, new strains emerged in Pakistani-American relations.
No less significant, in the wake of the terrorist assault in late 2008 on Mumbai (Bombay), which was mounted from Pakistan, the stage appeared to be set for still another more deadly conflict with India.
Nuclear deterrence, let alone mutually assured destruction, had limited value as policy in South Asia.
Furthermore, the Kashmir dispute remained as intractable as it was in those first years following independence, and the government in Kabul resolutely opposed Islamabad’s interference in Afghan affairs.
Finally the Pakistan army’s direct or indirect association with terrorist organizations exposed its long-term agenda.
That agenda, centred on perceived hostile forces in India and Afghanistan, reinforced the need to preserve if not enhance relations with Islamic extremists calculated to remain influential long after American forces withdraw from the region.
Trapped in circumstances largely of their own making, the guardians of Pakistan’s security continued to view India as their mortal enemy and thus appeared determined to perpetuate their country's deepening insecurity.
From Recruitment to Reintegration by Michael Wessells A boy in Mogadishu, Som., is armed with an ammunition belt and a rocket-propelled grenade used by Islamist fighters in attacks against the government.
Worldwide, armed forces and nongovernmental armed groups recruit and exploit children, who are defined under international law as those under 18 years of age.
Though the number of child soldiers is unknown— many child recruiters successfully hide their actions, and some children lie about their age in order to join political struggles—it is estimated that at any time, there are approximately 250,000 child soldiers, many of whom are girls.
Although most child soldiers are teenagers, the recruits also include children as young as six or seven years of age.
For example, the Lord’s Resistance Army , which abducted many children and fought against the government of Uganda, maintained military camps in southern Sudan, where its leader, Joseph Kony, sired many children who subsequently became soldiers.
Commanders often select children because they are available in large numbers and can be recruited with impunity, because they can be fashioned into effective fighters, and because commanders know that they can manipulate children easily by employing terror tactics and offering incentives for bravery and initiative in combat.
Armed with small lightweight weapons, such as AK-47 assault rifles, even young children can be effective fighters.
They may also serve as spies who can slip behind enemy lines without suspicion.
Teenagers are often sought for their size and strength, their willingness to take risks that many adults would avoid, and their political consciousness.
In Sri Lanka the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Elam fought government forces in part by recruiting teenage girls to serve as suicide bombers.
Child recruitment is contextual and may involve force or decisions made by the child.
The LRA forcibly recruited as many as 60,000 children by abducting and subjugating them into obedience through a regime of terror.
To deter escape the LRA forced abducted children to surround recaptured escapees and beat them to death.
Forced recruitment was also used in Sierra Leone, where the opposition group Revolutionary United Front forced young people at gunpoint to join and often required children to kill members of their own villages or families.
Some children decide to join armed groups, but their choices may not be “voluntary,” since they are made in desperate circumstances and involve a mixture of “push” and “pull"" factors.
In Colombia, for example, a boy who has been abused in his home may leave and seek an alternate “family” in the form of an armed group.
In other countries youths have been lured by propaganda and an ideology of liberation into believing that by becoming soldiers, they will help to liberate their people.
In Rwanda young Hutu were recruited into a youth militia and were taught that Tutsi had to be eliminated; more than 800,000 people, mostly Tutsi, were killed in the 1994 genocide.
Other pull factors may include retribution, money, family ties, and power.
In Liberia some children join armed groups in an effort to avenge wrongs, such as the killing of one's parents by government forces.
Children may also be eager to earn money that they can send home to support impoverished families.
In northern Afghanistan children frequently joined the Northern Alliance to fight the Taliban because their fathers, brothers, or uncles were members and because they regarded fighting as a matter of family honour and village protection.
A common myth is that all child soldiers are fighters, when in fact many recruits serve as porters, cooks, bodyguards, and domestics, among other roles.
In conflicts in countries such as Liberia and Sierra Leone, girls were recruited to serve not only as fighters but also as sex slaves, whose refusal to provide sex often led to severe punishment or death.
Because they have been socialized into lives as soldiers, child soldiers may themselves become a means of perpetuating violence and armed conflict.
To break cycles of violence, a key priority has been to demobilize child soldiers and help them to transition or reintegrate into civilian life.
Typically, this is done through a process of disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration.
Having turned in their weapons (disarmament), child soldiers are demobilized by being officially stood down from armed groups.
They are reintegrated through rehabilitation and work with families and communities to help them find a place in civilian society.
Rehabilitation requires attention to mental health issues that cause distress and impede reintegration.
In countries As part of her therapy, a female former child soldier in a rehabilitation camp in Bukavu, Dem.
Rep. of the Congo, plays a drum. such as Liberia and Sierra Leone, where commanders had plied child soldiers with drugs to make them fearless, many former child soldiers developed problems of substance abuse.
In other countries a minority of former child soldiers develop clinical problems, such as depression, anxiety, and trauma, particularly the post-traumatic stress disorder that can arise following extreme events, including exposure to deaths or active engagement in killing.
Effective treatment of these problems requires specialized supports, such as counseling by well-trained psychologists or psychiatrists, few of whom are available in war zones.
In Angola, for example, former child soldiers were terrified because they believed that they were haunted by the unavenged spirits of the people they had killed.
In this case, rather than counseling, the children benefit from the services of a traditional healer, who conducts a cleansing ritual to remove their spiritual pollution.
It is often everyday social issues, however, that cause the greatest distress and the most formidable barriers to reintegration.
To rectify family separation it is essential, when possible, to reunify former recruits with their families and to manage family conflicts.
Nearly all former child soldiers struggle because they have lost years of education and lack the income needed to start a family or the social skills to assume the role of mother or father.
Some develop unruly behaviour, while others have difficulty meeting expectations associated with ordinary living.
Many former child soldiers—particularly girls—are stigmatized and called “rebels” or are viewed as aggressive troublemakers.
Effective reintegration is possible through holistic community-based supports.
It is important to mobilize communities to support the livelihood, acceptance, and education of former child soldiers and to activate protection mechanisms that guard against rerecruitment or retaliation.
Nevertheless, reintegration efforts are not sufficient by themselves; equal efforts should be given to prevention, particularly to ending the impunity that allows recruitment to continue.
Recognition by the international community of the serious nature of enlisting children in warfare was highlighted in 2009 when the warlord Thomas Lubanga Dyilo became the first person to be tried by the International Criminal Court.
The UN was also at the forefront of strengthening international standards against child recruitment and urged governments to ratify the Optional Protocol on the involvement of children in armed conflict.
The optional protocol, which was adopted in 2000 to augment the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child , raises the minimum age of participation in hostilities from 15 years of age to 18.
These efforts will succeed, however, only if all countries agree to abide by the optional protocol and thus safeguard the world’s children.
Born on the very same day— Feb., 1809—these two icons, one of emancipation and the other of evolution, continue to stir us in the 21st century and remain contemporary in startling ways.
If anything, they are more alive for us now than they were at the moment of their centenary.
A hundred years ago, with civil rights unaccomplished and genetics not yet in place to explain the mechanisms of inheritance, Lincoln was perceived by many as a pious but in some ways impotent figure, and Darwinism was a speculative road, largely not taken.
Barack Obama cites and echoes Lincoln in most of his speeches and many of his actions, and arguments over Lincoln’s faith, acts, and attitudes continue to raise temperatures and feelings.
There is even more dispute about Darwin and his legacy—attempts to use Darwinism to understand not only biology but also art and literature pour out, while counterattacks from the religious-minded arraign Darwin for killing God and favouring eugenics.
Alone among the great scientists, he still lends his name to the tradition that he engendered.
Different controversies surrounded both men throughout the bicentennial year.
With Lincoln, the most vivid arguments turned on that “piety” and the politics that it produced.
The Biography of a Writer helps to make the case for Lincoln’s essential “literary” qualities.
Harvard professor Henry Louis Gates, Jr., wrote a searching book, Lincoln on Race and Slavery , and hosted an equally searching public television documentary, Looking for Lincoln.
Beginning with his own skepticism about Lincoln’s sincerity on the race question, Gates worked his way around to the view—widely shared—that Lincoln’s antislavery views, though they may have begun without a clear vision of equality, ended with such a vision and were consistently courageous for their time.
The Parallel Lives of Frederick Douglass and Abraham Lincoln emphasizes Lincoln’s moral education at the hands of the great African American abolitionist.
Others tried to argue, on the whole rather refebly, that Lincoln was really just a politiciah—as though eloquence and politics are alien to each other.
In any case, to segregate Lincoln’s work as a word maker from his work as a politician is historically absurd.
Lincoln became a plausible candidate for president because—and only because—of his reputation as an orator; his political life and his writing life were one.
The central insight of evolutionary theory—that the story of life, from first microbe to finished man, is one—was part of his abolitionist heritage.
Darwin, courteous by nature, gave a respectful hearing to his cousin Francis Daltons eugenicist ideas (as he did, for that matter, to the ideas of Karl Marx), but in his own work he explicitly and unequivocally rejected those first stirrings of social Darwinism, emphasizing instead the role of culture in fostering humane progress and that of the instinct of sympathy in making certain that human groups continued to care for the helpless.
Darwin was certainly a ""Europeanist,” who believed that the liberal culture of his time was better than tribal culture, but he thought that those differences were the result of an increase in the spread of social sympathy rather than something inborn or natural only to one race.
Both Darwin and Lincoln emerged from their bicentennial trials as men of their time with the marks of their time—but as men who, on the whole, grew in moral understanding as they aged and came to embrace the kindest and wisest ideas Abraham Lincoln about human equality that their time offered.
Yet, although the polemics about them are importantly different, the two men are still worth taking together.
It is (as I meditated at length in my own long essay Angels and Ages) not a simple parallel in life but a common liberal temperament—a modem turn of mind—that melds them together.
There was not some kind of secret magic connecting these two very disparate figures but rather a field of new feelings and voices that connected many of the liberal voices of the day, including John Stuart Mill, Ralph Waldo Emerson, George Eliot, and William James.
One might propose three common elements that gave this temperament a shape.
First, they shared a taste for argument from below, rather than insistence from above.
Darwin and Lincoln both began their great works not with grand principle and moral exhortation but with simple evocations of homely evidence.
Darwin had begun his epoch-making Origin of Species not with the ""cosmic question” that he would solve but with an almost absurdly homely description of the breeding of dogs and pigeons.
Darwin's argument is more than an analogy—his point is similar to Newton’s contention that a boy throwing a ball and the motions of the planets follow the same rules, even if one is volitional and one is not.
Second, both Lincoln and Darwin practiced the habit, at times exasperating to their admirers, of sympathetic summary.
The ability to enter into an opponent’s argument without contempt or sarcastic bitterness was common to them both.
Darwin did not merely articulate his opponents’ arguments against evolution; in every case he anticipated them and refuted them in advance.
This is not merely instrumental, or a sign of softness—Lincoln went to war; Darwin annihilated a thousand years of biblical literalism—but it is a sign of sureness and part of the liberal inheritance.
Charles Darwin Finally, they shared a tragic sense of life that did not paralyze their capacity for moral action.
Both men rejected organized religion and searched for some other way to understand the presence of pain and suffering in the world; they sought some other model—for Lincoln, a kind of private providentialism; for Darwin, a stoical resignation and contemplation of the power of time—to make sense of mortality.
These three elements—argument from below, from evidence; sympathetic summary; and an ability to recognize the man-made nature of morality without succumbing to meaninglessness or searching for false comfort—are the touchstones, the key notes of the liberal temperament, and the real event of the bicentennial was to see how Darwin and Lincoln helped to set them.
In the politics of the newly inaugurated President Obama and in the efflorescence of evolutionary arguments, Darwin and Lincoln persist as central figures of liberal civilization—the civilization in which scientific progress and democratic politics are, as British natural philosopher Sir Karl Popper showed half a century ago, deeply and permanently intertwined.
The 40th Anniversary by Chris Salewicz A free concert to mark the 40th anniversary of a cultural and musical phenomenon— the legendary rock festival known as Woodstock— being organized by Lang, one of the original promoters in 1969, to take place in Brooklyn, N.Y., in August 2009 was canceled just days prior to the event but an anniversary concert featuring Woodstock alumni including Richie Havens and Country Joe McDonald at the Bethel Woods Center for the Arts, at the original site, was a success.
Other performers included Big Brother and the Holding Company, Canned Heat, and Levon Helm.
After efforts to hold the festival close to the actual town of Woodstock had been stymied, the organizers—Lang, Artie Kornfeld, John Roberts, and Joel Rosenman—secured land outside the town of Bethel.
Despite the business plan of the organizers, by late July members of hard-core American alternative society had begun arriving at the festival site.
The Merry Pranksters, the counterculture legends who were the alumni of author Ken Kesey, turned up in their famous psychedelic bus.
Aware that the Pranksters' presence was proof of the festival’s credibility, the Woodstock organizers ignored what would become a major problem.
Further integrity was provided by the arrival of the Hog Farm (the longestrunning hippie commune in the U.S.), a self-styled ""mobile, hallucination-extended family,” who brought with them literally tons of muesli and bulgar wheat, as well as truckloads of assorted vegetables and fruit.
A week before the festival was set to begin, most of the venue seemed in readiness.
Unaccountably, the turnstiles and gates were not ready for operation, which created a considerable problem.
By the night of August 13, about 50,000 people had arrived, mostly without tickets, and entered for free; by the end of the next day, the crowd had doubled in size.
On the morning of August 15, a young man was killed, accidentally driven over by a tractor.
By the afternoon of August 15, all roads within a 32-km radius of Woodstock were utterly blocked; the organizers summoned up to 16 helicopters.
By Friday evening the festival audience was 500,000 strong, eagerly awaiting the first act, unaware that electricity had yet to be fully piped to the stage.
The first artist to play was Richie Havens, opening the event as a solo performer only because he had been able to fit into the four-seater helicopter that was all that was available at the time for taking acts to the site.
Armed with only an acoustic guitar, Country Joe McDonald was cajoled into following Havens onstage.
Hanging out backstage, not booked to perform, was Sebastian, formerly of the Lovin' Spoonful.
Asked to play, Sebastian went out in front of the crowd and provided one of the key moments of the event.
Later that evening there was a fierce rainstorm—though nothing compared with what was yet to come.
The spirit of the event was inculcated in the 8:00 AM Saturday morning wakeup call over the sound system.
We have one of the biggest cities in the United States, and we ought to be proud of ourselves.
With the site in danger of being overrun by garbage, the audience worked as one to eliminate this health hazard.
By now, the music was in full flow, with triumphant performances from Creedence Clearwater Revival, the Who— briefly interrupted by a stage protest from Hoffman—and the Grateful Dead.
Joe Cocker Jerry Garcia of the Grateful Dead Sly and the Family Stone sealed the day’s glory with a mind-blowing show.
At midday, however, as Cocker and the Grease Band delivered a memorable set, fat clouds rolled in and the heavens opened, transforming Yasgur’s land into an ocean of mud.
As though adversity was being turned to advantage, the mud became a feature of the festival, with festivalgoers playing mud-sliding games.
Nelson Rockefeller had declared the festival a disaster area; it was his intention, he stated, to send in the National Guard and remove the entire audience.
Meanwhile, Crosby, Stills, Nash and Young, performing live for only the second time, delivered a set of almost transcendent bliss.
His rendition of the United States national anthem was etched into the memories of the remaining 25,000 people in the audience and provided the conclusion of a remarkable experience.
Chris Salewicz, a former writer for the New Musical Express magazine, is the author of more than a dozen books and has chronicled popular culture.
In an age when war is increasingly dominated by robots, the United States military alone fields at least 7,000 of these machines, which are either remotely guided by a human using a radio link or self-guided by preprogrammed flight plans.
More than 60 manufacturers in at least 40 countries are now servicing a market that is expected to exceed tens of billions of dollars over the next decade.
It is not suprising, then, that Quentin Davies, the U.K.’s minister for defense equipment and support, predicted in July 2009 that the world is now witnessing the last generation of manned combat aircraft and that by 2030 UAVs will have displaced them.
UAVs, also called remotely piloted vehicles or unmanned aircraft systems , are aircraft without a pilot onboard.
Fixedwing UAVs resemble “smart weapons"" such as cruise missiles, but they are superior because they return to their base after a mission and can be reused.
The current generation of UAVs varies in size from small propeller-driven handlaunched models such as the German army’s Aladin to jet-powered intercontinental-range craft such as the United States Air Force’s RQ-4 Global Hawk.
Prices range from a few hundred thousand dollars for small models to well over $100 million for a Global Hawk.
UAVs first took to the skies during World War II with radio-controlled target drones, and they continued to develop slowly through the Vietnam era, when film cameras were mounted onto jet-powered drones for photoreconnaissance missions.
Truly modem UAVs did not begin to appear over battlefields until the 1980s, when a number of technical advancements made them much more effective.
Advanced composite materials made for lighter, stronger airframes, and improved electronics permitted the development of high-resolution TV and infrared cameras.
Also, full implementation of the Global Positioning System in the 1990s made it possible to navigate UAVs with a precision that was previously unattainable.
UAVs began to garner media attention during NATO’s intervention in the Yugoslav civil war of the 1990s.
In 1995 the United States Air Force put the RQ-1 Predator into service for airborne surveillance and target acquisition.
Predators flying over Yugoslavia, for example, tracked troop movements, monitored refugees, and marked targets so that manned aircraft could attack them with laserguided bombs.
The Predator remains the most widely used battlefield UAV operated by the United States.
The entire system consists of the vehicle itself (with built-in radar, TV and infrared cameras, and laser designator), a ground-control station, and a communication suite to link the two by satellite.
Though pilotless, the Predator is operated by approximately 55 personnel, including a pilot operator and a sensor operator as well as intelligence, maintenance, and launch and recovery specialists.
The current version, designated the MQ-1, went into service in 2001 armed with two laser-guided AGM-114 Hellfire missiles, giving the UAV the ability to attack targets as well as identify them.
The first time a Predator made a confirmed kill was in Yemen in 2002, when one operated by the CIA destroyed a vehicle carrying six members of alQaeda.
A turboprop-powered version of the Predator, called the MQ-9 Reaper, is significantly larger and has a greater payload.
The Reaper has been operational since 2007 with United States forces and is also used by Britain’s Royal Air Force.
Since UAVs are not yet completely autonomous, their operators must display great skill in judging distance and speed when landing, a task made more difficult by a slight delay in signal transmission between the UAV and the ground-control station.
Moreover, there are occasional technical glitches, such as the one that occurred in September 2009 when a Reaper on a combat mission over Afghanistan could no longer be controlled and had to be shot down by United States warplanes.
Successful attacks by UAVs depend upon the accuracy and timeliness of intelligence.
This principle was demonstrated in 2009 when an al-Qaeda military planner was believed to have been killed by an American UAV in September but suddenly appeared in a media interview in October.
Also, high-tech weapons may win engagements on the battlefield, but they cannot solve political problems—and on occasion they may even aggravate them.
In July 2009 the Brookings Institution think tank estimated that for every militant killed by a UAV in Afghanistan and Pakistan, approximately 10 civilians were also killed, a situation that was alienating the local population and turning them against the United States and its NATO allies.
According to the nongovernmental organization Human Rights Watch, Israeli UAVs unlawfully killed at least 29 Palestinian civilians during the Gaza incursion in late 2008 and early 2009 because UAV operators allegedly failed to verify that targets were combatants.
Most UAVs remain dedicated to what the military calls ISTAR—intelligence, surveillance, target acquisition, and reconnaissance.
For example, American UAVs began patrolling off the coast of Somalia in October 2009 in order to provide early warning of pirate vessels approaching merchant ships and to guide naval forces.
In August 2009 the United States Marine Corps awarded contracts to Boeing and a joint venture between Lockheed Martin and Kaman to develop cargo UAVs that would be capable of delivering supplies to troops on the battlefield.
The goal is to demonstrate how such UAVs could reduce risk and expense in logistics.
Currently it is expensive to operate ground supply convoys on the poor roads and in the back country of Afghanistan; also, convoys must be heavily guarded, and they continually run risks from roadside bombs and ambushes.
Besides these military uses, UAV technology is attracting interest from police forces and other civilian agencies.
For example, the United States Customs and Border Patrol has been using the Predator to patrol the MexicoUnited States border since 2005 and the CanadaUnited States border since early 2009, and two maritime-patrol variants are scheduled to be operational in 2010.
UAVs are also being developed for use in search-and-rescue operations to help locate survivors and deliver emergency supplies to them.
In addition, UAVs are being evaluated for their potential in assessing damage suffered from disasters such as hurricanes, forest fires, and maritime oil spills.
As robotic vehicles become more commonplace, UAVs can be expected to be used wherever possible to minimize threats to personnel and to do tasks that exceed human strength and endurance.
If current trends continue, UAVs could one day evacuate casualties from the heat of battle and mount round-theclock surveillance missions for months and maybe even years at a time.
The pilot and sensor operator of a United States Air Force MQ-1 Predator unmanned aerial vehicle perform function checks at Balad Air Base, Iraq, before handing control of the vehicle to personnel stationed in the United States.
Senior Airman Olufemi A Owolbabi— United States Air Force/AP; Master Sgt.
I n retrospect, 2009 may come to be seen as a year in which the movement toward electric automobiles gained momentum.
This sudden gathering of energy actually brought together a number of forces that had begun independently the previous year.
First was a spike in oil prices, which reached $147 per barrel in July 2008 and hovered in the $60-$80 range through much of 2009.
Gasoline prices followed, threatening to make sport-utility vehicles and pickup trucks less economically viable for American consumers.
Second was the severe recession that gripped first the United States and then the rest of the world in 2008 and 2009, squeezing sales of new automobiles to their lowest levels in half a century and bringing major automotive companies such as General Motors to their knees.
Third was a growing international awareness of the challenges posed by climate change, which led policymakers to seek ways to reduce carbon emissions such as those produced in automobile exhaust.
Finally, the electric car movement was given a lift by improvements in technology and by government commitments to help develop the infrastructure needed to support electric vehicles.
Indeed, in the late 19th century and the first two decades of the 20th, electricity was the preferred method of powering automobiles in Western Europe and the United States.
Electric motors did not have to be started manually; they were quieter than gasoline engines; and they provided a smoother ride because there were no gears to shift.
But a variety of innovations and discoveries proved enough to tilt consumers toward gasoline-powered cars.
Among these were the exhaust muffler, the electric starter, the discovery of underground reserves of petroleum in the United States, and, ultimately, Henry Ford’s assembly-line model for producing cars cheap enough to be owned by the common man.
The internal combustion engine dominated the rest of the 20th century, its success perpetuated by low fuel prices.
In addition, businesses helped to entrench gasoline-powered vehicles by establishing the infrastructure—gasoline stations—to support them.
Generally more expensive than fuelGear Up by Lee Hudson Teslik powered alternatives, they were unable to travel long distances without recharging.
Most significantly, the infrastructure needed to support a large fleet of electric cars—mainly, batterycharging facilities—did not exist.
Given the dearth of electric vehicles on the road, there was little demand for infrastructure—which in turn made it even less worthwhile to produce electric cars.
During the 1990s electric vehicles briefly reentered the public sphere in response to a mandate by the California Air Resources Board that ""zero emission vehicles” make up 10% of vehicle sales in that state by 2003.
General Motors introduced the first modem mass-produced electric vehicle, the EV1; Toyota followed suit with an electric version of its RAV4 SUV; and other automakers announced their own plans.
By 2003, however, the vehicles had been withdrawn from production, and CARB had rescinded its stringent requirements.
Automakers responded that the programs they had worked on simply were not commercially viable at the time.
Meanwhile, Toyota and Honda introduced hybrid electric automobiles, the Prius and the Insight, to the Japanese market in 1997 and to the United States market by 2000.
Featuring a small gasoline engine that supplemented an electric motor when necessary for added propulsion, hybrid vehicles proved popular, in part because they did not have to be plugged into the electric power grid to be recharged.
During his campaign for the United States presidency in 2008, Barack Obama promised that half of all vehicles purchased by the federal government by 2012 would be plug-in hybrids or fully electric.
In August 2009 Obama, now president, announced that $2. billion of his economic stimulus package had been awarded to some 48 automakers or parts manufacturers in order to increase production of electric vehicles.
China’s government announced that it would provide subsidies for research and would also subsidize the purchase of electric or hybrid vehicles for use in Chinese taxi fleets and by government agencies.
Britain’s Prime Minister Gordon Brown said in July 2009 that he wanted all new cars sold in his country by 2020 to be electric or hybrid— though British automakers retorted that Brown’s offer earlier in the year to subsidize purchases of electric vehicles would have little effect on sales.
General Motors, which by July 2009 was majority-owned by the United States government, announced plans to roll out its new electric car, the Chevrolet Volt, in late 2010.
The Volt was an “extended range"" model, one whose batteries would be recharged overnight by a plug-in connection or on the road by a small gasoline engine.
Also in August, Nissan Motor Co. announced production of the Leaf, a fully electric automobile that would boast zero tailpipe carbon emissions.
The mayor of London, vowing to make that city the “electric car capital of Europe,” announced plans to have as many as 25,000 charging points installed in accessible areas by 2015.
In Yokohama, Japan, the U.S.-based company Better Place, founded by Israeli-born entrepreneur Shai Agassi , demonstrated the prototype of an automated battery-exchange station that it intended to install throughout Israel and Denmark as part of a program to encourage a mass market for electric automobiles.
Despite the gathering momentum of 2009, several challenges will have to be overcome if a sizable portion of the world’s auto fleet is to be replaced with electric or hybrid vehicles.
First, at current gasoline prices it is unclear whether fully electric vehicles can be an economically viable alternative on a broad scale.
Given the limitations of current battery capacities, and given current technologies that partly recharge batteries by using energy produced while braking, electric vehicles at this time are best suited for stop-and-go, short-range city driving.
Before fully electric vehicles can realistically be expected to replace fuel-powered cars or hybrids, charging and battery-exchange stations will have to be put in place everywhere cars are driven—not just in a few cities.
Finally, even assuming the establishment of networks of charging stations, technological problems would have to be addressed.
For instance, many plug-in models take hours to recharge, whereas gasoline-powered cars take only minutes to refuel.
Stations that are capable of charging car batteries rapidly are possible in theory, but they would have to be designed and operated in such a manner that they would avoid straining municipal power grids.
Also, as long as electric power plants continue to run on fossil fuels such as coal, recharging fleets of plug-in electric cars will not eliminate the emission of carbon into the atmosphere.
Lee Hudson Teslik is Senior Editor and Analyst at Roubini Global Economics.
Nissan Motor Co. 's zero-emission electric car, the Leaf, is displayed in August in Yokohama, Japan.
The electric vehicle, powered by a lithium-ion battery, was scheduled for release in late 2010.
This frontal view of the skeleton of Ardipithecus ramidus, reveals some of the dramatic conclusions of years of painstaking work.
This drawing of ""Ardi” reveals, among other features, A ramiduss apelike opposable big toe . by Stephen L Zegura T he long-awaited results of a monumental effort to reconstruct the skeletal biology, paleoecology, and evolutionary position of Ardipithecus ramidus were published at last in the Oct., 2009, issue of the journal Science.
The issue featured 11 research articles written by an international team of 47 authors and a number of related stories and online materials.
Over the next year 16 additional specimens were found, including a number of teeth, a mandibular fragment, parts of four cranial bones, and four arm bones.
When information about these 4.4-million-year-old hominins was published in 1994, they were considered a new species of Australopithecus, but they were more morphologically primitive than the other members of this genus.
Starting in November 1994, remains of a spectacular partial skeleton were unearthed at Aramis, and the novelty of this new material necessitated a change in generic status from Australopithecus to Ardipithecus.
For instance, it took three entire field seasons of surface crawling to locate and subsequently extract the pieces of Ardi’s skeleton, and it took 14 pelvis and 10 cranial reconstructions before the authors were satisfied with the accuracy of their models.
White, co-director of the Middle Awash Project, which included 70 scientists from 18 countries, had been collecting fossils in this region since 1981.
Remains of eight different hominin species spanning almost six million years of evolution were uncovered there.
The A ramidus fossils at Aramis were very securely dated because they occurred between two key layers of volcanic tuff.
A ramidus represents a lessspecialized grade of hominin organization than the fully bipedal australopithecines.
For instance, judging from Ardi’s mosaic-like foot skeleton, although she walked bipedally when on the ground, she retained an apelike opposable big toe and also climbed trees.
In arboreal settings she operated as a monkeylike quadruped while moving on the top of branches and bridging between branches.
Her pelvis structure combined typical features of both hominins and apes.
Mattermes—Science/AAAS/Reuters/Landov A comparison of images of dentitions from human , Ardipithecus ramidus , and chimpanzee , all males.
Rather, a large very flexible midcarpal joint permitted her to support nearly all of her 50-kg body weight on her palms when clambering along tree branches.
An important evolutionary implication of Ardi’s postcranial material was that the approximately seven-million-year-old hypothetical common ancestor of humans and chimpanzees was most likely not morphologically or behaviorally similar to modern African apes, as was once envisioned.
Experts now believe that it was more probably a palmigrade quadrupedal climber that may have resembled some Miocene apes and the earliest hominins in its locomotor adaptations.
Thus, the comparative analysis of Ardipithecus necessitated a complete paradigm shift.
Ardipithecus lived in a humid, cool woodland with a grassy substrate and occasional patches of open forest.
The 150,000 fossil plant and animal specimens from Aramis documented the presence of browsers, fruit eaters, and leaf eaters.
The remains of spiralhorned kudus, two species of monkey, various kinds of small mammals, parrots, peafowl, catfish, palm tress, fig trees, shrubs, and grasses were plentiful, whereas turtles/tortoises, crocodiles, and invertebrates were present but less abundant.
Ardi was an omnivore, most likely consuming a diet of insects, small mammals, fruits, and nuts.
Ardi was only 1. m tall—short for a female hominin—but her height proved to be typical for both males and females of her genus;e., males in the rest of the assemblage did not have larger bones and were not taller than females, as among other hominins.
Both male and female Ardipithecus specimens had relatively small canines with diamond-shaped crowns.
No upper canine-lower premolar honing was present in any of the specimens.
The postcanine megadontia that characterized the australopithecines was absent, underscoring Ardipithecus' s physical inability to process a hard, abrasive diet.
Ardi’s face was relatively small with a projecting muzzle, especially in the midface, much like Sahelanthropus but unlike the extreme lower facial projection of modern apes.
Ardipithecus lacked the large flaring cheeks of the australopithecines associated with heavy chewing but did share a short cranial base with both the australopithecines and Sahelanthropus.
The short face (from top to bottom) also was reminiscent of Sahelanthropus’s face.
Grades are levels of functional organization usually associated with a particular adaptive zone.
All of the above fossils may actually represent a single genus (Ardipithecus would have priority) that contained the evolutionary forerunners of the australopithecines and occupied a distinct adaptive zone.
In terms of social behaviour and lifehistory strategies, inferences from Ardipithecus’ s dental and skeletal anatomy combined with principles and theories from evolutionary biology have led to a number of assertions.
Among these are the supposition that regular food carrying, pair bonding, and female ovulation concealment supposedly led to intensified male parental investment during the two million-three millionyear evolutionary emergence of the Ardipithecus grade from the last common ancestor humans share with the chimpanzee.
Increased male parental investment was seen as an important “breakthrough"" adaptation for early hominins.
In addition, the overall dental morphological pattern of Ardipithecus and the lack of pronounced sexual dimorphism in this taxon both signify that male-to-male conflict and aggression had been reduced.
A Key to Understanding What It Means to Be Human A baby orangutan laughs in response to a researcher’s tickling, providing evidence that laughter emerged in animals millions of years before humans evolved. by Lisa M Newbern L aughter, tantrums, and swinging are actions readily associated with human children, whereas planning for the future, tooth flossing, and music appreciation are actions typically associated with human adolescents and adults.
A number of investigations of nonhuman primates, however, connected these six topics in 2009.
Researchers worldwide surveyed the behaviours of nonhuman primates by analyzing the responses of great apes that were tickled, monitoring the public tantrums of young rhesus macaques and the abilities of long-tailed macaque (M. fascicularis) mothers to facilitate learning, observing the planning activities of a captive chimpanzee , and testing the responses of chimpanzees and cotton-top tamarins to different kinds of music.
Not only did they find that the origins of human laughter could be traced 10 million to 16 million years ago to the last common ancestor of humans and modern great apes, but they also concluded that laughter is a cross-species phenomenon.
The great apes are not the only nonhuman primates with humanlike displays of expression.
Infant rhesus macaques were found to be expressive too, especially when they did not get what they wanted.
Their mothers were found to be about twice as likely to give in to their offspring when the tantrum occurred in the presence of potentially threatening animals.
This study was considered the first to demonstrate how bystanders could affect the communication between the mother macaque and infant.
Researchers found that orangutans, the largest habitually arboreal mammal, use unique maneuvers to overcome the safety risks associated with accessing food and crossing gaps in tree crowns.
The irregular movements, which include shifting from side to side and using all four limbs at once, cause a minimal disturbance to the trees and facilitate the orangutans’ motion and access to food.
Because orangutans remain on the verge of extinction, it is critical that scientists understand their needs, their movement limitations, and their ability to overcome the environmental challenges posed by humans and their activities.
Such knowledge could form the basis for animal and environmental conservation programs.
He was observed stockpiling stones, which he later hurled at the zoo’s visitors.
This behaviour was proof that apes are capable of planning for the future.
One particular zoo became well known for the behavioral study of a bad-tempered primate resident in 2009.
Santino, an adult male chimpanzee, repeatedly gathered stones and concrete chips from his home at the Furuvik Zoo and stockpiled them in scattered areas throughout his habitat.
In the more than 10 years Santino has been accumulating his arsenal, the zoo’s animal-care staff has removed hundreds of weapon caches.
It was observed that Santino collected the objects while he was calm; however, he threw them at zoo visitors a number of hours later during his agitated dominance displays.
Such behaviour indicated that Santino was spontaneously planning for a future mental state, which suggests that chimpanzees have highly developed consciousness, a characteristic many scientists have been reluctant to attribute to nonhuman primates.
Tooth-flossing behaviour is not typically attributed to nonhuman primates.
The study was designed to investigate the proliferation of tool use throughout a population in a small group of females who were rearing infants.
A different primate study conducted at the Itozu-no-Mori Park, Fukuoka, Japan, tested the responses of Sakura, an infant chimpanzee, to music.
It was determined that Sakura could indeed appreciate music and preferred consonant, or harmonious, sounds to dissonant, or discordant, sounds.
During six weekly sessions, Sakura consistently preferred to produce consonant music for a longer period of time than dissonant music.
Other studies of primates published in 2009 revealed evidence that some monkeys and apes discerned right from wrong, chimpanzees negotiated with their troopmates and constructed mental maps based on geometric coordinates to navigate their home range, bonobos used their vocalizations to rank foods, and subordinate monkeys were capable of deceiving dominant ones to gamer a greater share of a particular resource.
These investigations and others also indicated that humans might not be as unique as they once thought and that research with nonhuman primates would continue to provide a portal through which humans might better know and understand themselves.
The Pandemic Doctors at the Mexico City Navy Hospital wear protective gear as they tend to patients complaining of swine flu-like symptoms. by Kara Rogers I n February 2009 a young boy in the small Gulf-coast town of La Gloria, Veracruz, Mex., fell ill with an influenza-like disease of unknown cause.
Within weeks nearly 30% of the town’s residents had been affected by a similar sickness, and people in nearby villages had fallen ill as well.
The young boy, however, was the only individual from the region to test positive for a new strain of influenza virus—named swine influenza, or swine flu, because it contained genetic material from existing swine flu viruses.
By mid-March a sickness resembling the one from La Gloria had emerged in Mexico City, and not long after, cases of the respiratory illness were reported throughout the country.
After several infected persons died, the country’s health officials decided to send more than 50 patient samples to a lab in Canada for analysis.
When 16 of them turned up positive for swine flu, authorities at the World Health Organization convened an emergency meeting to assess the situation.
The newly identified virus, deemed to have significant pandemic potential (the ability to spread easily over a wide geographic area) owing to the lack of preexisting immunity in humans, appeared in the United States in mid-April.
It subsequently spread to Canada and the United Kingdom, to Europe, and to New Zealand.
It was the first pandemic to occur since 1968, when the Hong Kong flu claimed the lives of more than 750,000 people globally.
Although the majority of individuals who became infected with swine flu experienced only mild symptoms of fever, cough, and runny nose, the rapid spread of the virus and confusion about the risk of death and which populations were most susceptible generated significant fear among the public.
The swine influenza virus at the root of the 2009 pandemic was a newly identified strain of influenza A subtype H1N1.
Influenza A viruses are the primary cause of seasonal influenza in humans, and they are constantly evolving.
One mechanism of evolution is viral reassortment—when multiple strains of influenza viruses infect a single host and recombine to give rise to a new strain.
In the case of the 2009 swine flu virus, genetic material from three organisms—humans, birds, and pigs—mixed and recombined in a pig host, giving rise to a triple reassortant virus.
Similar to all other influenza viruses, swine flu also was subject to constant evolution through antigenic drift as it circulated between the Northern and Southern hemispheres.
As it crossed the globe, strains carrying mutations for drug resistance emerged, with the first strain appearing in Denmark in June and demonstrating resistance to Tamiflu , one of the most effective antiviral drugs used to treat swine flu.
Scientists immediately began to search for ways to overcome resistant strains.
In laboratory studies, combinations of existing antiviral agents proved promising.
The genetic constitution of the reassortant virus rendered it more contagious than typical seasonal influenza, though it was still transmitted in typical flu fashion—via infectious droplets expelled into the air from infected persons when sneezing or coughing.
The virus could survive on hard surfaces for 24 hours, providing ample opportunity to spread to another person.
The thermal imaging system was used to screen passengers for swine flu. under age 5, and persons suffering from chronic illness or with suppressed immunity.
The name initially given to the virus, “swine influenza,” was fitting in several respects; the virus not only contained genetic segments from two different swine influenza viruses but also appeared to have originated on a pig farm near La Gloria.
The farm belonged to Granjas Carroll de Mexico, a joint venture operation working in partnership with U.S.-owned Smithfield Foods, Inc., a major international producer of pork products.
Countries such as China, Thailand, and Russia temporarily arrested the import of pigs from affected areas.
For example, Egyptian Minister of Health Hatem al-Gabali ordered the slaughter of up to 400,000 of the country’s pigs, though there was no evidence that they were infected with the virus.
The mandate instantly sparked riots and protests from Egyptian farmers who depended on raising and selling pigs as a source of income.
In an effort to dispel confusion, WHO changed the name of the virus to influenza Ain late April.
When the influenza A virus was discovered in Mexico, it was not considered of international concern.
As the disease spread across Mexico City, into the United States and Canada, and overseas to Spain, the United Kingdom, and the Middle East in late April, however, WHO acknowledged that global dispersion was imminent and issued a level 5 pandemic alert.
The alert served as a signal to national health agencies to finalize plans for the implementation of control measures, such as limiting travel to and from affected regions and distributing face masks to limit disease spread, and for the acquisition and mobilization of stocks of antiviral drugs.
When the pandemic was declared in June, cases had climbed to nearly 30,000 worldwide, and the virus had spread to many regions of the world, including Southeast Asia, Scandinavia, the West Indies, and Central and South America.
By early September, with the exception of several places, including Greenland, Mongolia, and some areas of Africa, swine flu was established in A Chinese factory worker checks eggs to be used for producing inactivated influenza A vaccine at the plant of Sinovac Biotech Ltd., a biopharmaceutical company based in Beijing. all parts of the world.
In late December some 622,480 cases and 12,220 deaths were confirmed globally.
Because not all cases and fatalities could be tracked, however, the actual figures were believed to be far greater.
Studies of past influenza pandemics revealed that outbreaks occur in waves, or alternating periods of high and low disease activity in the same region, with each ""wave” representing a period of increased activity.
In the postpeak period of swine flu activity during the summer of 2009 in North America, cases of illness dropped off significantly.
WHO issued a warning in late August, however, to countries in the Northern Hemisphere to prepare for a second pandemic wave, evidence of which began to emerge in the first week of September in the U.S., where some isolated areas experienced sudden spikes in influenza A activity.
When the pandemic potential of the virus was first realized in April, scientists set to work on vaccine development.
In July, just four months after the isolation of the new virus, the first swine flu vaccine for humans entered clinical testing.
The vaccine, however, required two shots, administered three weeks apart, which raised concerns that there was not enough time for full immunity to be established and that vaccine supplies would run out before a second wave hit.
Just days later, however, single-dose vaccines emerged, and meeting global vaccine demand appeared feasible once again.
A singledose vaccine developed by Sinovac Biotech Ltd., a Chinese company, was approved in China in early September, and similar vaccines developed by other pharmaceutical companies worldwide became available shortly thereafter.
As summer turned to fall in North America, a second pandemic wave, equal to or greater in severity, seemed certain.
Despite this, United States health officials remained confident that the virus could be contained.
The generation of single-dose vaccines, WHO’s effective surveillance program, and existing global mitigation and control measures, which were repeatedly strengthened and reevaluated throughout the pandemic, served vital roles in alleviating public fears as the Northern Hemisphere headed into the winter flu season.
Kara Rogers is the Senior Editor of Biomedical Sciences for Encyclopaedia Britannica.
Autism is a spectrum condition—it is manifested to varying degrees of severity.
At one extreme a person may have no social skills, no language skills, and major learning difficulties.
Both of these are subgroups on the autistic spectrum, and those living with either condition share a strong preference for routines and repetition and are characterized by an obsessional interest in highly specific topics.
In the late 1990s the prevalence of autism spectrum conditions was found to have increased substantially relative to previous decades, and data published in 2009 revealed that the number of children diagnosed with these conditions was continuing to follow this same trend.
The study assessed the prevalence of these conditions in eight-year-olds, since this represented the age by which most affected United States children had been placed under a specialist’s care.
This figure was also representative of an increase in the number of persons diagnosed with autism spectrum conditions, relative to previous decades in the United Kingdom.
It remained unclear, however, whether such increases were due to the conditions’ becoming more widespread or to improvements in knowledge and diagnostic procedures used to detect them.
Information on the incidence of autism spectrum disorders in other countries remained controversial.
A study published early in 2009 in the Israel Medical Association Journal addressed the incidence of autism spectrum disorders in that country.
These figures were further assessed in terms of the total number of children under age 18 who lived in the country during the time period investigated.
Thus, the per capita prevalence of autism spectrum disorders in Israel in 2004 was estimated to have been 1. per 10,000 children.
This technique can be combined with magnetic resonance imaging to obtain information about abnormalities in brain function in individuals with autism. in Israel between 2001 and 2004, the prevalence of autism spectrum disorders was about 36 per 10,000, placing the incidence of the conditions in the country closer to estimates of worldwide incidence reported in a study published in 2006 in the journal Lancet.
One of the most distinguishing characteristics of people affected by autism spectrum conditions is atypical behaviour.
Such behaviour has been associated with two primary psychological aspects, empathy and systemizing.
Empathy involves imagining another persons thoughts and feelings and having an appropriate emotional reaction to those feelings.
Children and adults with Asperger syndrome show their empathizing difficulties on tests of emotion recognition, theory of mind, and spontaneous empathy.
Theory of mind is the ability to attribute mental states to oneself or others and is regarded as the cognitive component of empathy.
Emotion recognition is sometimes regarded as part of theory of mind because emotions are mental states.
Often emotion-recognition deficits appear only if complex emotions are tested, though in some individuals with autism, the deficit is evident even when basic emotions are tested.
This deficit can explain the difficulties in social and communicative development and in imagining others’ minds.
Systemizing is the drive to analyze a system in terms of underlying rules in order to understand and predict its behaviour.
The repetitive behaviour, the desire for routines, and the need for sameness can be interpreted as being the result of a strong drive to systemize.
Systemizing also requires excellent attention to detail, and individuals with autism or Asperger syndrome are relatively fast on tests of attention to detail.
Adept systemizing can often explain the exceptional mental abilities possessed by some persons affected by these conditions.
Anatomical abnormalities have been identified in different brain regions in individuals with autism.
These abnormalities are not found in every case, and there are inconsistencies between studies, such that sometimes overgrowth or underdevelopment is found.
The brain regions that have been reported to be atypical include the cerebellum, the corpus callosum, the hippocampus, and the amygdala.
Epilepsy also occurs in a proportion of individuals with autism spectrum conditions, though the exact rate is not clear.
Although in classic autism one-third of cases develop epilepsy by adolescence, in the Asperger subgroup these rates may be much lower and have not been systematically studied.
In terms of neuropathology, the number of Purkinje cells (large neurons with many branching extensions) in the cerebellar cortex in people with autism is abnormally low.
Abnormalities have also been reported in the density of neurons in the hippocampus, the amygdala, and other parts of the limbic system.
One report also suggested a reduction in the size of cortical minicolumns, though the significance of this is unclear.
Functional neuroimaging studies of autism spectrum conditions show abnormalities in the amygdala and in the orbitofrontal and medial prefrontal cortex, among other areas.
These atypical patterns of neural activity occur in relation to the empathizing deficits.
For example, in a study of children diagnosed with autism, some 90% who were bom with normal head circumference were found to have, by ages two to four, MRI-based brain volumes that were larger than average.
In recent years the sibling risk rate for autism has been estimated to be about 5 to 10 times higher than general population rates.
Regarding twin studies where one twin had autism, 60% of MZ pairs were found to be concordant for autism, meaning that both twins were affected.
Genetic linkage studies have led to the implication of a number of chromosomal regions in autism.
In addition, abnormalities affecting the X chromosome have been identified in association with autism, which may explain the sex ratios being markedly biased toward males.
For example, studies have indicated that levels of fetal testosterone are associated with the number of autistic traits present in an individual.
The hormone also is positively correlated with the emergence of narrow interests, systemizing, and autistic traits.
Thus, the higher the levels of the hormone during fetal development, the more likely these features are to appear in early childhood.
The earliest that classic autism has been reliably diagnosed is 18 months of age.
This was shown by a screening approach known as the Checklist for Autism in Toddlers , which tests for the absence of “joint attention behaviours,” such as pointing and gaze following, and the absence of pretend play, all of which are typically present by this age.
Population-based studies have shown that CHAT, developed by the U.K.-based Autism Research Centre, has excellent specificity—children who failed on this test had an 83.3% chance of developing autism or a related pervasive developmental disorder.
The approach, however, has a low level of sensitivity— it detected only two out of every five cases, mostly missing the Asperger subgroup.
Asperger syndrome was found Autistic children gather around a computer to watch a movie made with Lego toys.
The most effective interventions for children on the autistic spectrum are special education, such as social skills teaching, and applied behaviour analysis , in which appropriate skills and behaviours are taught through principles of reinforcement.
The key ingredients for effective early intervention are that the methods are highly structured, intensive, and individualized.
Indeed, there are ethical issues surrounding the notion of trying to cure autism.
For many years “treatment” in autism proceeded on the basis of an approach that was tried and tested but without any real rationale for why it should be effective.
The principles behind it enable target skills to be broken down into simpler units to be acquired through shaping and mass practice.
While there is some evidence for the effectiveness of ABA, the methods require external reinforcers or rewards to maintain the child's attention and cooperation, which suggests that they are not as autism-friendly as they could be.
In contrast, newer interventions have been designed to harness individuals’ areas of strength and their natural interests as a means for building new skills.
One example is Mind Reading DVD educational software, in which the individual’s natural interest in lawful, predictable computers and in information's being systematically organized renders the domain of emotions easier to learn about.
A second example is The Transporters DVD animation, which relies on the child’s natural interest in the mechanical, predictable motion of vehicles to help the child attend to the film and to enable implicit learning of emotions, since these are grafted onto the vehicles.
A final example is Lego therapy, which also exploits the child’s strong interest in systems (in this case, constructional systems) to encourage turn taking and social communication.
All treatments that are claimed to be useful for children or adults with autism spectrum conditions should be subjected to a scientific evaluation.
This is to confirm that there are indeed benefits relative to no intervention and that there are no unwanted side effects.
Web sites have been developed to help parents as well as professionals make informed decisions about which treatment option to pursue, given that these are often expensive and that new methods are announced almost annually.
Teenagers and adults with Asperger syndrome often suffer from additional mental health problems, the most common being depression.
The high levels of depression are not surprising if people with Asperger syndrome feel that they do not fit into society and feel rejected by the majority.
For teenagers this may be because the peer group becomes less tolerant of those who do not fit in and because a failure to conform in the educational system can also mean underperforming academically.
Such depression may therefore be secondary to the condition and may be preventable with appropriate support.
Such support for teenagers may include special education, a buddy system, social skills training, and organized social groups.
Support in adulthood may include sheltered employment, mentoring, advocacy, befriending, social groups for Asperger syndrome, and help with housing.
This is in part intended to convey that one view of autism spectrum conditions is that they are not a disease or a disorder but simply an atypical form of neurological development, akin to left-handedness.
This view is less stigmatizing and makes an important political point— namely, that those individuals whose brains develop and work differently need not be judged to be inferior to the majority.
This view is called the neurodiversity movement and resembles the civil rights movement that was necessary to gain equal opportunities for ethnic minorities and for women.
Nevertheless, it is important that the disability element is not overlooked in this shift of emphasis, since the diagnosis is given only if the individual is suffering to some extent, with their autistic traits leading to significant interference in their everyday life.
This diagnostic criterion is important as a yardstick of severity, since if the features of the condition are very mild, they may not require a diagnosis.
This relates back to the notion of an autistic spectrum, a dimension of autistic traits that runs right through the population.
The current view is that all humans lie somewhere on this specAn autistic teenager holds his puppy and a small bucket of his belongings after receiving a Project Lifesaver tracking bracelet at the Staunton Police Department. trum and that it is only those who are at the extreme end and those who are experiencing difficulties as a result of their high number of autistic traits who will require a diagnosis.
Not all doctors share this view of autism spectrum conditions’ simply being a case of neurodiversity.
For example, the American Psychiatric Association retains the term autism spectrum disorder, since this group of conditions includes the pervasive developmental disorders, which involve varying degrees of impairment of language acquisition, communication, social behaviour, and motor function.
Those individuals on the autistic spectrum who also have below-average IQs (and therefore are at risk of broader developmental delays) are likely to need special support throughout their lives.
The issues and challenges that low IQ raises are in some respects no different from those issues raised by low IQs in other individuals (who are not on the autistic spectrum) and are probably best served by the same learning disability agencies.
Communities for autistic adults, such as Cascina Rossago in Italy, create a living environment that caters to the unique needs of these individuals.
ANTHROPOLOGY ey developments in the field of physical anthropology during 2009 included news about the reconstruction and analysis of an extraordinarily complete skeleton of a controversial Eocene primate.
The 47-million-year-old adapiform primate, Darwinius masillae, was announced to the world on May 19 via the most extensive public relations multimedia campaign in the history of primate paleontology.
The specimen was originally unearthed in 1983 near Messel, Ger. , and was cleaved into two parts that were subsequently sold separately.
She was probably nocturnal, and her incredibly well-preserved digestive tract contents indicated a diet of leaves and fruit.
An agile arboreal quadruped, she inhabited a rainforest and died near a volcanic lake.
She also possessed a mixture of primitive and advanced morphological traits that led to controversial claims about her taxonomic relationships and phylogenetic position within the order Primates.
The consensus favoured by most experts not connected to the research team placed Darwinius and other adapiforms within the lemurlike strepsirhines and not among the haplorhines.
Thus, the well-publicized conjecture that Darwinius was a linking form between lemurlike primates and anthropoids— hence an ancestor of humans—was considered to be false by many of the worlds leading paleoanthropologists.
Cross Altar because he had been in charge of this altar when serving as an unordained canon at the cathedral.
DNA was extracted from three upper molars and both femora of this skeleton, and the mitochondrial DNA profiles of these different samples were identical, which implied that the cranium and postcranial samples represented a single individual.
Although no relatives who could provide a DNA reference sample had been identified, investigators found a clever substitute source.
By carefully examining Copernicus’s heavily annotated copy of Johann Stoeffler's calendrical treatise Calendarium Romanian magnum (published 1518)—which had resided at Uppsala since the mid-17th century—they found nine hairs, two of which possessed the identical mtDNA profile of the molar and femur samples.
As a result, those strands of hair could be used as a reference sample for his skeletal DNA and thereby confirmed the identification of the skeletal remains as his.
Interestingly, although portraits of Copernicus usually showed him with dark eyes, genetic analysis revealed that he had the genotype predominant among blueor grayeyed humans and thus actually may have had a light iris colour.
Statistical analysis indicated 14 ancestral clusters present in the African data set.
Strong associations between geography, language, and genes reflected the concomitant spread of people, languages, and sometimes culture or ethnicity.
Genetic diversity was generally highest in African populations and declined with increasing distance from Africa consistent with serial founder effects that resulted from global migrations that initially departed from northeastern Africa near the midpoint of the Red Sea.
The analyses also indicated that modern human migration within Africa may have originated near the coastal border of Namibia and Angola, an area that constitutes the current San homeland.
The genetic analyses further suggested that the southern African Khoisan speakers, the eastern African Khoisanspeaking Hadza and Sandawe, and the central African Pygmies are all remnants of a widespread proto-KhoisanPygmy population of hunter-gatherers that existed more than 35,000 years ago.
According to this intriguing scenario, the Pygmies were originally Khoisan speakers who, in a rare example of complete language replacement, subsequently adopted the nonclick Niger-Congo languages spoken by their neighbours.
Among the other populations studied, African Americans had primarily West African roots, deriving 71% of their ancestry from both Bantoid and non-Bantoid Niger-Congospeaking populations, only 8% from the rest of Africa, 13% from European admixture, and the remaining 8% from a number of different source populations.
The October 2 issue of the journal Science devoted much space to the skeletal biology, paleoecology, and evolutionary position of the 4.4-millionyear-old hominin Ardipithecus ramidus found at Aramis, Eth.
In 2009 the largestknown trove of Anglo-Saxon treasure was unearthed in a farmers field in Staffordshire, Eng.
The so-called Staffordshire Hoard was dated to the 7th century CE and was composed of more than 1,500 pieces of gold and silver, weighing 5 kg and 2. kg (5. lb), respectively.
Hohle Fels Cave in the Ach Valley, southwestern Germany, continued to yield extraordinary Ice Age finds, among them the world’s oldest Venus figurine.
Dated to more than 35,000 years ago and carved out of mammoth ivory, the 6-cm -tall statuette was thought to be the earliest-known example of figurative art, predating previous finds by some 5,000 years.
Its patina and a loop on its back suggest it may have been worn as a pendent.
These artifacts brought to eight the total number of known instruments from the Swabian Aurignacian, which suggested that music was an important element of human cultural expression at this early date.
The hall, which measures some 16 m in diameter and was likely built of wood, rested upon a 4-m -wide pillar that had four spherical rotating mechanisms, affording Nero’s guests a panoramic view of the city as they dined.
The ships had been transporting wine from Italy, garum (fermented fish sauce—a key condiment in ancient Roman cuisine) from provinces in Spain and North Africa, and metal for making weapons and utensils.
According to archaeologist Timmy Gambin of the Aurora Trust, which found the cargo ships, the vessels were likely seeking safe harbour near the island during storms when they sank.
He also stated that the images made it clear that the citizens of the city, which reached its apogee in the mid-2nd century BCE, had mastered their marshy environment.
Remains of the oldest-known settlement in the Aegean came to light during excavations in June at Ouriakos on the Greek island of Limnos.
Also in Greece, ongoing research at the submerged city of Pavlopetri off the Laconian coast pushed back the date of the town's habitation to 2800 BCE, more than a millennium earlier than previously thought.
The site, thought to be the oldest-known sunken city in the world, covers more than 35,000 sq m and includes streets, houses, temples, and tombs.
Biomolecular analysis of residue within an amphora recovered from the multichambered tomb of the early Egyptian pharaoh Scorpion I (c.50 BCE) at Abydos revealed that the ancient Egyptians added a host of herbs and resins to their wines to endow them with medicinal properties.
Equine bones recovered at the four study sites revealed that the horses had had slenderer builds than their wild counterparts—a principal trait of domesticated horses from later Bronze Age sites—and their teeth exhibited wear patterns consistent with bridling.
Containers found within pit houses and in nearby middens at the semisedentary village sites also bore traces of fat solids from the horse milk once stored in them.
Before this discovery, the earliest-known evidence for horse domestication had come from a series of late 3rd-millennium-BCE chariot burials belonging to the Sintashta culture of Central Asia.
Shards of pottery recovered from a cave in southern China’s Hunan province were dated to 18,000 years ago, making them the oldest-known examples of clay craft in the world.
They were found in Yuchanyan Cave among sediments rich in animal bone and charcoal fragments, bone and shell tools, and cobble and flaked artifacts.
Prior to this discovery, the earliest-known evidence for pottery had come from a suite of Chinese sites in Hunan, Jiangxi, and Guangxi provinces, dating to 10,000-16,000 years ago.
And in the isolated Himalayan kingdom of Mustang, once a centre of Tibetan culture and now part of northcentral Nepal, Himalaya expert Broughton Coburn and Everest mountaineer Pete Athans in 2007 and 2008 discovered a long-lost library of 15thcentury manuscripts, many adorned with illuminated miniatures.
Found within Mardzong Cave, part of a rockhewn monastery complex carved into a cliff face overlooking the upper Kali Gandaki River, the more than 8,000 folios belong to some 30 religious tracts—most associated with Bon, an animist faith that flourished in the region before the arrival of Buddhism in the mid-7th century CE; adherents of the religion still resided in the area.
Among the newly discovered volumes was a heretofore-unknown version of the Lubum, a sacred Bon text devoted to the propitiation of naga serpent deities.
The manuscripts, which were discovered during a cave-documentation project, were transported to a local monastery for conservation and Study.
In 2009 archaeological research at the Fisher Mounds Site Complex in southern Wisconsin continued to expand knowledge about Cahokia Mounds, the largest and most complex Native American civilization in North America.
These Cahokians apparently brought pots and chert (fine-grained quartz) tools with them, as there was little evidence from excavated features for the use of local lithic materials and clay sources.
The Mississippian houses, potsherds, and stone tools recovered from these excavations dated to about 1050 CE, coinciding with Cahokia’s punctuated regional political consolidation.
The absence of a palisade wall at the site, however, indicated that the colony enjoyed a relatively peaceful existence.
Louis, Ill., uncovered large portions of one of the largest Mississippian mound centres in the eastern United States.
These excavations fundamentally revised archaeological understandings of the Cahokia civilization.
Louis mound centre witnessed its peak residential occupation while the nearby site of Cahokia was being depopulated.
Louis sites experienced their highest population densities contemporaneously, indicating a larger regional population than previously posited.
Excavations continued at the Topper site near the Savannah River in South Carolina.
Topper was once a Paleo-Indian quarry and habitation site where Clovis points were manufactured.
Work at the site in 2009 recovered more detailed information about the Clovis occupation of the site.
The presence of blades, cores, and flake tools indicated that manufacturing activities beyond the production of bifacial stone tools occurred at Topper.
Evidence for this claim consisted of various objects argued to be bend-break unifacial tools.
If this claim was proved accurate, it would overturn most current theories for the peopling of the New World.
Excavations at the Chimney Rock site near Pagosa Springs, Colo., provided important insight into Southwestern prehistory.
Lekson believed the site to be directly affiliated with Chacoan society and used as a lunar observatory by Chacoan elites.
Among the information gleaned from these excavations was the possibility that the elites who lived at Chimney Rock enjoyed a diet of deer and elk, while lower-status residents of the site dined on smaller game.
Among the significant Mesoamerican archaeological discoveries in 2009 was that of two large stone sculptures in Mexico City by archaeologist Leonardo Lopez Lujan.
These works provided additional depth to current understandings of Aztec sacrifice and funeral rituals.
The first sculpture, a 13-ton monolith, was discovered in October 2006 and was believed to represent Tlaltecuhtli, a female Aztec deity of the earth, known both for her nurturing symbolism and her voracious thirst for blood.
Stone representations of this goddess often served as platforms for the cremation rituals of deceased kings.
Pigment residues identified on the surface of the sculpture indicated that it would have been decorated in black, red, and blue.
The second sculpture discovered more recently by Lopez Lujan depicted a large cactus, believed to have been used as a platform for rituals involving Aztec sacrifice; this interpretation of the sculptures function was based on an Aztec legend that indicates that sacrificial rituals performed atop cacti confer the gods' favour upon the performers.
Archaeologist Richard Hansen recently discovered two 8-m -long panels carved in stucco from the preClassic Mayan site of El Mirador, Guat., that depict aspects of the Popol Vuh, the Mayan origin story.
In explaining how the Mayan gods created the world, the Popol Vuh features the Hero Twins, Hunahpu and Xbalanque, who were transformed into, respectively, the Sun and the Moon.
One of the panels depicts the Hero Twins beneath a bird deity; the other panel features a Mayan maize god surrounded by a serpent.
The panels thus authenticated the earliest written version of the Mayan origin story, transcribed in the 1700s by Spanish colonial priest Francisco Ximenez.
Additional findings at the Classic Maya farming village of Ceren, El Sal., continued to provide major insight into ancient subsistence and food production.
Discovered by archaeologist Payson Sheets in 1978, Ceren— which, like the ancient city of Pompeii, was buried in volcanic ash—was pivotal in providing amazing detail about ancient Mesoamerican lifeways.
An eruption 1,400 years ago covered the site in 5 m of ash, preserving houses and adjacent agricultural plots.
The use of ground-penetrating radar and limited test excavations during the 2007 field season revealed the presence of this agricultural field.
Excavations at the site in the spring of 2009, however, revealed the extent of intensive cassava cultivation in the New World, as evidenced in 18 3 x 3-m excavation blocks.
Although the actual cassava plants had long ago decomposed, their presence was revealed in the ash as hollow spaces that, as in Pompeii, were filled with dental plaster to determine shape and size of the missing object.
Cassava, a starchy root crop, is rarely preserved archaeologically, unlike the more common Mesoamerican triad of maize, beans, and squash, the seeds of which have durable structures that can survive charring.
In tropical and temperate regions, macroscopic plants can remain in preserved form only if they have been carbonized in fires; cassava is composed mostly of sugars, which melt away when burned.
As a result, manioc often was overlooked in the reconstruction of ancient Mesoamerican foodways.
Analysis of chili pepper DNA by botanists Seung-Chul Kim, Araceli Aguilar-Melendez, and Mikeal Roose revised previous interpretations of chili domestication in the New World.
Kim and his colleagues suggested that chilies, formerly believed to have been domesticated first in central Mexico, were domesticated independently and from several different wild ancestors in different areas of Mesoamerica.
ARCHITECTURE he top story in 2009 in architecture, as in many other fields, was the disastrous impact of the global economic recession.
Building projects around the world were suddenly stopped for lack of funding.
Some of them left holes in the ground where foundations had been planned.
In Germany and other countries, firms were cutting back to a four-day week for lack of work.
There was concern that many talented younger architects, after being laid off, might not ever return to architecture.
Most economic predictions foresaw only a slow recovery for the building market in 2010 and 2011.
Some journalists predicted that the era of so-called iconic architecture—the age of heavily publicized prominent buildings by famous-name architects that was said to have begun in the 1990s with the construction of Gehry s Guggenheim Museum in Bilbao, Spain—had come to an end.
Also having an impact on architecture was the threat of global warming, which encouraged architects to design “green” buildings—buildings that would generate less atmospheric pollution.
Despite the shrinking economy, many notable buildings did reach completion in 2009.
Among the most interesting structures was the new Acropolis Museum in Athens designed by Swiss-born Franco-American architect Bernard Tschumi.
The building's exterior was sheathed in a gleaming mesh of stainless steel, and the interior featured a vast freely shaped stairway that quickly also became a student social centre.
Italian architect Renzo Piano, the world’s leading designer of art museums, added a large new Modern Wing to the 1893 building of the Art Institute of Chicago.
The glass-faced exterior was topped by what Piano called a ""flying carpet,” a translucent roof of glass that projected from the building's walls like the visor of a hat.
Several major buildings completed in 2008 continued to garner much critical attention during 2009.
The first 77 stories were office space, and a hotel and observatory occupied the upper floors.
Gehry transformed the Art Gallery of Ontario in Toronto by wrapping a new glass and steel addition around an older art museum dating from 1918.
In Spain in the Museum of the Roman Theatre of Cartagena, Spanish architect Rafael Moneo wove his own work into the old city.
He created a path along which his new buildings merged harmoniously with historical ones, a public path that climbed upward through the hilltop city.
Stem, known usually for architecture in traditional styles, designed a 58-story Modernist office tower, the Comcast Center.
One entire side of the lobby was a media wall, with very realistic ever-changing video imagery.
Some thought that the media wall might be an omen of the architecture of the future, in which whole facades might someday consist of digital signage, rather than solid stone, brick, concrete, or glass.
The glass-covered public lobby of Philadelphia’s Comcast Center features life-size sculptures of people strolling on steel tubes.
The coveted Pritzker Prize was awarded in 2009 to Swiss architect Peter Zumthor.
This abandoned overhead freight-rail line sliced through the air across 22 blocks in Manhattan and had been scheduled for demolition.
Instead, after pressure from a volunteer citizens’ group, the city converted much of it into a linear park.
The park was immensely popular and also spurred development; a number of new buildings quickly appeared near it.
The park’s designers, who were careful to preserve some of its gritty industrial aesthetic, were landscape architect James Corner and architects Diller Scofidio + Renfro.
The Promenade Plantee in Paris, another park along a former elevated rail line, was one of the inspirations for the High Line.
Blamed were endless bickering and disagreement among the owners and others.
By way of contrast, the city of Dallas was well on the way to completion of the AT&T Performing Arts Center, which was dedicated in October and began performances in the same month.
Also well known was his complex of indoor and outdoor thermal baths in the mountains of Switzerland.
Here the visitor moved from dark, cavelike interiors out to sun-drenched terraces.
Zumthor also designed the Swiss Pavilion for Expo 2000 and the Kolumba art museum, both in Germany.
Pei, who turned 92 in 2009, was best known for his renovations to the Louvre Museum in Paris.
Among other notable Pei buildings were the East Building of the National Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C.; the Everson Museum of Art in Syracuse, N.Y.; the Fragrant Hill Hotel in Beijing; the John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum in Boston; and the Bank of China Tower in Hong Kong.
The Gold Medal of the American Institute of Architects was presented to Peter Bohlin.
Founder of the American firm Bohlin Cywinski Jackson, Bohlin was especially known for his beautiful rural houses.
Branson Regional south of Branson, Mo., near Arkansas state line 5,400 2009 Opened May 8; first privately funded commercial airport in United States Bridges Length Hong Kong-Zhuhai Crossing Hong Kong to China link 50 km 2016 To include world’s largest sea bridge and world's longest immersed tube tunnel ; construction began in mid-Dec.09 Hangzhou Bay #2 between Jiaxing and Shaoxing, China 2,689* 2012 *Will be world's longest all-span cable-stayed bridge Zambezi bridge at Caia Caia-Chimuara, Mozam.
The AIA's annual 25-Year Award, given to a work of architecture that had proved its merit over at least a quarter of a century, went to the Faneuil Hall Marketplace in Boston, a renovation of a group of wholesale market buildings dating from 1826.
American architect Benjamin Thompson restored the markets in 1976, converting them into what he called a ""festival marketplace” of indoor and outdoor streets of shops and restaurants.
The latter was a tall boat-shaped worship space filled with warm-toned light from above.
The hottest preservation issue of the year arose over a proposal by British Pritzker Prize winner Lord Rogers for a site in London.
Called the Chelsea Barracks, the project would have been built next to a historical 1692 landmark, the Chelsea Royal Hospital by legendary British architect Sir Christopher Wren.
He was opposed by Britain’s Prince Charles, a frequent critic of modem architecture, who demanded a more traditional design.
The prince won the battle in June when the project’s developers, investors from Qatar, dropped the Rogers scheme.
A happier preservation story was the restoration of the Darwin D Martin House in Buffalo, N.Y., a 1904 masterpiece by American architect Frank Lloyd Wright.
The restoration of the exterior was completed in 2008, and in 2009 the house acquired a new visitors’ centre next door.
It was designed by architect Toshiko Mori in a crisp glass style that acted as a foil to the heavier brick of the house.
In Scotland, American architect Steven Holl won the coveted job of designing an addition to another beloved and legendary building, the Glasgow School of Art, a 1909 work by Scottish architect Charles Rennie Mackintosh.
The Guggenheim itself was a Wright building, and the exhibit was timed to mark its 50th anniversary.
Workshops for Modernity,” an exhibit of the history of the German Bauhaus school, which was one of the major sources of the modern movement in art and architecture.
Photographs by Julius Shulman” displayed the work of a 20th-century architectural photographer best known for his images of modern houses in California.
An exhibit at Los Angeles’s Central Library featured artwork by 20th-century architect Richard Neutra.
At the Barbican Art Gallery in London was a massive exhibit of the work of the Swiss Modernist Le Corbusier, one of the three or four leading architects of the 20th century.
A Life, by Nicholas Fox Weber, and of an enormous compilation of his work and life entitled Le Corbusier Le Grand.
Taken as a group, these notable books and exhibitions seemed to mark a resurgence of a taste for Modernism in contemporary culture.
Sverre Fehn, 84, regarded as the leading Norwegian architect and a winner of the 1997 Pritzker Prize, died in February.
Also in February came the death of J Max Bond, Jr., 73, a noted American architect, educator, and advocate for African Americans in the architectural profession.
Arthur Erickson, the most influential Canadian architect, died at age 84 in May.
In September Joan Goody, 73, a pioneer and leader among American women architects, died in Boston.
In other news, the China Central Television headquarters, a major building by OMA, burned while under construction in Beijing.
The fire, which completely gutted the 33-story tower, was believed to have been started by fireworks in celebration of the Lunar New Year.
Washington, D.C., was the site of competitions for two major civic landmarks.
Gehry won the competition for the design of a memorial to United States Pres.
David Adjaye, a British architect born in Tanzania, led a team whose design won the competition for the National Museum of African American History and Culture.
It was to be built on an edge of the Mall not far from the Washington Monument.
ART he economic downturn of autumn 2008 cast a pall on every sector of the 2009 art market.
The auction houses faced straitened circumstances with new strategies as well as shaken confidence and diminished expectations.
Lowered estimates and restricted reserves—as well as tighter credit limits—were seen in all the major sales rooms, but bidders were equally cautious.
At Phillips de Pury & Co., London, 12 out of the 43 contemporary lots remained unsold.
Price records for individual artists were set by Claes Oldenburg’s pop sculpture Typewriter Eraser at more than $2. million and David Hockney’s iconic painting Beverly Hills Housewife at nearly $8 million, but it was a pale showing compared with those shattered in the previous year’s sales.
In December, Christie’s sold Rembrandt’s Portrait of a Man, Half-Length, with His Arms Akimbo for a record price of $33. million.
Chinese contemporary art brought strong returns at Sotheby’s spring sale in Hong Kong, and a new record was set there in October for the work of Zhang Xiaogang, whose austere black-and-white oil paintings of ordinary citizens were inspired by Cultural Revolution-era found photographs.
The double portrait Comrade surpassed its estimate by nearly a third, but its closing price of about $1 million, including commission, illustrated the ongoing disparity between the market value of Eastern and Western contemporary art.
Laurent and Pierre Berge’s collection of art and antiques at Christie’s in Paris at the end of February.
The best returns were seen for Modem paintings; records were set for works by Constantin Brancusi, Piet Mondrian, and Marcel Duchamp.
A scandal followed the sale when an anonymous bidder, who secured two 18th-century bronze animal heads from China, refused to pay.
Cai Mingchao, a consultant for China’s National Treasures Fund, revealed that he bid only to bring attention to the works’ suspect provenance.
Originally part of a fountain with a zodiac motif at the Old Summer Palace in Beijing, the bronzes had been looted by British and French troops during the Second Opium War.
Some clients turned to galleries for private sales, accepting lower returns to avoid the public embarrassment of selling off their collections.
Few buyers were willing to make daring purchases, preferring the established work of Modernists, such as Alexander Calder, over that of reigning art superstars, such as Damien Hirst and Takashi Murakami.
The decreased value of endowment investments, as well as a The shadows of visitors to the Tate Britain, London, are cast on a wall near the surrealist work Absuction Cardigan by Enrico David; the Italianborn artist was short-listed for the Turner Prize.
Major museums in the United States cut staff numbers and salaries, instituted hiring freezes, and imposed staff furloughs without pay.
There were program cuts as well, and museum directors encouraged their curators to create in-house exhibitions based on permanent collections to avoid the insurance and transportation expenses incurred by traveling exhibitions.
The success of the new Modern Wing at the Art Institute of Chicago offered a bright spot in a dire year.
After a decade in planning and construction, the addition opened in May to record crowds that boosted attendance rates by 80% during a weeklong celebration and averaged out to a 20% rise over the previous year.
Designed by Renzo Piano, the spacious and elegant Modern Wing featured permanent collection galleries for Modem and contemporary art, as well as designated space for architecture, design, and photography exhibitions, a large education facility, and outdoor spaces for changing displays of contemporary sculpture.
With an addition of 24,526 sq m —a 35% increase of total display space— the Art Institute became the second largest art museum in the country.
Antony Gormley’s One and Other, staged on the empty Fourth Plinth in London's Trafalgar Square from July 6 to October 14, attracted worldwide attention through streaming coverage on the Internet by Sky Arts, receiving more than seven million hits.
Out of a pool of 35,000 applicants from every region in the United Kingdom, 2,400 “plinthers"" were chosen by a random computer selection to occupy the plinth for the space of an hour to do whatever they liked.
The first, Rachel Wardell of the East Midlands, who used her time to promote children’s charities, described herself as a normal ""stay at home mum,” embodying the ""sample of now"" that Gormley sought to present in his project.
One plinther launched a paper airplane; another sat naked on a beach towel and read Treasure Island; and another displayed a paper cutout of a British woman on death row in a Texas prison to protest capital punishment.
Bmce Nauman finally launched the skywriting project that he conceived in 1969 called Untitled (LEAVE THE LAND ALONE) over Pasadena, Calif., on September 12, in conjunction with the 20th anniversary celebration of the city’s Armory Center for the Arts.
The letters spelling out his ecological dictum dispersed within the hour’s performance; the show also lived on as a YouTube video.
Combining a mischievous performance with a critique of the celebrity art world, Pruitt presided over an invitation-only dinner at which he presented awards to art world luminaries in the form of light bulbs—honouring Jasper Johns— inserted into champagne bottles.
Enrico David, a self-described surrealist who used a hardedged style and disturbing commedia dell’arte characters, and Richard Wright, whose intricate patterns on existing architecture were often painted over at the close of an exhibition.
Also listed were installation artist Roger Hiorns, who transformed derelict rooms in South London into glittering blue crystal caves with liquid copper sulfate, and Lucy Skaer, whose drawings and sculptural installations hovered between abstraction and figuration.
Visual artists named as John D and Catherine T MacArthur Foundation fellows included mixed-media installation artist Mark Bradford, landscape painter Rackstraw Downes, and digital artist Camille Utterback.
Notable deaths in the art world included painters Andrew Wyeth and Nancy Spero; graffiti artist Iz the Wiz; sculptor Ruth Duckworth; installation artist Jeanne-Claude; and curator and writer Coosje van Bruggen.
Other losses included those of painters Tyeb Mehta, Ray Yoshida, and Robert Colescott; mixed-media artist Dash Snow; sculptors Tony Rosenthal and Ingeborg Hunzinger; and art dealer Christopher Wood.
ART EXHIBITIONS The spring art auction season opened in March 2009 on a positive note that countered dire predictions, and most observers attributed the optimism to the recent spectacular sale of the Yves Saint Laurent private art collection in Paris.
Sales were steady at the fairs, but, in fact, the market had not taken an upswing, and many dealers were selling works from established collections to raise cash for their clients.
Sales were slow but better than expected, and a new feature called ""Special Projects"" presented large-scale site-specific works in public venues.
The 10th Havana Biennial, which was held at the Museo Nacional de Bellas Artes, welcomed the first comprehensive representation of American contemporary art in Cuba in more than A rubber figure, representing the corpse of an art collector, floats face down in a swimming pool in an installation by Danish duo Michael Elmgreen and Ingar Dragset that was displayed in front of the Nordic and Danish pavilions at the 53rd Venice Biennale.
With 68 dealers, the third Art Dubai fair, held at the Madinat Jumeirah resort, enjoyed good attendance, but business was slower than at the previous year’s edition.
Art Vilnius '09 opened in early July in the Lithuanian capital as the first international art fair to be held in the Baltic states.
Critics noted that energy was high and that European attendees outnumbered Americans.
Artist duo Michael Elmgreen and Ingar Dragset curated two pavilions in a single installation called The Collectors, a deadpan critique of owning art in the current market.
The sleek Califomiastyle Nordic Pavilion hosted the home of a fictional playboy collector, with works of Wolfgang Tillmans and Tom of Finland on the walls and scantily clad house boys wandering through the rooms.
The adjacent Danish Pavilion was ""for sale” with a real-estate agent on hand to point out the amenities.
In a pool in front of the pavilions, a figure—one of the ""collectors”—floated face-down, dead in the water.
Elmgreen and Dragset won the Curating Worlds Special Mention for their installation.
British artist Liam Gillick filled the German Pavilion with simple pine kitchen furnishings in the installation Kitchen, inspired by the 1926 modernist designs of Viennese architect Margarete Schiitte-Lihotzky.
The spare cabinetry lacked fixtures and appliances, subverting the intended efficiency of the original design.
The Golden Lion for best national participation went to the United States Pavilion for Bruce Nauman’s Topological Gardens; it was the first such award granted to an American exhibition since 1991.
The exhibition, organized by the Philadelphia Museum of Art, filled three venues—two local universities supplied the additional space to the United States Pavilion in the Biennale's Giardini—with a four-decade retrospective of the artist’s work.
Nauman defined his concepts as ""Heads and Hands,"" “Sound and Space,"" and “Fountains and Neon,” with all three themes blended in each venue.
The Silver Lion, citing the promise of a young artist, honoured Swedish artist Nathalie Djuberg, whose Experiment was a multimedia installation of nature gone awry.
John Baldessari and Yoko Ono received Golden Lions for lifetime achievement.
Intended to track shifting trends as the largest generation since the baby boomers came of age, the exhibition revealed the full assimilation of digital media and the displacement of irony with sentiment.
Divisions between media were permeable, as seen in Turkish artist Emre Huner’s combined painting and animation and in Texan Ryan Trecartin's use of paint as cosmetics in performance.
Many works defied categories, such as French artist Cyprien Gaillard’s threepart filmed performance, shot in Ukraine, Russia, and France, featuring a disjunctive narrative of staged and real violence and destruction, with a sound track of anthems composed for the production.
At the 53rd Venice Biennale, German artist Tobias Rehberger was awarded the Golden Lion for best artist for his eye-popping installation Cafeteria.
Protect Protect —spanned 15 years and included her new redaction paintings based on content from declassified United States government documents associated with the Afghanistan and Iraq wars.
Combining fashion, performance, and sculpture, Chicagoan Nick Cave's Soundsuits provided a pansensory experience in the new exhibition Meet Me at the Center of the Earth at the Yerba Buena Center for the Arts, San Francisco.
In contrast, Polish artist Miroslaw Balka’s How It Is, a massive steel chamber lined with felt and installed in the Tate Modern’s Turbine Hall, plunged visitors into silence and darkness.
Londonbased Yinka Shonibare used colourful Dutch-wax fabrics to craft the elaborate costumes worn by the headless mannequins that populate tableaux interrogating African identity and colonial power in the exhibition Yinka Shonibare MBE at the Brooklyn Museum of Art.
Rivals in Renaissance Venice, co-organized by the Boston Museum of Fine Arts and the Louvre Museum, Paris, exposed how the three artists pushed one another toward innovation.
A Dutch Master Rediscovered, curated by Arthur K Wheelock, Jr., at the National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C., shed new light on the painter whose own fame had been obscured by his friend Rembrandt’s gigantic shadow.
Influence, Anxiety, and Myth, curated by Jay A Clarke and based on documents that reveal Munch’s ambitious career strategies and his keen awareness of prevalent trends in the art world across Europe, was seen only at the Art Institute of Chicago.
It provided new insights and a much broader international context for the Norwegian painters emotionally charged work.
Budget cutbacks discouraged plans for large loan exhibitions, prompting curators to rethink their permanent collections.
Temkin explained that the wooden frames, added to the works for exhibition purposes, diminish viewers’ perception of the original radical impact of the works.
PHOTOGRAPHY In 2009 the attention of the world on the inauguration of Barack Obama as the 44th president of the United States (and the first African American to hold this office) rekindled interest in contemporary American photography and its revelation of the country’s values and culture.
Los Angeles ,” a vast exhibition documenting the history and popular culture of the City of Angels.
More than 50 photographs were displayed, many by White House photographer Pete Souza, including his intimate study of Obama embraced by an elderly Ethel Kennedy, widow of Sen.
Over the years Wegman had gained a worldwide following for using his Weimaraner dogs as models.
His latest offering featured new colour prints taken on the Maine coast in the previous 10 years.
Other Americans given solo exhibitions in Europe included Bill Owens, Helen Levitt, William Eggleston, and Ralph Gibson.
America Fast Forward” at Galerie Alex Daniels, Amsterdam (February 28-April 4), while, elsewhere in Peter Macdiarmid/Getty Images Polish artist Miroslaw Balka’s installation How It Is, a massive steel structure encasing a cavernous area in which visitors were invited to walk, was displayed in Turbine Hall at the Tate Modem, London.
Sarfati's 26 colour prints in the exhibition were originally published in Magnum Photo's Fashion Magazine in 2008.
The more renowned Les Rencontres Photographie festival at Arles, France, celebrated its 40th anniversary (July 7-September 13) by hosting dozens of exhibitions, workshops, tours, and seminars within a historic backdrop of ancient Roman architecture.
The international lineup included exhibitions featuring Nan Goldin, Duane Michals, Martin Parr, and Brian Griffin, and there was a special retrospective by Willy Ronis, who died at age 99, one day before the end of the festival.
The great American fashion and still life photographer Irving Penn turned 92 on June 16.
A total of 41 young, mostly European, photographers were invited to submit photographs inspired by the work of the master.
The 2009 event had a special focus on Arab and Iranian photography, with work from the Arab Image Foundation and emerging work from the region.
The artist’s work, already known in Europe, confronted from a female perspective the conflict between tradition and modernity.
One of her series of works, Like Every Day, featured portraits of veiled women, their faces hidden by domestic items, and another, Wldte Square, consisted of pictures of individual objects for military use—such as a helmet and a grenade—decorated with red ribbon and placed on a white surface.
Following the acclaim of his first exhibition, ""On This Earth” in 2005, British photographer Nick Brandt published the second volume of his planned trilogy of books and exhibitions depicting the wildlife of East Africa in sumptuous black and white.
Photographs from East Africa,"" at Atlas Gallery, London , featured 58 recent images from famous game reserves, including Amboseli, Nakuru, Maasai Mara, and the Serengeti.
Of course, the year would not be complete without a dose of celebrity photography, and in 2009 one of the most sought-after artists of this genre was Zurich-born Michel Comte.
Comte’s work was also exhibited at Guy Hepner Contemporary, Los Angeles, in the show “Women” , where vivid colour portraits of Carla Bruni (wife of French Pres.
Nicolas Sarkozy) and actress Pamela Anderson hung alongside artful black-and-white studies of a nude Christensen.
The American auto industry experienced the BANKRUPTCIES of GM and Chrysler, as well as an increased interest in ELECTRIC CARS and gas-electric hybrids.
In other sectors companies SLASHED inventories, costs, and personnel in the hopes of KEEPING AFLOAT until the economy revived.
The CEOs of the Big Three automakers—GM, Ford, and Chrysler— had appeared before Congress in November 2008 to ask for $25 billion, hoping that the cash infusion would help them weather the developing economic downturn, but in the first few months of 2009, car sales collapsed.
In January automakers sold 656,976 cars and light trucks in the U.S., the lowest total since December 1981, and for the first time in history, auto sales in the United States were lower than in China, where 790,000 cars were sold in the same period.
Barack Obama announced that $2. billion of his economic stimulus package had been awarded to some 48 automakers or parts manufacturers in an effort to increase production of electric vehicles.
In late March 2009 the Obama administration's auto task force imposed strict measures on GM in exchange for continued federal aid, including the resignation of GM CEO Rick Wagoner and a comprehensive restructuring plan.
GM entered Chapter 11 protection on June 1; it emerged about a month later with a new board and the United States government holding a roughly 60% stake in the company.
The reorganized GM announced plans to shed more than $79 billion in debt, reduce its dealer network by 40%, shutter 14 factories, and cut at least 21,000 jobs.
In November GM pulled out of a deal to sell a majority stake in its European operations Opel and Vauxhall.
The auto task force nearly voted to let Chrysler collapse by not providing additional financing.
President Obama reportedly decided that the loss of as many as 300,000 jobs would be too much for the already-ailing United States economy, however, so Chrysler entered Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection on April 30.
Under the agreement, Fiat would hold a 20% stake in the new Chrysler Group LLC, with an option to increase its stake to 35% and eventually to a majority of 51% after taxpayers were fully repaid.
Fiat CEO Sergio Marchionne ( see BIOGRAPHIES) took over as the new head A Ford dealership in Culpeper, Va ., creatively advertises the cash-for-clunkers program, in which the United States government offered money to consumers who traded in their older cars for new, fuel-efficient models.
The revamped Chrysler continued to be hit by grim sales declines, however—its September United States sales were down 42% year-on-year, and its former 11.1% market share had been reduced to 8.4% by year’s end.
Meanwhile, Fiat posted a 62% drop in quarterly trading profit in the third quarter of 2009, and contrary to earlier statements, officials spoke of possible write-downs due to its partnership with Chrysler.
Ford Motor Co., which only a few years earlier had been considered to be in weaker shape than GM, managed to avoid bankruptcy and government bailouts.
Ford increased its overall market share, mainly at its Big Three rivals’ expense, and by September Ford’s market share in Europe exceeded 10.1%—the company’s best performance since September 2001.
Boosted by the federal government’s cash-for-clunkers plan (in which the government gave consumers up to $4,500 toward trade-ins of older cars for new, fuel-efficient models), Ford added 10,000 vehicles to its third-quarter production schedule.
By year’s end new vehicle sales had improved slightly, and Ford had boosted its United States market share to 16.1% for the year.
Ford, which had been targeting a return to profitability by 2011, surprised analysts with a profit of $834 million in the first half of the year and a $1. billion profit for the first nine months.
The chaos in American auto manufacturing enabled Japanese carmaker Toyota Motor Corp. to claim the title from GM of the world’s largest automaker in late 2008, but the global recession wreaked havoc on Toyota’s sales as well.
The company in May 2009 posted its first annual loss in 59 years and said that it was also likely to post a loss in its fiscal year ending March 31, 2010.
Other Asian automakers, while struggling for sales in the collapsed North America market, found some balance in the burgeoning Indian, Chinese, and Pacific Rim markets.
Japanese carmaker Honda Motor Co. was expected to post a first-half 2009 operating profit driven mainly by sales in China and Japan, where the governments had introduced tax cuts and subsidies to increase domestic sales.
South Korean automakers also prospered; both Hyundai Motor Co. and Kia Motors Corp. reported that profits rose to record highs during the third quarter.
Many European carmakers faced the same formula—declines in Europe and North America countered by gains in Asia.
Sweden’s AB Volvo announced a third-quarter net loss of $423 million, due to a sharp drop in sales in Europe and the United States (heavy-duty-truck sales were expected to fall up to 40% in the United States from 2008 levels), but the company reported that demand was stabilizing, particularly in Asia.
Volkswagen AG's third-quarter earnings were driven by the company’s strong sales in China and improved demand in Germany, which was boosted by an equivalent to the United States cash-for-clunkers program.
In a strange twist of fate, after Porsche had spent a year battling to purchase a majority stake in Volkswagen (it had a 35% share in 2008), it could not raise enough funds, owing to the decline in car sales and a tightening of the credit markets.
In October China announced that its annual production had exceeded 10 million cars for the first time in history and was expected to top 12 million by year's end.
By the summer, when Chinese domestic car sales were up 48% year-on-year, many industry analysts said that China was on pace to become the world’s largest car market.
Ford especially made a push in late 2009 to boost its presence by introducing the Figo, a low-cost car to be built in India and sold to other Asian-Pacific markets.
While much of the automobile sector was in tatters, the American airline industry, which had been battered for much of the previous decade, appeared to stabilize in the second half of 2009.
Although the International Air Transport Association predicted that its members would lose $9 billion in 2009— and the five largest U.S.-based airlines all posted losses in the second quarter— none of the airlines went under or required federal bailouts.
One boon for the airline industry was the decline in jet fuel costs for much of the year.
Southwest Airlines Co. and United Airlines’ parent UAL Corp. reported narrower losses in the third quarter than in late 2008.
Southwest, which lost $16 million in third-quarter 2009, compared with $120 million in thirdquarter 2008, increased its ridership by lowering its fares, which reduced passenger revenue yield by 12% in the period.
Delta Air Lines Inc. and United States Airways Group Inc. also posted losses in the third quarter.
AMR Corp., the parent of American Airlines, registered a third-quarter loss of $359 million, compared with a profit of $31 million in third-quarter 2008, but the company showed signs of reducing costs and improving productivity; it showed a record-high load factor (the percentage of available seats filled) of 83.9% as of September 30.
The low-cost, smallervolume JetBlue Airways Corp. returned to profitability in late 2009.
International airlines also faced declining ridership and the subsequent need to reduce flights, costs, and staff.
Those in the strongest position were low-cost leaders such as Ireland's budget airline Ryanair, which aggressively pursued a strategy of reducing fares while increasing customer charges, such as fees for checked baggage and charges to customers of roughly $64 to check in at the airport rather than by using Ryanair's Web site.
Ryanair was rebuffed in its attempt to purchase Irish rival Aer Lingus, in which it owned a 29% stake.
Meanwhile, Aer Lingus expected to lay off up to 17% of its staff and to impose salary cuts and caps on much of the remainder.
Germany's Deutsche Lufthansa AG slumped by 19% in the quarter ended June 30, though its purchase of the ailing Austrian Airlines was approved by the EU in August.
Japan Airlines Corp., which lost more than $1 billion in its fiscal quarter ended June 30, said that it would cut 6,800 employees; it also continued in joint-venture talks with both Delta and American.
India's low-cost Jet Airways, which in 2003 had controlled nearly half of India’s domestic market, saw its market share fall to 25%, and by mid-2009 it was posting losses and cutting staff.
The two largest global aircraft manufacturers had a difficult year, plagued with what seemed to be endless delays in their next-generation aircraft and a great decline in orders.
As of Sept., 2009, total orders booked by Airbus and rival Boeing Co. were only 203, compared with the 1,360 orders that the two had booked in the first nine months of 2008.
Company analysts said that Boeings decision to outsource much of the Dreamliner's manufacturing to save costs had contributed to the bottlenecks in production.
Boeing posted a $1. billion loss in third-quarter 2009, compared with a $695 million profit in the same quarter in 2008.
Despite escalating costs and canceled sales, the Airbus A400M military transport made its long-delayed maiden test flight on December 11.
Energy producers, after years of record profits due to high oil and natural gas prices, endured a year marked by extreme price volatility not seen since the energy crisis of the late 1970s and by, in many cases, reduced earnings.
Oil fell from $145 a barrel in summer 2008 to $33 a barrel in December 2008 and then soared again to above $80 a barrel in late October 2009 before slipping below $80 at year’s end.
The price spikes occurred even though energy demand was low and inventories high, which suggested that they were driven more by market fears of inflation and the reduced prospect of new oil discoveries.
ExxonMobil, the world’s largest privatesector oil company, was expected to report a 63% drop in profit to $4.94 billion in the third quarter, and Britain's BP PLC posted a 53% decline in profit in second-quarter 2009 alone.
Royal Dutch Shell PLC’s angry shareholders shot down the company's executive-compensation plan in May.
In August 2009 Brazil’s government announced that its national oil company, Petrobras, would control all future development of Brazil’s deep-sea oil fields found in 2007 and considered one of the biggest new oil discoveries in recent years.
Venezuela bypassed American and Western European firms for its new development, instead signing a $ 16 billion investment deal with China for oil exploration in the Orinoco River region and reaching a similar $20 billion agreement with Russia.
Cnooc Ltd., China’s biggest oil and gas producer, and China National Petroleum Corp. , the largest state-owned oil firm, proposed a $17 billion acquisition of Repsol YPF’s stake in the Argentine YPF unit.
This followed the $7. billion acquisition in June of Switzerland’s Addax Petroleum by the Chinese chemical and oil company Sinopec and CNPC’s joint $3. billion purchase (with KazMunaiGas) of a Kazakh oil producer in April.
In early December it topped $1,200 per ounce, though it had dropped to about $1,095 by year’s end.
According to the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, speculative investors in mid-October betting on longterm gold price increases outnumbered short-term speculators by 10 to 1, compared with a 4-1 ratio in late 2008.
Silver was up 44% to $ 17 per troy ounce as of mid-October 2009, and the price of front-month copper had more than doubled, to $2.5290 a pound, in July from December 2008, reflecting investor belief that two of the major price drivers for copper— United States housing and Chinese industry—were on the rebound.
Aluminum prices, by contrast, slumped in 2009, with prices down 45% year-on-year as of July 2009.
Alcoa Inc., which posted a $454 million loss in the second quarter and had idled 20% of its production by April 2009, reported a third-quarter profit of $77 million and indicated that most of its major markets, including automobile makers, were showing signs of stabilizing.
Alcoa finished a $750 million construction project on a products factory in Russia and also procured Switzerland-based Noble Corp.’s intellectual property rights on welded-aluminum products.
Steelmakers across the globe contended with bloated inventories, slackened demand, and in some cases heavy losses.
ArcelorMittal, the world’s largest steelmaker, posted a $792 million loss in the second quarter but anticipated that the worst of the economic turmoil was over.
As in other sectors, demand was recovering faster in India, Russia, China, Brazil, and Eastern Europe than in the United States and Western Europe.
ArcelorMittal’s mills in India were operating at full capacity by mid-year 2009, while only three of its nine American blast furnaces were operating as of July 30.
Nippon Steel Corp., ArcelorMittal’s biggest rival, also posted net losses in first-half 2009, citing increased raw material costs and flattening demand.
At the start of the year, the world economy faced the worst recession in modern history, with an increasing number of bankruptcies and rising unemployment.
Firms and individuals were having difficulty in accessing operating funds and loans, and there was a dramatic slowdown in global production and trade.
In September 2009 the IMF estimated worldwide toxic debt, or subprime assets, at $3. trillion, down from its April estimate of $4 trillion.
Many banks were close to collapse and were rescued by their respective governments.
In the U.S., where 99 banks had been closed down by the end of October, the government's $700 billion Troubled Asset Relief Program fund was used to extend loans to many banks, and toward the end of the year, TARP was expected to divert funds to small community banks to help companies with assets of less than $1 billion.
In Ireland the Anglo Irish Bank— Ireland's third largest bank and Europe's most successful during the housing-price ""bubble"" years—was nationalized in January.
In the U.K., Lloyds Banking Group and the Royal Bank of Scotland were partly and almost completely nationalized, respectively.
In continental Europe casualties included the Dutch banking group ING, Fortis in Belgium, and the Flypo Bank in Germany.
In Eastern Europe more than $1. trillion had been borrowed, and many banks were in trouble; in 2009 some $400 billion had to be renewed or repaid, mainly to Western banks that were unable to roll over the debt.
Throughout 2008 central banks around the world had cut interest rates to increase liquidity.
Some, led by the U.K. and the United States early in 2009, adopted quantitative easing, buying British gilt-edged securities and United States Treasury bills, respectively, in order to increase lending.
For the first time in 39 years, the 25 leading banks, which accounted for nearly 40% of bank capital and 45% of total assets, suffered losses, and the top 5 alone lost a combined $95. billion.
Western banks endured hefty losses, led by the United States with $91 billion, although three American banks—JPMorgan Chase, Bank of America, and Citigroup—raised enough funds to head The Banker's list based on Tier 1 capital.
The 27-member European Union sustained a total loss of $16. billion, while the U.K.'s banks lost $51. billion.
Bank profits after the first quarter were much better than expected, and 10 American banks in June repaid $68 billion to the TARP fund, which freed them from adhering to the constraints on salaries and other income that had been introduced by the United States Congress.
There was growing concern and public anger, however, that the deeply embedded bonus culture persisted, especially in the United States and the U.K., where late in the year bank employees—especially those in upper management—were poised to receive huge bonuses.
This was in spite of the fact that the $9 trillion cost of the bank rescues had fallen on the taxpayers.
Meanwhile, central banks and regulatory bodies were formulating measures to prevent another banking crisis.
Capitalization requirements were increased, and there was to be greater transparency.
In October the United States Treasury announced a draft bill that would enable a financial institution to be ordered by the Federal Reserve to sell a risky part of the business or have it seized.
In Europe the EU was imposing penalties on all European banks that had been bailed out in the financial crisis, and even more stringent measures were likely.
There was ongoing debate on the wisdom and feasibility of dividing banks into a two-tier system of commercial and investment banks in an effort to ensure that the more risky investment bank activities, such as hedge funds and derivatives, never again had so serious an impact on the retail banking sector.
BHP Billiton Ltd., the world’s largest mining company, settled iron-ore price negotiations with more than half of its steel industry customers; many customers agreed to rates 33% below 2008 prices, and others agreed on quarterly price negotiations.
The more flexible contracts would enable BHP and other miners, such as Anglo-Australian mining giant Rio Tinto Ltd., to respond quickly to spikes in demand and would also allow steelmakers to cut costs during low-demand periods.
BHP failed to break through with Chinese steelmaker clients, who were seeking a 50% discount.
China Minmetals Non-Ferrous Metals Co. bought many of Australia’s Oz Minerals Ltd.’s assets, while Sinosteel Corp. purchased iron-ore miner Midwest Corp. in a hostile bid.
Aluminum Corp. of China's proposed purchase of an 18% stake in Rio Tinto fell apart in June, however, when the Anglo-Australian company walked away from the $19. billion proposal, in part owing to shareholder and governmental disapproval.
Rio Tinto, still burdened by debt from its 2007 purchase of Alcan, suffered a 65% decline in first-half profit.
In April the American steel industry filed an antidumping suit against China, alleging that Chinese steelmak219 Business Overview ers had unfairly dumped tubular and pipe steel imports into the domestic market in 2008.
Steelmakers, including United States Steel Corp., Nucor Corp., and AK Steel Holding Corp., and the United Steelworkers union called on the Obama administration to push for tougher enforcement of trade laws and even to impose extra tariffs against primarily Chinese imports.
At the same time, the Chinese government attempted to consolidate its steel industry, which accounted for about 38% of global production but was fragmented into hundreds of small companies.
When China attempted to privatize Linzhou Iron and Steel Co., 3,000 steelworkers protested; the government eventually scrapped its plan.
Dow Chemical Co. was forced to complete its purchase of rival Rohm & Haas Co. for $16. billion, for which it borrowed $9. billion in short-term loans and nearly saw its credit status downgraded to ""junk” because of the increased debt.
Dow had tried to cancel or at least delay the deal, but Rohm sued Dow to close the deal.
Faced with a short-term debt burden, Dow undertook layoffs, sold off Rohm & Haas's Morton Salt unit to Germany’s K&S AG for $1. billion, sold its interest in a Malaysian chemical joint venture for $660 million, and began consolidating some of its latex, rubber, and plastics businesses into one division for a possible sale.
Drug manufacturers also offered a string of megamergers during the year.
Pfizer Inc. in January paid $68 billion to acquire its rival Wyeth, the largest pharmaceutical merger since Glaxo Wellcome PLC bought SmithKline Beecham PLC in 2000.
Six weeks after the Pfizer deal, Merck & Co. announced that it would buy Schering-Plough Corp. for $41. billion.
Merck, with Schering’s patents and new-drug pipeline, could soften the blow from the loss of its patent for the bone drug Fosamax, which had recently become available as a generic.
Merck’s patent for the asthma drug Singulair (which had $4. billion in worldwide sales in 2008) was set to expire in 2012, and in August Merck won a patent-infringement suit against Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd. when the United States District Court for the District of New Jersey ruled that Teva was prohibited from marketing a generic version of Singulair prior to the expiration of Merck's patent.
Abbott Laboratories in September acquired the pharmaceutical unit of Belgium’s Solvay SA for $7 billion in one of several deals undertaken by drugmakers to get rights to new flu vaccines, which the industry considered a growth area.
In September Pfizer agreed to pay $2. billion to settle allegations that it had illegally marketed its withdrawn painkiller drug Bextra and three other drugs—the largest health care fraud settlement and the largest criminal fine in corporate history.
A federal case against Merck involving Fosamax ended in a mistrial in September because of a deadlocked jury.
In June 2009 President Obama signed the Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act, legislation that gave the FDA regulatory authority over the manufacturing and marketing of cigarettes and other tobacco products, including final approval of new tobacco products, cigarette ingredients, and tobacco industry advertising.
The FDA’s first major action in September was to ban flavoured cigarettes, including candy and clove varieties.
Reynolds Tobacco Co. and Lorillard Inc., had filed a federal lawsuit in August to protest the FDA's new power to impose marketing restrictions, claiming that it violated the companies’ First Amendment rights, but in early November a United States District Court judge in Richmond, Va., denied a motion for a preliminary injunction sought by the tobacco companies.
In 2009 the global economy showed signs that it was emerging from the “Great Recession,” which officially began in December 2007.
Although unemployment remained high, even the tarnished banking and finance systems showed improvement.
After hitting their lows in the first quarter of 2009, world stock markets rose steadily, with many bourses recording their highest levels at year’s end.
In the United States the Dow Jones Industrial Average closed at 10,428.05, up 18.8% for the year and 59.3% from the March low but still 26.4% below its all-time high , set on Oct., 2007.
Apple CEO STEVE JOBS returned to the company after surgery, and Microsoft introduced WINDOWS 7 to replace the much-criticized Vista.
T he global economic recession made 2009 a difficult year for technology workers and companies.
In the first quarter alone, American high-technology firms laid off more than 84,200 workers, according to jobtracking firm Challenger, Gray & Christmas.
In Japan financially troubled computer-chip manufacturer Toshiba announced plans to lay off 3,900 contract workers over the next year, in addition to the 4,500 temporary workers it had already cut from its workforce.
As the year ended, computer companies hoped that they were seeing the signs of an economic upturn, spurred in part by Microsoft's new Windows 7 operating system , which, it was envisioned, would generate a new round of computer-upgrade purchases.
Optimism was based on better-than-expected quarterly earnings reports from several companies, including Google, IBM, and Intel.
It was too early to tell whether an uptick in technology purchasing in the U.S., driven largely by consumer electronics, would spread to the corporate market.
Electronic gadgets of all sorts continued to become part of the everyday lives of ordinary citizens.
In the U.S., 44% of households owned a laptop personal computer , and the average family owned two PCs.
High-definition television and home computer networks were among the gadgets most rapidly gaining favour with consumers.
Wireless phone companies continued to invest heavily in smartphones and netbooks (downsized laptops equipped with cellular-network Internet connections) as new ways to sell more data services—which was necessary if they were to offset declining prices for cellular voice service.
One cellular company tried to borrow an audio technique from consumer electronics to make voice calls more appealing.
France Telecom offered HD cellular audio, which brought to cell phones the digital sound reproduction used with digital TV, music compact discs, and FM radio stations.
Electronic books, or e-books, caught the eye of publishers as never before in 2009 because of Amazon’s Kindle and Sony’s Reader, stand-alone devices designed to read the e-books that were sold online by Amazon and Sony, respectively.
Google also said that it would begin offering e-book downloads, although it was unclear which equipment it would use.
Other e-book providers included iRex, a division of Royal Philips Electronics, and cell phone company China Mobile.
Some printed book publishers were compelled to take e-books seriously because e-book sales were growing, while sales of printed books were not.
That was because publishers could do away with physical book expenses such as printing, storage, and transportation.
E-books also offered multimedia options that printed editions could not, and text could be combined with occasional video snippets and links to Web sites.
It was unclear how many consumers would shift from printed books to ebooks; in 2009 the latter accounted for only a few percent of unit book sales.
Still, some in the book industry worried about piracy of electronic books via downloads of illegal book copies—similar to what had already happened to the music industry.
In addition, book publishers worried that letting libraries offer e-books would make consumers less inclined to buy print versions, because downloading e-books made library use easier.
As a result, some book publishers refused to allow their e-books to be offered through libraries.
Amazon was slammed with a barrage of criticism, made more intense because 1984 details how powerful rulers can dominate peoples’ lives.
A Michigan highschool student whose copy of 1984 was deleted sued Amazon, and in September the case was settled out of court.
As part of the settlement, the company also pledged not to delete e-books from United States customers’ Kindle units in the future unless the user agreed, the user wanted a refund or failed to make the electronic payment, a court ordered a book deleted, or removing a book was necessary to eliminate malicious software.
The company introduced the iPhone 3GS (which added voice controls, a digital compass, and the ability to record video to the third-generation wireless-network platform) for $199-$299 and, in an effort to broaden iPhone use even further, dropped the price of the previous model, the iPhone 3G, to $99.
Apple’s iPod remained the top-selling digital music player, although Microsoft continued to compete with its Zune music player, to which it added the capabilities of playing HD video and receiving HD radio signals with better-quality sound than traditional FM radio.
Cell phone companies AT&T and TMobile sought to differentiate their data-using smartphone services by offering customers free Wi-Fi (wireless fidelity) connections when they could not get a cellular network connection.
AT&T had faced the bigger problem because its iPhone customers used more data than owners of other smartphones and thus tended to take up more network capacity per user.
Apple reported that it had sold its two billionth unit of iPhone and iPod Touch application software, or app, from its iTunes online store.
Users could choose from among 100,000 apps in 20 categories, including games, business, and social networking.
Hundreds of independent firms wrote apps for the iPhone and iTouch, but Apple had to approve the programs before they could be sold online through the App Store portion of iTunes.
For the first time, Apple allowed two of its music competitors, on-demand streaming music services Rhapsody and Spotify, to provide an app that connected iPhone and iPod Touch customers to their services.
This app used the GPS (global positioning system satellite navigation) location chip in the phone to overlay the phone’s camera view of a street scene with local tidbits of information, such as the identity of stores, points of interest, or real-estate listings.
The reliability of augmented reality was limited by the accuracy of the GPS units that the phones contained, but research firm iSuppli concluded that the GPS capabilities of smartphones were opening up a new area of growth for the devices, particularly the iPhone.
One use of GPS was to enable the iPhone to compete with stand-alone GPS navigation systems, but there were still technical hurdles in placing complex navigation software on cell phones.
Apple won in another controversy over whether Palm Inc.’s Palm Pre smartphone should be allowed to connect to Apple’s iTunes software, in competition with the iPhone and the iPod.
When Apple blocked the connection, Palm complained to an industry oversight group for USB-port connection standards that Apple’s action was improper restraint of trade.
The USB Implemented Forum dismissed Palm’s claim, however, and said that Palm was in the wrong for making its device appear to be an Apple device.
Sales of video games and the game consoles that played them suffered from poor economic conditions, even though the sector had been expected to be recession-proof— on the theory that the games represented stay-at-home escapist entertainment.
Experts attributed the sales decline to both tight consumer budgets—new console games cost about $60 each—and a lack of new must-have games.
ODST and The Beatles: Rock Band, in which the music and images of the legendary 1960s band were paired with a playalong game.
The gaming industry also began to embrace a new trend, playing casual games on cell phones.
The iPhone’s App Store had made hundreds of low-cost or free games available to consumers for downloading, and there were concerns that cell-phone games could take attention away from moreexpensive games for other portable gaming devices.
A study by Forrester Research showed that half of American adults who spent time online used social networks such as Facebook or Linkedln, a 46% rise from the previous year.
Another survey, conducted by Common Sense Media, a group that monitored children's issues, demonstrated that while teenagers were big users of social networks, most parents did not understand the extent to which the teens used the networks.
Rock Band, was released during the year; it featured the music and images of the legendary 1960s band.
In addition to this aspect of the service, which worked in some ways like an Internet or mobile telephone instant messaging client, Twitter incorporated features of traditional social networking Web sites, such as MySpace and Facebook.
Twitter users (alternatively called Twitterers, Tweeters, or simply Twits) could elect to receive the tweets of other posters or track specific topics, creating a dialogue of sorts and potentially pushing the number of ""followers"" in a given Twitter feed into the millions.
In April 2009 actor Ashton Kutcher made the news when he became the first Twitterer to collect more than a million followers.
While the service itself made headlines throughout the year, its users made their own, transforming Twitter from something that was regarded as an idle hobby for an increasingly wired world into an upto-the-second news outlet that transcended political borders.
On January 15, commuter ferry passenger Janis Krums broke the story of the successful water landing of United States Airways Flight 1549 on the Fludson River when he sent out a tweet stating that his ferry was going to rescue people from the downed plane.
Krums's hastily snapped camera-phone image of passengers disembarking the halfsubmerged aircraft was uploaded to Twitpic.com, a photo-hosting service for Twitter users; the site promptly crashed as thousands of Twitterers attempted to view it.
Twitterers scored another scoop in June when National Basketball Association star Shaquille O'Neal learned of his trade from the Phoenix Suns to the Cleveland Cavaliers via tweet.
Although celebrity accounts tended to attract hackers interested in little more than sophisticated pranks, a massive denialof-service attack in August targeted an economics professor in the republic of Georgia, knocking out the entire site for hours.
Millions of users attempted to log into Twitter only to be greeted by the service's iconic ""fail whale""—the image of a cartoon whale being hoisted into the air by a flock of birds, signaling a site outage.
On hand was astronaut Michael Massimino, who posted the first tweet from space during a shuttle mission in May.
Nowhere was Twitter's role as an emerging outlet for the dissemination of information more apparent than during the events surrounding the Iranian election in June 2009.
Mahmoud Ahmadinejad had secured an easy victory, supporters of opposition candidate Mir Hossein Mousavi took to the streets in a series of increasingly violent demonstrations.
The topic known as #lranElection became one of the most followed on Twitter as Mousavi supporters coordinated protests and posted live updates of events throughout Tehran.
On June 15, three days after the election, Twitter delayed a 90-minute maintenance period at the request of the United States State Department, rescheduling it for 1:30 am Tehran time in order to avoid interfering with the flow of information within and from Iran.
The following day foreign journalists were banned from covering opposition rallies, and Twitter, along with other social networking sites, filled the void left by the traditional media.
Government security officers tried to stanch the flow of information by blocking the Web site, while opposition supporters urged #lranElection followers to change their profile settings to the Tehran time zone in an attempt to overwhelm government filters.
Events reached a fever pitch following the shooting of Neda Agha-Soltan as she was leaving a protest on June 20.
A mobile phone video of the young woman's graphic death was posted on the YouTube video-sharing Web site, and by the following day ""Neda"" was both the rallying cry of the opposition and one of the top trending topics on Twitter.
The creators of Twitter—social media entrepreneur Evan Williams, social networking expert Christopher Isaac Stone, and messaging-software engineer Jack Dorsey—did not envision such a paradigm shift when they first designed and launched the service in 2006.
From its inception, Twitter was primarily a free short messaging service with a social networking element.
As such, it lacked the clear revenue stream that one could find on sites that derived income from advertising or membership fees.
Much of the attention in 2009 was focused on Twitter, a social-networking service that allowed people to exchange short messages, or “tweets,"" on any topic via computer or cell phone.
On the basis of its popularity, Twitter was able to raise $100 million in new funding, even though it was a start-up with little or no revenue.
Twitter’s founders—entrepreneur Evan Williams, social-networking expert ""Biz"" Stone, and software engineer Jack Dorsey (see BIOGRAPHIES) —sought to expand the reach of the service that they had launched in 2006 without a formal business plan.
Overall, text messaging—sending short written messages via bursts of data from one cell phone to another— grew in popularity, but the activity became controversial when more people began driving and texting at the same time.
Research into so-called distracted driving found that drivers using cell phones were four times as likely to have a crash as other drivers.
United States government employees were banned from text messaging while driving government vehicles.
Another problem of cell-phone texting was the transmission of sexual images or messages, which became known as “sexting,” between teenagers.
In the United States the problem posed new issues for schools and courts.
The Iowa state Supreme Court upheld a misdemeanor conviction of an 18-year-old boy who had sent a nude photo of himself to a 14-year-old classmate via text messaging.
While the extent of the problem was hard to gauge, a survey by the National Campaign to Prevent Teen and Unplanned Pregnancy showed that 20% of young Americans between the ages of 13 and 19 had either texted or posted online partially or completely nude pictures or video of themselves.
Microsoft, admitting that users had been disappointed with the Windows Vista OS (introduced in early 2007), launched the next-generation Windows 7 in October 2009.
Windows 7 was said to address complaints about Vista—slowness, software crashes, and software incompatibility issues—while keeping the underlying Vista architecture.
Windows 7 improvements included more efficient use of memory, which caused a PC to start up faster and run more smoothly.
When Vista was announced, its high computing demands meant that it would not run well on many existing computers.
That was expected to be less of a problem with Windows 7, which was said to work on nearly all new computers as well as those that were up to three years old.
Satisfactory performance on older PCs was said to vary, although Microsoft's official system requirements were set fairly low.
In December Microsoft reached an agreement on Windows long-running antitrust issues with the European Union.
The EU reacted favourably to Microsoft’s offer to alter the way that it combined its Internet Explorer Web browser with Windows.
Microsoft also won a patent victory when a federal judge in Providence, R.I., overturned a $388 million penalty against the company, one of the largest amounts ever awarded in a civil patentinfringement lawsuit.
Software firm Uniloc USA, Inc., had won damages from Microsoft in an earlier jury trial on the basis of claims that Microsoft had infringed on Uniloc's security software patents.
A federal court in Texas in May ruled in favour of the Canadian firm i4i, Inc., which claimed in a lawsuit filed in 2007 that Microsoft’s Word software infringed on an i4i patent.
In August the court ruled that Microsoft should pay more than $290 million in damages and issued an injuction that would prohibit the company from selling versions of the Word program that contained the patented technology.
Microsoft obtained a temporary stay of the court’s order and in September told a federal appeals court that the lower court had erred in interpreting i4i’s patent claim, but i4i told the appeals court that Microsoft had known about Mi’s patent before using the technology and had simply disregarded it.
Microsoft lost its appeal and agreed to replace the infringing code in Word 2003 and Word 2007.
The court ruling might force the software company to make technical changes to the next version of Word, planned for release in 2010.
Under the agreement, Microsoft was to provide Bing’s search technology on Yahoofs Web sites.
There were more delays in Google’s settlement with authors and publishers in a 2005 copyright-infringement case over scanned library books that were to appear online.
Google's original settlement called for Google to pay $125 million to compensate authors and publishers of books that were still protected by copyright and to help locate the copyright holders for out-of-print books covered by the law.
The United States Department of Justice raised legal and antitrust objections to the agreement on the basis of complaints that it gave Google too much power over copyrighted works.
The two sides in the copyright case—the defendant, Google, and the plaintiffs, the Authors Guild and the Association of American Publishers—negotiated a replacement agreement, which was awaiting court approval at year’s end.
In a related matter, Google acquired reCAPTCHA, a company that created visual puzzles to ensure that people and not automated hots (short for robots) were signing up for Internet services.
Google sought to adapt the technology to improve optical character recognition for out-of-copyright books that it scanned and offered for downloading.
The PC industry waited for signals that the recession was over, but the outlook was not good in the first part of the year.
Research firm IDC said that worldwide PC shipments were down 2.4% in the second quarter from a year earlier, and the value of PC shipments dropped about 19%, in part because of price discounting.
It was hoped that the year-end holiday season would signal the return of better economic times—and there were early indications that could be true.
In the third calendar quarter of the year, all PC companies reported rising sales.
Late in the year, according to IDC, PC maker Acer replaced Dell as the second-ranked PC market-share holder, with 14% of the worldwide market.
Hewlett-Packard remained number one, with just over 20% of the world PC market.
Apple boosted its United States market share with record nonholiday sales in the third quarter, but the Macintosh remained a minor player internationally.
Netbooks were the fastest-growing PC category and were seen as bridging the gap between smartphones and laptop computers.
Netbooks were small notebook computers with slower processors, smaller screens, shrunken keyboards, and lower-capacity disk drives that nonetheless could handle Internet browsing and routine computing tasks.
They were aimed in part at users who were comfortable with using online applications for common productivity tasks, such as document or spreadsheet creation.
There was concern in the computer industry, however, that netbooks simply represented a new, lessexpensive product category and that their sales would cut into sales of traditional laptop PCs.
Designed to fit in a pocket or purse, it was intended for e-mail or Web browsing via cellular network or Wi-Fi Internet connection.
Google, which already made the Android OS used on some cell phones, declared that it would compete with Microsoft and Apple in the market for PC operating systems.
Google planned to challenge the Windows and Mac OS X operating systems, using an extension of its Chrome Web browser technology in a product that it expected to introduce in late 2010.
As a result, Google CEO Eric Schmidt resigned in August from Apple’s board of directors.
Steve Jobs, the charismatic Apple CEO and cofounder who had been given credit for Apple’s dominant position with the iPhone and iPod, returned to his job after having taken a medical leave of absence for much of the year.
During that time he had a liver transplant that was needed because he had suffered complications from pancreatic cancer.
His return was considered likely to reassure Apple shareholders who were concerned that Jobs was an irreplaceable part of Apple’s financial success.
Apple in August introduced an undramatic upgrade to its Macintosh operating system, called Mac OS X Snow Leopard; it incorporated many small improvements rather than high-profile changes.
Oracle continued its ambitious growth plans in the software industry, which had resulted in the purchase of more than 40 companies in four years.
Oracle's plan to acquire Sun Microsystems, a computer hardware and software firm, for $7. billion was announced early in the year.
Analysts said that the deal would make Oracle more competitive against IBM in the corporate computing market.
Oracle’s plan was delayed when the European Commission decided to extend its investigation of the acquisition's ramifications.
EU officials expressed concern that the acquisition of Sun by Oracle, one of the world’s largest software firms, could reduce competition in the market for database software.
The delay was unexpected because the United States DOJ had already approved the transaction.
Oracle CEO Larry Ellison said that he was eager to complete the acquisition because, he said, Sun was losing $100 million a month.
Intel appealed a $1.45 billion antitrust fine levied against it by European Union regulators, asking that the fine be overturned or reduced.
Intel was accused of having provided rebates to some PC makers who were heavy users of Intel chips and of having rewarded them for delaying the production and release of PCs using chips from Intel competitor Advanced Micro Devices , which filed a related lawsuit in 2005.
It was unclear how the settlement would affect the ongoing government antitrust actions against Intel in Europe, Asia, and the U.S., although it would end private antitrust cases pending in the United States and Japan.
Computer storage firm EMC Corp. paid $2. billion to acquire Data Domain, which had “data deduplication” software that helped corporations to sharply reduce the amount of computer storage they required.
Adobe Systems, known for its Photoshop and document-reading software, bought Omniture, a Web-traffic-analysis firm, for about $1. billion.
Omniture’s software was designed to facilitate online marketing, while Adobe’s focus was on software to create online and offline content.
Cisco Systems was in the process of acquiring Tandberg, a Norwegian videoconferencing company, for $3. billion after initially having bid $3 billion.
Tandberg sold videoconferencing equipment and software that could make connections between different types of video equipment.
Hewlett-Packard said that it would acquire network equipment company 3Com for $2. billion in order to compete more effectively with Cisco, the networking market leader.
Texas-based Perot Systems, which was founded in 1988 by businessman H Ross Perot, a former United States presidential candidate, provided services ranging from data centre management to consulting.
Legal opposition was resolved to allow eBay’s $2 billion sale of the majority interest in Internet phone service Skype to a consortium of investors.
The founders accused eBay of having violated copyright by changing and sharing key software code associated with the Skype service, which consisted of free Internet-based voice and video messages between users of Skype software on computers and smartphones and of for-pay calls from Skype software to conventional landline and cell phones.
EBay settled the lawsuits filed by the Skype founders by giving the founders a 14% ownership position in Skype and two seats on Skype's board of directors.
In return, the founders were to transfer to Skype the intellectual property that was the basis for the lawsuits.
Skype was acquired to help eBay connect buyers and sellers via Internet phone service, but analysts said that Skype never fit in with eBay’s business.
A federal appeals court overturned the 2007 conviction of Gregory Reyes, the former CEO of computer data centre supplier Brocade Communications Systems, citing improper actions by prosecutors.
He had been sentenced to 21 months in prison and a $15 million fine for illegal backdating of stock options to increase employee pay, but in 2009 he faced a new trial.
Reyes had resigned from Brocade in 2005 after accounting problems were connected to the stock-option grants.
Prior to the investigations, it had been common practice in some corporations to backdate the grant date of stock options to a day when the stock price was low, which presumably would increase the value of the options when they were eventually exercised at a higher price.
While not illegal in itself, the practice required a special accounting treatment to avoid artificially increasing company profits, a rule not always followed.
AOL said that it would eliminate 2,500 jobs, or one-third of its workforce, as part of its spin-off from media company Time Warner Inc.
The spin-off reversed the highly publicized but largely unsuccessful merger of ""old"" and ""new” media firms nine years earlier.
Video-game maker Electronic Arts announced that it would eliminate 1,500 jobs, or about 17% of its workforce.
Computer security experts said that the risks from hackers were changing.
There was a decline in attacks on security flaws in the ubiquitous Microsoft Windows OS, which had been made more impervious to attacks.
Instead, hackers were shifting to attacks on security holes in other programs found on many PCs, including the Microsoft Office software package, Adobe’s Flash Player (used to display video animations), and Apple’s QuickTime video player software.
In addition, hackers increased the number of attacks on corporate Web sites, either to steal information or to convert legitimate Web sites into distribution points for malicious software that could take over PCs.
The theft of data and intellectual property via Web site break-ins reached a value of more than $1 trillion in 2008, the security firm McAfee said.
A hacker in one of the largest identitytheft cases in United States history pleaded guilty in late August and faced up to 25 years in prison.
It was a turnabout for Albert Gonzalez of Miami, who had been arrested in 2003 but was not charged because he had become a government informant in the case.
One of the most infamous Internet sources of pirated movies, music, and video games, the file-sharing service the Pirate Bay, was to be converted to a legitimate business after being acquired by the Swedish firm Global Gaming Factory for $7.75 million.
The Pirate Bay had an estimated 20 million users worldwide, but it ran aground in early 2009 when a Swedish court convicted its three founders and one of their investors of copyright law violations.
Each was sentenced to a year in prison, and they were collectively fined $3. million in damages.
Later the three founders were threatened by a Dutch court with $9 million in additional fines unless they removed links on the Pirate Bay service to copyrighted material owned by a group of Dutch musicians and filmmakers.
The founders claimed that they had no power to do so because they were no longer affiliated with the company, which was now owned by Riversella Ltd. of the Seychelles.
Questions remained about how the Pirate Bay could be turned into a legal business without either losing its file-sharing audience or violating copyrights.
Data security was a big issue in negotiations between the United States and the EU over sharing banking data across country lines to help fight terrorism.
The issue arose when it was announced that the database that enabled the financial tracking was being moved from the United States to The Netherlands, which brought into play European data-privacy rules that more tightly controlled the sharing of information about trans-Atlantic financial transactions.
An interim one-year data-sharing agreement was in the works, but critics questioned its legality.
Barack Obama’s administration announced that it would devote more attention to cybersecurity to protect an American computer infrastructure that was vulnerable to foreign attack.
Theft, alteration, or destruction of data could reduce public trust in information systems.
Microsoft joined a small number of companies that provided antivirus software free instead of selling it.
Adobe and security firm McAfee said that they would adapt digital-rights-management software—long used to protect digital music from unauthorized use—to protect corporate documents from unauthorized viewing.
Access to documents would be controlled by the level of security classification they carried.
A university study sponsored by Cisco Systems found that the best-performing broadband connections (based on download and upload speeds and the time it took to get an online connection) were in South Korea, Japan, and Sweden.
In rankings of both broadband performance and market penetration, the leaders were South Korea, Japan, and Hong Kong.
As part of the United States government’s economic stimulus plan, the Departments of Commerce and Agriculture were to award $7. billion in broadband stimulus grants beginning in 2009.
The Obama administration’s new FCC chairman, Julius Genachowski, claimed that “net neutrality” would be the federal government’s policy toward the Internet.
Net neutrality, as advocated by Web companies and consumer groups, would require that all data flowing over the Internet be treated equally.
That ran counter to the wishes of some cable-television and telephone companies that wanted to provide different priorities for broadband Internet traffic depending on how much was paid to transport the data.
Net neutrality also affected the free flow of information, because it was designed to prevent unpopular views from being blocked by datatransmission companies.
Genachowski affirmed that wireless data carriers should be held to the same networkneutrality standards as wired carriers, a situation that did not exist currently.
Another federal agency, the Federal Trade Commission, imposed new regulations on bloggers, those who voiced their opinions online on Web logs.
Under updated federal rules covering endorsements and testimonials in advertising, bloggers and others who posted product reviews online would be required to disclose whether they were paid for the reviews in money or free merchandise.
The rules were updated because advertisers were believed to be using paid endorsements on blogs and social networks to promote their products under the guise of noncompensated personal recommendations.
The blurring of the distinction between television and Internet services continued.
German public broadcasters planned to let viewers catch up on previous episodes of TV shows via computer Internet connections.
The British system would go farther by combining digital TV broadcasts with a companion Internet service that included special TV content.
Netflix, Amazon, and Apple all offered online movie rentals, and Google’s YouTube offered some older movies free.
Google had experimented with video rentals but stopped offering the service after it bought YouTube.
Cloud computing—providing computing power to customers over the Internet—continued to gain traction in the corporate world, despite some embarrassing setbacks.
Some corporations considered cloud computing to be less expensive and easier to scale up than self-run computing operations.
When a Microsoft-run remote server for T-Mobile failed, users of TMobile Sidekick phones were cut off from Internet services such as e-mail and Web browsing.
When Microsoft restored the server, part of the data— phone numbers, photos, calendars, and other information—was inadvertently corrupted.
It was unclear how many of the one million users of Sidekick phones were affected.
Google also had cloud problems when a computer error redirected some of its Web traffic through Asia, creating data congestion that slowed or stopped Google online services such as e-mail, calendars, and office-productivity software for some 14% of its users.
The significance of the interrupted Google service was that Google accounted for 5% of all Internet traffic.
China demanded that all new PCs sold in the country be outfitted with Internet-filtering software preinstalled by computer manufacturers.
In the face of computer industry opposition and Chinese citizen protests, however, Chinese officials softened the requirement to apply only to PCs in schools and public places such as Internet cafes.
The software, called Green Dam-Youth Escort, was ostensibly developed to block pornography and violence on the Internet in an effort to protect children, but it had the capability to block any content that Chinese officials designated as undesirable.
PCs would receive automatic downloads of updated lists of prohibited content, and Chinese hackers reported that the lists included political topics.
GEOLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY he first Epstein Medal for innovation in geochemistry was awarded to John Eiler at the 2009 Goldschmidt Conference in Davos, Switz.
This medal celebrates the pioneering research of the late Samuel Epstein, a geochemist perhaps most famous for his calibration of oxygen isotope distributions between carbonates and water, and thus for initiating the field of deriving paleotemperatures in marine sediments and ice cores.
These paleotemperature determinations required the estimation of vanished reservoir information such as the oxygen isotopes of the ocean from which marine organisms grew.
Eiler, a geologist from the California Institute of Technology, developed an expanded technique that involved the measurement of ""carbonate clumped isotopes,” which considered the distribution of oxygen and carbon isotopes among element sites in carbonate minerals.
This distribution is temperature-sensitive and independent of the composition of the host medium, such as seawater.
Eiler's acceptance lecture presented new data extending his previous findings that many carbonates and carbonate-bearing minerals follow a single temperature-dependent calibration of the clumped isotope thermometer.
He outlined the techniques applications to a variety of problems involving crustal rocks down to depths of 10 km , including geotherms (mapped lines of equal temperature within Earth), fault friction, fossil extremophiles, and the genesis of oil, gas, and coal.
For about 30 years, scientists had recognized that this ice sheet was vulnerable to abrupt collapse, which could potentially increase global sea level by up to 7 m and possibly devastate the economies of many megacities.
A team of 56 scientists led by sedimentologist Tim Naish of the Antarctic Research Centre in Wellington, N.Z., identified 38 sedimentary cycles, each of about 40,000 years' duration, in good accordance with the same cyclicity recorded in marine-isotope records of global ice volume and mean deep-sea temperatures.
Japan’s National Institute for Materials Science continued to explore the geochemical hypothesis put forth by NIMS emeritus fellow Hiromoto Nakazawa that life on Earth evolved from biomolecules formed by meteorite impacts in early oceans.
Recent research about the composition and temperature of Earth’s early atmosphere had refuted the relevance of previous experiments devoted to the generation of organic compounds in gas mixtures that simulate the planet’s early atmosphere.
NIMS materials scientist Toshimori Sekine and his colleagues published results of a new approach in 2009.
Sekine conducted innovative shock-wave experiments by using a propellant gun that accelerated A “smart spider” sensor package sits on a deposit of volcanic rock.
Delivered by helicopter, this unit was part of a network designed to detect earthquakes, ground deformation, explosions, and large emissions of ash associated with volcanic activity.
High-speed impacts generated extremely high pressures and temperatures within the sample for a fraction of a second.
Analysis of the shocked samples by chromatography-mass spectrometry established the presence of minute quantities of an amino acid, four types of amines, and six types of carboxylic acid.
The experiment confirmed that organic molecules could be generated as proposed by Nakazawa’s ""big bang” hypothesis for the birth of life.
Meteorites may have been influential in generating life on Earth more than four billion years ago.
Since then, however, impacts, such as the one many scientists contend caused the extinction of dinosaurs 65 million years ago, have destroyed life.
The boundary was marked in North America by a widespread layer of black sedimentary rocks covering the bones of many large fauna ; such remains were not found above the layer.
In addition, the layer contained billions of nanometre-sized diamonds, most of which were encapsulated within carbon spherules.
Although some independent experts remained unconvinced that these particles really were diamonds, new evidence indicating that they were shock-induced diamonds appeared definitive.
The presence of particulate carbon and grapefruit-sized clusters of soot was consistent with the occurrence of intense wildfires, which were also associated with the asteroid-induced mass extinction of 65 million years ago.
These facts supported the conclusion that the Younger Dryas Period began as Earth crossed paths with a swarm of comets.
Ancient sedimentary rocks contain what little evidence there is for the life forms that followed the early synthesis of organic chemicals.
Their formation, established by comparison with the activities of cyanobacteria in modern tidal flats, occurred during periods of calm hydraulic conditions as the bacteria formed an organic meshwork of microbial mat that bound together fine sand grains.
MISS were produced by interaction of microbiota with wave and current dynamics, and they suggest the presence of strongly seasonal paleoclimates.
Extensive microbial mats grew over large areas of ancient shallow seafloors from at least 3. billion years ago until the present, and their fossil remnants promised to supplement the geobiological interpretations from the betterknown stromatolites.
The need to monitor active volcanoes in order to provide reliable estimates of renewed activity to ensure safe evacuation procedures was emphasized by the eruption of Mt.
The project (also supported by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory and the United States Geological Survey) was expected to provide a blueprint for the installation of sensor networks at other unmonitored active volcanoes.
Such a plan could help determine reliable estimates for the evacuations of endangered populations.
The battery-operated robots looked like microwave ovens on tripods, and each contained an earthquake-detecting seismometer, a GPS receiver to pinpoint location and ground deformation, an infrared sounder to sense volcanic explosions, and a lightning detector to detect ashcloud formation.
The robots communicated wirelessly with one another and with NASA’s Earth Observing Satellites, thus providing a low-cost sensor network that could operate in harsh conditions.
Similar sensor webs were also planned for the exploration of other planets with hostile environments.
GEOPHYSICS A damaging earthquake occurred near the Italian village of L’Aquila on April 6, 2009.
The main shock was followed by thousands of aftershocks that were detected and located by the Instituto Nazionale di Geofisca e Vulcanologia , using a portable network of seismometers.
The L’Aquila earthquake resulted from normal faulting on the northwest-southeast-trending Paganica Fault.
It and several neighbouring faults are related to extensional tectonic forces associated with the opening of the Tyrrhenian Basin to the west.
Earthquakes that occur deeper than about 50 km have long been enigmatic to seismologists.
At these depths the lithostatic pressure is large enough to inhibit brittle failure, or rock fracturing.
In January a team of geologists from Norway and Germany led by Torgeir Andersen presented new evidence in favour of a proposed mechanism for generating intermediate-depth earthquakes.
They analyzed veins of rock that had been formed by flash heating in a Precambrian terrane in Norway.
In this case, geochemical analysis showed that the pseudotachylytes had initially formed at depths greater than 70 km before being exhumed to the Earth’s surface.
Using computer modeling, the authors explained their observations by means of a self-localized thermal runaway failure mechanism, a process by which the rocks are softened by released heat.
Interestingly, this mechanism does not depend on the existence of free fluid in the pore spaces of rocks and therefore provided a distinct alternative to the dehydration embrittlement hypothesis that was currently favoured as a mechanism for generating intermediatedepth earthquakes.
Using the laser-flash analysis technique, her research provided insight into how heat behaves as it is conducted through rock. enriched with dissolved minerals.
Discovered in the late 1970s, these features had been extensively studied because they led to distinct biospheres that did not depend on photosynthesis.
In 2003 scientists began monitoring the Endeavour segment of the Juan de Fuca Ridge in the Pacific Ocean off the coast of Oregon and Washington with a network of eight seismometers buried just beneath the seafloor.
Using the high-fidelity seismic data, the scientists located several thousand small earthquakes that were associated with an axial magma chamber that drives the hydrothermal, or deep-sea, venting in the region.
They concluded that cracking associated with the recharge of the axial magma chamber was the key mechanism for localizing and maintaining black-smoker vent fields over long periods of time.
The scientists used a new technique known as laser-flash analysis to determine the time that it took for heat to diffuse from one end of a rock sample to the other.
This technique properly accounts for biases caused by radiative heat loss and allowed for accurate measurement of the drop in conductivity as the sample was heated.
The results of these experiments showed that thermal conductivity was reduced by as much as 50% at the base of the crust compared with previous estimates.
This in turn implied that the base of the crust was much hotter than previously thought and that the large amounts of granitic magmas observed in hot mountain belts such as the Himalayas could be generated without the radioactive heat production in the lower crust increasing.
Instead, heat generated by the localized deformation of the crust may form the magmas.
Another implication was that the positive feedback created by temperature-dependent conductivities may have been integral to the differentiation of the Earth into core, mantle, and crust from its original chrondritic (meteorite-derived) composition.
Scientists studying Earth’s magnetic field reported new constraints on the structure and dynamics of Earth’s core.
Although the magnetic field fluctuations were observed at the Earth’s surface, they reflected processes of fluid dynamics that took place in Earth's liquid-iron outer core.
The fluctuations were created by torsional oscillations that occurred with a cylindrical geometry.
In contrast to the elastic restoring force responsible for seismic waves from earthquakes, a magnetic restoring force creates these hydromagnetic waves.
Nevertheless, using methods that seismologists developed to study seismic waves, the scientists modeled the hydromagnetic waves to constrain the structure of the magnetic field in the outer core and the rigidity of the solid inner core.
The ""core-quakes” that generate the hydromagnetic waves appeared to originate near the equator of the inner core, but their precise source mechanism remained a mystery.
METEOROLOGY AND CLIMATE The first stage of the largest and most ambitious tornado field experiment in history ran from May 10 to June 13, 2009, across the United States Great Plains.
VORTEX2 (Verification of the Origins of Rotation in Tornadoes Experiment 2) involved a roving armada of more than 50 scientists and 40 research vehicles, which included 10 mobile radars.
The collaborative project was designed to explore the origins, structure, and evolution of tornadoes by collecting data from portable instruments placed near or inside the violent storms.
Understanding how tornadoes form is expected to aid the ongoing improvement of severe weather warnings.
The original VORTEX program operated in 1994-95 in the Great Plains and documented the entire life cycle of a tornado for the first time in history.
Applications of the findings from this project contributed to improvements in National Weather Service severe weather warning statistics.
VORTEX2 was a $11. million program funded by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the National Science Foundation , 10 universities, and three nonprofit organizations.
NOAA’s National Severe Storms Laboratory provided leadership and equipment for the program, which was scheduled to operate its second and final field phase from May 1 to June 15, 2010.
Scientists hoped to use the VORTEX2 program to study five tornadic storms in 2009, but the year was a historically quiet one, especially during May.
Researchers believed that this tornado became the best-documented tornado in history, with data collection beginning before the tornado developed and continuing through its lifetime.
In addition to collecting data on the Wyoming tornado, the scientists investigated several supercell thunderstorms that did not spawn tornadoes.
In other meteorological developments, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration launched NOAA’s latest geostationary satellite of the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites project.
Hovering about 36,000 km above Earth, GOES-14 carried enhanced instrumentation to capture high-definition images of severe weather patterns and atmospheric conditions.
Such images could help meteorologists develop more accurate forecasts and warnings for hurricanes, tornadoes, floods, and disruptive solar disturbances.
GOES-14 joined GOES-13 to serve as a backup satellite until one of the operational satellites experiences trouble.
Launched in February, NOAA-19, a polar-orbiting satellite, was part of the Polar Operational Environmental Satellites project.
The POES project was designed to detect more subtle changes in atmospheric and oceanic conditions, and its satellites could be used for longer-range forecasts as well as research on climate change.
Regarding the impacts of climate change, on June 16 the White House released a landmark study on the effects of climate change on the United States.
The report was commissioned in 2007 and was written by a team of 31 climate scientists from the United States Global Change Research Program; it outlined climate-related trends and projections for the country, as well as for specific regions.
The report stated that climatic changes already under way in the United States were forecast to increase.
Some of the predicted effects of global warming included rising temperature and sea level, retreating glaciers, longer growing seasons, and earlier snowmelt.
The report also affirmed that the effects of climate change would differ by region.
For example, water stress from reduced mountain snowpack would continue to intensify, especially in the West and Alaska.
Although agriculture was one of the sectors most adaptable to climate change, the report maintained that growing crops and raising livestock would become more difficult.
Among other predictions, the report also anticipated that land along the Atlantic and Gulf coasts, Pacific Islands, and parts of Alaska would be at greater risk of sea-level rise and storm surge and that climatic changes would exacerbate other environmental problems and social stresses.
Echoing other publications, the study noted that the pace of climate change would ultimately depend on levels of current and future greenhouse gases and particulates released into Earth’s atmosphere.
To solve this problem, many scientists called for a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions.
The WCC-3 summary reported that the goal of the conference, which was convened by the World Meteorological Organization and its partners, was to ensure that every country was equipped to access and apply the array of climate prediction and information services made possible by recent developments in climate science and technology.
The conference concluded that such capabilities fell far short of meeting present and future needs, particularly in less-developed countries.
Researchers countered stating that the e-mails were taken out of context.
On December 19, the Copenhagen United Nations Climate Change Conference ended with a nonbinding agreement to cap an increase in average global temperatures to below 2 °C (3.
To achieve this goal, industrialized countries would commit to implement economy-wide emissions targets.
Developed countries agreed to support a goal of mobilizing $100 billion annually by 2020 to address the needs of less-developed countries.
A National Severe Storms Laboratory Field Command Vehicle helps track a nearby tornado as part of the Verification of the Origins of Rotation in Tornadoes Experiment 2 in Goshen county, Wyo.
The project was designed to examine the evolution of tornadoes in an effort to improve the ability of the National Weather Service to predict severity of these phenomena.
In addition, American students LAGGED behind their Asian counterparts ACADEMICALLY, India began offering FREE elementary EDUCATION, China focused on rebuilding EARTHQUAKE-RAVAGED schools, and H1N1 FLU closed numerous schools worldwide.
PRIMARY AND SECONDARY EDUCATION epercussions were felt in 2009 when the results of the 2007 Trends in Math and Science Study —assessments given to fourthand eighth-grade students in 59 countries and 8 other jurisdictions—confirmed that students in Asia were at the top of the world in math and science achievement.
The assessments, reported in late December 2008, showed that students in Hong Kong and Singapore were the top-performing fourth-grade math students in the world.
Students in Taiwan, South Korea, and Singapore were the top eighth-grade math students, followed by students in Hong Kong and Japan.
In science, students in Singapore were the top fourth-grade scorers, followed by Taiwan and Hong Kong.
Students in Singapore and Taiwan had the highest average science achievement among eighth graders.
This assessment, the largest gauge of student achievement in the world, was a project of the International Association for the Evaluation of Educational Achievement , headquartered in Amsterdam, and was administered by the TIMSS & the PIRLS (Progress in International Reading Literacy Study) International Study Center at Boston College.
The results were considered somewhat disheartening in the United States, which once again found itself trailing much smaller and poorer countries, such as Latvia and Kazakhstan, though it was ranked above the average world performance.
Interestingly, fourth and eighth graders in Massachusetts, which was one of only two states that participated in TIMSS as a separate jurisdiction, performed at levels comparable to students in Japan, Taiwan, and Hong Kong.
The other state, Minnesota, also performed above the United States average.
The TIMSS results helped to spur a new round of American policy makers, including the newly elected United States president, Barack Obama, to call for American schools to adopt world-class standards.
United States Secretary of Education Arne Duncan, the former chief executive officer of Chicago Public Schools, made the establishment of world-class standards and assessments a hallmark of the $4.35 billion “Race to the Top” initiative that Obama established as a onetime fund to spur reform.
States were encouraged to apply for Race to the Top grants if they aggressively pursued reform in accordance with the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009.
The ARRA pumped money into the economy to stimulate recovery after the near collapse in 2008 of the financial system, which caused a deep recession that threatened to cut funds to schools across the country and severely cut education budgets in some states, notably California.
In order to be eligible for Race to the Top money, states had to affirm that they were working to develop worldclass standards and assessments, introduce data systems that would be able to track the progress of individual students and link those students to their teachers, allow the establishment of charter schools, and rehabilitate the country's 5,000 lowest-performing schools.
NCLB required that Five students share a single textbook at a pritnary school in Harare, Zimb., one of many state schools suffering from severe shortages of educational materials.
Although the results of the long-term National Assessment of Educational Progress (also known as the Nation’s Report Card), released in April 2009, showed that there had been considerable progress in reading and math for younger students as well as some narrowing of achievement gaps between different groups of students, the relative stagnation of state-by-state math scores on what is known as the “main NAEP,” released in October, and the persistence of low-performing schools meant that educators and policy makers continued to search for new ways to spur improvement.
Although there had been some discussion of reworking the federal ESEA legislation in 2009, the illness and death of Sen.
Edward Kennedy (see Obituaries), one of the coauthors of the 2001 authorization, was one of many factors that pushed back the legislation to the 2010 legislative schedule.
While the United States struggled to provide its students with a world-class education, many countries still struggled to provide students with any education at all.
Sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia were the regions with the most children out of school.
Following the near collapse of Zimbabwe’s schools in 2008, UNICEF announced in September one of the biggest donor programs in five years, stating that Australia, New Zealand, and European countries had donated $70 million to fund a program to get Zimbabwean students back in school and to provide them with textbooks.
As schools opened in 2009, it was estimated that there was only about one textbook for every 10 students in Zimbabwe.
By far the country with the most children chronically out of school was India.
A UNESCO 2009 report estimated that 9. million boys and 11 million girls in India did not attend school in 2007.
Recognizing the scope of the problem, India’s parliament passed and the president signed into law the previously controversial Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009, which guaranteed all children between the ages of 6 and 14 the right to an elementary-school education with no fees.
This specifically included children with disabilities and older children who should have received such an education at a younger age.
Indian policy makers continued to wrestle with the practicalities of how to make free education available to all children, particularly in rural areas, and agreed to a national-curriculum framework and appropriate training and education for teachers.
They also established a higher-education commission to tackle issues of access and quality at the higher-education level.
Schools—particularly those serving girls—continued to be under siege from extremists claiming that Islamic law prohibited girls from being educated.
In one particularly vicious attack in July in Afghanistan, a truck bomb killed 25 people, including 13 children on their way to school.
The story prompted readers to send donations, which Filkins used to buy a school bus to help protect the girls from further attacks.
In Egypt top Muslim clerics and governmental officials worked to ban in schools the niqab —a face veil with only a narrow opening for the eyes that was often worn by women—which the sheikh of al-Azhar, Muhammad Sayyed Tantawi, the nation’s top cleric, declared had nothing to do with Islam and was only a custom.
There were reports that he planned to bar female students who wore face veils from entering the schools of al-Azhar, Sunni Islam's premier institute of learning.
In the aftermath it became clear that many schools had been shoddily built in the 1990s following the extension of compulsory education.
The central government set aside about $1. billion, Shah Marai—AFP/Getty Images An Afghan woman visits Shamsia, who was a victim of an acid attack on schoolgirls by Islamist extremists in Kandahar, Afg., as she recovers from facial injuries in the hospital on Nov.
Many countries, particularly Mexico and the United States, struggled with the effects of the pandemic H1N1 flu , which caused the closure of many schools toward the end of the 2008-09 school year and threatened many schools in the fall of 2009.
Schools in the United States were instructed to prepare materials for students to continue their lessons in the event that the schools had to close owing to illnesses, and trials for an H1N1 vaccine were quickly put into place in order to make vaccines available in October.
Although 11 million doses were available in October, most doses were not available until later in the year.
The World Health Organization identified schools as a key link in the spread of pandemics and issued guidelines urging schools to stock soap and other hand-washing supplies and encouraging students and staff to stay home if they felt sick.
Because this figure included many doctors and nurses with school-age children, WHO found the decision to close schools under these circumstances difficult.
At the beginning of the 2009 school year, colleges and universities in the United States reported that hundreds of students had fallen ill with H1N1 flu.
By December 26, it was reported that nearly 1,700 deaths had occurred in the United States.
Public health officials said that figure was comparable to the usual number of deaths from the common seasonal flu; however, the H1N1 flu victims were more likely to be young and healthy.
HIGHER EDUCATION The 2009 Condition of Education, produced by the United States Department of Education, reported that higher-education enrollment grew sharply from 2000-07, with total undergraduate enrollment in degree-granting postsecondary institutions increasing from 13. million in 2000 to 15. million in 2007.
As schools opened in the fall of 2009, however, there was widespread concern that the cost of college might cause a decline in enrollment, particularly since the near collapse of the financial system the previous year had caused many private college and university endowments to drop.
In addition, cuts in state budgets meant that public colleges and universities cut programs and increased tuitions.
At the same time, many public-university systems began addressing the disparity in graduation rates among students.
African American students were found to attain a baccalaureate degree at about half the rate of white students, and Latino students only at about one-third the rate.
United States higher-education institutions continued to be a draw for international students, according to the Institute of International Educations report “Open Doors on International Educational Exchange,” issued late in 2008.
Almost 624,000 international students enrolled in the 2007-08 school year, a 7% increase over the previous year and an indicator that the difficulties of obtaining student visas after the terrorist attacks of Sept., 2001, had eased.
The majority of international students hailed from India, China, South Korea, Japan, and Canada.
This increase was matched by a sharp increase in students from the United States attending institutions abroad, with the United Kingdom, Italy, Spain, France, and China being the most popular destinations for American students.
It was charged with developing the research that would solve problems related to energy production and drew considerable criticism from within Saudi Arabia because women on campus were permitted to drive automobiles and mingle freely with men and were not required to wear veils.
Qatar continued with its own ambitions to reestablish the Arab world as a seat of knowledge development.
By 2009 some 1,200 students were enrolled in these institutions, and the foundation was in discussion with Imperial College London to establish a branch campus at Education City within a few years.
In March the Qatar Foundation also launched the Qatar Science & Technology Park for technological research and development.
International efforts toward standardization in postsecondary education continued in 2009 as part of the Bologna Process, which began as an attempt to create a way for European countries to recognize credits and degrees among European universities but had since grown to become an attempt for worldwide cooperation in higher education.
In April a Bologna Policy Forum included not only the 46 participating Bologna Process countries but also many others, including China, Egypt, Israel, Japan, Tunisia, and the United States.
The forum addressed such issues as the universal recognition of teacher qualifications; teacher, researcher, and student exchanges; and measures to ensure quality assurance.
Surveys of EUROPEAN WADING BIRDS showed that 50% are in decline; AFGHANISTAN established its first NATIONAL PARK; and the first FIJI PETRELS were rediscovered after 25 years.
INTERNATIONAL ACTIVITIES he decision by EU governments to phase out all incandescent lightbulbs and low-efficiency types of halogen bulbs by 2012 was confirmed on March 18, 2009.
On February 2 a directive came into force under which carbon emissions from all flights arriving at and departing from EU airports would be capped in 2012 at 97% of their 2004-06 levels and at 95% of those levels after 2012.
The court also ruled that the EC had exceeded its powers by reducing the caps for Estonia and Poland to levels lower than those the two governments had requested in their National Allocation Plans , thereby imposing too heavy a burden on their industries.
On January 13 the European Parliament approved a new regime for granting market approval to pesticides and consented to a draft directive guiding their sustainable use.
Pesticide application near schools, parks, or hospitals would be forbidden or severely restricted; aerial crop-spraying would be banned; and buffer zones would have to be established to protect aquatic environments and drinking water.
About 22 pesticides would be removed altogether from the EU market—approximately 25% of all pesticides in use.
In December 2008 Prime Minister Kevin Rudd announced a plan to combat climate change under which his country would reduce emissions by between 5% and 15% below 2000 levels by 2020 and would introduce a carbon-trading scheme in 2010.
In early May Rudd announced that the introduction of the trading scheme would be postponed for one year owing to the poor economic climate; however, the delayed scheme would aim to reduce emissions by up to 25% of 2000 levels.
In June it was reported that the Environment Ministry had halted construction on two dams in Yunnan province on the Jinsha River, a tributary of the Yangtze River.
The projects had commenced without environmental assessments or ministry approval.
In early August 33 persons were admitted to hospitals in Hunan province and hundreds of others were found to have high levels of cadmium in their bodies following a series of leaks from the Changsha Xianghe chemical plant, a producer of zinc sulfate, in the city of Liuyang.
In the nearby town of Zhentou on July 30, approximately 1,000 people staged protests against the polluting chemical plant, and during the following weekend medical tests were carried out on nearly 3,000 Zhentou residents.
The authorities promised to pay compensation for tainted farm produce and livestock that needed to be destroyed.
It was also reported in August that two environment agency officials in Wugang On the shelf of an electrical supply store in central London, a sign warns of the approaching ban of incandescent lightbulbs.
The incident took place in August near the city of Xi’an in south central Shaanxi province, China.
City, Hunan province, were being investigated for suspected dereliction of duty over an incident in which 1,354 children suffered lead poisoning, evidently from a metal smelter.
Two executives of the Wugang Manganese Smelting Plant had earlier been arrested and the smelter shut down.
On August 27 the Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress announced its approval of a resolution calling for new laws to target energy savings and emissions reductions.
On July 15 the government published a white paper outlining its plan to reduce U.K. greenhouse gas emissions by generating 40% of electricity from low-carbon sources by 2020.
Barack Obama's science adviser and director of the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy.
In April the Environmental Protection Agency said that it planned to declare that carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons, and sulfur hexafluoride emissions contributed to air pollution that endangered public health and welfare.
On June 23 the United States Chamber of Commerce filed a petition for a formal hearing on the decision.
It filed a 21page petition on August 25 asking for the EPA and environmental and business groups to undertake a credible weighing of the scientific evidence that global warming endangered human health.
Pacific Gas and Electric Co., Exelon, and the Public Service Co. of New Mexico resigned from the chamber in protest.
On June 26 the House of Representatives passed the American Clean Energy and Security Act by a margin of seven votes.
The law, sponsored by Henry Waxman, a Democratic representative from California, and Edward Markey, a Democratic representative from Massachusetts, committed the United States to adopting clean energy sources and reducing emissions of greenhouse gases to 17% below 2005 levels by 2020 and to 83% below 2005 levels by 2050 through a cap-and-trade mechanism.
The law would also require utilities to generate 20% of electricity from renewables by 2020, although they could meet one-quarter of the target through improved energy efficiency.
Democratic Senators John Kerry and Barbara Boxer drafted a Senate bill that was published at the end of September.
It set a target of reducing carbon emissions by 20% below the 2005 level by 2020.
The act allowed the United States to impose penalties on imports from countries that did not take steps to reduce emissions.
LDCs called on industrialized countries to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions substantially and commit 0.5-2% of their GDP to fund mitigation and adaptation measures in LDCs.
On March 31 Su Wei, leader of the Chinese delegation, said that success at the December Copenhagen meeting depended on whether developed countries were prepared to provide substantial funds and transfer climate-friendly technologies to LDCs.
India, supported by about half of the Group of 77 LDCs, proposed an amendment to the Kyoto Protocol that would require developed countries to reduce their emissions to 40% below 1990 levels by 2020, with indicative targets for each developed country.
China and India, supported by the Group of 77, defeated an attempt by industrialized countries to offer curbed reductions while seeking solid commitments from LDCs.
Subsequent rounds of talks were held in Bonn in August, in Bangkok in September and October, and in Barcelona in November; little progress was made, however, toward reconciling the differences between industrialized countries and LDCs.
Hu Jintao said that his country would try to limit its emissions by a notable margin by 2020 by improving energy efficiency, but he set no target.
Delegates agreed that the meeting had been constructive but made no specific recommendations.
The second meeting took place in July at L'Aquila, Italy, alongside a Group of Eight summit.
The shrinkage of the lake was caused by irrigation projects along the valleys of two of the lake’s tributaries.
Over the course of 50 years, these projects caused the loss of more than 90% of the lake’s volume. relayed his country’s determination not to commit to making any quantifiable reductions in greenhouse gases.
Delegates agreed that the global average temperature should not be permitted to rise by more than 2 °C , and G8 leaders pledged to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions by 80% by 2050.
He also stressed that Russia would not threaten its economic growth by agreeing to emissions cuts.
The United States and the EU also urged LDCs to commit to a 50% cut in emissions by 2050, but the LDCs rejected this proposal.
At the third meeting, held in Washington, D.C., in September, the United States and other industrialized countries said that they wished to abandon the Kyoto Protocol in favour of an Australian proposal.
This proposal, which was strongly opposed by India, demanded that all countries, regardless of their level of development, commit themselves to timetables for reducing emissions by stated amounts and that reductions begin by 2020.
On June 10 Japanese Prime Minister Taro Aso announced that by 2020 Japan would cut emissions to 15% below 2005 levels, amounting to a reduction to 8% below 1990 levels.
During the year several cost estimates for adapting to climate change were published.
In 2007 the UNFCCC had calculated an annual cost of $49 billion to $171 billion.
A study published on Aug., 2009, by the London-based International Institute for Environment and Development and the Grantham Institute for Climate Change at Imperial College London estimated that when the effects on various key economic sectors were taken into account, the total might be two to three times higher.
In contrast, the preliminary findings from a World Bank study suggested that the cost to the LDCs might amount to $75 billion-$100 billion annually from 2010.
The report also said that developed countries would have to bear much of that cost.
On Feb., 2009, the Committee of Geological Sciences of the Polish Academy of Sciences issued a statement saying that recent global climate change was part of an entirely natural climate cycle.
They agreed, however, that the increase in the atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations was partly due to human activity and that these emissions should be reduced while sustainable economic progress is maintained.
Keynote speakers included Vaclav Klaus, president of the Czech Republic and of the EU, American astronaut Jack Schmitt, and Arthur Robinson, curator of a petition rejecting the assertion that global warming is caused primarily by human activity and constitutes a crisis.
The petition was signed by more than 34,000 American scientists, more than 10,000 of whom had doctorate degrees.
Many skeptics of human-induced climate change maintained that some messages provided evidence that climate data were deliberately manipulated and exaggerated and dissenting research suppressed to serve an alarmist agenda.
Many climate scientists answered these allegations by stating that the messages were taken out of context.
The goal of the conference was to develop a binding global agreement on greenhouse gas emissions that would replace the Kyoto Protocol.
In October 2008 a meeting of the International Maritime Organization in London formally approved amendments to the UN MARPOL convention on ship-source pollution, confirming new global limits on the sulfur content of marine fuels.
Sulfur in fuels would be reduced from 4.5% to 3.5% in 2012 and to 0.5% in 2020, subject to a review in 2018.
The meeting also produced tougher emission standards for nitrogen oxides for new marine engines and the final draft text of a new IMO convention on ship recycling.
Under the convention, ships would have to hold inventories of all hazardous materials on board, and certain substances would be banned outright.
The improvement was attributed to increased surveillance and tighter rules.
It was reported in July that Brazilian police were investigating the discovery of 99 containers of hazardous waste in the port of Santos, near Sad Paulo, and at two other ports in the state of Rio Grande do Sul.
The containers held approximately 1,400 tons of dangerous material from the U.K., but they were labeled as recyclable plastic.
Environment Agency officials arrested three men, who were later released on bail.
Brazil formally accused the U.K. of having breached the international law forbidding the export of toxic materials.
Environment Agency, said that the U.K. authorities were working with the Brazilians to arrange the return of the material.
In September a report unveiled that Italian authorities were investigating a claim made by a member of the Calabrian mafia that the mafia had deliberately sunk ships carrying toxic wastes to evade laws on waste disposal.
One wreck was located 30 km southwest of Italy, and images from a robot camera revealed yellow barrels with toxic warning labels.
At the end of the trial over the 2006 dumping of toxic wastes in Abidjan, Cote d’Ivoire, Nigerian Salomon Ugborugbo, head of Tommy, a local company contracted to handle the waste, was sentenced to 20 years’ imprisonment.
Essoin Kouao, the shipping agent from Abidjan who recommended Tommy to Trafigura, the Dutch-Swiss commodities company that chartered Probo Koala, the ship carrying the waste, was sentenced to five years in prison.
Trafigura and the captain of the Probo Koala were also facing criminal charges in The Netherlands for having illegally exported the waste.
In September Trafigura agreed to pay more than $46 million in compensation to people made ill by the waste, and each of the 30,000 victims would receive $1,546.
This payment was in addition to the $200 million Trafigura had paid in 2007 to the Ivorian government.
Uzawa was honoured for his advocacy of the concept of social common capital as a theoretical framework for confronting environmental issues.
Lord Stem was recognized for his report “The Economics of Climate Change,"" which he prepared for the U.K. government.
The seven 2009 Goldman Environmental Prizes were presented in April at a ceremony in San Francisco.
WILDLIFE CONSERVATION The intricate relationships between biodiversity conservation, ecosystem services, human livelihoods, and sustainable—or unsustainable—exploitation of wild resources were highlighted in the news in 2009.
Perhaps no event was more visceral than a series of bushfires that began on February 7 in the Australian state of Victoria.
The fires, thought to be deliberate acts of arson, were amplified by dry conditions of a seven-year drought to become the worst in Australia’s history.
A warning was issued in February through an assessment of the vulneraA koala receives a drink from Country Fire Authority firefighter David Tree amid the wildfires that ravaged Victoria, Australia, in February.
The burning of more than 1,500 sq mi of drought-affected land was thought to be the result of arson.
Fourteen of the 20 most-at-risk countries were in Africa, along with Peru, Colombia, Bangladesh, Cambodia, Pakistan, and Yemen.
The vulnerability indicator for each country was influenced by the results of predicted warming models, the importance of fisheries to economies and diets, and the country's limited capacity to adapt to potential impacts.
Nearly all shortfin mako sharks caught east of 120° W by commercial fishing boats were female, whereas most caught west of this line were male.
The western part was fished more heavily, and thus a disproportionate number of males may have been caught.
Despite being classified as Vulnerable by the International Union for Conservation of Nature , many individuals fell victim to accidental capture in drifting gill nets.
In April, Afghanistan's first national park was created at Band-e-Amir, a region of blue lakes separated by dams of travertine mineral deposits.
Although much of the area’s wildlife had been lost, some species remained—including the urial , the ibex ( Capra sibirica), the wolf {Cams lupus), and the Afghan snow finch ( Montifringilla theresae), the country’s only endemic bird species.
Another April report revealed the reappearance of the blue whale ( Balaenoptera musculus ) in the North Pacific Ocean.
It was thought that whaling activities up to 1965 had eliminated this population.
An analysis of sightings that had occurred since 1997 near the coast of British Columbia and in the Gulf of Alaska, however, revealed that blue whales in these areas were part of an extant Californian population, which suggested that the migration pattern of an eastern North Pacific population may have resumed.
These observations also suggested that the California population and the population historically inhabiting the area around the Gulf of Alaska could be one and the same.
In addition, a June report showed that the global whale watching industry had burgeoned over the past 10 years.
It was estimated that 3,300 boat operators and other tourism officials offered whale watching and employed an estimated 13,200 people around the globe.
The report affirmed that protecting whales had generated significant economic benefits to communities worldwide.
Two communities in Tanzania obtained the first Forest Stewardship Council certification for African forests in April.
They developed a plan to harvest and sell African blackwood ( Dal bergia melanoxylon), or mpingo, which was used to manufacture clarinets, oboes, and bagpipes, to international markets.
The wood could fetch £13 per log—a considerable increase over the 5 pence previously received.
Provided that the forests were managed sustainably, these communities should profit from timber sales.
An expedition to Fiji in May rediscovered one of the world's most elusive birds.
The Fiji petrel ( Pseudobulweria macgillivrayi), classified by the IUCN as Critically Endangered, was formerly known from one specimen collected in 1855 on Gau Island.
In 1984 a single adult was caught on Gau Island, photographed, and released.
The expedition baited the sea 25 nautical miles south of Gau with a special food made from finely cut fish offal and fish oil.
When cast into the sea, the mixture created a pungent oil slick that attracted the petrels.
Another study published in May revealed that 50% of the populations of wading birds in Europe, western Asia, and Africa had declined, and the pace of falloff had accelerated.
Their decline was linked to inadequate protection of key sites on their migratory routes.
While wading birds used a network of protected areas in Europe, key sites elsewhere were not adequately protected.
Wetlands along Africa’s west coast, for example, had been affected by the construction of dams that drain wetlands and irrigation schemes that affect water flow.
The IUCN classified the species, endemic to China’s Yangtze River system, as Critically Endangered, and the last confirmed sighting occurred in 2003.
Individuals bom in the late 1980s and early 1990s may survive in the wild because the Yangtze River system has complicated habitats where paddlefish could hide.
The upper Yangtze is probably one of the last places that the fish may survive.
Many Asian vulture species have been decimated by consuming the remains of livestock laden with diclofenac, an antiinflammatory dmg used to treat cattle.
Lammergeiers had previously been seen on India’s border with China but not in such a large group or at so high an altitude.
Lammergeiers were known for dropping the bones of the animals they consumed onto rocks in order to smash them open and access the marrow.
Although Lammergeiers were not badly affected by diclofenac, their numbers had significantly dwindled in India.
A ll sectors of the fashion industry were affected in the year 2009 by the recession as the prolonged global economic downturn dramatically curbed consumer spending on fashion and luxury products.
Conspicuous consumption, once perceived as “retail therapy”—or an entertaining distraction from daily life—became viewed as superfluous in the straitened economic times.
To support London Fashion Week , Boris Johnson, mayor of the city, joined forces with the London Development Agency in the allocation of £40,000 to fund the cost of airline tickets and hotel accommodations for 30 Middle Eastern buyers.
The gesture was made in recognition of their “significant” and “growing” purchasing power.
In Great Britain a Local Data survey revealed that during the first nine months of the year, 18% of women's and children’s shops closed across the country.
CompagTeenager Tavi Gevinson, whose blog Style Rookie became a popular destination for fashion tips, secured a front-row spot at the Mercedes-Benz Fashion Week in September.
Astrid Stawiarz/Getty Images nie Financiere Richemont SA—the Swiss luxury-goods company and owner of Cartier, Alfred Dunhill, and Chloe, among other premium labels— reported that fiscal first-half sales were down by 15% from the same period in 2008, and Burberry revealed that during that same March-September period, it experienced a 19% drop in profit.
In October, LVMH Moet Hennessy-Louis Vuitton—the parent company of a host of brands that included Christian Dior, Louis Vuitton, and Fendi—released news that revenues over a nine-month period in 2009 had suffered a 6% fall year-on-year.
Italy's IT Holding SpA—proprietor of Gianfranco Ferre and Malo knitwear—went into receivership, as did Christian Lacroix’s Paris couture house after 22 years of operation.
On May 28 it was announced that cutting-edge 3 5-year-old Belgian designer Veronique Branquinho would close her company; she had already accepted a new role as creative director of Delvaux, the venerable Brussels leathergoods label.
Besides numerous nonpayments for her spring-summer line, she experienced a ""sharp drop” in orders for her autumn-winter collection; in 2008 she had staged a celebratory 10year retrospective at the ModeMuseum for fashion in Antwerp, Belg.
Yohji Yamamoto, the “elder statesman” of Japanese fashion, who founded his label in 1972, filed for bankruptcy protection on October 9, although an investor was in place to restructure the brand.
On November 9, the same day that Luella Bartley celebrated master240 minding the decoration of Londons Liberty department store’s Christmas windows, she announced that her eponymous label would cease trading; though it was perceived that Bartley’s label was thriving, her financial backer, Club 21, withdrew its investment.
In 2008 she had reported a £9 million turnover and received the British Fashion Council’s coveted Designer of the Year award.
Models’ fees plummeted as designers cut back their budgets for once-lavish fashion advertising campaigns, and editorial opportunities lessened as the pagination of fashion magazines dramatically diminished because of “staggering” advertising cutbacks.
Leading Conde Nast titles laid off staff, and quarterly magazines InStyle Weddings and Time Style and Design, devoted to chronicling the luxury market, halted publication.
Ultimately, fashion was about change, and financial hardship ushered in a new era of pragmatism.
Rather than purchase monthly magazines, hundreds of thousands of readers logged on to style Weblogs, such as The Sartorialist, a chic street-fashion blog maintained by photographer Scott Schuman.
Its images provided visitors with “inspiration and ways to reinterpret the clothing they already have” or prompted them to “shop in their own closet,” a phrase that became popular as the fashionable turned to their own wardrobes for style inspiration instead of buying new items.
Equally popular was Tavi Gevinson, a quirkily styled 13-year-old girl from Illinois, who daily flaunted and chronicled her favourite clothes on her Style Rookie blog.
She had just appeared in “Blog Off”—a four-page profile in issue two of Love, a new Conde Nast biannual fashion magazine—and on the autumn-winter cover of Pop, another biannual glossy.
In February Pop publisher Bauer Media appointed Dasha Zhukova as its editor in chief.
The attractive 27-year-old girlfriend of Russian oligarch Roman Designer Beth Ditto favoured hold designs in the quirky collection she created for the full-figured woman.
Dave Benett/Getty Images Abramovich also owned a Moscow contemporary art gallery and the Kova & T fashion label.
Fast fashion —inexpensive briskly produced merchandise that copies or interprets runway trends—became even more popular because of its accessible price and celebrity endorsements.
To celebrate the opening of the four-story, 2,323-sq-m retail space, Sir Philip Green, the flamboyant proprietor of Topshop’s parent company, the Arcadia Group, flew in Kate Moss to open the store.
The celebrities in attendance included actress Jennifer Lopez, designer Marc Jacobs, and Georgina Chapman, designer of the Marchesa fashion line.
In June, Beth Ditto, the feisty lead singer of the electro-pop group the Gossip, launched an eponymous line of designs for the plus-size British highstreet brand Evans.
For the 22-piece collection, Fashions Ditto specifically created items that curvaceous women usually avoided, including dresses with thigh-grazing hemlines as well as those embellished with sequins and featuring polka dots.
Doing so, Ditto prompted a debate about why more stylish clothes were not readily available for the generously sized figure.
Leading designers continued to cause retail sensations by producing lowpriced limited-edition collections for high-street retailers.
Within hours of the November 14 retail debut of Jimmy Choo’s collaboration with the retail giant H&M, several styles of high heels— including suede shoe boots and gladiator heels—were sold out and were later bought on eBay for double their original price.
The Choo multifaceted line— conceived by Tamara Mellon, the company’s glamorous president—marked the shoe and accessories brand’s first foray into clothing.
The line included 1980s-inspired women’s wear and slick menswear staples, including jeans and T-shirts as well as a slim-fit black suit.
United States Vogue’s June issue debuted Steal of the Month—a new section featuring fashion that retailed for under $500.
This reflected the plethora of quality fast fashion along with the demand for affordable clothes and also high-low dressing —mixing upscale clothes with chain-store merchandise to create an ensemble.
Flaunting an array of cardigans with great flair during the Group of 20 London summit, Obama made the knitwear staple a “must-have” for spring.
Several weeks later, however, the first lady’s appearance at a Washington, D.C., food bank in a “high-low” combination of a J Crew cardigan and casual capris paired with sneakers produced by the French fashion house Lanvin prompted objections when it was revealed that the footwear retailed for $540.
These fashion boutiques opened spontaneously in every major fashion capital as designers negotiated short-term leases, temporarily occupying storefronts vacated by bankrupt retailers.
Affordable straw panama hats—which first appeared on the Gucci men's and women's ready-towear runways—became a ubiquitous street fashion trend.
Feisty prints and bright “feel-good hues” dominated the designer ready-towear collections and were introduced, it seemed, in an effort to spur purchases.
Balmain's Christophe Decamin debuted Swarovski-crystal-embellished peak-sleeved minidresses, a zipped miniskirt, and a bow-bedecked blouse in an arresting petrol blue.
That hue also appeared in Sublime Deco, an Art Deco-inspired Chanel costume-jewelry collection, and when it was reproduced as Jade—a limited-edition Le Vernis nail polish—the shade sold out.
The latter chronicled the relationship of Valentino Garavani and his business partner, Giancarlo Giammetti.
Though Project Runway had a yearlong absence from the airwaves—due to legal wrangling as it moved cable channels from Bravo to Lifetime—the show experienced a peak in its popularity, drawing a record-setting 4. million viewers.
The hit hour-long weekly reality TV show was hosted by Fleidi Klum (see BIOGRAPHIES), who set challenges for contestants in the quest to discover the next top designer.
Selma Weiser, the owner of Manhattan’s Charivari fashion boutiques , passed away in June.
She was also known for having taken pioneering steps to sell the designs of important Japanese and Belgian designers; at one time she employed a teenage Marc Jacobs as a stock boy.
Health and Disease Elucidation of the HIV GENOME structure revealed information about the virus’s infectious nature.
In 2009 American scientists made significant progress in their understanding of how HIV infects humans.
Their analysis of the architecture of the virus’s genome found that its RNA structure plays a key role in its infection cycle.
The lead researcher said that the findings could help reveal how RNA genomes influence the behaviour of not only HIV but also other viruses.
Prior to this, scientists had charted only small areas of the HIV RNA genome.
At issue was a group of study participants that had been inappropriately counted in the results.
Others who saw the research believed that further analysis would show that the results were not statistically significant for the group that had received all six doses of the vaccine and remained in the study until its conclusion.
In a more encouraging development, access to HIV treatment continued to improve around the globe, particularly in parts of Africa.
A report released in 2009 by the World Health Organization , the United Nations Children’s Fund , and the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) stated that the number of people receiving antiretroviral treatment in lowand middle-income countries in 2008 was 36% higher compared with the previous year.
It also concluded that more than four million people were receiving the therapy, which represented an increase of 10 times the number of people who were using the medications just five years earlier.
The discovery of a species of African chimpanzee susceptible to an AIDS-like illness could help scientists better understand how HIV attacks humans.
In July scientists reported that the species developed the illness after being infected with a version of HIV unique to simians.
In addition, in August scientists in Europe reported the discovery of a new strain of HIV-1, which was closely related to a strain of virus occurring in gorillas.
The transmission of a simian immunodeficiency virus from gorillas to humans had not before been documented.
The three known and characterized strains of HIV-1 had previously been linked to chimpanzees, but their association with gorillas represented a groundbreaking discovery in HIV/AIDS research.
The government of The Sudan called for emergency measures in 2009 to stop a polio outbreak that was spreading across the Horn of Africa.
The International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies also sought emergency funding to battle the outbreak.
Officials said that eradication efforts fell short in stopping the spread of two strains of polio from the northern regions of India and Nigeria.
Polio also reached Port Sudan, which was a cause for concern because many people had to pass through the area in their travels to Mecca.
Persons going to Mecca were suspected of having caused the spread of the disease from Port Sudan to Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Yemen, and Indonesia between 2004 and 2006.
Despite continued efforts, the disease still had not been eradicated in Nigeria, India, Pakistan, and Afghanistan.
Officials also reported that polio appeared to be reemerging in Angola, Chad, Niger, The Sudan, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Rotary International and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation committed $355 million to strengthening eradication efforts.
Globally, the number of new polio cases in 2009 that had been reported by late December was 1,517, compared with 1,651 the previous year.
In January the government of the Philippines reported what may have been the first known case of the Ebola virus’s being transmitted from a pig to a human.
A farmer thought to have come in contact with infected pigs tested positive for antibodies to EbolaReston virus.
Later the government reported that four other people, including farmers and a slaughterhouse worker, had also tested positive for Ebola-Reston antibodies.
The Philippine Department of Health said that the people who tested positive appeared healthy.
Officials believed that direct contact with infected pigs was the underlying cause for the presence of Reston antibodies in all five individuals.
Studies of the Reston strain had shown that the virus can be passed to healthy humans without resulting in illness.
Its effects in other populations, including the elderly and women who are pregnant, were not known.
To prevent the potential spread of the virus, the Philippine government ordered the slaughter of 6,000 pigs at a farm north of Manila.
Health ministers from countries where drug-resistant tuberculosis was most prevalent agreed in April to increase efforts to fight the disease.
At the centre of these agreements was their promise to invest $15 billion to support TB-elimination efforts over the course of the following six years.
WHO reported that the number of high-burden countries, in which at least 4,000 new cases of drug-resistant disease arose annually or in which one-tenth of the total number of new cases were drug resistant, reached 27 in 2009.
She explained that a united, global effort in fighting the epidemic was of utmost importance and required consideration on a political level.
The emergence at the border between Thailand and Cambodia of parasites resistant to the antimalarial drug artemisinin caused concern that global malaria-control efforts could face a major setback.
In a report released by WHO in February, agencies monitoring antimalarial drug efficacy said that artemisinin-resistant parasites were found along the Thai-Cambodia border.
Combination therapies using artemisinin were considered extremely effective, with more than 90% of infected persons being treated successfully.
The malaria drug resistance seen along the border, which was likely to have been fueled largely by the continued use of artemisinin alone rather than in combination therapy, endangered the progress against the disease that had been made in previous years.
Malariacontrol efforts implemented in Zambia included the widespread distribution of insecticide-treated nets, as well as the distribution of combination treatments based on artemisinin.
Two studies released in September found that using a double dose of a cancer drug increased the chance of disease remission for patients with a common form of leukemia.
The studies examined the treatment of patients with acute myeloid leukemia, a cancer of the bone marrow and the blood and one of the most common acute forms of the cancer that occurs in adults.
The studies, which appeared in The New England Journal of Medicine, examined A man with tuberculosis awaits free treatment outside a medical facility in Siliguri, a city in northeastern India.
WORLD TB DAY »ii» m The image The dandelion is a plant which propagates by airborne means In the same way. social action can spread and take root, carried on the winds of our efforts and the global determination to overcome this disease.
In one study, of those who took the higher dose, some 71% experienced remission of their disease, whereas of those patients receiving the normal amount of drug, about 57% entered remission.
The results also showed that more chemotherapy was associated with improved survival length, with those receiving the larger dose surviving 24 months and those receiving the smaller dose surviving just 16 months.
The second study examined patients aged 60 to 83 and found that more than two-thirds of patients had remission of their cancers when given a dose of chemotherapy that was twice the standard amount.
This was in contrast to remission in about 54% of patients treated with the regular dose of daunorubicin.
Researchers said that their work could produce a shift in the treatment of adults under 65.
The elderly, however, who were at an increased risk of developing acute myeloid leukemia, were not predicted to see any change in the current approach to the treatment of the disease.
In an effort to better address cancer in Hispanic populations, the United States National Cancer Institute created partnerships with the governments of Argentina, Brazil, Mexico, and Uruguay.
The network’s mission was to develop a comprehensive understanding of cancer among Hispanics in Latin America and the United States as well as to improve cancer research and care in those regions.
In 2009, for the first time, a person's own heart stem cells were used to help repair tissue damage after a heart attack.
In June a team of doctors performed the procedure on a 39-year-old male patient at Cedars-Sinai Heart Institute in Los Angeles.
The tissue was then taken to a lab, where it was cultured, giving rise to heart stem cells.
Millions of cells were grown in order to ensure that there was an adequate supply for the treatment.
Using a catheter, doctors were able to deliver the stem cells to the patient's heart via the coronary arteries.
The procedure was part of a Phase 1 clinical trial in which 15 other patients were scheduled to undergo the same treatment.
A study published in March in the Journal of the American College of Cardiology concluded that if doctors broadened statin-prescribing criteria to include C-reactive protein levels, an indicator of inflammation, that might enable them to prevent thousands of heart attacks, strokes, and deaths each year.
Their report indicated that 6. million older adults with low cholesterol but high CRP levels might benefit from statins.
Previous studies had shown that statins can prevent additional heart attacks and strokes in patients who had already suffered from one or the other.
Statins were also known to help those who were at increased risk for cardiovascular disease but may not have had a heart attack or stroke.
About 50% of adverse cardiovascular events, such as heart attack or stroke, occurred in persons who had normal cholesterol levels.
Some 20% of these events occurred in persons who had no evidence of cardiovascular disease risk factors.
The incidence of heart attacks had decreased significantly in places in North America and Europe where smoking bans had been passed.
These places reported a reduction of 17% in the incidence of heart attacks one year after passing the bans, relative to communities that had not taken steps to reduce smoking in public and work areas.
Researchers were hopeful that a new drug tested in 2009 could stamp out river blindness, or onchocerciasis, a disease that occurred primarily in Central and South America and in sub-Saharan Africa.
The drug, known as moxidectin, was investigated as part of a clinical trial involving three African countries.
Africa was the region of the world most affected by river blindness; more than 37 million people worldwide were infected with the causative parasite, Onchocerca volvulus, and many of these individuals lived in poor rural African communities.
The study was focused mainly on determining moxidectin’s activity against the adult worms of O volvulus.
The drug was developed as part of a collaboration administered by WHO and Wyeth Pharmaceuticals known as the Special Programme for Research and Training in Tropical Diseases.
In a related development, a study suggested that eliminating onchocerciasis through ivermectin treatment may be possible.
The study, released in July in the journal PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases, stated that ivermectin treatment had stopped infections and further transmissions in three African regions.
Because ivermectin kills the larvae but not the adult worms of O volvulus, annual or biannual treatments would be necessary to prevent resurgence.
Promising results were reported in a study examining a new vaccine for advanced melanoma, a deadly form of skin cancer.
Anderson Cancer Center in Houston found better response and survival outcomes among patients who received a peptide vaccine combined with interleukin-2, an agent that stimulates the body's immune cells to attack cancer cells.
Among those given the vaccine, 22.1% of patients responded, and for nearly three months, the treated patients' cancers did not progress.
Those who were not treated with the vaccine, however, experienced an average of about 1. months of progression-free survival.
The average overall survival time for patients treated with the vaccine was 17. months.
In contrast, patients not treated with the vaccine survived only an average of 12. months.
The vaccine was also the first to have demonstrated, in a Phase 3 clinical trial, beneficial effects in patients with melanoma.
New hope for cocaine addicts may be on the horizon after an experimental vaccine showed positive results in helping treat their addiction.
Vaccination with the anticocaine agent reduced cocaine use in 38% of treated patients.
The clinical trial, which included patients who were being treated for methadone addiction, received backing from the United States National Institute on Drug Abuse.
The results were published in October in the journal Archives of General Psychiatry.
The vaccine works by triggering antibody production by the immune system, similar to the way in which other vaccines work against infectious diseases.
In the presence of the anticocaine vaccine, antibodies are produced that bind specifically to cocaine in the blood.
This stops the drug from moving through the blood-brain barrier and thereby prevents the “high” that it normally causes.
The vaccine Gardasil, widely used to help prevent cervical cancer in women, found a use among men.
In September United States drug advisers recommended that Gardasil be used for the prevention of genital warts in men.
Genital warts are caused by the human papillomavirus, the same virus that can cause cervical cancer in women.
A committee associated with the United States Food and Drug Administration voted to support the extension of Gardasil uses to include the vaccination of males aged 9 to 26.
The vaccine binds to the papillomavirus, rendering it incapable of infecting the cells of the genital tract.
Gardasil was approved in 2006 for use in females aged 9 to 26 to aid in the prevention of cervical cancer.
In September Pfizer Inc., one of the world’s largest pharmaceutical companies, along with one of its partner entities, settled an agreement to pay $2. billion for having illegally encouraged the medical use of several drugs that were known, by company officials, to have potential health risks.
The United States Department of Justice described the case as being a landmark health care settlement and one of the largest of its kind in the country’s history.
The drugs at the centre of the case included the painkiller Bextra, which had been withdrawn from the market several years earlier.
Bextra was known as a COX-2 inhibitor, the name given to a class of pain-relieving drugs that inhibit the cyclooxygenase-2 enzyme, which is involved in inflammation.
Pfizer pulled Bextra from the market when it was revealed that the drug posed potential risks to heart health in some patients.
The government charged that Pfizer officials engaged in schemes to illegally market Bextra and other drugs, including the antibiotic agent Zyvox and an agent known as Lyrica, which was used to treat nerve pain.
An FDA panel urged a ban on the popular prescription painkillers Vicodin and Percocet because of their potential for causing liver damage.
Acetaminophen is an aspirin alternative used in over-the-counter pain relievers, such as Tylenol and Excedrin.
Patients who need to take Percocet or Vicodin for long periods of time often require periodic increases in dosage for the drugs to remain effective.
This means that more acetaminophen enters their bodies, creating a higher risk for liver damage.
The panel also recommended lowering the maximum dose of over-the-counter painkillers with acetaminophen.
The recommendations followed an FDA report showing that severe liver damage, and even death, can result from a lack of consumer awareness that acetaminophen carries such risks.
Many patients take acetaminophen because it is easier on the stomach than aspirin and ibuprofen.
In September information published in the 2009 World Alzheimer Report indicated that some 35 million people worldwide were living with some form of dementia, such as Alzheimer disease.
The newly published data were the result of an extraordinarily comprehensive investigation aimed primarily at assessing the prevalence of the illness.
The number surprised scientists because it was about 10% higher than what they had anticipated according to assessments that had been completed several years earlier.
The previous studies had not fully estimated the extent of the impact that Alzheimer disease would have in less-developed countries.
The report also indicated that the number of persons with dementia would continue to increase substantially every year, so that by 2050 Alzheimer disease could affect more than 115. million people.
This rise was attributed in part to increased life expectancy in developed countries.
Whereas the United Kingdom and several other countries had in place long-term proSaul Loeb—AFP/Getty Images Therapists and Alzheimer patients play percussion instruments at the Copper Ridge Care Center, Sykesville, Md.
Music therapy was shown to positively affect behaviour and mood in persons with dementia.
In fact, in the United States Alzheimer disease, compared with other diseases, had received much less attention and federal support.
A government advisory group in the United States sparked a heated debate in November after recommending that women begin screening for breast cancer at age 50 rather than 40.
The panel also said that women should have mammograms only every other year rather than annually.
United States Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius said that women should continue to have regular mammograms starting at age 40 and reminded the public that the task force did not set federal policy and was only an advisory group.
The guidelines were described as ""a step backward” by officials at the American College of Radiology.
The same group also said that the new recommendations could potentially harm the health of women.
The American Cancer Society also strongly objected to the new recommendations.
The task force’s decision to recommend later and less-frequent screening was based on research into the benefits and risks of mammography.
It took into account whether screening actually led to reductions in the number of deaths from breast cancer, and it assessed the number of false-positive instances and unnecessary treatments that occurred as a result of the procedure.
It also said, however, that the potential harms, such as unnecessary biopsies and treatment of non-life-threatening slow-growing cancers, needed to be taken into consideration.
The new screening guidelines did not include women who may be at greater risk for breast cancer and recommended that women 40 and older still consult with their doctors about when to undergo testing.
Greg Walden hoists a jar of peanut products tied with cautionary tape at a House Energy and Commerce Committee hearing in Washington, D.C., in February.
The president of Peanut Corp. of America, Stewart Parnell, refused to answer questions concerning the salmonella outbreak that was linked to the company’s Georgia plant. salmonella poisoning, United States health officials announced a countrywide recall for all peanut products made during the previous two years at a Georgia plant that was linked to the outbreak.
Peanut Corp. of America, which initiated the recall, produced various peanut products, including peanut butter and peanut paste.
The warnings did not include peanut butter sold in jars at retail stores.
Barack Obama lifted the ban on human embryonic stem cell research in the United States, opening the door to new avenues of scientific study that had previously been closed.
The ban had been imposed in 2001 by former president George W Bush, who, among many others, objected to the research because studying embryonic stem cells required the destruction of a human embryo.
Obama’s order removed the restrictions on federal funding for such research.
A separate legislative ban on federal funds to pay for the development of stem cell lines was not part of the president’s order.
Deaths from unsafe abortions, particularly in poor countries of Africa, remained a serious problem worldwide in 2009.
The data further indicated that of the 41. million abortions reported in 2003, nearly 20 million were unsafe and many were carried out by women themselves.
The report noted that sub-Saharan Africa was particularly affected, with more than half the deaths from unsafe abortions occurring in this region of the world.
The region also was reported to have had an exceptionally high occurrence of unintended pregnancies.
This was likely associated with the fact that very few people there used contraceptives.
Worldwide, however, more people were taking advantage of contraceptives, which contributed to a decline in the overall number of abortions performed globally in recent years.
ZOOLOGY he year 2009 marked the sesquicentennial of the publication of Charles Darwin's On the Origin of Species and the bicentennial of his birth.
Among Darwins many other outstanding accomplishments were his book The Variation of Animals and Plants Under Domestication and his lesswell-known discourses on coral reefs.
One of three separate lines of evidence was based on a comparative analysis of bones of domesticated horses from the Bronze Age and those of wild specimens from older Paleolithic sites.
Skeletal material revealed Botai horses to be slenderer and more similar to Bronze Age domestic horses than to wild horses from the older sites, providing evidence of domestication.
In addition, a third of the mandibles of horses that were examined showed signs that they had held bits in their mouths and possibly carried riders.
Furthermore, isotopic analyses of fat residues in Botai pottery fragments revealed that the pots had once held horse milk.
Arne Ludwig of the Leibniz Institute for Zoo and Wildlife Research in Berlin and Michael Hofreiter of the Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology in Leipzig, Ger., along with several of their colleagues, examined bones of fossil horses and used DNA sequence polymorphisms (genetic variations) to determine coat colour.
Wild horses from the Iberian Peninsula dating to the Early Holocene, however, carried both black and bay genes thousands of years before horses were domesticated anywhere.
Black colour expressions in wild horses are presumed to have been a consequence of natural selection associated with dense forests following glaciation.
The investigators concluded that selective breeding of domestic stock is the most parsimonious explanation for the observed changes in horse coat coloration in the Eurasian Steppe.
Since the deep ocean is one of the least-explored parts of the planet, the myriad interactions and associations between species there—as well as the trophic dynamics occurring within biological communities—are not well understood.
Among the population traits that can be critical to the persistence of some communities is the longevity of a keystone species upon which other species depend.
Fishing and other harvesting activities that destroy such deep-ocean corals were thought to disrupt the fragile ecological balance of deepsea communities.
They found that some individual colonies were several thousand years old.
The oldest Gerardia species specimens were more than 2,700 years old, and those of Leiopathes species had longevities of more than 4,200 years.
Many scientists maintain that the destruction of deep-sea coral eliminates critical living space and other ecosystem services for many members of the biological community.
Bottom trawling, other fishing activities, and harvesting for the coral jewelry trade have been identified as the cause of longlasting damage to deep-sea coral beds in many regions.
Such activities are not compatible with maintaining ecosystem integrity in fragile deep-sea communities dependent on long-lived coral.
Researchers studying animal behaviour continued to discover patterns that shed light on the ecology and evolution of species.
Using a statistical technique called principal components analysis, the investigators determined that choice of foraging microhabitats by juvenile cottonmouths was not random.
In contrast, adults were randomly scattered throughout a diversity of microhabitats.
Young cottonmouths were found on land alongside the wetland, typically in a tight coil, in a sit-and-wait foraging posture for ambushing prey.
Juveniles also occurred in locations hidden from predators, whereas adults were generally discovered outstretched and actively foraging throughout the wetland.
Juvenile snakes, which have yellow tails, were able to use caudal luring to attract salamanders and small frogs.
The findings underscored how developmental changes in coloration and the behaviours that affect an animal’s risk of becoming prey can influence foraging strategy and the choice of microhabitat within a predatory species.
Many social animals gain ecological benefits from living in groups, and two that are commonly accepted by behavioral ecologists are more effective predator avoidance and an increase in foraging success, or prey capture.
A third recently identified advantage to larger groups is the development of more effective problem-solving skills in novel situations.
Groups of six were found to be as much as 4 times more successful than groups of two at solving the problem of removing the lid and 11 times faster at gaining access to the food.
A clear conclusion was that larger group size resulted in more rapid problem solving.
One explanation for the higher success rate of larger groups was that certain individuals may have had experience in solving similar problems or simply have an aptitude for doing so.
Research in 2009 also focused on questions related to how animals may respond to shifts in climate.
Two generally accepted responses of animal populations and communities to global warming are latitudinal or elevational shifts in geographic distribution and changes in the seasonal timing of critical biological events, such as reproduction, migration, or emergence from hibernation.
Two independent research projects identified components of higher environmental temperatures that affect the body size of animals.
Martin Daufresne, Kathrin Lengfellner, and Ulrich Sommer of the Leibniz-Institut fur Meereswissenschaften in Kiel, Ger., tested the hypothesis that decreased body size among ectothermic, or cold-blooded, aquatic animals will generally become more prevalent with continued global warming.
They provided evidence from fish sampled in the Baltic Sea and rivers in France and from published data about the North Sea.
The investigators found that in rivers with more than two decades of gradual increases in water temperature, average fish size decreased and species with smaller body sizes became significantly more prevalent.
The latter observation was also true for North Sea fish communities where warming trends had occurred.
In some fish the This specimen of smooth black coral , which lives in deep water near Hawaii, lived for approximately 4,000 years.
Among the overall findings, it was revealed that increased water temperature resulted in changes in species composition, individual growth rates, and reproductive patterns of fish and other aquatic ectotherms.
Similar patterns were found in lab experiments in which a warming environment decreased the size of zooplankton, phytoplankton, and bacteria.
Arpat Ozgul and Tim Coulson of the Imperial College London and colleagues examined the causes of decreasing body size among a free-living population of Soay sheep on Hirta, an island in the Saint Kilda archipelago of Scotland.
They concluded that the shift in size was primarily a consequence of ecological responses to climate change that produced milder winters over the previous two decades.
Although seemingly counterintuitive, the explanation was that more sheep survived milder winters, resulting in greater population densities that led to grazing competition and slower growth rates overall.
The results from the studies of body size of both fish and sheep, which changed in under three decades, suggested that rapid changes in a trait as biologically important as body size can be induced by climate change.
BOTANY Important breakthroughs were made in 2009 by using genetic engineering to raise the productivity of crop plants.
Most rice plants die if they are completely submerged in floodwaters for more than a few days, and this problem afflicts up to 40% of rice crops in Asia and Africa during their rainy seasons.
Some rice varieties, however, can survive flooding by rapidly growing their stems upward, in some cases reaching 4 m in height.
Such plants are typically far less productive than high-yield varieties.
As the stems grow, they form hollow structures inside that allow gas exchange with the atmosphere and thus prevent the plant from waterlogging.
When these genes were introduced into common rice plants, their stems rapidly elongated in deep water and withstood flooding.
In another study a team led by Shuichi Fukuoka at the National Institute of Agrobiological Sciences in Tsukuba, Japan, identified a gene that helps some types of wild rice fend off rice blast disease, a fungal infection caused by Magnaporthe grisea that destroys up to 30% of world rice production.
Previous attempts to breed cultivated rice with resistance to the fungus produced poor-tasting, low-quality rice.
The fungus also quickly evolved to overcome the resistance in as little as two years.
The new work successfully used genetic sequencing to isolate the blast-resistant gene, P121, from a linked stretch of DNA responsible for the bad flavour of the wild varieties of rice.
The gene also increased the plant’s defenses against infection in general, making it harder for the blast fungus to take hold.
Scientists from Germany, Switzerland, and the United States used another form of plant defense to genetically engineer com plants to fight off a serious root pest.
Larvae from a beetle known as the western corn rootworm , which had become the most destructive corn pest in the U.S., burrow into the plants’ roots.
D virgifera and other corn pests are largely controlled with insecticides; some varieties of com, however, fight off D virgifera by releasing a chemical messenger called -beta-caryophyllene.
The chemical attracts protective soil-living nematode worms, which attack and kill the beetle larvae.
After decades of breeding, most North American com varieties no longer emitted -beta-caryophyllene and thus had lost the ability to recruit protective nematodes.
When the gene for the chemical was introduced into the genomes of ordinary corn plants, the plants became far less vulnerable to beetle attacks.
Plant scientists took a major step forward in their plans to “barcode” every plant species in the world by using DNA analysis.
The selection of the most appropriate gene for barcoding animals had been achieved several years earlier, but a botanical equivalent proved troublesome.
A team of 52 scientists working in 10 countries spent four years discussing which DNA barcode to use.
They eventually selected portions of two chloroplast genes— rbcL and matK —where variations in the DNA give a characteristic signature for plant species.
In 72% of the cases, they immediately determined the correct species of plant.
For the remaining specimens, they were able to place each plant within a group of related species.
Researchers in the United States and Belgium identified two species of microbes growing on the inside of roots of poplar trees that boost the trees’ productivity on barren or contaminated soils.
Genetic analysis of the two bacterial species revealed that they produce growth-promoting plant hormones, which could stimulate the trees’ growth.
With fertile farmland in short supply, the notion of adding bacteria to poplar trees to help them grow on marginal land was particularly attractive.
Such trees could be used as feedstock for the production of biofuels and to help sequester carbon from the atmosphere.
Another study revealed a fascinating symbiosis between bacteria and the giant cardon cactus, Pachycereus pringlei, that allowed the plant to grow on barren rocks in Mexico.
When the cactus seeds germinated, bacteria contained within the seeds dissolved the rock and released minerals that the seedling roots could absorb.
Once the cactus was established, its roots grew into the rock and, with the help of the bacteria, eventually produced soil.
In return for supplying the minerals, the bacteria were fed carbon and nitrogen compounds by the cactus.
Many orchids lure insects to pollinate their flowers by imitating the insects’ sex pheromones.
A unique type of mimicry was discovered in Dendrobium sinense, an orchid that grows in China.
A team of Chinese and German scientists discovered that the orchid produces a chemical that exactly imitates the honeybees’ alarm pheromone Z-l 1-eicosen-l-ol, a chemical previously unknown in plants and rarely identified even in the insect world.
Hornets typically home in on this pheromone to catch honeybees for food.
The hornets are so fooled by the orchid’s scent that they pounce on it and thus pollinate the flower.
Every human is host to a microorganism community—a veritable ecosystem of a diverse array of microbes that outnumber the more than 75 trillion cells of the human body by at least 10 to 1.
What is perhaps most striking is that the majority of microbial populations that inhabit the skin, nose, mouth, gut, urogenital tract, and other tissues are not simply opportunistic parasites; they are true symbionts vital to human health, and they exert previously unappreciated influence on the ability of humans to resist disease.
One reason that many of these microbes have remained unknown until recently is that they do not grow well outside of their normal habitat, meaning they cannot be cultured in the laboratory.
In addition, available samples of human secretions or tissues contain such a complex array of different species as to be refractory to analysis by traditional means.
In 2009 scientists made great strides in improving their understanding of the identities and roles of these microbes.
These research efforts were spearheaded in part by the Human Microbiome Project , an undertaking sponsored by the National Institutes of Health in the United States.
Launched in December 2007, the HMP pursued stated goals that included identifying and sequencing the genomes of those microbial species that inhabit the healthy human body, exploring similarities and differences in the microbial populations that inhabit different individuals or different groups of people, developing new tools to facilitate the stated goals, and addressing the social and ethical implications of human microbiome research.
One of the first members of the human microbiome to be recognized as beneficial to human health was E coli, which inhabits the large intestine.
It became clear, however, that the community of microbes inhabiting the gut is startlingly diverse.
DNA sequence analysis of the gene 16S rRNA (ribosomal small subunit RNA), which is unique to each species of microorganism, enabled scientists to identify various microbes in the human gut.
Studies of the microbial communities in healthy humans and laboratory animals implicate microbial variation as a factor influencing everything from nutrient extraction during digestion, to defense against invading pathogens, to the ability to inactivate environmental toxins.
One of the most compelling connections reported between gut microbes and health deals with obesity.
Researchers exploring the distal gut microbes of obese and lean laboratory mice, and also of obese and lean human volunteers, noted striking differences between these groups in terms of The bacteria Enterococcus faecalis, found in the human gut, is a member of the diverse community of microbial species that constitute the human microbiome.
What was most striking, however, was that the trait was transferable; germ-free mice intentionally colonized with “lean” gut microbes accumulated significantly less total body fat through the course of the experiment than did their counterparts colonized with “obese"" gut microbes.
Of note, the “obese” gut microbes also demonstrated an increased ability to extract energy from the diet.
While circumstantial, these data clearly implicate the “obese” gut microbes as a contributing factor in human obesity and may also suggest novel routes of intervention in the battle against this health epidemic.
One of the least-well-understood aspects of the human microbiome deals with the question of initial colonization of an infant.
A newborn emerges sterile from the womb, and over the course of the next days to months, he or she must acquire a full complement of “good"" microbes.
One can only wonder whether the most ingrained and natural of all behaviours—that of human parents to nuzzle and kiss their baby, or of a mother mouse to lick her pups—derives from the need to share not only love but also microbes.
Classic autism, the most common autism spectrum disorder , is a neurodevelopmental disorder that is evident by age three and that affects four times as many males as females.
Whether this apparent ""epidemic” of autism reflects a true rise in incidence or is due to changes in diagnostic criteria and ascertainment is a point of some contention, though most experts in the field attribute at least a majority of the apparent increase to ascertainment.
The heritability has been estimated at greater than 90%, but even monozygotic twins do not show 100% concordance; sometimes one twin is affected and the other twin is not.
Further, even when both twins are affected, the level of severity can differ.
The sibling risk is 5-10%, which is 10 times higher than the population risk.
Together these data confirm that ASDs result from a combination of both genetic and environmental factors.
Further, neuroanatomical and neuroimaging studies suggest that affected individuals may experience abnormal neurodevelopment in utero, beginning as early as the first or second trimester of gestation.
The key environmental influences, therefore, may be prenatal as well as postnatal.
The article, published by British physician Andrew Wakefield and colleagues in the journal The Lancet —though later retracted by a majority of the coauthors—caused a wave of fear among parents and health care providers, so much so that immunization rates in the U.K. fell by more than 10%, and in 2006 the country saw its first death from measles in 14 years.
In February 2009 the Omnibus Autism Proceeding in the United States Court of Federal Claims ruled against the plaintiffs in three test cases, thereby closing this sad chapter in medical legal history.
The mouse demonstrated a variety of social and behavioral characteristics reminiscent of the disorder, providing further evidence of a causal relationship between the chromosomal abnormality in patients and their clinical symptoms.
Other data suggested that some of the features of ASD may respond to fever and may result from impaired regulation of neurons in a region of the brain stem called the locus coeruleus.
These advances offered hope that the cause of autism would soon be understood, which may enable future generations to prevent or reverse its course.
PALEONTOLOGY In October 2009 a number of reports documenting the discovery of a new early hominid were published in the journal Science.
This species, named Ardipithecus ramidus, was dated to 4. million years ago and appeared to be far more primitive than Australopithecus.
The hadrosaur sequences were determined to have more in common with those of birds than those of other reptiles, confirming the close relationship between birds and dinosaurs.
The family Heterodontosauridae represents a very basal group of omithiscian, or ""bird-hipped,” dinosaurs.
They were small bipedal animals known mainly from the Early Jurassic Period of Africa.
A report published in March 2009 described the first known Early Cretaceous heterdontosaur from the Chinese province of Liaoning.
In addition to extending the temporal range of the heterodontosaurs, the new species, Tianyulong confuciusi, extended their geographic range into Asia.
A new Jurassic ceratosaur from China shed light on the origin of the reduced number of digits in birds.
Previous studies suggested that the reduction to three digits in theropod dinosaurs occurred by the loss of digits four and five.
Birds, however, appeared to have lost digits five and one—leaving the three expanded central digits to support the wing.
In the new Chinese ceratosaur, the metacarpal region (an area made up of the bones of the hand proper) shows similarities to digits two, three, and four, while the phalangeal region (the outer portion of the hand) shows more affinity to digits one, two, and three.
The authors indicated that this phalangeal anatomy in other theropods may be the reason for the idea that they retain digits 1-3.
The authors suggested, however, that it made more sense to assume that the reduced number of fingers in theropods actually represents digits 2-4, given the avian affinities to the theropods combined with the hand anatomy of the new ceratosaur.
A study published in 2008, comparing the clutch volumes of the dinosaurs Troodon, Oviraptor, and Citipati, supported a bird-patemal-care model for the dinosaurs, indicating that the male parent cared for the young.
In contrast, living archosaurs, such as the crocodilians, follow the maternal behaviour model, in which the young are cared for by the female.
Another 2008 report on Epidexipteryx hui, a new avian from the Jurassic of Inner Mongolia, showed a surprising mixture of characteristics from several different theropod groups, unlike other early bird species that seem more aligned with a particular type of coelurosaurian.
An analysis of pterosaur limb strength indicated that, unlike birds, pterosaurs may have launched into flight by using all four limbs.
The research compared bone strength of three pterosaur species with that of 20 bird species.
In heavier birds the leg becomes much thicker than the humerus of the wing, which creates more leg strength for takeoff.
In pterosaurs, however, the forelimbs are much stronger, which suggests that pterosaurs may have used them to aid in takeoff.
These features suggest that the animal lived in trees, making it the oldestknown tree-dwelling vertebrate in the fossil record.
A biometric study published in 2008 compared the bending force of the jaw of this animal with that of the American alligator and estimated that Deinosuchus had a bite 13 times as powerful as the alligator.
It was likely one of the top predators of coastal environments, capable of easily taking down a sizable dinosaur.
An online report of three new Australian dinosaurs was published in August.
The three were the first to be named from Queensland in 28 years, and two of the new genera, Diamantinasaurus and Wintonotitan, represented the first new sauropods from Australia in 75 years.
The third dinosaur, a large carnivorous theropod, was assigned to the newly created genus Australovenator.
All three dinosaurs lived during the Cretaceous Period approximately 98 million years ago.
With a body length of 13 m (about 43 ft) and an estimated weight of 1,135 kg , Titanoboa cerrejonensis, a newly described 60-million-year-old boid from northeastern Colombia, represents the largest-known snake of any age.
Since the maximum size of poikilothermic, or ""cold-blooded,” animals is restricted by metabolic rate, average temperatures must have been relatively high to support the snakes growth.
This interpretation supports the hypothesis of very hot Paleocene climates in the neotropics based on high concentrations of carbon dioxide predicted by climate models.
Fossil evidence has indicated that it took 14 million years for whales to sequence from a terrestrial animal to a fully aquatic one.
A 47-million-year-old specimen of Maiacetus inuus, a semiaquatic ancestor of the whales, was reported with a fossilized fetus in the skeleton.
The size and position of the fetus indicates that the young were delivered headfirst, similar to terrestrial mammals.
Since marine mammals deliver the fetus tail first, the new specimen suggests that this ancestral whale still gave birth on land.
Trilete spores in the fossil record indicate the presence of vascular plant lineages.
During the Ordovician, Saudi Arabia was part of a large southern landmass known as Gondwana.
The paper hypothesized that vascular plants originated and diversified in Gondwana and then migrated elsewhere.
The group known as the “great appendage” arthropods, so named because of large clawed limbs at the front of the head, has been known only from Cambrian deposits such as the Burgess Shale and occurs near the base of the arthropod family tree.
The rarity of great appendage arthropods in the fossil record was probably due to a scarcity of the types of sites needed for their preservation.
This image provides a side-by-side comparison of the vertebrae belonging to the present-day anaconda and to that o/ Titanoboa cerrejonensis, an extinct boid from the Paleocene Epoch that is considered the world’s largest-known snake.
Online publishing figured prominently, especially in China, where the growth of INTERNET LITERATURE overshadowed the production of print products.
While Russia announced a RECORD number of literary deaths, major novelists elsewhere—including Americans John UPDIKE and Frank MCCOURT and Brazilian Augusto BOAL —also departed.
In the nonfiction realm, 2009 was a vintage year for books that examined the death of unbridled capitalism.
In these books one could see the authors analyzing, defining, and coming to terms with the end of an era.
Financial journalist Gillian Tett’s Fool’s Gold similarly attributed the recession to unfettered greed.
Many of these books looked forward optimistically toward a kinder, greener business climate.
The well-received book The Storm by Vince Cable, treasury spokesman for the Liberal Democrats, argued for a return to safe, regulated banking, and Zac Goldsmith’s The Constant Economy sketched out a new society, in tune with the limits of the Earth.
Why More Equal Societies Almost Always Do Better, which identified inequality as the cause of isolation, depression, and the drive to consume.
Fear and Happiness in the Twenty-first Century City assessed the privatization of the British city and the cost of championing investors’ needs over those of residents in terms of human happiness.
In Sarah Waters’s The Little Stranger, readers entered a post-World War II landscape of decay, austerity, and class envy.
Simon Mawer’s The Glass Room was a historical novel set in 1930s Czechoslovakia.
Adam Foulds based his novel The Quickening Maze on a moment in the late 1830s when ""peasant poet” John Clare and future poet laureate Alfred Lord Tennyson shared a home in High Beach Asylum.
Full of verbal jousting, rich historical detail from tapestries to heretic burnings, and human insight, Mantel's novel was described as a “Tudor spellbinder”; it was historical revisionism at its best.
Coetzee , and Mantel all occupied the highest echelons of the literary hierarchy, and the youngest contender, Foulds, was already a seasoned award winner.
Furthermore, for an award often maligned for championing “unreadable” novels, the short list was full of commercially viable ""cracking good” reads.
This was newcomer Samantha Harvey, who surprised critics when she was nominated over Nobel Prize-winning American writer Toni Morrison.
Harvey’s first novel, Th.e Wilderness, traced the descent of an aging architect into dementia as he loses grasp of his own memories and consequently his identity.
The winner of the Orange Prize was American writer Marilynne Robinson for Home , another book in which the characters attempt to come to terms with their personal and family histories.
As with many novels honoured in the U.K. in 2009, Home was appreciated for both its technique and its humanity.
If the narrator of The Wilderness could be described as unreliable, so too could the main characters of a number of other well-received novels.
Charlie calls into question his own attempts to order the chaos of his life, “This falsification of memory—the adjustment, abbreviation, invention, even omission of experience—is common to us all, it is the business of psychic life,” and the reader is left searching for the truth between the lines.
Whether they be historical novels with a political edge, cosmic adventures, or dystopian fantasies, central to all the books nominated for the CILIP Carnegie Medal for children’s books was the transition from childhood to adulthood.
Set in 1980s Ireland, the winning entry, Bog Child , by the late children’s author Siobhan Dowd, combined the stories of Fergus, an Ulster teenager with a brother half dead in the Maze prison on a hunger strike, and Mel, the Iron Age girl whose body Fergus finds preserved in a bog.
Dealing with teenage sexuality and the difficulties of disentangling politics from immediate human relations, Dowd showed an empathetic understanding of the confusing terrain of adolescence.
Set in postwar Britain, it promoted the timeless values of tolerance and friendship by telling the story of Henry, a boy forced to work on a photography project with two classmates stigmatized by the prejudices of the age.
Unusually, poetry captured front-page headlines twice within three weeks in May.
Carol Ann Duffy (see BIOGRAPHIES) became the first woman to be appointed poet laureate since the post was created in 1668.
Duffy’s hard-hitting first poem in her new role was a departure from the topics expected of a poet laureate.
As one commentator described it, Politics was an ""almost speechless with rage” attack against the effect of politics on the politician; the poem was seen to have topical resonance in a year brimming with politicians’ expense scandals.
The scandal continued apace when Ruth Padel, who won the election, admitted to her part in disseminating sexual-harassment allegations against Walcott to the press.
Padel, who would have been Oxford's first woman professor of poetry, subsequently resigned.
Josephine Hart, the judges’ chair, also spoke of a “renaissance in poetry” as the prize boasted its strongest short list in years.
The winner in the best collection category was Scottish poet Don Paterson for his fourth collection.
Other contenders included the 80-year-old establishment poet Peter Porter and Christopher Reid.
Reid’s collection A Scattering was a “moving, unsentimental record of loss,"" dedicated to his wife, who died in 2005.
The Cry of the Flesh , which blended philosophy with phenomenology to reflect on the social effects of illness on the sufferer, and was based on the author’s own experience of living with a rare and fatal lung disease.
Nine Hypochondriac Lives, also short-listed, drew links between hypochondria and creativity, examining such historical figures as Charlotte Bronte, Marcel Proust, Charles Darwin, and Glenn Gould.
How the Romantic Generation Discovered the Beauty and Terror of Science, by literary biographer Richard Holmes, looked at radical science before Darwin and its impact on great writers such as Shelley, Coleridge, Byron, and Keats.
The prizewinners are selected in October by the Swedish Academy and receive the award on December 10 in Stockholm.
Herta Muller International IMPAC Dublin Literary Award First awarded in 1996; this is the largest international literary prize and is open to books written in any language.
Organizations that contribute to the literary welfare of children and young people are also eligible.
Tamer Institute for Community Education (Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip) Commonwealth Writers’ Prize Established in 1987 by the Commonwealth Foundation.
In 2009 there was one award of £10,000 for the best book submitted, as well as an award of £5,000 for the best first book.
Awarded to the best full-length novel written by a citizen of the Commonwealth or the Republic of Ireland and published in the U.K. during the 12 months ended September 30.
Awarded to a work of published fiction written by a woman in English and published in the U.K. during the 12 months ended March 31.
Home by Marilynne Robinson Frank O’Connor International Short Story Award The prize was first awarded in 2005 and recognizes a collection of short stories in English by a living author and published in the previous 12 months.
The award is organized by the Munster Literature Centre in Ireland and Cork and underwritten by the Cork City Council in association with the Irish Times.
Love Begins in Winter by Simon Van Booy Bollingen Prize in Poetry Established in 1949 by Paul Mellon.
Allen Grossman PEN/Nabokov Award With this award, in even-numbered years the PEN American Center recognizes a living author for his or her body of work in a variety of genres written in, or translated into, English.
The award, named for Vladimir Nabokov and supported by the Vladimir Nabokov Foundation, was first presented in 2000.
Cynthia Ozick PEN/Faulkner Award The PEN/Faulkner Foundation each year recognizes the best published works of fiction by contemporary American writers.
The award, named for William Faulkner, was founded by writers in 1980 to honour their peers.
Netherland by Joseph O'Neill Pulitzer Prizes in Letters and Drama Begun in 1917.
Categories have varied, beginning with 3—Fiction, Nonfiction, and Poetry—swelling to 22 awards in 1983, and returning to the following 4 in 2001.
Twice Toward Justice by Phillip Hoose Awarded annually since 1930 by the Poetry Society of America for distinguished lifetime service to American poetry.
The Newbery Medal, first bestowed in 1922 (the oldest award in the world for childrens literature), honours the author of the most distinguished contribution in English to American literature for children.
Established in 1951 by the Planeta Publishing House for the best unpublished original novel in Spanish.
Established in 1988 by the governments of Portugal and Brazil to honour a ""representative"" author writing in the Portuguese language.
First given out in 2006; it is sponsored by the government of Russia and underwritten by a number of prominent businessmen, who also serve as the jury.
Leonid Yuzefovich for his novel Zhuravli i karliki Naguib Mahfouz Medal for Literature Canadas premier literary awards.
Fiction, Poetry, Drama, Translation, Nonfiction, and Children’s Literature , each in English and French.
The award honours first-edition books of poetry published during the preceding year.
Wright Buchner Prize Established in 1996 and awarded for the best contemporary novel published in Arabic.
Warrak Al-Hub by Khalil Sweileh Caine Prize for African Writing The Caine Prize for African Writing is awarded annually for a short story Georg-Biichner-Preis.
First awarded in 1923; now administered by the German Academy for Language and Literature.
Walter Kappacher Hooft Prize written by an African writer and published in English.
Selections are made by a 10-member jury from among original works first published in Danish, Norwegian, or Swedish during the previous two years or in other Nordic languages (Finnish, Faroese, Sami, etc.) during the previous four years.
Jeg forbanner tidens elv by Per Petterson Prix Goncourt Prix de VAcademie Goncourt.
First awarded in 1903 from the estate of French literary figure Edmond Huot de Goncourt, to memorialize him and his brother, Jules.
Trois femmes puissantes by Marie NDiaye Prix Femina Established in 1904.
The awards for works ""of imagination"" are announced by an all-women jury in the categories of French fiction, fiction in translation, and nonfiction.
French Fiction Personne by Gwenaelle Aubry Strega Prize Man Asian Literary Prize Established in autumn 2007; this prize is awarded annually for an Asian novel unpublished in English.
The prize is underwritten by the Man Group PLC and the Hong Kong International Literary Festival Ltd.
The Boat to Redemption by Su Tong Jun’ichiro Tanizaki Prize Tanizaki Jun’ichiro Sho.
Established in 1965 to honour the memory of novelist Jun'ichiro Tanizaki.
Established in 1935 and now sponsored by the Association for the Promotion of Japanese Literature; the prize is awarded in January and June for the best serious work of fiction by a promising new Japanese writer published in a magazine or journal.
Awarded annually since 1947 for the best work of prose (fiction or nonfiction) by an Italian author in the previous year.
The prize is supported by the beverage company Liquore Strega and Telecom Italia.
Stabat mater by Tiziano Scarpa Cervantes Prize for Hispanic Literature Premio Cervantes.
Established in 1976 and awarded by the Spanish Ministry of Culture for a body of work in the Spanish language.
Jose Emilio Pacheco Mao Dun Literary Award Established in 1981 to honour contemporary Chinese novels and named after novelist Shen Yanbing , whose nom de plume was Mao Dun; awarded every three years.
Certainly, science’s impact on culture was a topic raised in the armfuls of histories, primers, and collections published to mark the bicentenary of Darwin's birth and the 150th anniversary of his On the Origin of Species.
Rated at the top of the list by the New Scientist magazine, Darwin’s Sacred Cause, by Darwin biographers Adrian Desmond and James Moore, controversially located Darwins motivation for his theory of evolution in his repugnance for the slave trade and his desire to show the ancestral brotherhood of all men.
American publishers were assaulted on a number of fronts in 2009, including by the down-tending economy, flat or sagging book sales, the distractions of the Internet, and the now seemingly ever-present ascent of the electronic book.
Many readers looked to escapist literature, especially those who flocked to the works of such best-selling authors as James Patterson, Dan Brown, Nicholas Sparks, and Nora Roberts.
Nevertheless, it was a silver year, if not a golden one, for readers who enjoyed good fiction, poetry, and nonfiction narrative.
Doctorow built on, changed a bit, and transformed the lives of the Collyer brothers into a stately, beautiful performance with great resonance within the narrow range of their housebound lives.
Her first novel in nearly a decade was a dense, sharply rhythmic work of fractured narrative about a nearly broken West Virginia family.
The book shifts back and forth over a nine-year period, between South Korea’s North Chungchong province in late July 1950, where an American corporal named Robert Leavitt and a band of South Korean war refugees are assaulted by friendly fire, and a West Virginia hamlet in 1959, where Leavitt's mentally challenged son (nicknamed Termite by his family) and the boy’s half sister Lark find themselves besieged by rising floodwaters and apparent threats from the local social service agency about the care of young Termite.
She’s already walking off across the grass, but Termite is outside so he doesn’t mind her going.
She’s a little shape in the shine of glare on the window, then the gravel crunches and they’re moving off fast, like they’re going somewhere important.
Murder was also at the centre of John Irving’s latest opus, Last Night in Twisted River, a novel that carries the reader from a remote New Hampshire logging camp in the mid1950s to a freezing lake house near Toronto early in the new century.
Less successful were Philip Roth's latest short novel, The Humbling, about an aging actor who tries to cure his stage fright with sexual addiction, and the book-length work by gifted storyteller Lorrie Moore, A Gate at the Stairs; though widely praised, the work unaccountably read like a first novel that was some decades into revision.
Well-regarded and enterprising work by writers with smaller followings also gained considerable attention.
The story begins with a depiction of the real August 1974 illicit high-wire feat of French tightrope walker Philippe Petit, who strung cables between the twin towers of the World Trade Center, stepping out to begin his epic walk.
McCann wrote, ""He entered the noise of the city, the concrete and glass made a racket, the thrup of the traffic.
The action also follows the stories of a priest, prostitutes, a judge, and an heiress.
Mexican American Luis Alberto Urrea’s novel Into the Beautiful North drew a lot of praise for its lyrical narrative, wedded to a plot similar to Akira Kurosawa’s film Seven Samurai.
Their ribs showed—the farther north the bus drove, the more pronounced the cages.
Bonnie Jo Campbell’s short-story collection American Salvage offered a look at cold, lonely, methamphetaminedrenched modern working-class life in small-town Michigan.
Few of the stories ended with a resolution, but because of their despairing feel and their shape and form, they felt all too real.
Daniyal Mueenuddin, the author of another fiction finalist, In Other Rooms, Other Wonders, was educated in Pakistan and the U.S., where he attended Dartmouth College, Hanover, N.H., and Yale Law School.
As do a number of his characters in these sharp and insightful stories, he lived in the Punjab, which he offered as the centre of the world.
Beginning with the opening story, a large cast of characters, ranging from wealthy landowners to servants, pass through his pages, providing a wonderful sense of the strata of contemporary Pakistan—and a great corrective to the cartoonlike representation in current-day newspapers; the latter frequently depicted the country as teeming with fanatics and terrorists but explored nothing about ordinary dayto-day life.
Marcel Theroux, son of novelist Paul Theroux, was born in Uganda and resided in the United Kingdom.
His novel Far North offered a dystopic look at the future, with Americans living in encampments along the Russian tundra.
Two new novels of note, The Way Through Doors and Lowboy, by two young male writers, Jesse Ball and John Wray, respectively, both featured major characters who were rather odd young men.
Boyle nobly attempted an affecting portrait of American architect Frank Lloyd Wright in The Women.
South African expatriate Lynn Freed focused once again on her native ground in The Servants’ Quarters.
Michael Malone took readers onto his North Carolina turf and into the air above it in The Four Comers of the Sky.
Achy Obejas, author of Memory Mambo and Days of Awe , chose Havana for the setting of her third novel, the appealing Ruins.
Jean Thompson’s latest collection of short fiction, Do Not Deny Me, won some praise, as did Joanna Scott’s novel Follow Me and Robert Cohen’s Amateur Barbarians.
The Library of America published the Collected Stories of Raymond Carver—1,000 pages of Carver’s work, including variant versions of his most famous short fiction.
Another compelling collection of posthumous work was William Styron's Marine Corps sketches titled Suicide Run.
In addition, Michael Crichton's last fully completed novel, Pirate Latitudes, lit up the fall title list.
While the fiction of 2009 shot off sparks and sometimes fireworks, the nonfiction books, whether memoir, criticism, history, or a blend of the above, smoldered rather than exploded.
The Death and Life of an American Small Town offered a worrisome piece of book-length reportage of a methamphetamine-saturated American heartland.
Eula Biss published a collection of eccentric and well-composed personal essays on race in American life and various other subjects in Notes from No Man’s Land.
Novelist Jane Vandenburgh's memoir, A Pocket History of Sex in the Twentieth Century, was built on a wonderful fusion of insight and eccentricity of vision.
The posthumous The Essays of Leonard Michaels (edited by Katherine Ogden Michaels) showed off the brilliance of the late story writer in nonfiction prose.
Alan Cheuse published A Trance After Breakfast, a collection of travel essays that ranged in subject from his native New Jersey to the islands of Bali, Indonesia, and New Zealand.
Former poet laureate Rita Dove signed in with Sonata Mulattica, a collection of poems about a young African European composer who first won Beethoven’s approval and then earned his anger.
Campbell McGrath turned his attention to the figure of young George Shannon, the Pennsylvaniaborn teenage boy who was the youngest member of the Lewis and Clark expedition.
In Shannon he dramatized George’s 16 days of wandering alone across the Great American Desert after becoming separated from the main group of explorers.
Novelist Richard Bausch went mostly in the direction of lyric in his book These Extremes, which featured prose to his relatives as well as verse based on historical and literary figures.
Marilyn Kallet, longtime resident of Tennessee, brought out Packing Light.
Miguel Algarin, founder of the Nuyorican Poets Cafe, produced essays and poems in Survival Supervivencia.
Snodgrass, James Purdy, Harold Norse, Frank McCourt, and William Safire.
Humour and disaster were often uneasy companions in Canadian novels in 2009.
Margaret Atwood’s The Year of the Flood was an inventively witty but bleak account of life on Earth after a long-predicted worldwide disaster has occurred, while Douglas Coupland's darkly comic Generation A was set in a future in which bees were nearly extinct and only storytelling—or lies—survived.
Tall tales also informed Michael Crummey’s Galore, set in a remote Newfoundland outport.
The true and tragic capsizing of the oil rig Ocean Ranger in 1982 formed the backdrop for Lisa Moores novel February, the story of a family surviving the loss of husband, father, and breadwinner.
Other settings were as various as ancient Macedonia, where Aristotle tutors the future conqueror Alexander, in Annabel Lyon's The Golden Mean; a World War II-era factory, where four women investigate the mystery of malfunctioning aircraft in Jeanette Lynes’s quirky The Factory Voice; and postKhmer Rouge Cambodia, where a young woman searches for the lover who disappeared there a decade earlier in Kim Echlin's The Disappeared.
Anne Michaels’s compelling love story The Winter Vault took both Egypt and Canada as its setting while also interweaving flashbacks of historical events in post-World War II Poland and England.
Barry Callaghan also played with time, present and past, in Beside Still Waters, a peripatetic search for a lost love.
In contrast, Bonnie Burnard’s Suddenly was placed squarely in the centre of a cancer patient's family and friends.
Kate Pullinger, in The Mistress of Nothing, reworked the story of a rebellious housemaid and her famous employer, Lucie Duff Gordon, an unconventional, not to say eccentric, literary figure; and Claire Holden Rothman was not too closely bound by the facts in The Heart Specialist, an account of the life and career of Maude Abbott, one of Canada’s first female doctors.
The pitfalls of expediency and morality were examined in Linden MacIntyre's The Bishop’s Man, in which a priest is sorely tested when confronted with the consequences of his cover-ups and selfsuppression; by Colin McAdam in Fall, a portrait of privileged male adolescents at an Ottawa boarding school; and by Martha Baillie in The Incident Report, a fantastic romp of literary references, allusions, and illusions, based loosely on Giuseppi Verdi's opera Rigoletto.
Short stories also included the rewriting of real lives, as in Alice Munro’s latest collection, Too Much Happiness, in which the title story told the tale of the final journey of Sofya Kovalevskaya, a famous 19th-century Russian mathematician.
In other collections, Ali Smith demonstrated the versatility of the short-story form in The First Person, and Other Stories, as did Deborah Willis in Vanishing, and Other Stories, while Mavis Gallant once more utilized her talents for observation in Going Ashore.
The stories in Alexandra Leggat’s Animal plumbed the often unrecognized affinities of animals and humans.
Two very different world views were offered in Curry Is Thicker than Water by Jasmine D’Costa, a deftly witty excursion into tales set in the heart of India, and in George Bowering’s The Box, a playful riff on Vancouver in the 1960s.
A common theme in many books of poetry was the differences that both separate and unite individuals.
Adeena Karasick’s Amuse Bouche served up a word salad of phrases, concepts, metaphor, and wit in wild and tasty juxtapositions.
Marguerite Pigeon’s Inventory examined the interface between subject and object, where the observer and the observed begin and end; Fred Wah considered the relations between word and thing in Is a Door, and Jeanette Lynes contrasted Canadian places and pastimes in The New Blue Distance.
Douglas Lochhead stayed put and studied his own backyard in Looking into Trees.
Barry Dempster reveled in the contrasting vagaries of the human heart in Love Outlandish.
David Zieroth meditated on escaping from oneself in The Fly in Autumn, while Carmine Starnino in This Way Out looked for exits from modernity, and Sina Queyras’s Expressway was a direct route into the heart of other times and places.
Poetic milestones were marked by Robert Bringhurst’s Selected Poems and Susan Musgrave’s When Canadian author Margaret Atwood attends a photocall in London for a theatrical performance of her novel The Year of the Flood.
Important works written in English by authors from sub-Saharan Africa, Australia, and New Zealand made a strong showing among other noteworthy and awardwinning books published in 2009.
Much to the delight of readers and critics alike, new releases by several of South Africa’s preeminent writers hit bookstores.
Coetzee, the 2003 Nobel Prize-winning laureate in literature, brought out Summertime, the final volume in his trilogy of fictionalized memoirs; compatriot Andre Brink also released an autobiographical volume, A Fork in the Road.
Poet, author, painter, and activist Breyten Breytenbach offered a vast array of aesthetic, social, and cultural commentary in two of the year’s most memorable books, Intimate Stranger and Notes from the Middle World.
Drawing from the 1996 testimony presented to South Africa’s Truth and Reconciliation Commission of a mother who lost her son in a massacre, authors Antjie Krog, Nosisi Mpolweni, and Kopano Ratele released their investigative collaboration There Was This Goat, illuminating South Africa’s racial and cultural misunderstandings.
Elsewhere, Nigerian fiction writer Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie continued her remarkable success with the publication of her debut collection of short stories, The Thing Around Your Neck.
Australians heralded the publication of David Malouf’s novel Ransom, his first to appear in more than a decade.
The work revisited Homer’s Iliad and gained widespread praise for its spare, elegant prose and imaginative rendering of ancient Greece.
Colleen McCullough, well known for her prodigious Masters of Rome historical novel sequence, extended her foray into the mystery-suspense genre with Too Many Murders, her second novel in the Carmine Delmonico series.
Two other Australians, Tim Winton and Christos Tsiolkas garnered international attention in receiving the Miles Franklin Literary Award and the Commonwealth Writers’ Award , respectively.
Award-winning Aboriginal author Alexis Wright, whose talents became best known with her breakthrough best seller Carpentaria , reached an even wider readership with the publication of the novel in the United States in 2009.
Sankawulo, Sr., Liberian political leader, short-story writer, novelist, essayist, and translator, died in February.
GERMAN The authors of a number of the major German-language works of 2009 were bom in the communist part of Europe during the Cold War.
The Germanspeaking literary world was caught off guard on October 8 when the Swedish Academy announced that Herta Muller was the winner of the Nobel Prize for Literature.
Muller, who came from a German-speaking village in the historic region of Banat, Rom., had moved to West Germany in 1987 in order to escape repression and censorship under the dictatorship of Nicolae Ceausescu.
Muller’s novel Atemschaukel, published in August, told the story of a young German-speaking Romanian at the end of World War II and his experiences in a Soviet labour camp.
The novel was about a woman who, like the author herself, loses the ability to speak after a stroke and has to relearn language.
Schmidt had published several well-received books in the decade before 2002, when a cerebral hemorrhage forced her to go through that very experience.
Du stirbst nicht dealt with the way that language and identity are interwoven, and since the novel’s protagonist was, like its author, born in East Germany, it also addressed the final years of the East German dictatorship and German reunification.
Hungarian-born Terezia Mora, who had moved to Berlin at the beginning of the 1990s, published Der einzige Mann auf dem Kontinent, an exploration of life in the contemporary international business world and what it does to the human personality.
The novel’s protagonist, Darius Kopp, lives in a synthetic world of computers and office buildings that is no longer connected to the natural world and its rhythms.
Written by an author who grew up in the brittle world of socialism in Hungary, the novel explored the fragility of contemporary capitalism and the personality structures associated with it.
Rainer Merkel’s novel Lichtjahre entfemt dealt with contemporary sexual relationships.
Norbert Scheuer's novel Uberm Rauschen was also an introspective exploration of personal relationships, this time between two brothers and their father, who is dead.
This novel, unlike the novels of Mora and Merkel, showed the interrelationship between humans and nature; the primary activity of its protagonist, Leo Arimond, as well as of his brother and father, is fishing in a country river near his hometown, a village in rural North Rhine-Westphalia.
Stephan Thome’s novel Grenzgang also told a provincial story about life in a small village with its rituals, problems, and interactions with city people.
Swiss novelist Urs Widmer published Herr Adamson, a novel about death and its relationship to life.
When the novel’s protagonist is eight years old, he meets a man named Adamson; it turns out that Adamson emerged from the world of the dead, having died at the precise moment when the novel’s protagonist was born.
Adamson can be seen only by the novel’s protagonist, and he can be released completely into the land of the dead only when the protagonist himself dies.
Thus, the living and the dead are united by bonds that are separable only by death, and all of life is a preparation for dying.
Logically, the novel is narrated on the day of the protagonist’s death.
Jens Petersen was awarded the Ingeborg Bachmann prize in June for his unfinished novel Bis dass der Tod.
Like Herr Adamson, this work also explored issues of life and death; the novel’s protagonist, Alex, who cares for his terminally ill and comatose girlfriend, considers the possibility of suicide.
Similarly, Judith Hermann’s short-story collection Alice addressed the prominence of death in life.
The five stories in the book revolve around one main figure , various men in her life, and her attempts to deal with their deaths.
On a lighter note, Brigitte Kronauer’s novel Zwei schwarze Jdger was a playful self-referential exploration of literature and the way it reflects and enriches life.
Its protagonist was the writer Rita Palka, who, over the course of the novel, encounters a number of people with unusual histories.
Finally, Lutz Seiler’s sombre short-story collection Die Zeitwaage returned to the problem of life in socialist East Germany and its negative impact on human life.
The year 2009 showed a marked decrease in the number of works of autobiographical fiction, or ""autofiction,” a genre in which authors novelize their lives and which had reigned over the past decade of French literature.
Indeed, the title of one of 2009’s best-selling works, Emmanuel Carrere’s D’autres vies que la mienne , could be viewed as the year’s literary rallying cry.
The prizewinning author Alain Fleischer subverted autofiction in Moi, Sdndor F by treating biography as autobiography.
Through the literary legerdemain of channeling his uncle, who had been killed by the Nazis during deportation—the man after whom he had been named and whose personality, by all accounts, he had inherited—Fleischer opened a new literary frontier where novel, biography, and autobiography meet and one man’s past elucidates another’s present.
This process was closely mirrored in another homage to a dead relative, Agnes Desarthe’s Le Remplagant, in which the author described the man whom her grandmother had married after her first husband’s death at Auschwitz and from whom the author believed herself to have inherited her understanding of storytelling as a weapon against resignation and forgetting.
The decline of autofiction was matched by a resurgence of traditional fiction, particularly in works exploring the close setting of the family.
In ParisBrest, Tanguy Viel offered the spectacle of a dysfunctional family in which the narrator, Louis, is trapped between his disgraced, bankrupt father, his domineering mother, and his oppressive grandmother, who has unexpectedly inherited a fortune that Louis hopes to gain for himself.
Wielding two weapons, a novel he has written to expose his family’s foibles and his friendship for a young hoodlum whom his family despises, Louis attempts a rebellion that is doomed from the outset, in a novel that intertwines humour and despair.
In a similar vein, the celebrated novelist Philippe Djian published Impardonnables, in which a has-been writer who lost his wife and one daughter in a car accident sees his world crumble again when his other daughter disappears.
As his quest to find her estranges him from his new family, he begins to worry whether destiny has chosen him as its special victim and whether forgiveness of oneself can ever be anything but an illusion.
One subgenre of fiction, historical fiction, also saw a particular revival in the vacuum left by autofiction.
In Des hommes, Laurent Mauvignier described the ramifications of the Algerian War on a group of French men who, once drafted, witnessed unspeakable horrors.
The novel begins 40 years after the war, with the men suffering from psychological problems, and culminates in a moving flashback describing their experiences in the Algeria of 1960.
Pierre Lartigue completed a historical novel just days before his death.
In Des fous de qualite, he portrayed the loss of idealism of soldiers who believed in the military virtues of honour, courage, and meritocracy under Napoleon only to return home after Napoleon’s defeat to a France where the restoration of the embittered monarchy, eager to bury Napoleon’s memory, has replaced honour with the cynical omnipotence of money Jean-Marie Laclavetine had the similarly ambitious project of painting a fresco of an entire era in his Nous voila, but the era he examined was his own.
French author Marie NDiaye was awarded the 2009 Prix Goncourt for her novel Trois femmes puissantes.
Ironically, in a year marked by pure fiction's triumph over autofiction, three of the four main literary prizes were awarded to autofictions.
The Prix Medicis went to Haitian Canadian Dany Laferriere’s L’Enigme du retour, in which the author described his homecoming, after decades of political exile, to his native Haiti, a country for which he had longed but to which he had become hopelessly foreign.
In the winner of the Prix Renaudot, Un Roman frangais, Frederic Beigbeder took the opportunity afforded by his infamous 2008 drug bust to reminisce upon the troubled childhood that shaped the hell-bent man he later became.
Gwenaelle Aubry won the Prix Femina for Personne, her portrait in 26 chapters, one for each letter of the alphabet, of her father, a lifelong manic-depressive who in the end died homeless.
The Prix Goncourt was awarded to the year’s one true literary sensation, Marie NDiaye’s Trois femmes puissantes, set in three vividly dysfunctional families.
The second, Fanta, is living in France with her failure of a husband, who envies her and suspects her of having an affair with his boss.
The third, Khady, is a young widow at the mercy of her in-laws, who hate her for not having given her husband a child before his premature death.
Though subjected to the worst humiliations as she attempts to reach France, Khady remains poignantly true to herself in a triumph of the human spirit over adversity.
Two fiction titles dominated the literary scene in French Canada in 2009.
Haitian-born writer and filmmaker Dany Laferriere matched literary quality with popular success with his novel L’Enigme du retour, a story of a man who, after his father’s funeral, returns to Haiti to recover what remains of his family.
The book won not only the Grand Prix du Livre de Montreal but also France's Prix Medicis.
The other dominant title was Le Ciel de Bay City by Catherine Mavrikakis, which in 2009 picked up the booksellers’ prize and the increasingly influential Prix Litteraire des Collegiens, an award conferred by secondary-school students.
This was Mavrikakis’s breakout book— though, like her earlier works, it featured a dark and brooding atmosphere.
In competition for the Grand Prix du Livre de Montreal was a graphic novel, Paul a Quebec by Michel Rabagliati.
This was the first time that such a work had been considered for a major prize.
The year saw the continued flowering of the Aurelie Laflamme phenomenon; the character was the creation of writer India Desjardins, who understood the need for a local series of novels for teen and preteen girls.
An all-but-overlooked novel, Julie Mazzieri's Le Discours sur la tombe de I’idiot , won the Governor General’s Literary Award for French-language fiction for a story that depicted a society falling apart after the village idiot is killed.
The suicide of novelist Nelly Arcan (see OBITUARIES) at age 36 shocked Quebec society.
Sadly, she did not live to see the publication later in the year of her book Paradis, clef en main, ironically a novel that ultimately argued against suicide.
ITALIAN Tiziano Scarpa's novel Stabat mater , recipient of the 2009 Strega Prize, focuses on the impact of Antonio Vivaldi’s innovative music on his contemporaries.
Abandoned at birth, 16year-old Cecilia spends her nights writing letters to her unknown mother and conversing with a personification of her own death.
For Cecilia, Vivaldi’s most talented pupil at the Ospedale della Pieta in Venice, music is only a mechanical activity until she gets to play the Red Priest's unconventional scores.
Shocked at first, she gradually perceives the revolutionary power of music.
In her journey of discovery, writing and music eventually coincide and lead her to pursue her freedom.
In Edith Bruck’s Quanta Stella c’e nel cielo, recipient of the Viareggio-Repaci Prize for fiction, the protagonist, Anita, who is also 16 years old, summons the strength to escape from an oppressive reality.
After surviving the Auschwitz concentration camp, she finds herself in Czechoslovakia, treated as an object by members of her own family, who, like her, are Jewish, living in a precarious condition, in perpetual wait to leave for Palestine.
Maternity makes her regain control of herself and her body and gives her the courage to rebel and begin a journey to reach the Promised Land.
Elena Lowenthal’s Conta le stelle, se puoi is a family saga told in a “counterhistorical” perspective.
The author, a Hebrew studies scholar, imagines that Mussolini died in 1924 of a stroke and that 1938, instead of being the annus horribilis of racial laws in Italy, was the annus mirabilis of the birth of the state of Israel.
Their hopes to find their own ""promised land"" seem to burn along with Smyrna (now Izmir, Tur.) during the terrible fire that devastated that city in 1922.
Through a fast-paced, humourous, captivating narration, Almeno il cappello by Andrea Vitali brings to life the small intrigues, lies, mysteries, quarrels, and reversals of destiny that animate Bellano, a small town on Lake Como, in Fascist-era Italy.
The creation of a brass band in the town exposes the protagonists of this endeavour to petty power games between the podesta and the parish.
Cesarina Vighy’s L’ultima estate, winner of the Campiello Prize for a first novel, is a caustic coming-of-age narrative told partially by an internal narrator, who coincides with the author, and partially by an omniscient narrator, who is intermittently present to disseminate a sense of ironic detachment in what is announced as a painful inner excavation.
Shadows from the internal narrators past populate the limited physical and sensorial space in which she has been confined by illness, and these shadows urge her to make them live through her.
Antonio Scurati’s II bambino che sognava la fine del mondo tells a story inspired by the case of alleged pedophilia at a school in Rignano Flaminio, which received enormous media attention in 2007.
Through a complex interplay of fiction and nonfiction, autobiographical fiction and autobiography, the author— a media and communications specialist—reflected on the manner in which the media often amplify collective fears, thereby making the distinction between illusion and reality very thin.
After publishing Gomorra (2006; Eng. trans., 2007), Roberto Saviano continued to write as an act of resistance, in the obstinate belief that truth ""exists in spite of everything” and is to be found in the proliferation of accounts of “microstories” that are often neglected by the media.
La bellezza e I’infemo, a collection of essays that he had written and in part published between 2004 and 2009, was his second book.
Space and time cross and overlap in two significant works published during the year.
In Daniele Del Giudice’s Orizzonte mobile, accounts of his expedition to the Antarctic in 1990 and of an imagGustau Nacarino—Reuters/Landov Continuing to attract attention was Italian writer Roberto Saviano, who followed up his 2006 novel Gomorra with La bellezza e l’infemo, a collection of essays. inary journey to the same lands set in 2007 alternate with excerpts from two notebooks by 19th-century explorers Giacomo Bove and Adrien de Gerlache de Gomery.
By switching continuously between different times and perspectives, the author re-creates the ""moving horizon” referenced in the title.
Eraldo Affinati’s Berlin is an homage to that city 20 years after the fall of the Berlin Wall.
Seven chapters, each with a different narrator, render the multifaceted image of a city that still carries the marks and wounds of 20th-century history, along with the signs of the promise of a multiethnic, productive future.
Fernanda Pivano, whose work as a translator and essayist was pivotal in the diffusion of 20th-century American literature in Italy, died in August.
Another loss to Italian letters was that of Alda Merini, one of the country’s most important contemporary poets.
Many of the novels published in Spain in 2009 had a generational content and a tendency to refer to past times in order to explain the present.
Set in the political transition of the 1970s and reissued 30 years after its original publication, Cronica del desamor by Rosa Montero explored the worries of the post-Franco generation of women and gay men that felt powerful and disoriented at the same time and their uncertainty about how to manage personal freedom.
Perez-Reverte presented a violent story about ambition and miscegenation; his novel depicted the most dramatic night in Mexico’s conquest.
In his first short-story collection, Tres vidas de santos, Eduardo Mendoza presented pseudosaintly characters who are willing to give up everything in the pursuit of an idea.
Angeles Caso won the Planeta Prize with Contra el viento, the story of a young Cape Verdean woman who seeks a better life on the Iberian Peninsula but discovers that life is still harsh and challenging.
La sombra de lo que fuimos, by Chilean Luis Sepulveda, was awarded the Primavera Prize.
Kirmen Uribe won the National Prize Spanish journalist and novelist Rosa Montero observed the 30th anniversary of the publication of her first work of fiction, Cronica del desamor.
Luis Leante’s La luna roja was a novel of secrecy and passion, about the love for books and storytelling.
It narrated the parallel lives of a writer and his translator and the ruthless woman between them.
After dying, the protagonist is reunited with two of her friends in heaven, where they look back at their lives in Barcelona during the 1960s and their childhood in postwar Spain.
The Alfaguara Prize was awarded to Argentine-born Andres Neuman for El viajero del siglo, an ambitious experiment in which he looked back at the 19th century from a 21st-century perspective, analyzing issues such as immigration, multiculturalism, and the transformation of gender roles.
The highest distinction in Spanish letters, the Cervantes Prize, went to Mexican poet, short-story writer, and novelist Jose Emilio Pacheco.
Among the writers who died in 2009 was the winner of the 1991 prize, Spanish novelist Francisco Ayala.
One of the best surprises of 2009 was the novel El viajero del siglo, which was awarded the Alfaguara Prize.
Set in an imaginary German town at the beginning of the 19th century, this beautifully written novel was a love story as well as a novel about ideas, literary criticism, philosophy, and politics, with multiple levels of meaning.
La muneca rusa, by the Argentine Alicia Dujovne Ortiz, provided a fictional account of the life of Africa de las Heras, one of the wives of the Uruguayan writer Felisberto Hernandez, who never suspected that she was a Russian spy.
Another Argentine author, Claudia Pineiro, published Las grietas de Jara, a thriller with elements of the psychological and the existentialist novel.
The protagonist, a weak man who is submissive to his boss and his wife, finally breaks free of the humiliation and submission he suffers.
Todos los hombres son mentirosos , by the Argentine Alberto Manguel, a resident of France, was a novel that could be read, in part, as a continuation of the authors essays on the art of writing and reading.
It not only was a meditation on the art of narration and a tale about Argentina’s recent past but also represented for Manguel a nostalgic, sometimes funny, sometimes desperate, return to Latin America, its language, and its realities.
The Guatemalan Rodrigo Rey Rosa published El material humano, about the Guatemalan civil wars.
Using documents recently discovered in the police archives in Guatemala, Rey Rosa created a journal-like narrative in which historical reality, fiction, and autobiographical elements alternate.
The result was an exploration of the capacity of fiction to depict the ugly reality of repression.
The Chilean Luis Sepulveda used the techniques of the grotesque in La sombra de lo que fuimos (winner of the 2009 Primavera Prize) in order to convey the disenchantment of a generation of old political activists who return to Chile after years of forced exile.
Both El material humano and La sombra de lo que fuimos were in part autobiographical novels, and the same was true of Demasiados heroes, by the Colombian author Laura Restrepo, who fictionalized her revolutionary activities in the Argentina of the 1970s.
The book questioned memory, authenticity, the limits of heroism, and the search for personal identity.
Memorias de una dama, by the Peruvian Santiago Roncagliolo, was a tragicomic novel about the Mafia, Caribbean dictators, and the relationship between the upper classes and political power in Latin America.
It also represented Volpi’s further exploration of the genre of the poetic narrative, which began with El jardm desvastado , a novel about the Iraq War.
La isla bajo el mar, by the Chilean American Isabel Allende, was the story of Haitian slaves told through a wellbuilt narrative populated with characQuim Llenas—Cover/Getty Images Peruvian author Santiago Roncagliolo earned praise for his tragicomic novel Memorias de una dama. ters of diverse races and nationalities.
It focused on one of the slaves, Zarite, and her masters, large landowners who had escaped to New Orleans after their slaves rebelled and their plantation was burned.
After being humiliated repeatedly and after having children by her master, Zarite achieves her freedom.
Santiago Gamboa, a Colombian author residing in New Delhi, chose, as in his previous novels, an international setting for Necropolis.
In it, a series of persons of different origins and professions attend a conference in Jerusalem, where a homicide occurs, and the narrator contrasts various versions of the same story.
Israel was the setting in another novel, Aquarium, by the Argentine Marcelo Figueras.
This lack of communication was intended as a metaphor for the ongoing Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Argentine Carlos Maria Dominguez, a resident of Uruguay, published La costa ciega, a short experimental novel in which different voices were superimposed and confused.
At the end of 2008, William Ospina, from Colombia, received the Romulo Gallegos Prize for El pais de la canela, the second novel of a trilogy based on the cronicas, or chronicles, written during the exploration and colonization of Latin America.
Papeles inesperados, a collection of previously unpublished works and texts discarded by the author but retained in his archives.
Among those writers who died in 2009 was the Uruguayan Mario Benedetti.
The most important trophy of Portuguese-language literatures, the Camoes Prize, was awarded in June 2009 to Cape Verdean poet, fiction writer, and journalist Armenio Vieira.
Although he wrote in opposition to the colonial and postcolonial political authorities and the established literary canons, Vieira’s poetry was rooted in the tradition of the foundational Cape Verdean literary movement Claridade and glorified Western classics such as Homer.
The second-ever Leya Prize, a prominent literary honour awarded to unpublished works, sponsored by the powerful recently founded Portuguese publisher Leya (which acquired several iconic independent publishing houses), went to the novel O olho de Hertzog by Portuguese-born Mozambican historian and fiction writer Joao Paulo Borges Coelho.
The story centred on European colonial rivalries in Africa and depicted Mozambique and its neighbours as proto-independent countries in the period around World War I Among Coelho’s previous fictional works were Ax duas sombras do rio , As visitas do Dr.
The Portuguese literary scene was agitated in 2009 by the publication of NoMiguel Tovar/AP Portuguese writer Antonio Lobo Antunes released his 24th novel, Que cavalos sao aqueles que fazem sombra no mar?, which chronicled the lives of members of a dysfunctional family. bel Prize winner Jose Saramago's novel Caim.
The polemic against Cairn by Roman Catholic leaders recalled the one provoked years earlier by Saramago’s O evangelho segundo Jesus Cristo (1991; The Gospel According to Jesus Christ, 1991), when Catholic authorities responded impetuously to his deconstruction of the divine origin of Christ.
In Caim he revisited the Bible, this time the Old Testament story of Cain and Abel, with an anticlerical perspective that subverted the traditional relationship between an envious and resentful God and the suffering Man.
The latter book narrated the lives of members of a dysfunctional family in seven chapters named after the formal moves of traditional bullfighting in the family’s native province of Ribatejo.
Among new works of Brazilian fiction in 2009 was a family saga, Chico Buarque’s novel Leite derramado, which narrated in parallel fashion the evolution of a Brazilian family and the transformation of Brazilian society over the past two centuries.
In Tatiana Salem Levy’s first novel, A chave de casa , awarded the 2008 Sao Paulo Prize for first works of literature, the protagonist travels to Turkey, her family’s homeland, as she discovered what it means to be a Jewish-Brazilian descendant of immigrants.
The very short stories in Mario Sabino’s collection A boca da verdade highlighted unhappiness as a key element of life.
The poet Rosa Lia Dinelle published Enquanto os sinos plangent, a collection of poems with a wide variety of forms and styles, from classical stanzas to popular Brazilian national forms with contemporary ecological themes.
Carlos Newton Junior’s essay on Lampiao, a legendary cangaceiro (backlands bandit), introduced his anthology O cangago na poesia brasileira, which offered an original viewpoint on the importance of popular poetry (trovas, literatura de cordel) within Brazilian literature.
Among new works of literary criticism were the outstanding English-language biography of Clarice Lispector, Why This World, by Benjamin Moser; Rita Olivieri-Godet's study of the works of Joao Ubaldo Ribeiro; a collected volume of essays, Nas tramas da ficgao, on the relationship between Brazilian literature and Brazilian history, which was edited by Clovis Gruner and Claudio DeNipoti; and a volume of literary essays by Susana Vemieri, Vozes da estante.
Throughout 2009 there were celebrations of the centenary of the death of Euclides da Cunha, author of Os sertoes (1902; Rebellion in the Backlands, 1944), a classic narrative of life in the backlands.
Salim Miguel was awarded the Machado de Assis Prize by the Brazilian Academy of Letters for his body of literary works.
During the harshest years of the military dictatorship, Boal founded and led the Teatro do Oprimido (""Theatre of the Oppressed”) and was arrested, tortured, and sent into exile by the regime.
His decades-long influence on Brazilian and international theatre was profound.
In her latest work she used provincial life in a Sovietera city as the setting for a voyage to the land of the dead.
Another writer working on the border between the real and the fantastic was Leonid Yuzefovich.
The protagonists of his novel, Zhuravli i karliki , were the real-life 17th-century adventurer Timofey Ankudinov and a fictional contemporary researcher working on a biography of Ankudinov.
A second trend in contemporary Russian prose could be distinguished in Roman Senchin’s novel Yeltyshevy (""The Yeltyshevs”), a dark, naturalistic saga of contemporary peasant life that was stylistically reminiscent of the “country prose” of the late Soviet period.
Andrey Gelasimov’s novel Stepnyye bogi (2008; ""Gods of the Steppe”) and Aleksandr Terekhov’s Kamenny most (""The Stone Bridge"") occupied an intermediate zone in that landscape.
Stepnyye bogi combined a heartfelt realistic description of life in the Baikal countryside in 1945 with elements of a mystical thriller, while Kamenny most, a taut psychological thriller, was based on the true story of a double murder committed in 1943.
Also on that list were the novels Vremya zhenshchin by Yelena Chizhova, who won the prize, Zhili-byli starik so starukhoy (2006; ""Once There Lived an Old Man and His Wife”) by Yelena Katishonok, and Vcherashnyaya vechnost (2008; “Yesterday’s Eternity”) by the venerable former Russian dissident Boris Khazanov.
The novel Okolonolya (""Almost Zero"") provoked something of a sensation as much because of its author as because of its content.
The work, a satiric look at circles close to government power, was signed by the pseudonymous author Natan Dubovitsky.
Most suspected its real author to be none other than Vladislav Surkov, one of the most influential figures in the current Russian government.
In September a heated discussion about the state of Russian publishing broke out when the poet Olga Martynova published a brief article—in German—in a German newspaper.
Soon after, the article was anonymously translated into Russian and posted on the very influential Russian Web site Openspace.
The article, which she agreed to expand and write in Russian, argued that Russia’s dominant publishers (including, among others, Eksmo, Ad Marginem, and Limbus Press) had decided to ignore aesthetically and intellectually complex works in favour of a kind of mishmash of mass market and “serious” literature that was reminiscent of Soviet literary norms.
Martynova criticized a number of Russia’s best-known and most popular writers, including Lyudmila Ulitskaya, Dmitry Bykov, Zakhar Prilepin, and Vladimir Sorokin.
The year saw the publication of new books by Igor Bulatovsky, Ilya Kucherov, Dmitry Grigoryev, Natalya Chernykh, Aleksey Porvin, Boris Khersonsky, Aleksandr Mironov, Gali-Dana Zinger, and Vadim Mesyats.
Although most of the authors in this list were representatives of the Petersburg School, their publishers were Moscow-based, which signaled a healthy openness.
Another highlight of the year was the entry into literature of several young poets whose reputation was based exclusively on Internet publication and who had not yet attempted printed publication.
This group included the 20-year-old poets Vera Polozkova and Alya Kudryashova.
Although neither had yet produced a masterpiece, their work showed promise, and its level of professionalism was considerably higher than that of the “Web poets” of previous years.
Many writers died during the year, including acclaimed popular prose writer Vasily Aksyonov and 96-year-old Sergey Mikhalkov, the very official author of both the Soviet national anthem and the new Russian national anthem.
Not since the end of World War II and Joseph Stalin’s terror had Russian literature lost so many writers in a single year.
PERSIAN Literary production in Iran continued to suffer from restrictive government measures and was eclipsed in the latter part of 2009 by the political turmoil that followed the disputed June presidential election.
Herfeh-ye man khavab dldan ast (""My Profession Is Dreaming”), a collection of short stories by Fatimah Zari'i, was among the year’s most innovative works of short fiction.
Censoring an Iranian Love Story, based on an unpublished original Persian manuscript by Shahriar Mandanipour, addressed the issue of censorship in a novel way and led an impressive array of literary translations from Persian.
Her works—including Afsanah-ye Baba Layla , a poetic novel published in a heavily censored version in Tehran in 2006, and ' Aks-e fowrl-ye ' eshq-bazl (“A Snapshot of Love-Making”), a collection of poems published by the author in Los Angeles in 2007—attracted much attention after they were posted on the authors Web site.
The Courrier International’s literary prize was awarded to Zoya Pirzad for Christophe Balay’s French translation of her collection of short stories, titled Le Gout apre des kakis (""The Bitter Taste of Persimmon”), and novelist Isma'il Fasih— whose notable works included Sorayya dar eghma and Zemestan-e 62 —died in Tehran.
ARABIC There was concern among Arab publishers in 2009 about the continuing impact of the global financial crisis that had begun the previous year.
That in turn translated into lower book prices and thus made books more affordable for the general public.
New writers, however, who traditionally published their first work at their own expense, could not afford to do so.
Arab writers were generally dissatisfied with aspects of the cultural life in their countries.
Complaints abounded about censorship, weak distribution of their works, biased award systems, and what many felt was the undue recognition of writers with strong connections to government publishing houses.
Arab writers also showed a growing interest in translation, with some questioning both the quality of the books selected by national translation organizations and the intentions of Western publishers.
Among those writers whose work echoed the most pressing problems of the region was Iraqi writer In'am Kajahjl.
In Al-Hafldah al-amrlkiyyah (2008; “The American Granddaughter”), Zaynah, the protagonist, is an American Iraqi who faces her multiple identities while working as an interpreter with the United States Army in Iraq.
By exploring the contempt Iraqis feel for their Americanized compatriots, whom they consider traitors, the novel revealed the harsh reality in Iraq, where sectarian and religious divisions destroyed a society that prided itself on religious tolerance.
Mourid Barghouti’s second memoir, Wulidtu hunak, wulidtu buna (“I Was Bom There, I Was Born Here”), celebrated his Egyptian-born son Tamim’s first visit to the West Bank and the affirmation of his Palestinian identity.
The book provided an account of the hardships of the Palestinians and praised those who battle Israeli restrictions and find creative strategies for overcoming hurdles on a daily basis.
He denounced religious intolerance, divisions between various political factions, and abuses of power.
Narrating the story of the Qahtan family from the Ottoman era to the period of the British mandate, the book denounced Britain's role in Palestine, revealed the weaknesses of the early Palestinian liberation movement, and provided insight into Palestinian traditions in marriage and discrimination against women.
Depicting various Islamic groups as being manipulated by the state, the novel paints an atmosphere of fear and secrecy in which the characters are pawns, secretly maneuvered and manipulated.
In the short-story collection Fl hi]cC albashar wa-madlh al-baho’lm wa alhasharat (“Scoffing at Human Beings and Praising Animals and Insects”), Libyan writer Ahmad Ibrahim al-Faqlh explored human interactions and found strong compassion on the part of animals and insects toward humans and an absence of compassion in humans’ relationships among themselves.
Muhammad al-Bisatl remained close to his society’s problems with his novel Aswar , about life in Egypt being akin to life in a prison.
The story revolves around a chat room that becomes accessible to new members every Friday and that gives young people in particular the opportunity to discuss their problems freely and anonymously.
Despite awards for poetry, such as those presented by the Foundation of Abdul Aziz al-Babtain, which are among the most prestigious in the Arab world, poetry continued to lose readers to fiction, especially the novel.
The staunchest critic of weakening interest in verse, the Egyptian poet and literary critic ‘Abd al-Mu'tl HijazI, continued to defend the genre tirelessly.
He attributed its loss of popularity in Egypt to a poor educational system that failed to provide students with a solid knowledge of classical Arabic.
The death in 2008 of Palestinian Mahmud Darwlsh, one of the most prominent and popular Arab poets, perhaps contributed to poetry’s waning popularity.
His last collection of poems, La uridu li-hadht alqasidah an tantahi (""I Do Not Want This Poem to End”), was published posthumously and was well received.
The novel did not attract much attention when it first appeared, in 2008, but it later became the subject of strong criticism from the Coptic Orthodox Church.
CHINESE Of some 3,000 new Chinese novels published in print in 2009, few found favour with the critics.
One of the few exceptions was Yi ju ding yiwan ju by well-known writer Liu Zhenyun, though it too had a few detractors.
Composed of 400,000 Chinese characters, the novel told the story of a peasant, Yang Baishun, who leaves his home in Yanjin (also Liu’s home village) after the death of his adopted daughter in search of someone who can fill her place in his life.
Decades later the daughter’s son, Niu Jianguo, who had left the village, returns to it with the same strong desire for personal connection.
Using a fine, delicate narrative style, the author probingly examined the concept of friendlessness — which differs from what in English is called loneliness —and attempted to redefine the meaning of friend.
Since 1997, when the first literary Web site in mainland China (www.rongshuxia.com) was established, digital publishing had developed rapidly.
Organizers reported that during that period more than 70,000 new works, including fiction, essays, and plays, were submitted online.
The work of the winners would be published on Qidian Zhongwen wang (Starting Point Chinese Web ), www.qidian.com, the official Web site of the project.
This project was organized by Shengda Literature Ltd. , the leading Web-based interactive entertainment media company in China.
SDL owned the three biggest Chinese literary Web sites, including Jinjiang yuanchuang wang (Jinjiang Web of Original Creation), www.jjwxc.net, which was believed to be the largest literary Web site in the world devoted to female writers, and Hongxin tianxiang xiaoshuo wang (Hongxiu tianxiang Fiction Web), www.hongxiu.com, in addition to Qidian.
Hou Xiaoqiang, the chief executive officer of SDL, declared that his company would use copyright as a core tool to seek a new shape for the literary industry.
Two Chinese-born nonagenarians died in 2009—Nien Cheng, whose 1986 memoir Life and Death in Shanghai recounted her tribulations during the Cultural Revolution, and Yang Xianyi, the most noteworthy Chinese translator of the 20th century.
JAPANESE The most notable event in 2009 for Japanese literature was undeniably the publication of Haruki Murakami’s 1Q84.
So many people preordered the two-volume novel that it appeared on best-selling lists as soon as it was released in late May.
Public interest in 1Q84 was only increased by the silence Murakami and his publisher—and the Japanese media broadly—maintained about the content of the book prior to its publication.
Aomame, a 30-year-old woman who works for a secret agent whose aim is to kill those who hurt others, is driven by a strong memory of Tengo, a childhood friend, and seeks him out.
Tengo, who teaches school but aspires Ken’ichiro Isozaki Sankei/Getty Images to be a novelist, in turn seeks her.
One day he receives a ghostwriting job from a publisher that had rejected his work, and it is that job that brings him close to Aomame.
The novel’s title, according to Murakami, is intended as a play on that of George Orwell's dystopian 1984 —the English letter Q and the Japanese word for the number 9 are pronounced identically.
Murakami also stirred some controversy by accepting the Jerusalem Prize for the Freedom of the Individual in Society in early 2009, just after the cessation of hostilities between Hamas and Israel in the Gaza Strip.
Resisting calls by pro-Palestinian groups, Murakami insisted that it would be better to attend the ceremony and deliver his speech (about the role of novelists in the world) than to keep silent.
One of the other best-selling books of 2009 was Ken’ichiro Isozaki’s Tsui no sumika , a short novel—first published in the literary magazine Shincho —that won the year’s first Akutagawa Prize, normally awarded twice a year to promising Japanese writers.
The selection committee declined to award the year’s second Akutagawa Prize.
Shirin Nezammafi won the Bungakukai New Writer's Prize with Shiroi kami , becoming only the second non-Japanese winner of the prize.
So Kurokawa’s Kamome no hi (2008; “The Day of the Seagull”) received the Yomiuri Prize for Literature.
The Yasunari Kawabata Prize, given to the year’s most accomplished short story, went to Nanae Aoyama’s “Kakera” (“A Fragment”), first published in the November 2008 issue of Shincho.
The Kenzaburo Oe Prize was awarded to Hikari no mandara , an essay on Japanese literature, by the literary critic Reiji Ando.
Deaths in 2009 included Kaoru Kurimoto, who wrote science fiction (most notably the Guin Saga)) she also wrote literary criticism under the name Azusa Nakajima.
But WAR INTENSIFIED in Afghanistan, where the United States and NATO prepared to send more troops, and in Pakistan, where the government launched new offensives.
T he 26-year rebellion waged by the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam to establish an independent homeland in Sri Lanka was crushed in 2009 by government forces, who overran the last area of rebel-held territory in May.
During the final battle Tiger leader Velupillai Prabhakaran was killed.
WMD, ARMS CONTROL, AND DISARMAMENT The UN Security Council unanimously adopted Resolution 1874, tightening an existing arms embargo against North Korea.
The action occurred after Pyongyang conducted its second-ever underground nuclear explosion in May.
A treaty establishing Africa as a nuclear-weapon-free zone came into force in July after Burundi became the 28th African country to ratify it.
The Treaty of Pelindaba prohibited the possession, development, manufacture, testing, or deployment of nuclear weapons on the African continent.
Barack Obama announced the launch of bilateral talks to succeed the 1991 Strategic Arms Reduction Talks treaty.
START I expired in December 2009 without agreement on a successor even though diplomats had been negotiating a new treaty since April.
Except for sporadic violence and banditry, the six-year war between The Sudan’s pro-government forces and rebels in Darfur effectively ended, according to the UN’s military commander in the region.
Since fighting began, an estimated 300,000 people had died in Darfur and a further 2. million had been displaced.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo continued to be plagued by insecurity and violence.
More than 1,000 civilians were killed in the east of the country during joint DRC army-UN operations against the Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda , a Rwandan rebel group linked to the Hutu extremists responsible for the genocide of Rwandan Tutsis in 1994.
Forces from the Ugandan Lord’s Resistance Army continued to operate in the DRC’s northeast, but a joint offensive by Congolese and Ugandan troops forced most of them into neighbouring Central African Republic.
Islamist groups and warlords fought for control of much of southern Somalia.
After Ethiopia pulled its troops out of the country in January 2009, the extremist Islamic group al-Shabaab, thought to have links with the terrorist group al-Qaeda, began to dominate the struggle.
There had been no effective government in Somalia since 1991, and the transitional government, backed by the UN and the African Union, controlled only small parts of the capital, Mogadishu.
Only about half of the 8,000 troops authorized for the UNbacked African Union Mission to Somalia had been deployed by the end of 2009.
The president of Honduras, Manuel Zelaya, was removed from office by the military and forced into exile in June.
Zelaya managed to secure the support of the Organization of American States and to have himself smuggled into the Brazilian embassy in Tegucigalpa, but neither his supporters nor the OAS was able to prevent an interim government from holding elections to decide on Zelaya's successor.
Mexico deployed thousands of troops along the country’s northern border to stem violence between gangs supplying illegal drugs to the United States.
Such violence in Ciudad Juarez, a city of 1. million people, for example, resulted in nearly 2,000 drug-related murders in the first 10 months of 2009.
Violence in Iraq fell to its lowest level since the U.S.-led invasion in 2003.
Iraqi forces took control of security in Baghdad’s fortified Green Zone and assumed more authority over foreign troops based in the country.
United States troops withdrew from many towns and cities across the country, and British combat operations officially ended in April.
Saudi Arabian forces and Shi'ite Yemeni rebels clashed along the border between the two countries in November and December.
During 2009 sporadic fighting between Yemeni security forces and the rebels resulted in hundreds of casualties and an estimated 150,000 internal refugees.
In April Russia declared its nearly decade-old ""counterterrorism operation"" against separatist rebels in Chechnya to be over.
In November a Muslim group from the Caucasus set off a bomb that derailed an express passenger train between St.
The war in Afghanistan grew in intensity and spread to the country’s north, which had been relatively peaceful since the Taliban were overthrown in 2001.
At the end of 2009, there were approximately 71,000 troops (about half from the U.S.) from 43 countries contributing to the NATO-led International Security Assistance Force supporting the Afghan government.
An additional 36,000 United States troops not part of ISAF were also in the country.
Barack Obama announced that more than 30,000 additional troops would be sent to the country, and NATO Secretary-General Anders Rasmussen announced that European members would contribute another 7,000.
The government of Pakistan launched several offensives during 2009 to wrest control from the Taliban and other militants in northwestern tribal districts bordering Afghanistan.
Affairs claimed that hundreds of militants were killed as well as dozens of security force personnel, but independent verification was impossible.
The militants responded with attacks on government and civilian targets across Pakistan.
MILITARY TECHNOLOGY The Ion Tiger, a small unmanned aerial vehicle developed by the United States Naval Research Laboratory, flew for more than 26 hours in November.
The UAV set an unofficial endurance record for fuel-cell powered flight.
The United States Navy commissioned the amphibious assault ship Makin Island.
It was the first navy ship to use a combination of gas-turbine engines and electric drive for propulsion to reduce fuel usage and maintenance costs.
The United States Air Force Research Laboratory in 2009 test-fired two new laser weapons in flight for the first time.
The Advanced Tactical Laser, designed to destroy ground targets up to 20 km (12 mi) away, was fired from an NC-130H Hercules aircraft.
The much larger Airborne Laser , designed to shoot down ballistic missiles, was fired from a converted Boeing 747.
The U.K.’s Ministry of Defence announced that it was fielding a new generation of lightweight textile-based armour designed to protect vehicles against rocket-propelled grenades.
Named TARIAN , the new armour was deployed on heavy trucks serving with the British army in Afghanistan.
India thus became the sixth country capable of building its own nuclear-powered submarines, joining China, France, Russia, the U.K., and the United States ARMED FORCES AND POLITICS France rejoined NATO's military command in March after having left it in 1966.
Russia announced plans to set up an Arctic Group of Forces to protect its interests in the far north.
Establishment of the new command was influenced by the growing importance of oil and gas reserves in the region.
The group would coordinate activities of the armed forces, border guard, and coast guard.
The seven-member Collective Security Treaty Organization , comprising Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Russia, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan, agreed to establish a rapidreaction force to defend member states against foreign military aggression, terrorism, and drug trafficking.
The force would also offer assistance in recovery from natural disasters.
In October Turkey banned Israel from participating in a planned NATO military exercise.
In the same month, Israel and the United States held their largest-ever joint exercise, simulating the defense of Israel against a ballistic-missile attack.
MILITARY AND SOCIETY To combat piracy around the Horn of Africa, approximately 30 ships plus aircraft from 17 countries began operating together in January as Combined Task Force 151.
Turkey enacted new legislation to give civilian courts the authority to try military personnel who threaten national security.
The law also prohibited military courts from prosecuting civilians during peacetime.
By a vote of 25-6, the UN Human Rights Council backed a report that accused both Israel’s armed forces and Palestinian militants of war crimes that occurred during the 2008-09 Israeli offensive in Gaza.
An estimated 1,300 Palestinians and 10 Israeli soldiers were killed during the fighting.
A Rwandan man convicted of war crimes committed in 1994 was jailed for life by a Canadian court in October.
Desire Munyaneza, 42, was found guilty in May in the first court case brought under Canada’s Crimes Against Humanity and War Crimes Act.
In August the United States Air Force established its first numbered air force dedicated to fighting in cyberspace.
The 24th Air Force, based in Texas, comprised the 688th Information Operations Wing and the 67th Network Warfare Wing.
The Japanese government relaxed its long-standing self-imposed ban on arms exports to allow more joint development and production of weapons with other countries.
Exports to countries that sponsor terrorism, violate human rights, or have inadequate controls over arms sales continued to be outlawed.
The number of suicides in 2009 was set to make it the fifth straight year that such deaths had set a record within the United States armed forces.
United States Secretary of Defense Robert Gates ordered a high-level review of military policies after army psychiatrist Maj.
Nidal Malik Hasan shot dead 13 people and wounded at least 29 more at Ft.
A separate review of the way in which intelligence agencies handled information about Hasan before the killings was ordered by President Obama.
For years before the shootings, Hasan, a devout Muslim, had expressed misgivings to colleagues about the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.
British Royal Marines intercept a Somali pirate vessel in the Gulf of Aden on June 2.
A spate of musicals BOOSTED theatre attendance on Broadway, while 3-D FILMS thrilled moviegoers.
It was a frigid day in Washington, D.C., on Jan. 20, 2009, when classical music, literally, took centre stage at the inauguration of United States Pres.
As part of the festivities, cellist Yo-Yo Ma, violinist Itzhak Perlman, clarinetist Anthony McGill, and pianist Gabriela Montero performed the debut of Air and Simple Gifts, composed for the event by John Williams.
The performance went off without a hitch—not surprisingly, given that it had actually been prerecorded and was mimed at the event by the illustrious musicians.
When the deception was revealed days later, a controversy began to stir.
The media made references to Milli Vanilli, the infamous lip-syncing pop duo.
The furor subsided quickly, however, when it was reported that the cold had prevented a ""live” performance because of the effect low temperatures have on musical instruments.
In fact, Ma and Perlman had put soap on their bows to dull the sound of their instruments so as not to intrude on the recording, which had been made the previous Sunday at a Marine barracks in Washington.
It was that sort of year in classical music, when the controversies surrounding the music tended at times to obscure the music itself.
Earlier in January, Argentine-born Israeli conductor Daniel Barenboim canceled performances in Doha, Qatar, and in Cairo because of security concerns related to the ongoing fighting between Israeli forces and Hamas.
The concerts were part of the 10th anniversary tour of Barenboim’s West-Eastern Divan Orchestra, which was composed of young musicians from Israel, Palestine, and Arab countries.
In March a West Bank children’s orchestra, the Strings of Freedom, was shuttered by local residents after it performed a concert for Holocaust survivors in Israel.
An official of the Jenin refugee camp accused the orchestras leader of having exploited the children for political purposes in what was billed as a Good Deeds Day event organized by an Israeli billionaire.
Polish pianist Krystian Zimerman created a stir of his own when in April he announced during a performance at the Walt Disney Concert Hall, Los Angeles, that because of his objection to United States foreign policy, he would no longer perform in the United States.
When continuing United States restrictions on travel to Cuba ultimately forced the concerts to be canceled, the Cuban government proclaimed its outrage and blamed the fracas on the United States government.
Meanwhile, two opera stars who had previously announced their retirement changed their minds.
In August, New Zealand soprano Dame Kiri Te Kanawa, 65, said that her opera career was coming to an end as well.
While neither singer had ruled out future recital appearances, they both subsequently withdrew any plans to quit the world of opera.
Meanwhile, Placido Domingo, 68—no longer able to hit the high notes that made him one of the most illustrious tenors of his generation—drew a standing ovation when in October he made his debut appearance in a baritone role in a production of Giuseppe Verdi's Simon Boccanegra at the Staatsoper in Berlin.
Oddly, given its role as a perennial source of familial opera, the 2009 edition of Germany’s Bayreuth Festival opened with a children’s version of Richard Wagner’s The Flying Dutchman.
Children were even encouraged to participate in the newly conceived truncated version of the opera, which was the brainchild of new festival co-directors, Eva Wagner-Pasquier and Katharina Wagner.
The half sisters, both great-granddaughters of the composer, took over the reins of the annual Wagner festival from their father, Wolfgang, who had ruled the festival roost for more than half a century.
As part of that effort, the new directors also announced a deal with London’s Royal Opera House’s Opus Arte production company to release the festival’s productions on DVD, and on August 9 they offered the festival's performance of Tristan und Isolde live on the Internet.
As it had often in recent years, the world of classical music continued to embrace the Internet as a way of extending its outreach and influence.
The service offered online users the ability to search its database by composer, artist, and individual concert programs.
The Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra pursued a more commercial course with its online ""digital concert hall,” in which performances were made available either live or via reruns on the Internet.
In July Classical TV, an online streaming video service, was launched, offering both free and pay-per-view opera, ballet, and theatre performances.
Metropolitan Opera , Classical TV also presented broadcasts by the English National Opera, the Royal Shakespeare Company, the Zurich Opera, and others.
The price of an online viewing was set at $4.99 or $9.99 per performance.
Twitter, the online social network phenomenon, was the star of the show in September at London’s Royal Opera House.
The company presented The Twitter Opera, with music by composer Helen Porter and a libretto made up of the site’s signature short messages submitted by the public via the ROH’s @youropera Twitter feed.
Twitter was also the focus of a concert by the National Symphony Orchestra in July.
The orchestra was made up of 93 musicians who had been selected from some 3,000 audition videos that had been submitted to the Web site from more than 70 countries.
Fifteen million online visitors voted on the winners, who were led in the debut performance by conductor Michael Tilson Thomas.
Even as the classical world embraced the future, it was confronted by the disturbing economic realities of the present.
While the nonprofit group Americans for the Arts estimated that the ongoing recession in 2009 would force as many as 10,000 arts organizations out of business, classical orchestras and opera and ballet companies tried to weather the economic storm.
Both the Met and the Los Angeles Opera cut productions from their seasons and cut salaries; the Los Angeles Opera laid off 17 people in the process.
The Connecticut Opera closed after 67 seasons, as did the Opera Pacific, Santa Ana, Calif., and the Baltimore Opera declared bankruptcy.
Budgetary problems caused the San Francisco Opera to cancel a production of Benjamin Britten's Peter Grimes and a revival of Puccini's La Boheme.
Financial difficulties were not confined to the United States Russia’s Bolshoi Theatre was forced to cancel a tour of Mexico and the premiere of its new production of Verdi’s Otello.
Italy’s Maggio Musicale Fiorentino called off productions of Verdi’s Macbeth and Britten's Billy Budd that were to have been featured at the Florence festival.
South Korea particularly felt the impact when tours to that country by the Radio France Philharmonic Orchestra, the Vienna Symphony, and the Cincinnati Symphony were called off for reasons of belt-tightening.
After a career that spanned 45 years, the legendary Guarneri String Quartet called it quits in 2009.
Three of the group's members had founded the ensemble at Vermont’s Marlboro Music Festival in 1963 and were in their 70s.
In an October program at the Hollywood Bowl, entitled ""Bienvenido Gustavo,"" 28-year-old Venezuelan conductor Gustavo Dudamel made his debut as music director of the Los Angeles Philharmonic.
In October Rattle reaffirmed his commitment to the Berlin Philharmonic when he signed a contract to continue as the artistic director through 2018.
Throughout the year orchestras in the United States and Europe marked the 200th anniversary of the birth of composer Felix Mendelssohn with performances of his works.
Two previously unknown works by Mozart were heard for the first time in August when the International Mozarteum Foundation, based in Salzburg, Austria, unveiled them in a performance by pianist Florian Birsak, who played the pieces on the composer’s own fortepiano.
An opera by popular singer-songwriter Rufus Wainwright debuted in July at the Manchester International Festival.
The work, Prima Donna, was originally commissioned by the Met, but the company withdrew when Wainwright decided to write the libretto in French.
Canadian playwrightdirector John Murrell’s English libretto for composer Leos Janacek’s opera The Cunning Little Vixen received its premiere in August at the Banff Centre.
Music orchestral work, Laboratory, by 13-yearold George Frankie of Scarsdale, N.Y., during a School Day Concert.
In one of the more glittering events of the year, the Met presented its 125th Anniversary Gala in March.
The fourhour performance included appearances by Roberto Alagna, Angela Gheorghiu, Domingo, Renee Fleming, Dmitry Hvorostovsky, Natalie Dessay, and a host of others in selections from 23 operas, some featuring re-creations of sets and costumes from fabled productions of the company’s past.
Drucker, 80, who was not scheduled to play that night and who had not performed the piece since the 1950s, reportedly did not drop a note.
It was a delightful and unexpected coda to a career that ended with his retirement in 2009 after 60 years with the orchestra.
The classical world was saddened during the year by the passing of several of its most beloved performers, including sopranos Hildegarde Behrens of Germany and Elisabeth Soderstrom of Sweden and conductor Erich Kunzel, Jr., who helmed the Cincinnati Pops Orchestra for more than 30 years.
Moreover, the median age of jazz listeners rose to 46, and the number of young jazz musicians declined.
Even though classical audiences were older than jazz audiences and had experienced a comparable decline in their total numbers, the jazz community was especially sensitive to public perceptions of the art form.
Jazz, a fundamentally African American music, was a comparatively young art without the weight of centuries of tradition; it had been generally accepted as a legitimate art form only since the mid-20th century.
There were few significant jazz institutions with resources equal to those of major-city art museums, symphony orchestras, and opera companies.
In a year when the top recording companies had largely abandoned jazz and two of the major living jazz artists, Ornette Coleman and Sonny Rollins, turned 79, the NEA survey reinforced fear that jazz was a gradually disappearing art.
The JVC Jazz Festival, to have been held in June, was canceled by its producer, Festival Network, which had bought it in 2007 from founder George Wein.
Earlier in 2009, Wein, who founded the Newport Jazz Festival in 1954, had rescued that and the Newport Folk Festival for 2009 after Rhode Island had canceled Festival Network’s license to operate those two events.
The 39-year-old monthly did suspend activity in June, but a new owner resumed publication with the old editorial staff in July.
In contrast to the bad news was the activity of the dynamic Wynton Marsalis, who since the mid-1980s had fostered appreciation of jazz as a fine art.
On Martin Luther King, Jr., Day, January 19, one day before the inauguration of United States Pres.
On his album released in March, the trumpeter-composer alternated music by his quintet with the recitation of his original poem “He and She,” which was also the title of the album.
The Living Theatre, which had ignited controversy in 1959 with its jazzand drug-themed Off-Broadway production of Jack Gelber’s The Connection, revived the play for its 50th anniversary.
This time saxophonist Rene McLean led the onstage band; his father, Jackie McLean, was the saxophonist during the play’s original run.
A highlight of the Chicago Jazz Festival was the triumphant lyric duets by clarinetist Buddy DeFranco and pianist Johnny O'Neal.
Notable new releases included singer Madeleine Peyroux’s Bare Bones, for which she composed or cocomposed all the songs, and piano-bass-drums trio the Bad Plus's For All I Care, with interpretations of music by Wilco, Nirvana, the Bee Gees, Gyorgy Ligeti, Milton Babbitt, and Igor Stravinsky.
Younger brass improvisers, including cornetist Josh Berman , trumpeter Darren Johnston , and trumpeter Peter Evans (Nature/Culture), also released impressive albums.
Among other releases by the prolific Braxton were Creative Orchestra 2007 with the Italian Instabile Orchestra, Creative Orchestra 2007 with the AIMToronto Orchestra, and Quartet 2008.
Music tarist Coleman Mellett, of the Chuck Mangione band, as they were flying to a concert in Buffalo.
The year’s other deaths included those of drummer Rashied Ali, singers Chris Connor and Blossom Dearie, composer George Russell, saxophone partners Hank Crawford and David Newman, drummer Louie Bellson, saxophonists Bud Shank and Charlie Mariano, and percussionist Manny Oquendo.
In the United Kingdom unknown Scottish vocalist Susan Boyle exploded onto the global stage with breathtaking performances on the television show Britain’s Got Talent.
A video clip of her rendition of “I Dreamed a Dream” from Les Miserables made her a YouTube sensation and led to one of the year’s top-selling albums.
Achieving celebrity on the other side of the globe was Geoffrey Gurrumul Yunupingu, a blind Aboriginal singer-songwriter from Australia's Arnhem Land.
It was recorded for an independent label in Darwin, Australia, but became a surprise success across the country and then in Britain, where it topped the World Music album charts.
Gurrumul’s songs attracted an international audience, thanks to his thoughtful and soulful vocals and melodies that echoed Western gospel and folk themes.
Australian music was also buoyed by the Black Arm Band, a collective of Aboriginal and white performers whose multimedia revue highlighted the ""two worlds of Australia” with stories of Aboriginal suffering and survival matched against music that included rock, reggae, and the Aboriginal didgeridoo.
From Africa there were also unexpected newcomers who moved from poverty and obscurity to playing in major concert halls.
Staff Benda Bilili, a group of paraplegic polio victims and abandoned children who lived on the grounds surrounding the zoo in Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo, survived by performing on the streets.
They came to the attention of Western musicians who were appearing in Kinshasa and rightly won praise for their debut album, Tres tres fort, which matched rumba Congolese influences and funk with some extraordinary solos by Roger Landu on an instrument that he called the satonge, which he constructed from a tin can, a piece of wood, and one guitar string.
Elsewhere in Africa, Mali’s Bassekou Kouyate, the virtuoso exponent of the ancient West African lute, the ngoni, released I Speak Fula, a further demonstration of his rapid-fire improvised playing that featured veteran singer Kasse Mady Diabate and kora star Toumani Diabate.
Maal was joined onstage by U2 for a memorable set of songs that included “One Love” written by reggae legend and Blackwell discovery Bob Marley.
From Latin America there were further reminders that world music artists were becoming increasingly keen to collaborate and experiment.
On the album Nuevos sonidos afro peruanos, their aim was to transform AfroPeruvian styles, making use of rhythm instruments invented by African slaves whose drums had been banned.
The growing success of global fusion styles was also demonstrated by American producer Mark Johnson with his Playing for Change album, Songs Around the World.
Johnson traveled around the world, recording both street musicians and celebrities playing soul standards and then mixed the results together.
It earned her a Grammy Award nomination for record of the year and featured prominently on the sound track of Danny Boyle's (see BIOGRAPHIES) hit film Shtmdog Millionaire.
Blind Aboriginal singer-songwriter Geoffrey Gurrumul Yunupingu performs during the Indigenous Music Awards on August 21, in Darwin, Australia.
Music Brad Barket—PictureGroup/AP Rapper Kanye West brazenly interrupts singer-songwriter Taylor Swift’s acceptance speech for Best Female Video at the MTV Video Music Awards on September 13.
One of the tragedies during the year was the death of Tlahoun Gessesse at age 68.
Gessesse, Ethiopia’s best-loved singer, first came to fame in the era of Emperor Haile Selassie singing with the Imperial Bodyguard Band.
The death of iconic pop star Michael Jackson and the remarkable success of 19-yearold singer-songwriter Taylor Swift (see Biographies) were the top stories of the American popular music year in 2009.
Jackson died of drug-induced cardiac arrest on June 25, and American television networks devoted hundreds of hours to remembering and celebrating his legacy.
In the two and a half weeks following his death, consumers purchased 2. million Jackson albums, guaranteeing that the late “King of Pop"" would be one of the year’s biggestselling artists.
Swift’s album Fearless , named best album at the Academy of Country Music Awards in April 2009, overtook Jackson’s compilation Number Ones as the year's best-selling album, with Jackson further pushed into third place by the debut album of Scottish singer Susan Boyle.
Swift saw her song “Love Story” top charts internationally, and she sold out Madison Square Garden in one minute.
She also became the object of much public sympathy in September when rapper Kanye West grabbed the microphone from her at the MTV Video Music Awards as she was attempting to accept an award for Best Female Video.
She capped the year with an impressive showing at the Country Music Association awards in November, sweeping all four categories in which she was nominated and becoming the CMA’s youngest-ever entertainer of the year.
Sales of physical CDs, digital CDs, and what Nielsen SoundScan termed “track-equivalent albums” (10 tracks sold from a particular album equaled one album sale) in the first half of 2009 declined 8.9% from the first half of 2008, and digital sales slowed from a 30% increase in growth in 2008 to a 13% increase in 2009.
Despite some aberrations—a sales spike in the wake of Jackson’s death and better-than-expected sales of remastered Beatles albums—the pop-music market was in free fall for much of the year.
In January Bruce Springsteen performed on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial in Washington, D.C., singing through the winter chill at the kick-off concert in honour of the inauguration of United States Pres.
In August rock historians marked the 40th anniversary of the Woodstock Music and Art Fair.
Former Led Zeppelin front man Robert Plant and bluegrass thrush Alison Krauss seemed an unlikely pairing on paper, but the duo’s Raising Sand , helmed by all-star producer T Bone Burnett , won album of the year honours at the 51st Annual Grammy Awards on February 8.
Plant and Krauss were the night's biggest winners, also notching four other Grammy trophies.
Lil Wayne, who planned a late-2009 release for his Rebirth album, won four awards, including best rap album.
Backstage, Plant talked about his pleasure in being associated with the Americana genre after so many years of being labeled a rock and roller.
In independent music critical praise and crossover success greeted Pacific Northwest-based rockers the Decemberists and hyperliterate multi-instrumentalist Andrew Bird.
Experimental pop ensemble Animal Collective, introspective singersongwriter Bon Iver, and alt-country chanteuse Neko Case were also lauded.
Rockabilly singer Wanda Jackson was inducted in the Early Influence category.
In country music Darius Rucker ended 2008 as the first African American solo artist to have scored a number one country single since Charley Pride in 1983.
In November Rucker was named best new artist at the CMA awards, becoming the first African American performer to win in a major individual category since 1972.
Other losses included Memphis-based producer, musician, and singer Jim Dickinson, California roots music luminaries Duane Jarvis and Amy Farris, songwriter and musician Stephen Bruton, Nashville producer Aubrey Mayhew, former Grand Ole Opry manager Hal Durham, and country singer Vern Gosdin.
The centenary of Russian-born arts patron and impresario Serge Diaghilev’s founding of the renowned Ballets Russes dance company gave the year 2009 cause for focus and reflection.
Twenty Years that Changed the World of Art,” which was held in April at the Harvard Theatre Collection.
Various companies around the United States as well as around the world acknowledged Diaghilev’s legacy by presenting works from his era and by commissioning works to reflect the innovative thrust of the Ballets Russes.
Boston Ballet commissioned from its resident choreographer, Jorma Elo, a new work inspired by Igor Stravinsky’s The Rite of Spring, whose ballet’s notorious 1913 premiere caused a riotous stir with its unexpected modernist aspects, both musical and choreographic.
These included a performance by Ballet West (Salt Lake City, Utah) of Bronislava Nijinska’s Les Biches and a production of Belgian choreographer Stijn Celis's recent ""contemporary response to Nijinska’s Les Noces"" by Les Grands Ballets Canadiens de Montreal.
On the Dnieper, a world premiere using a Prokofiev score that was dedicated to Diaghilev.
A ""Live from Lincoln Center” national telecast was given of Romeo + Juliet, in the 2007 staging by NYCB’s ballet master in chief, Peter Martins.
At year’s end NYCB played the Kennedy Center with seven performances of mixed repertory.
Among KC’s foreign offerings was a visit by Moscow’s Bolshoi Ballet with its production of Le Corsaire, a landmark work of 19th-century ballet theatre, historically researched by Ratmansky and his team when he was Bolshoi Ballet director.
ABT gave a much-shortened NYC fall season, spanning only four days, at LC’s Avery Fisher Hall, where Ratmansky presented Seven Sonatas, his latest ABT premiere.
Newly prominent at ABT was Cory Stearns, who in March won the eighth international competition for the Erik Bruhn Prize from the National Ballet of Canada.
Much-admired Julie Kent returned for the fall season from maternity leave.
At the end of the spring MOH season, veteran ABT guest artist Nina Ananiashvili gave a series of farewell performances, marking in June her very last appearance with the company as Odette/Odile in Swan Lake.
Longtime San Francisco Ballet ballerina Tina LeBlanc was likewise celebrated at her farewell from the company in May.
Because it was less difficult to ship, the new staging substituted for Tomasson’s 1988 production on SFB’s three-city, 12-day fall tour to China.
Also on the touring circuit to China was ABT, which played a 4-day season in Beijing in November.
Prior to the death in July of legendary modern dance choreographer Merce Cunningham , the Brooklyn Academy of Music marked his 90th birthday in April with a presentation of his grand new work, Nearly Ninety.
Not long afterward, Cunningham’s foundation announced the launch of a plan that would oversee the dissemination of his work after his death, including the disbanding of the Merce Cunningham Dance Company itself after a two-year world tour.
Pacific Northwest Ballet showed the dances of former Cunningham dancer Ulysses Dove, who died in 1996, on an all-Dove bill the company took to the Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival.
Among the festival’s other offerings was a program of hip-hop works by Rennie Harris Puremovement and a program by the Canadian choreographer Crystal Pite.
Near the end of the year, the company presented the United States premiere of Itutu as part of BAM’s Next Wave Festival.
The Martha Graham Dance Company played a brief NYC season following a successful run in Paris.
Grahams nowadays little-seen multiact Clytemnestra was the seasons most prominent offering, in a staging by MGDC artistic director Janet Eilber, who was especially concerned with returning the work to its full breadth.
Other prominent multiact dances included the Houston Ballet’s premiere of Marie, a Marie-Antoinette-inspired ballet by HB artistic director Stanton Welch to the music of Shostakovitch.
Additionally, the Joffrey Ballet of Chicago presented its first performance of Lar Lubovitch's Othello.
The Mark Morris Dance Group played LC with Romeo and Juliet, on Motifs of Shakespeare, Morris’s 2008 moderndance rendering of Prokofiev’s score.
The Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater rounded out its 50th anniversary at BAM in June.
The company’s December season at CC offered a retrospective look at the legacy of Judith Jamison, who would be leaving the troupe's directorship in 2011.
Lucinda Childs, an experimentalist from the 1960s, gained prominence after a number of years of low-key presence in the dance world by overseeing a reconstruction of Dance, her 1979 collaborative work with composer Philip Glass and visual artist Sol LeWitt.
It was presented at Bard Summerscape and then went on a national tour to select cities.
Experimental choreographer Stephen Petronio marked the 25th anniversary of his own troupe and repertory, with a special season at NYC’s Joyce Theater.
The bicontinental British-born choreographer Christopher Wheeldon had his work shown at the Vail International Dance Festival, where his Morphoses company had been launched three years earlier.
At CC he offered two programs of his own works alongside those of choreographers Tim Harbour, Lightfoot Leon, and Ratmansky.
In May ballerina Chan Hon Goh retired from her career with NBC in the title role of the troupe’s production of Giselle.
Ballet British Columbia saw the departure of its longtime artistic director John Alleyne and the appointment of Emily Molnar as interim artistic director.
Eduardo Vilaro was named artistic director of Ballet Hispanico in NYC, replacing founding director Tina Ramirez, who left in June.
Deaths, besides that of Cunningham, included those of dancers Eva Evdokimova, Pearl Lang, Frankie Manning, and Georgina Parkinson and dancerturned-actor Patrick Swayze.
Dancers Haynes Owens, Marjorie Mussman, George Zoritch, Nora Kovach, Carolyn George d’Amboise, Bruce Bain, Dick Beard, and Lola MacLaughlin and dance teachers Gage Englund Bush, Gerald E Myers, and Fernando Schaffenburg were other notable losses.
The centenary of the first performances of Serge Diaghilev's Ballets Russes provided the central theme of the European ballet world in 2009, inspiring several new works as well as commemorative galas, exhibitions, and film shows.
In Paris the Theatre du Chatelet—where it all began—contented itself with two evenings of documentary films, but the Theatre des Champs-Elysees hosted a season by the Kremlin Ballet from Moscow, with guest appearances by leading dancers from the Bolshoi and Mariinsky companies.
The program followed a pattern also seen in other cities, combining revivals of original ballets by Diaghilev’s great choreographers—Michel Fokine and Bronislava Nijinska in this case— with a contemporary reworking of Fokine’s Thamar, choreographed by Jurius Smoriginas.
The Paris Opera Ballet waited until December to show a program of works by Leonide Massine and Vaslav Nijinsky as well as two works by Fokine.
Petersburg in October included major exhibitions, an international gala, and an evening presentation by John Neumeier’s Hamburg Ballet, which included Neumeier’s ballet about Nijinsky, Vaslav, as well as his own version of Le Pavilion d’Armide.
With its original choreography by Fokine, Le Pavilion d’Armide had formed part of the historic debut of Ballets Russes on May 18, 1909.
The Hamburg company had already shown a tribute program in its home theatre, as had the Bavarian State Ballet in Munich, the Rome Opera Ballet, and many others.
In London the Royal Ballet introduced Sensorium, a new piece by house choreographer Alastair Marriott, into a program otherwise by Fokine.
Meanwhile, the English National Ballet , with Faun, and the Scottish Ballet showed reworkings of Nijinsky’s L'Apres-midi d'un faune and Fokine’s Petrushka by David Dawson and Ian Spink, respectively.
ENB’s two Ballets Russes programs brought them some very respectful reviews, despite the gossip-column publicity given to a new costume design by Karl Lagerfeld for Fokine’s The Dying Swan.
Celebrating the present rather than the past, there was new work to be seen in many European theatres.
The Royal Ballet used its smaller theatre for a new work based on Bach’s Goldberg Variations, choreographed by Kim Brandstrup in close collaboration with his principal dancer, Tamara Rojo.
The major revival of the Royal Ballet’s season was a cut-down version of Kenneth MacMillan's 1981 two-act ballet, Isadora, based on the life of dancer Isadora Duncan.
Theatre Luke MacGregor—Reuters/Landov Dancers of the English National Ballet rehearse Apollo as part of the Ballets Russes programs at Sadler’s Wells Theatre in London in June. the story and used film to establish the historical background to Duncan's life and work.
The result, however, was no more popular with the critics than the original had been.
In July the company made its first-ever visit to Cuba, fulfilling the dream of guest artist Carlos Acosta, whose enthusiasm and hard work were well rewarded by the responsive and welcoming local audiences.
Elsewhere in the U.K., two companies celebrated their 40th anniversaries.
The ballets return to the repertory was especially welcome for the memories it evoked of the former company director Christopher Gable, who had created the leading role.
Scottish Ballet continued its rise in public and critical estimation in its 40th year of existence by introducing Frederick Ashton's Scenes de Ballet and William Forsythes Workwithinwork to its repertory.
In France the Paris Opera Ballet gave its first performances of John Cranko’s Onegin, a piece widely performed elsewhere in Europe.
The Royal Danish Ballet’s year included a visit to Japan, a Jerome Robbins evening featuring the company premieres of Dances at a Gathering and West Side Story Suite, and a Balanchine triple bill including another first for the RDB, the Symphony in Three Movements.
Ballet master Sorella Englund and artistic director Nikolaj Hiibbe collaborated on a controversial new production of one of the company's treasures, August Bournonville’s Napoli, setting it in the rough environment of Naples in the 1950s and replacing the lost second act with completely new choreography to a commissioned score.
The National Ballet of Finland showed a program of works by Jin Kylian and David Dawson, while Kylian’s former company, Nederlands Dans Theater, celebrated its 50th anniversary and showed a number of retrospective programs as well as new work by Johan Inger, Lightfoot Leon, and Kylian himself.
At the beginning of the year, Yury Burlaka succeeded Aleksey Ratmansky as director of the Bolshoi Ballet.
In March, Maria Aleksandrova and Ruslan Skvortsov danced the leading roles on the first night of Sergey Vikharev's reconstruction of Coppelia, and in December, Burlaka programed his own new production of La Esmeralda.
In between, the company toured the United States and Spain, while at home the rebuilding project at the Bolshoi Theatre was disrupted by yet more delays.
The theatre had closed in 2005 and was due to reopen in 2009, but the expected date was pushed back to 2013 amid reports that the original budget had been seriously overspent.
The Mariinsky Ballet also toured the U.S., and in August the company was in London for two weeks, selling well at the Royal Opera House despite some complaints about the unadventurous repertoire.
Opening night was devoted to Leonid Lavrovsky’s 1940 version of Romeo and Juliet, with Alina Somova making her debut in the leading role; neither she nor the ballet was to the taste of most of the London critics, but the young Romeo, Vladimir Shklyarov, had a big success.
Petersburg, the annual White Nights Festival included a revival of Leonid Yakobson’s Tatar-inspired Shurale.
Leading the cast were Yevgeniya Obraztsova, Aleksandr Sergeyev, and Denis Matvienko.
Legris was chosen to take over as artistic director of the Vienna State Opera Ballet in 2010; Schandorff moved into a backstage role in Copenhagen; and Edur and Oaks returned to their native Estonia, where Edur took over as artistic director of the National Ballet.
More tragically, the year was marked by the sudden death of the German choreographer Pina Bausch , one of the giants of the dancetheatre movement.
Her company, Tanztheater Wuppertal, continued with the touring schedule that it had already planned, but there was no announcement about the company’s long-term future.
Other losses during the year included those of Danish dancer, director, and choreographer Flemming Flindt, ballerinas Ekaterina Maximova and Eva Evdokimova ( see Obituaries), and two leading male dancers, Andre Prokovsky and David Ashmole.
Money itself, and the collapse of the world markets, became the hot theatre topic of the year in plays by 10 new writers at the small Soho Theatre under the group title Everything Must Go.
Second-time playwright Lucy Prebble and director Rupert Goold offered Enron, an epic satiric drama of that company's demise, produced by Goold’s touring company, Headlong, at the Chichester Festival Theatre and the Royal Court Theatre.
Theatre Big Bang (the radical deregulation of the London Stock Exchange in 1986), but the play seemed even more timely in its skillful anatomization of the financial shenanigans in the fantasy world of projected profits and phantom companies, with Samuel West’s outstanding portrayal of Enron's disgraced president, Jeffrey Skilling, assuming the tragic heft of a Shakespearean hero.
The financial crisis was explored more broadly in David Hare’s The Power of Yes at the National Theatre in an attempt, said the playwright, to break through the protective attitude of the bankers.
Hare spent an intense period of research on his play, and it attracted enormous interest, not least for his view that in rescuing the banks the British government was replacing capitalism with a socialism that bailed out the rich alone.
The theatre seemed to be catching the mood of the country all year as big, important plays appeared in rapid succession across the London stages.
Jez Butterworth returned to the theatre after a long absence with two new plays— Parlour Song and Jerusalem.
They were both directed by Ian Rickson and suggested that nature would take revenge on suburban town dwellers and that the process of disintegration had already begun.
George’s Day, with Johnny Byron—the Pied Piper of the drunk, disenfranchised, and disaffected—leading the dance against the incursions of the authorities who wanted to wipe out his mobile home.
Byron, as played by Mark Rylance in a performance of Falstaffian swagger and humanity, was a modem Lord of Misrule summoning the mysteries of Stonehenge and the legends of old Albion.
The other big play of the year was Simon Stephens's Punk Rock at the Lyric Hammersmith, a scintillating comedy of high-school classroom anxieties and friendship culminating in a terrible tragedy in the school library.
The echoes of the 1999 Columbine High School massacre were the least of the play's strengths, which also covered ground similar to Spring Awakening and many British plays such as Julian Mitchell’s Another Country and Alan Bennett's The History Boys.
Nevertheless, Stephens was a unique and increasingly powerful voice on the British stage, and the vigour and perceptiveness of his dialogue as well as the brilliance of the acting in a cast of mostly unknowns—Tom Sturridge (a new Ben Whishaw, possibly), Jessica Raine, Henry Lloyd-Hughes, and Nicholas Banks were all outstanding— ensured against cliche and banality.
Punk Rock marked a new era at the Lyric, one of London’s leading outerring theatres, under the artistic directorship of Sean Holmes, who was making a point of building his policy around a youth theatre scheme, much as Dominic Cooke had channeled the Royal Court’s young writers onto the main stage.
Polly Stenham followed her remarkable 2007 debut play, That Face, with Tusk Tusk, a similar almostanthropological account of young teenagers left to fend for themselves in a middle-class limbo without adults; their mother had gone missing on a drink-and-drugs binge.
The productions included two revivals, The Fever (in which the self-lacerating monologist was played by Clare Higgins) and Aunt Dan and Lemon, and the world premiere of Grasses of a Thousand Colours, in which Shawn, directed by his old friend and colleague Andre Gregory and abetted by Miranda Richardson as his feline wife and Jennifer Tilly as his lubricious mistress, played a self-satisfied scientist who rhapsodizes on his sexual obsessions in a fantastical memoir.
Grasses was a genuinely controversial play, but it struck a firm chord in a year that also saw several fine West End revivals.
Bennett’s one-time flop Enjoy, was restored, in performances by Alison Steadman and David Troughton, as a plangent and bitter comedy of old age with more than a touch of both Joe Orton and Beckett.
Other notable revivals were Alan Ayckbourn’s remarkable Woman in Mind, with Janie Dee fantasizing an alternative life in her own back garden; Tom Stoppard's Arcadia, an almost indecently enjoyable comedy of conflicting time periods, biography, mathematics, and gardening; Richard Greenberg's Three Days of Rain, starring James McAvoy; and Arthur Miller’s A View from the Bridge, with Ken Stott easily the best British Eddie Carbone since Michael Gambon.
The Donmar Warehouse’s season in the West End at Wyndham’s Theatre wrapped with Dame Judi Dench leading an extravagantly costumed cast in Yukio Mishima’s tiresome Madame de Sade, which not even Michael Grandage’s classy but stilted direction could save from critical odium, and Grandage’s production of Jude Law’s Hamlet.
It was Law’s performance, however, that flattered to deceive in its monotonous anger and conspicuous lack of wit; it was not apparent that Hamlet was actually a very funny character.
Theatre house style (black brick wall, flagstones, dry ice, great sound tracks, quick acting) was wearing thin.
Rachel Weisz scored a personal success as Blanche DuBois in an overrated A Streetcar Named Desire (directed by choreographer Rob Ashford), and Dominic West returned from television to lead a new look at Pedro Calderon de la Barca’s classic Life Is a Dream.
The West End smash hits, apart from Law’s Hamlet, were Sir Ian McKellen and soon-to-be-Sir Patrick Stewart in Waiting for Godot at the Theatre Royal Haymarket, both in top form and very funny, and a bevy of discreetly naked respectable actresses, including Sian Phillips and Patricia Hodge, in the stage version of the sentimental film Calendar Girls.
Peter Flannery's skillful stage version of the Russian movie Burnt by the Sun, which featured knockout performances by Ciaran Hinds, Michelle Dockery, and Rory Kinnear and direction by Howard Davies; and Helen Mirren as the tragically smitten queen in Jean Racine’s Phedre.
The latter, which used the old Ted Hughes translation, was directed by Nicholas Hytner and set the action on a sunbaked Mediterranean design by Bob Crowley.
At year's end, Hytner was awarded a Knighthood in the New Year’s honours list.
Phedre was the first NT production to be screened live, as performed onstage, in Britain and abroad; it was the latest move by Hytner, the NT's artistic director, to sustain as wide a public interest as possible in the work.
His own production of Richard Bean’s England People Very Nice was a cartoon resume of immigration to Britain, flaring in a public row over the Muslim section when antiracism campaigners led the first onstage demonstration of the NT’s history, which disrupted a preperformance discussion.
The theatre stood firm in its commitment to the play, and the furor soon abated.
Auden and the composer Benjamin Britten (portrayed, respectively, by Richard Griffiths and Alex Jennings) and played entertainingly with more high-brow, less controversial concerns.
The rare sightings of the Royal Shakespeare Company in London were eclipsed anyway by Marianne Elliott’s fairy-tale production of All’s Well That Ends Well at the National and the consistent standards at Shakespeare's Globe, where Naomi Frederick was a truly delightful Rosalind in As You Like It.
In the temporary Courtyard Theatre in Stratford-upon-Avon, the RSC offered tepid revivals of As You Like It and The Winter’s Tale but a more interesting Julius Caesar, with a 'Virtual'' crowd on film that railed against the conspirators in the Forum and then took a bow—and waved to the audience.
The Chichester Festival Theatre offered Joseph Fiennes in Cyrano de Bergerac, directed by Trevor Nunn, and Diana Rigg as Judith Bliss in a poor revival of Noel Coward's Hay Fever.
Nunn popped up again at the Old Vic to direct Kevin Spacey and David Troughton in a barnstorming revival of the old Broadway Darwinian warhorse Inherit the Wind.
Spacey’s Old Vic also celebrated the 80th birthday of Ireland’s greatest living dramatist, Brian Friel, with a gorgeous in-the-round production of Dancing at Lughnasa, and Friel was further represented at the Edinburgh International Festival in a trilogy of plays from the Gate Theatre in Dublin.
Other Irish playwrights with new work at the Dublin Theatre Festival included Sebastian Barry, Enda Walsh, and Conor McPherson, who continued the screen-to-stage craze with The Birds.
Though McPherson returned to Daphne du Maurier’s short story, the publicity material included a reference to the 1963 Alfred Hitchcock movie, a ploy to boost ticket sales.
Another highlight of the Edinburgh Festival was an orgiastic version of Goethe’s Faust by Romanian director Silviu Purcarete in a huge out-of-town warehouse arena, while Edinburgh’s Traverse Theatre participated with Rona Munro’s The Last Witch, based on accounts of the last woman to be burned for witchcraft in Scotland, in 1727.
The Traverse also ran a full program of new work on the fringe at their home base next to the Usher Hall, notably Midsummer by David Greig and Gordon McIntyre; the searing Orphans, yet another look at the dysfunctional-family front line, by the talented Dennis Kelly; and the enchanting reminiscences of a politicized drag queen, A Life in Three Acts.
The latter, which perhaps owed something to Harvey Fierstein’s Torch Song Trilogy, was written and performed by Bette Bourne and Mark Ravenhill.
Other losses were the actors Dilys Laye, Edward Judd, Harry Towb, and Iain Cuthbertson and the playwrights Tom McGrath and Mike Stott.
It was the best of times and the worst of times for theatre in the United States in 2009 as Broadway racked up record profits while nonprofit regional theatres coped with shrinking resources, cutbacks, and even closures.
Some arts pundits speculated that hard times fueled the impulse for escapist entertainment—as was the case during the Great Depression—and the bottom-line success of these musicals gave some credence to their thesis.
Broadway’s sheen was enhanced as well by an eye-catching sales installation, the $19 million TKTS Discount Booth that opened in late 2008 on the triangular patch of Times Square where Broadway and Seventh Avenue intersect.
The booth's ruby-red, 27-stair glass-step design won awards and approbation from the ticket-buying public.
Theatre organizations both large and small watched donations from foundations and corporations shrink or run dry, and all-important individual contributions dwindled as well.
Some major companies cut staffs and shortened seasons to make ends meet.
Paradoxically, despite hard times, a spate of newly created and innovatively improved theatre spaces sprang up in the United States during the year.
Two of the most prominent were in Dallas, where the venerable Dallas Theater Center moved out of its longtime home designed by Frank Lloyd Wright into a new $354 million performing-arts complex downtown, and in Washington, D.C., where the historic Ford's Theatre and Museum sported a glistening renovation.
Probably the most-honoured play of the year was Lynn Nottage’s Ruined, a humanist expose about the brutalization of women in the decade of conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which was coproduced by the Manhattan Theatre Club and Chicago’s Goodman Theatre.
Coming Home and Have You Seen Us?, a pair of new works by 77-year-old South Africa playwright and activist Athol Fugard were both mounted during 2009 by director Gordon Edelstein at New Haven, Conn.’s Long Wharf Theatre.
Up-and-comer Sarah Ruhl’s In the Next Room , a sly meditation on Victorian-era relationships and gadgets for ""women’s health,"" moved to Broadway from California’s Berkeley Repertory Theatre.
The Berkeley company, under the savvy artistic leadership of Tony Taccone, was also the source of a muchtalked-about musical, American Idiot, adapted from a 2004 multiplatinum album by the superstar pop-punk trio Green Day.
The unusual project, despite mixed critical response, was likely to have a rich future life on American stages.
The year’s most widely performed plays (as tabulated by the national theatre service organization Theatre Communications Group) were boom, Peter Sinn Nachtrieb’s self-described ""explosive comedy about the end of the world,"" followed by Irish playwright Conor McPherson’s The Seafarer and Stephen Karam’s Speech & Debate.
Philadelphia’s versatile Pig Iron Theatre Company also made its mark with such shows as Chekhov Lizardhrain, a heady deconstruction of the Russian master’s mind-set, and Welcome to Yuba City, a genial and exuberant send-up of the American West, with 7 actors playing some 40 characters.
Among the major theatre figures moving into new jobs in 2009 were highprofile director Mark Lamos and manager Michael Ross, who jointly took the reins of Connecticut’s stalwart Westport Country Playhouse, and Angels in America director George C Wolfe, who was hired to help design a museum in Atlanta, slated to open in 2012 as the Center for Civil & Human Rights.
Director Bartlett Sher, at the top of his game thanks to such successes as Lincoln Center Theater’s long-running South Pacific revival, announced that Kate Whoriskey would succeed him as artistic director of Seattle’s Intiman Theatre in 2011.
Two other women of prominence, Kate Warner (formerly of Dad's Garage Theatre Company in Atlanta) and Raelle Myrick-Hodges (the founder of Philadelphia’s Azuka Theatre), took over Massachusetts’s New Repertory Theatre and San Francisco’s feminist-oriented Brava Theater Center, respectively.
Playwright Marsha Norman, who also taught dramatic writing at the Juilliard School, took up the torch of gender equality in a sharply worded essay in the November issue of American Theatre magazine that sparked a flurry of debate in the arts blogosphere.
The impact of a bleak economy was felt north of the border as well, as Canada’s legitimate theatre scene attempted to hold itself together in the face of canceled shows, soft sales, and slashed prices.
In a typical move, Toronto’s Buddies in Bad Times, a 30year-old nonprofit devoted to gay themes and artists, scotched its final mainstage show of the 2008-09 season.
Motion Pictures Twentieth Century-Fox Film Corporation/The Kobal Collection Sam Worthington stars as Jake Sully and Zoe Saldana portrays the character Neytiri in the 3-D science-fiction film Avatar, directed by James Cameron. realist comedy by Morris Panych—reports leaked out that total sales amounted to only about a third of the seating capacity.
Even highly publicized commercial musicals were belt-tightening—David Mirvish’s Dirty Dancing and the Queen songfest We Will Rock You were hawking reduced-price seats, as was Dancap’s hit production of Jersey Boys.
Even the Stratford Shakespeare and Shaw festivals suffered from stalled tourism, though strong reviews and a government marketing initiative helped to avert big losses.
Noteworthy theatre figures who died during 2009 included playwright and screenwriter Horton Foote (whose acclaimed Orphan Home Cycle premiered posthumously); the lighting designer Tharon Musser; Brazilian dramatist Augusto Boal; and actors Karl Malden, Harve Presnell, and Zakes Mokae.
Other losses included playwright Lynne Alvarez, designer Ursula Belden, historian and poet Stefan Brecht, and iconoclastic director Tom O’Horgan.
In 2009, 3-D films, a brief fashion of the 1950s, roared back as a significant theatrical attraction.
This ecologically minded science-fiction parable about earthlings and humanoids on the planet Pandora took cinema fantasy to new levels of realistic detail, thanks to developments in 3-D photography, 2,500 special-effects shots, and an apocalyptic production cost of more than $230 million.
Other films available in the format included Disney’s A Christmas Carol , Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs (Phil Lord, Christopher Miller), Henry Selick’s fancifully ghoulish stop-motion animation Coraline, and the year’s best animated achievement, Up , Pixar’s captivating film about a balloon seller, a boy explorer, and old dreams fulfilled.
The year’s family films also included the digitally enhanced Where the Wild Things Are, Spike Jonze’s gradually disappointing take on Maurice Sendak’s classic children’s picture book about a neglected boy’s flights of fancy.
Disney returned to traditional hand-drawn animation for The Princess and the Frog , derivative in style and ingredients but blessed with a marketable lead character in the African American Tiana.
George Clooney’s subtle acting and physical charisma lit up the screen in Up in the Air , a lightly thoughtful diversion about a corporate hired gun addicted to business-class life.
He also appeared as a crazed ""psychic spy” in Grant Heslov’s brilliant satire The Men Who Stare at Goats.
Clooney served as the voice of the title character in Fantastic Mr Fox, Wes Anderson's uneven stop-motion puppet adaptation of Roald Dahl’s children’s book.
Jeff Bridges drew renewed acclaim as a broken-down country singer in Crazy Heart , while Colin Firth was touching as a gay man dealing with personal loss in A Single Man, an atmospheric first attempt at directing by fashion designer Tom Ford.
Sobriety and sensitivity characterized Invictus, Clint Eastwood’s even-handed drama about Nelson Mandela, South African unity, and rugby football.
Joel and Ethan Coen also showed their strengths in A Serious Man, a wryly comic account of divine fate at work among a Jewish family in Midwestern suburbia in the 1960s.
Increased reality entered the mix for the technically sumptuous Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince , made in England.
Abrams’s Star Trek reinvigorated its veteran franchise with a fresh cast and a fast-paced, witty “prequel” narrative.
Following The Da Vinci Code , Ron Howard and lead actor Tom Hanks teamed up again in the moderately improved Angels & Demons, adapted from an earlier Dan Brown novel of ponderous religious intrigue.
Roland Emmerich, specialist in science-fiction bonanzas, returned with the doomsday drama 2012, visually spectacular but dramatically laughable.
Charting the adventures of a flamboyantly gay Austrian fashionista, Bruno, from the Borat team of Sacha Baron Cohen and director Larry Charles, followed the earlier film's mock-documentary technique, but its mean spirit dampened some audience laughter.
Battle of the Smithsonian continued the popular adventures of Ben Stiller’s former museum security guard.
Films agonizing over United States fields of military conflict were less conspicuous.
Kathryn Bigelow’s The Hurt Locker, concerning the activities of an elite United States bomb squad in Iraq, easily stood out for its physical intensity and claustrophobia.
Julia Roberts returned to star prominence in Duplicity , a sophisticated romantic thriller about the convoluted activities of two corporate spies.
Among independent filmmakers, Todd Solondz in Life During Wartime rigidly stuck to his standard topic, the misfortunes of social misfits, but new blood pulsed through Cary Fukunaga’s Sin nombre [Without Name), an exceptionally strong debut film about the efforts of Central American immigrants struggling to reach the American border.
Based on the Novel “Push” by Sapphire also attracted much attention for its unsparing yet tender story of a pregnant Harlem teenager, an abject victim of parental abuse.
The realist tradition in British cinema continued to bear fruit with Andrea Arnolds Fish Tank, a gripping drama about bleak lives on a housing estate, told observantly and tautly, without moralizing judgments.
Nonprofessional Katie Jarvis was mesmerizing as the surly unloved teenager at the plot’s centre.
Lone Scherfig’s An Education painted a vibrant portrait of an English teenage girl’s dubious romance with an older man.
Realist stalwart Ken Loach drifted slightly awkwardly into fantasy-tinged romantic comedy with Looking for Eric, about a postal worker obsessed with association football (soccer) who receives visitations and advice from the philosophical footballer Eric Cantona.
Soccer also provided material for The Damned United , a bouncy film about the 1970s soccer manager Brian Clough.
Another popular hero, John Lennon, received unusually conventional attention in Nowhere Boy, cautiously directed by the conceptual artist Sam Taylor-Wood.
Jane Campion's Bright Star, produced with Australia and France, stood out for its tender, detailed depiction of the last years of the poet John Keats, viewed through the eyes of his lover and betrothed, Fanny Brawne.
Terry Gilliam’s exuberantly fantastic The Iniaginarium of Doctor Parnassus, completed with some ingenuity following actor Heath Ledger’s 2008 death during filming, stirred much curiosity, though its convoluted tale about a traveling-sideshow operator trying to wriggle free of his pact with the Devil appealed most to the director’s die-hard fans.
In Ireland, Neil Jordan pitted fairy-tale myths against the grating modern world in the esoteric Ondine.
Wider tastes were catered to in Conor McPherson’s emotional drama The Eclipse and in John and Kieran Carney’s Zonad, a lunatic comedy about a drunk in a red vinyl suit mistaken for a superior life form.
Canadian cinema was relatively dormant, though 20-year-old Xavier Dolan stirred much interest with his semiautobiographical J’ai tue ma mere (I Killed My Mother), a biting, at times funny account of a 16-year-old homosexual’s turbulent relationship with his mother.
From Australia, Sarah Watt pondered on the travails of a Melbourne mother recovering from a serious illness in the funny and affecting My Year Without Sex.
The low-budget Samson & Delilah, directed, written, and photographed by Warwick Thornton, attracted much praise for its sensitive treatment of the messy lives of two Aboriginal teenagers in the outback, while troubled teenagers and their anxious mothers in suburban Melbourne absorbed Ana Kokkinos’s attention in the raw and compassionate Blessed.
In The Boys Are Back , a sportswriter unaccustomed to home responsibilities struggles with being a single parent following his wife’s tragic death, a situation explored without maudlin sentiment.
New Zealand’s biggest filmmaker, Peter Jackson, lent his weight as producer to District 9 , an original, gritty science-fiction drama about a slum ghetto of extraterrestrials in South Africa.
The European film that stirred most controversy was the maverick Danish director Lars von Trier’s Antichrist.
In other Danish films, Martin Pieter Zandvliet’s Applaus ( Applause) packed some biting wit into its tale of a prickly alcoholic actress endeavouring to get her life in order, while Nicolo Donato made an impressive directing debut with Broderskab ( Brotherhood ), a solidly packaged account of a gay relationship between members of a neo-Nazi organization.
Veterans of the French New Wave movement of the 1950s and '60s continued in business.
Claude Chabrol, 78, reached a wider audience with Bellamy, an enjoyably old-fashioned and witty policier, with Gerard Depardieu as a police inspector cast in the friendly domestic mold of Georges Simenon’s famous character Maigret.
The films with most audience appeal and the hottest fire, however, came from the younger generations.
Director Jacques Audiard cemented his stature with 11 n Prophete [A Prophet), a tough and absorbing drama about the thriving life of a young Arab French petty criminal.
Tahar Rahim grabbed all eyes with the detail and intense physicality of his lead performance; the film won the Grand Prix at Cannes.
In a lighter vein, Anne Fontaine’s Coco avant Chanel pleased wide audiences with its prettily mounted portrait of the early years of the fashion designer Coco Chanel, disarmingly impersonated by Audrey Tautou.
Bruno Dumont continued his austere examinations of community life with Hadewijch, concerning a devout young woman's extreme crisis of faith.
Jean-Pierre Jeunet pursued a livelier path in Micmacs a tire-larigot , a broad hyperactive tale about Paris misfits banding against arms dealers, featuring the comic Dany Boon.
Closer to reality, Jean-Paul Lilienfeld’s provocative La Joumee de la jupe was overloaded with social issues but brought Isabelle Adjani back into the limelight as a teacher in a suburban school driven to take her pupils hostage.
Andre Techine took a more sophisticated view of social malaise in La Fille du RER , a kaleidoscopic drama based on the true story of a woman train passenger who falsely declared herself the victim of a racist attack.
Felix Van Groeningen’s visually boisterous De helaasheid der dingen and Un Ange a la mer , a striking feature debut by director Frederic Dumont, about a family struggling to cope with a suicidal father.
Motion Pictures events unfolding in a German rural village prior to World War I With its cruel view of human behaviour, this was a film to admire rather than love, though Haneke's craft, the detailed performances, and beautiful black-and-white photography still made for a significant achievement.
Warmth radiated from Fatih Akin's Soul Kitchen, a friendly portrait of multicultural Germany seen through the microcosm of a Hamburg restaurant.
Heinrich Breloer’s adaptation of Thomas Mann’s novel Buddenbrooks settled too easily for surface melodrama, though the noteworthy cast, headed by Armin Muller-Stahl, injected some dignity.
Shot in English, The Last Station , co-produced with Russia and the U.K., conjured solid middlebrow entertainment from the tempestuous last year of Tolstoy's life.
Livelier commercial fare was offered by Alain Gsponer’s Lila, Lila, a neatly turned romantic comedy about a waiter (Daniel Briihl, a rising star) who passes off an unpublished manuscript as his own work.
Spain’s output was dominated by Pedro Almodovar’s Los abrazos rotos ( Broken Embraces), a labyrinthine tale about obsessive love, revenge, and cinema, circling around the travails of a former film director blinded in a car crash.
Almodovar’s medley of styles and genres ensured continual interest, as did the presence of Penelope Cruz ( see Biographies), though the film remained a clever exercise rather than a drama from the heart.
Serious attention was also paid to La teta asustada (The Milk of Sorrow), Claudia Llosa’s sober but vividly realized drama about a Peruvian housemaid so afraid of being raped that she blocks access to her vagina with a potato.
The most spectacular Spanish film was Alejandro Amenabar’s Agora (Mists of Time), an emotionally cool but visually succulent epic about love and conflicting beliefs in 4th-century Alexandria.
Singularidades de uma rapariga loura (Eccentricities of a Blonde-Haired Girl), a brief, mannered story of misguided love.
Giuseppe Tornatore’s Baaria, sentimental and vacuous, opened the Venice Film Festival with a blast of hot air.
Marco Risi’s Fortapasc, about the last months of a Neapolitan journalist killed by the Mafia, painted a precise and grungy picture of the Neapolitan scene.
Vincere, directed by Marco Bellocchio with operatic panache, related the story of Mussolini’s cruelly discarded first wife and son.
Luca Guadagnino's Io sono I’amore (I Am Love), featuring Tilda Swinton, explored the world of a wealthy Milanese family with vigour, detail, and psychological penetration.
In Greece, Giorgos Lanthimos contributed Kynodontas , the weirdly absorbing tale of three children trapped in an alternate universe created by their cruel parents on their isolated country estate.
From Scandinavia, Norway offered Nord , Rune Denstad Langlo’s agreeably quirky comic drama about a dejected man who gradually warms up on a long Arctic journey.
Swedish director Lukas Moodysson made his first international production, Mammoth, a three-pronged drama about parents, children, and global capitalism, smoothly made but not quite the equal of its ambitions.
Romania’s recent cinema renaissance continued with the episodic film Amintiri din epoca de aur , a patchy but watchable panorama of the absurdities of life under communist rule, conceived, written, and partly directed by Cristian Mungiu.
Episodes (directed by five separate filmmakers) ranged in tone from sharp light comedy to black irony.
Another leading Romanian talent, Corneliu Porumboiu, returned with Politist, adj. , a thoughtful drama about a policeman’s unwilling surveillance of a teenager suspected of selling marijuana.
Turkey made a small mark with Mommo (The Bogeyman), Atalay Tasdiken’s heart-tugging, limpidly filmed debut feature about two young siblings from an Anatolian village who are threatened with separation.
Slovenia’s Slovenka (Slovenian Girl), directed by Damjan Kozole, told of an amoral student led into prostitution by dreams of riches; the film was strengthened by the lead performance of stage actress Nina Ivanisin.
Andrzej Wajda, Poland’s greatest veteran director, offered the well-meaning but unsatisfying Tatarak — at heart a mournful tale about a middle-aged woman lured by an attractive young man, but the tale goes astray with the interweaving of personal monologues from Krystyna Janda, Wadja’s lead actress.
Stronger dramatic fare was provided by Rewers , a promising dramatic debut by documentary maker Borys Lankosz, tracing the effect of an encounter with communist Poland’s secret police on three generations of women.
In Mexico, Rigoberto Perezcano’s Norteado gave unhackneyed treatment to the familiar topic of immigrants struggling to enter the United States.
Chile secured international attention with La nana , Sebastian Silva’s tensely wrought drama about an obsessive, gloomy, territorial maid.
Veteran Chilean director Miguel Littin showed his muscles in Dawson Isla 10, a harrowing drama about the treatment of political prisoners by the regime of Augusto Pinochet, while Alejandro Fernandez Almendras trod more gently in Huacho, a touching family saga following 24 hours in the life of a poor provincial family.
Productions from Uruguay, though small in number, continued to reveal talent.
Adrian Biniez's Gigante tenderly pursued the comic fortunes of a shy supermarket security guard, nervously in love with one of the store’s janitors.
Argentina enjoyed a big local success with Juan Jose Campanella’s El secreto de sus ojos , a complex but gripping romantic thriller.
In Brazil, Esmir Filho impressed with his Os famosos e os duendes da morte (The Famous and the Dead), the delicately surreal tale of a Bob Dylan fan whose main connection with the world is through the Internet.
Israeli filmmakers proved the most prolific and successful in exploring the region’s conflicts.
Samuel Maoz’s Lebanon, winner of the Golden Lion prize at Venice, placed the viewer inside an Israeli tank on the first day of the 1982 invasion of Lebanon.
Visceral camera work gave the film a claustrophobic power, though characterizations stayed relatively drab.
Ajami, co-directed by Israeli Yaron Shani and Palestinian Scandar Copti, focused sharply on a revenge killing in Jaffa and its tragic repercussions.
The mood stayed intense in Einaym Pkuhot , Haim Tabakman’s courageous film about a married male butcher in Jerusalem, a strict Orthodox Jew, in love with a seductive male student.
Political restrictions pressed down on Iranian filmmakers, but Abdolreza Kahani managed a touching portrait of working-class life in Bist , an ensemble drama about the staff of a Tehran reception hall faced with closure.
Motion Pictures khabar nadareh (No One Knows About Persian Cats) burrowed into Tehran's underground music scene for an uneven quasi-documentary blend of limp narrative and fiery music.
A new director, Nour-Eddine Lakhmari, won popular success with Casanegra, an energetic dark-hued tale about two smalltime hustlers in Casablanca.
In a barren year artistically, Bangladeshi director Mostofa Sarwar Farooki made a mark with Third Person Singular Number, a stylistically polished and striking drama about a single Muslim’s woman’s struggle for an independent life.
Dev Benegal’s lightly likable Road, Movie, following the cross-country trek of a disaffected young man, paid greater heed to international tastes.
China marked the 60th anniversary of communist rule with Jian guo da ye (The Founding of a Republic; Han Sanping, Huang Jianxin), a lavish depiction of the post-World War II battles between communists and nationalists.
Within a month of its release, it had become China’s biggestgrossing film.
Subtler tastes were satisfied with Tin shui wai dik ye yu mo , Ann Hui’s vividly acted drama about domestic violence.
South Korea sold plenty of popcorn with Haeundae , a rousing disaster movie about a popular beach resort struck by a tsunami.
Life was taken more seriously in Yeo-haeng-ja (A Brand New Life), Ounie Lecomte’s absorbing drama based on her own experiences as an orphan sheltered by nuns.
Kwasok scandle (Speed Scandal; Kang Hyeong-Cheol) spun popular comedy around the clever tale of a self-obsessed radio host whose life spins out of control.
National Geographic Entertainment/Everett Collection some pleasure with Park Chan-Wook’s Bakjwi , the outlandish result of fusing vampire comedy with elements from Emile Zola’s novel Therese Raquin.
Hirokazu Koreeda, one of the most idiosyncratic of Japanese directors, continued his musings on lost souls and love in Kuki ningyo , a fragile modem fairy tale about a waiter and his favourite partner, an inflatable doll.
In the Philippines, in Kinatay , Brillante Mendoza’s directorial skills barely salvaged his coarse narrative about a police trainee losing his innocence in Manila’s urban hell.
The veteran Malian director Souleymane Cisse produced his first film in 14 years with Min Ye , a talkative tale of infidelity and polygamy among Mali’s upper classes.
Environmental issues continued to have a major presence in the documentary arena during 2009.
In The Cove —an Audience Award winner at the Sundance, Hot Docs, and Silverdocs film festivals—veteran National Geographic still photographer Louie Psihoyos probed abuses suffered by commercially exploitable dolphins in Japan.
His crew included Richard O'Barry, the former dolphin trainer of Flipper TV-series fame.
Robert Kenner's Food, Inc. scrutinized the history of the world food chain and the ramifications of its current control by multinational corporations.
Joe Berlinger’s Crude reported the effects of oil drilling on communities along the Amazon River in Ecuador.
The film was highly critical of the U.S.’s handling of the recent economic crisis and its bailouts of corporations and banks.
Other prominent documentaries explored issues in less-developed countries.
A Grierson Award winner, Burma VJ by Anders Ostergaard, followed the efforts of reporters in Myanmar who, armed with video cameras, risked their lives to expose political and social repression in their country.
British director Havana Marking’s Afghan Star, winner of two awards at Sundance, explored Afghanistan's version of the TV show American Idol, the program’s open voting system, and its implications for the country’s democratic process.
Screened at numerous festivals internationally, Hamid Rahmanian’s The Glass House looked at the plight of four young Iranian women striving to break free from repression and exploitation with support from a rehabilitation centre in Tehran.
In the United States, Peter Esmonde’s Trimpin was a portrait of a truly original composer who used unorthodox instruments.
Goldberg celebrated Gertrude Berg’s extraordinary contributions to radio and television, including the innovation of the character-driven situation comedy.
Scientists DISCOVERED significant amounts of WATER on the MOON and evidence that stars had formed not very long after the big bang.
In 2009 there was a notable surge in research on graphene—an atomthick layer of carbon atoms tightly arranged in a honeycomb structure.
The exceptional mechanical, structural, and electronic properties of graphene had propelled this form of carbon to the forefront of academic and commercial materials research.
Graphene had great strength and stiffness, and at room temperature it conducted electrons faster than any other material.
Crystals of the form of carbon known as graphite had long been described as being composed of multiple layers of graphene, and carbon nanotubes and buckyballs were seen essentially as rolled-up forms and spherical enclosures of graphene, respectively.
The team had succeeded in isolating graphene by turning to a rudimentary method—they stuck small specks of graphite onto adhesive tape.
In 2009 scientists reported many advances in graphene synthesis, including methods of forming graphene strips by “unzipping” carbon nanotubes chemically and physically, using surfactant-guided molecular self assembly, and deoxygenating graphite oxide (an inexpensive precursor) photothermally by means of a camera flash.
They also reported advances in the development of graphene applications, including electrically conductive coatings and polymer composites, ultracapacitors, nanoscale field-effect transistors, and ultrafast photodetectors.
In June 2009 the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry officially recognized a group of scientists led by Sigurd Hofmann of the Institute for Heavy Ion Research in Darmstadt, Ger., as the first to have produced nuclei of element 112.
The research group chose the name copemicium and symbol Cp in honour of Polish astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus, and the IUPAC was expected to approve the new name and symbol in early 2010.
The Lawrence Berkeley group used high-velocity ions of calcium to bombard a target containing plutonium.
Such unfavourable statistics made it especially challenging, yet critically important, to independently confirm heavyelement synthesis results.
According to the classic textbook formulation of electrophilic aromatic substitution reactions, the presence of substituents on aromatic rings such as benzene guides incoming substituents to specific ring positions.
Amines and other electrondonating groups, for example, direct newly arriving reactants to the ortho and para positions (one and three carbon atoms away from the amine group, respectively) on the ring.
It appeared that these time-honoured organic-chemistry rules might need to be qualified, however.
The unconventional reaction might lead to new syntheses for valuable products such as pharmaceuticals.
The study of proteins inside their native cellular environment could provide key insights into the biological mechanisms of diseases.
An analytic technique known as in-cell nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy held promise for carrying out detailed intracellular studies of proteins, but the method's application had been limited mainly to probing in-cell protein conformations, dynamic motions, and binding interactions.
The group reported subtle differences between the structure of the metal-binding protein TTHA1718 found in bacterial cells and the structure of the protein in vitro.
The method had previously been limited to the study of prokaryotic cells that had been customized to express isotopelabeled proteins at elevated levels for NMR analysis.
Researchers boosted the time resolution of electron energy loss spectroscopy by a factor of 10 billion and also pushed the spatial resolution of the technique to the single-atom limit.
EELS, often used in conjunction with transmission electron microscopy , could be used to reveal the chemical identity of a specimen by measuring element-specific decreases in beam energy caused by interactions between an electron beam and atoms in the sample.
Ahmed H Zewail and co-workers at the California Institute of Technology developed a laser-driven TEM method that enabled EELS signals, which were typically recorded on the millisecond scale, to be measured with femtosecond resolution—the time scale on which chemical reactions occur.
To more fully demonstrate the methodology, the group mapped changes in real time in the chemical bonding and electron distribution of a graphite crystal as it was momentarily compressed by a laser pulse into the structure of a diamond crystal.
In another study a team headed by Kazu Suenaga of Japan’s National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology showed that by finely focusing a TEM beam with devices known as aberration correctors, they were able to pinpoint the location and chemical identity (including oxidation state) of single impurity atoms of calcium and cerium inside carbon nanotubes.
Converting the chemical building blocks of plant matter into fuels and other useful substances could help alleviate the problems of a dwindling supply of available petroleum resources and of the environmental consequences that resulted from their use.
Major research efforts into this area of green chemistry had largely focused on producing ethanol and other liquid transportation fuels.
Referred to as a platform chemical, HMF could readily be transformed into various products typically made from petroleum, including solvents, fuels, and monomers for polymer production.
Although methods for converting raw lignocellulose to HMF or other finished chemical products had not yet been demonstrated, research in the biomass field was moving in that direction.
In the early part of the year, Z Conrad Zhang and co-workers at Pacific Northwest National Laboratory , Richland, Wash., reported devising a single-step method of making HMF directly from cellulose.
The conversion was driven by a combination of copper chloride and chromium chloride dissolved in an imidazolium ionic liquid.
The catalytic mixture operated under mild conditions and rapidly depolymerized cellulose—the main bottleneck in the development of a commercial process for the conversion of cellulosic biomass.
The production of millions of tons of hydrogen peroxide (an oxidizer used as a disinfectant and bleach) each year depended on an indirect chemical process that was based on the sequential hydrogenation and oxidation of organic compounds called anthraquinones.
The direct synthesis of hydrogen peroxide from hydrogen and oxygen would be simpler and potentially less expensive, but it was not employed for the production of bulk quantities of the oxidizer because the catalysts known to drive such a reaction also catalyzed the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide.
The group showed that a goldpalladium alloy catalyst supported on a carbon film pretreated with acid avoided the unwanted decomposition.
The team explained that their preparation method formed catalyst particles that were very small (less than 10 nanometres in diameter) and well dispersed.
As a result, the particles guided hydrogen peroxide synthesis selectively and shut down the decomposition pathway.
Recognizing that a new generation of logic circuits would be needed for the next generation of computer systems, physicists focused much work in 2009 on “quantum dots,” tiny collections of atoms that function together as a single atom.
For example, the spin of a single electron trapped inside a quantum dot can act as a binary digit to store information.
The information is unfortunately degraded by interactions with the nuclear spins of the atoms that make up the surrounding lattice.
These assemblies can work at room temperature and use very little energy.
If electronic systems are going to be built that are nanometres in size, the pieces of those systems will be the size of molecules.
Previously, switching in single-molecule junctions was produced by changing the shape or the charge of the molecule.
Su Ying Quek and co-workers at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, Calif., demonstrated switching in a single-molecule junction by merely stretching and compressing the molecule.
The way in which electrons are transported in semiconductors is determined by the gap between the valence and the conduction energy bands.
If this bandgap could be tuned, particularly with an external electric field, the design of devices with semiconductors would be much easier.
Microchips that use light instead of electrons could outperform their electronic counterparts.
Photonic crystals are periodically arranged structures designed to confine light on subwavelength scales; they could also provide a way to guide light through an optical microchip without losing any of the light’s energy.
At even smaller dimensions, J Hwang and co-workers at the Institute of Technology, Zurich, used a single dye molecule as an optical transistor.
An optical transistor of this size could also be used to manipulate individual photons.
In traditional photoconductors, impinging light causes conductivity to increase.
The interaction between light and matter would be at the heart of any light-based device.
This demonstrated that several unusual light-matter phenomena could now be tested experimentally.
Devices that control light with frequencies between 0. and 5 THz could be useful in many areas, such as medical imaging, astronomy, and security.
Y Chassagneux and colleagues at the Universite de Paris-Sud and Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Orsay, France, significantly advanced the field of THz devices by building electrically pumped lasers that operate between 2.55 and 2.88 THz.
Nevertheless, devices that can effectively manipulate THz radiation require substantial development.
A promising step was made when Hou-Tong Chen and colleagues at Los Alamos National Laboratory demonstrated a two-dimensional device that controlled the phase of THz radiation over a narrow frequency band.
Alternatively, the device could also modulate THz radiation over a broad frequency band.
For the first time, the detailed chemical structure of a single molecule, pentacene, was imaged.
This was accomplished by Leo Gross and colleagues at IBM Research, Zurich, using an atomic force microscope, which acts like a tiny tuning fork, with one of the fork’s prongs passing incredibly close to the sample.
When the fork is set vibrating, the prong nearest the sample experiences a minuscule shift in frequency that depends on the molecule’s structure.
Understanding structure on the molecular scale could help in the design of drugs and electronics.
Molecules in gases and liquids are always moving, thanks to their thermal energy.
Albert Stolow of the Steacie Institute for Molecular Sciences, Ottawa, and his colleagues did this to a carbon disulphide molecule, observing its dynamics in a photochemical reaction.
A Ravasio and co-workers at the Centre d'Etudes de Saclay, France, reported a different method for obtaining images of objects nanometres in size.
A 20-femtosecond pulse of X-rays generated a diffraction pattern when shone on such an object.
The concept of entanglement, where two spatially separated systems may have instantaneous correlations, could someday form the basis of quantum information networks.
These networks would require buffers to control how data moves through such a network.
Such buffers not only would need to store single ""quantum bits” but would also need to store “quantum images”—that is, pairs of images that are entangled.
To be able to control the flow of the quantum image through such a system would mean that one of the images would be slowed down with respect to the other.
The interaction between the two qubits allowed highly entangled states between them to be created.
Despite this success, much work remained on increasing the power and performance of quantum processors.
Jost’s group at the National Institute of Standards and Technology, Boulder, Colo., took a different approach to entangled states.
They took two magnesium-beryllium ion pairs held in different locations and entangled their mechanical vibrational states.
They also were able to entangle the internal states of the beryllium ion with the oscillations of the other ion pair.
This work pointed the way for possible future experiments in which the effects of quantum mechanics might be observable in systems larger than the microscopic.
Pascal Bohi and co-workers of the Max Planck Institute of Quantum Optics, Munich, took rubidium atoms and cooled them to near absolute zero to form a Bose-Einstein condensation, a state of matter in which they coalesced into a single quantum mechanical entity.
They were able to entangle the internal atomic states of the atoms, as well as the states relating to their motion.
This work could lead to future quantum computer systems in which many atoms are entangled.
The Casimir-Lifshitz force exists between two uncharged perfectly conducting plates because of quantum fluctuations, random tiny amounts of energy, that exist even in a vacuum electromagnetic field.
For all systems studied experimentally prior to 2009, the C-L force was attractive.
Physicists placed fresh limits on the mass of the Higgs boson—the hypothetical carrier particle of the Higgs field that was thought to confer mass on other matter.
ASTRONOMY To mark the 400th anniversary of Galileos first use of the telescope for astronomical observations, 2009 was designated the International Year of Astronomy by the astronomical community’s professional societies, including the International Astronomical Union.
The Hubble Space Telescope was repaired in May and then took some of the sharpest images to date of a wide variety of astronomical objects.
The year also witnessed both the launch of and the first observations with a variety of other space-based astronomical instruments, such as NASA’s Kepler satellite to search for habitable planets orbiting other stars and the European Space Agency’s Herschel space telescope and Planck satellite, designed to study far-infrared and submillimetre radiation from astronomical objects and microwave background radiation left over from the big bang, respectively.
New searches for water on the Moon were conducted in 2009, in part because of proposals to have future astronauts spend long periods of time there.
This interest also spurred astronomers to look through older space-mission data for evidence of lunar water.
In September it was announced that three different space probes had detected small amounts of water on widespread areas of the surface.
One such probe was India's Chandrayaan-1 spacecraft, which carried NASA’s Moon Mineralogy Mapper and operated in 2008-09.
Scientists analyzing new data from NASA’s Deep Impact/EPOXI probe and 10-year-old data from NASA’s Cassini spacecraft also reported evidence of small amounts of water on the Moon’s surface.
The most likely place on the Moon to find extensive quantities of water was thought to be in craters on the far side.
Water might exist there in the form of ice, since it would be protected from direct exposure to the intense solar radiation.
In October NASA’s Lunar Crater Observation and Sensing Satellite sent the upper stage of its launch rocket to crash into a crater called Cabeus, which lies near the Moon’s south pole.
Nine different instruments aboard LCROSS recorded a great deal of data about the impact itself—which produced a small crater some 28 m across—and about the gas and dust kicked up by the collision.
Near the year's end, scientists reported that they had found strong evidence for the presence of significant amounts of water in the material Earth Perihelion and Aphelion, 2010 Jan.
July 6 Aphelion, approx.:00* Equinoxes and Solstices, 2010 March 20 Vernal equinox, 17:32* June 21 Summer solstice, 11:28* Sept.
Sun, annular , visible along a path beginning in central Africa; extending across eastern Africa, the Indian Ocean, southernmost India, and Myanmar; and ending in eastern China; with a partial phase visible in Africa (except the western and southern parts), southeastern Europe, most of Asia, most of the Indian Ocean, and the western Pacific Ocean.
July 11 Sun, total , visible along a path beginning in the southern Pacific Ocean and extending to southernmost Chile and Argentina; with a partial phase visible in the southern Pacific Ocean and southern South America.
Moon, total , the beginning visible in Europe , western Africa, most of the Atlantic Ocean, North and South America, and the eastern Pacific Ocean; the end visible in the northwestern Atlantic Ocean, North America, northwestern South America, the Pacific Ocean , Australia (except the western part), East Asia, and most of Southeast Asia.
The blue shows the presence of water and hydroxyl molecules. excavated from the permanently shadowed lunar impact crater.
Another interesting impact within the solar system occurred at the giant gas planet Jupiter.
A temporary new atmospheric feature, a debris plume that was the result of an astronomical objects having collided with the planet, was found in Jupiter’s south polar region.
Australian amateur astronomer Anthony Wesley reported first seeing it on July 19.
Then four days later the revamped Hubble Space Telescope snapped the highest-resolution image yet taken of such an evolving Jovian debris plume.
The event could have been caused by either an asteroid or a comet of perhaps several hundred metres across.
By way of comparison, 15 years earlier Jupiter had sustained a more massive series of hits by debris from the breakup of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9, which produced many temporary features in the dense Jovian atmosphere.
Together, these two sightings suggested that such solar system impacts are more common than had been previously thought.
Since these planets are so dim compared with the stars they orbit, they were very difficult to detect directly.
Astronomers had found nearly all the known exoplanets by using a variety of indirect means, the most effective of which was to look for tiny changes in the motion of a star along its line of sight, indicating the presence of one or more orbiting planets.
This method was used by a group of European astronomers led by Michel Mayor of the Geneva Observatory to detect 32 new exoplanets.
The discoveries, which were announced in October, had been made with an instrument called the High Accuracy Radial Velocity Planet Searcher , a spectrograph attached to the 3.6-m telescope of the European Southern Observatory at La Silla, Chile.
It was capable of detecting stellar motions as small as 3. km/hr , about the speed of a person walking.
This indicated that astronomers were not far from being able to detect planets of about the same mass as Earth.
Probably the most intriguing exoplanet discovery in 2009 was of the object designated CoRoT-7b.
It was the most likely of the known exoplanets to be a solid, rocky body like Earth.
Didier Queloz and colleagues from the Geneva Observatory reported that the planet probably has a silicate mantle and an iron core similar to Earth's.
The exoplanet’s orbit is tilted about 77° with respect to the spin axis of its host star, however, which is much different from Earth’s orbit around the Sun.
Unfortunately for the search for life on exoplanets, this planet was found to orbit its star at a distance far less than that between Mercury and the Sun.
This meant that liquid water could not exist on the surface of CoRoT-7b, so the possibility of its harbouring life as known on Earth was highly unlikely.
Throughout 2009, astronomers reported the detection of a wide range of astronomical objects with the Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope.
Perhaps most exciting was the discovery of 16 previously unknown pulsars solely on the basis of their gamma-ray emissions.
Thirteen of them coincided with previously detected gamma-ray sources that had not been known to be pulsars.
Of the 1,800 pulsars discovered to date, the vast majority had been identified first by radio telescopes, even though their gamma-ray luminosity often exceeds their radio power by orders of magnitude.
For 40 years, gamma-ray bursts —flashes of gamma rays that last from fractions of a second to minutes—had been detected coming from directions all over the celestial sphere.
They were thought to accompany the deaths of massive stars in giant supernova explosions.
Because the gamma rays emitted in GRBs are beamed into small solid angles, they can be detected at great distances.
On April 23 NASA’s Swift satellite identified such a burst of gamma rays, now called GRB 090423 for the date of the event.
It lasted for about 10 seconds and originated in the direction of the constellation Leo.
Ground-based telescopes in Hawaii and Chile determined that this GRB had come from a supernova in a galaxy with a redshift of 8.2, which indicated that it was very distant.
Detection of this GRB provided direct evidence that stars had already formed not very long after the big bang.
Corn293 Physical Sciences plementing this gamma-ray discovery, infrared observations of 21 very distant galaxies were made with the Hubble Space Telescope's new Wide Field Camera 3.
They implied that galaxies probably did not form at very much earlier times than suggested by GRB 090423.
The colours of the 21 galaxies indicated that they lie between 12. billion and 13.01 billion light-years from Earth.
Taken together, all these observations suggested that galaxy formation was just beginning—but was happening quite rapidly—very early in the history of the universe.
The major issue in manned spaceflight in 2009 was the outcome of hearings on the future of the American space program.
The Review of United States Human Spaceflight Plans Committee—better known as the Augustine Commission, after its chairman, Norman Augustine—was appointed by Pres.
It was chartered to review the future of the United States in space, including former president George W Bush’s plans to return to the Moon and continue to Mars.
The commission concluded that NASA’s human spaceflight program was “at a tipping point, primarily due to a mismatch of goals and resources.
Manned missions in 2009 brought the International Space Station closer to completion.
The ISS could house a crew of six following the addition at the end of 2008 of a bathroom and a urine-distillation processor for recycling water.
STS-126 returned with the first samples of recycled water from the urine processor, as well as frozen specimens taken from the crew over several months to help measure the long-term effects of low gravity.
STS-127 completed the assembly of Japan’s Kibo experiment module by installing the exposed platform component.
In addition, the shuttle also carried a test model of the DragonEye docking target system that would be used by the commercial SpaceX Dragon spacecraft.
The STS-128 mission took up the Leonardo Multi-Purpose Logistics Module, containing 6,894 kg of supplies and scientific equipment.
The astronauts replaced an ammonia cooling tank and retrieved specimens that had been exposed to space from the exterior of the European Columbus laboratory.
The last shuttle mission of the year, STS-129, took up an assortment of parts, including gyroscopes and nitrogen tanks, in two ExPRESS Logistics Carriers.
A new supply route to the ISS opened when Japan successfully launched the first H-II Transfer Vehicle with the HII rocket on September 11.
It docked with the ISS on September 18, taking up 4,500 kg of food, computer equipment, and other supplies.
In five spacewalks the crews replaced two science instruments, gyroscopes, star sensors, a computer, batteries, and thermal blankets and repaired two science instruments.
The mission had been delayed by several months from 2008 when Hubble’s primary computer failed.
This required extra time to pull the spare from storage and requalify it for flight.
The astronauts also opened the Advanced Camera for Surveys instrument and replaced parts at the computer board level, something that was never envisioned when Hubble was designed.
After STS-129, only five shuttle missions remained before the system was to be retired in 2010.
The only interplanetary launch of the year was NASA’s Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter and Lunar Crater Observation and Sensing Satellite on June 18.
Most LRO instruments surveyed the lunar surface, searching for, among other things, evidence of water in permanently shadowed craters.
It was overshadowed by the LCROSS mission, which used the launch vehicle’s Centaur upper stage to strike the Moon.
The LCROSS spacecraft, which was devised from the Centaur/spacecraft adapter and used commercial parts, carried cameras and spectrometers to detect materials in the impact plume from the Centaur upper stage.
The LCROSS ""shepherd” spacecraft separated from the stage on October 8.
The two plowed into a crater near the lunar south pole on October 9, with the Centaur preceding LCROSS by about four minutes.
The plume revealed “significant” quantities of water, which would be valuable as a resource for life support and propulsion at a lunar base.
India’s Chandrayaan-1 lunar satellite, which was launched on Oct., 2008, failed on August 28 as a result of key guidance components’ overheating.
While this loss cut short the planned two-year mission, officials at the Indian Space Research Organisation judged the mission, India’s first interplanetary endeavour, as a success because it discovered water molecules in the lunar surface.
The major astronomy missions of the year were Russia’s Koronas-Foton on January 30, NASA’s Kepler on March 6, and Europe’s Herschel/Planck spacecraft on May 14.
Koronas-Foton was part of the International Living with a Star program.
It carried instruments to observe the most violent solar activity in the extreme ultraviolet through gamma-ray range of the spectrum.
Space physics instruments monitored the response of Earth's magnetosphere to solar storms.
The telescope was slightly out of focus to help it meet its goal of recording when Earth-size planets transit—cross in front of—their host stars.
As such it produced not images or maps but light curves of some 100,000 stars.
The sensitivity was great enough that early in the mission NASA announced that it could observe a Jupiter-size exoplanet by its reflected light, as well as by transit.
Herschel and Planck were launched on the same Ariane 5 rocket to orbit separately the L2 gravitational balance point between Earth and the Sun.
It provides an easy place to “park” telescopes to observe deep space with virtually no radiation input from Earth.
Herschel became the largest space telescope, with a 3.5-m primary mirror, compared with the Hubble Space Telescope’s 2. m , but it operated in the far-infrared spectrum to image stars, galaxies, and star-forming regions.
By comparison, the deepest red that the human eye can perceive is 0.77 Planck carries two millimetrewave instruments to map unevenness in the intensity and polarization of the cosmic microwave background radiation left over from the big bang.
North Korea failed in a second alleged attempt to orbit a satellite with the Taepodong-2 launch on April 5.
While North Korea claimed that it was a satellite launch, Western observers believed it was a three-stage ballistic missile that lofted its payload some 3,800 km downrange.
On August 25 South Korea also failed to launch a satellite in its first outing with the Naro 1 launch vehicle, which had a Russian-built first stage and a Korean second stage.
The demonstration version of NASA's new Ares 1 -X vehicle—possibly the only one in light of the Augustine report— was launched on October 28.
The suborbital flight tested only the booster, The Constellation Program’s Ares I-X test rocket lifts off Launch Complex 39B at NASA’s Kennedy Space Center in Florida, on October 28. which had succeeded in all static ground firing tests, and a structural model of the second stage and the Constellation spacecraft.
The flight was a success, although NASA was studying to determine why the second stage and booster slowly jackknifed toward each other after separation.
The recovered booster suffered a major dent in its lower section when two of its three parachutes failed after opening.
SpaceX, a private launch company, scored its second success out of five attempts with the Falcon 1 vehicle, which flew from Kwajalein Atoll in the Marshall Islands and carried Malaysia’s RazakSAT communications satellite.
SpaceX had developed and soon will test a larger Falcon 9 vehicle to carry supplies and crews to the ISS in the Dragon capsule.
Advanced testing of the Variable Specific Impulse Magnetoplasma Rocket , developed by former astronaut Franklin Chang-Diaz, showed great promise for providing a stage capable of taking humans to Mars in less than six weeks.
VASIMR uses radio waves to heat ionized argon gas, thus accelerating it to high speeds.
While the thrust was low, it could be continuous, as opposed to chemical rockets that provide high thrust for a few minutes at most.
In an attempt to heal a 20-yearold schism in Roman Catholicism, Pope Benedict XVI rescinded in January the excommunications of four members of the traditionalist Society of St.
One of the four, Richard Williamson, had made statements denying the Nazis’ use of gas chambers to exterminate Jews and asserting that only up to 300,000 Jews had died in Nazi concentration camps instead of the generally accepted figure of six million.
The pope's rehabilitation of the bishop was denounced by Jewish leaders around the world and led Israel’s chief rabbinate to sever ties with the Vatican.
Benedict subsequently reiterated his condemnation of antiSemitism, saying that he had not known about the bishop’s views when he lifted the excommunication and that the Vatican needed to make greater use of the Internet to prevent such controversies.
In August, Younis al-Astal, a spiritual leader of Hamas, denounced the UN Relief and Works Agency’s reported plans to introduce lessons about the Holocaust in its schools for Palestinian children in the Gaza Strip.
Dutch prosecutors announced in September that they planned to charge the Dutch arm of the Arab European League with having violated hate-speech laws; the group had published a cartoon on its Web site that suggested that the Holocaust was a fabrication or an exaggeration.
The church was organized as an alternative for Anglicans who disagreed with the theology of the United States Episcopal Church and the Anglican Church of Canada on several issues, including the sanctioning of same-sex unions.
Former Pittsburgh Episcopal bishop Robert Duncan was installed for a five-year term as the ACNA's first archbishop.
A month later the triennial Episcopal General Convention met in Anaheim, Calif., and adopted a resolution affirming that gay men and lesbians were eligible for ""any ordained ministry” in the 2.1-millionmember church.
Traditionalists who opposed such liberal trends in the Anglican Communion were given a new option in October when the Vatican announced the pope’s approval for the establishment of structures known as personal ordinariates, which would enable Anglicans to form their own communities within the Roman Catholic Church.
William Cardinal Levada, the Vatican’s chief doctrinal official, said that Anglicans would be able to maintain their liturgical traditions and be allowed to have married clergy, although unmarried priests in the new structure would need to remain celibate.
In December the Episcopal diocese of Los Angeles elected an openly gay woman, the Rev.
Archbishop Rowan Williams of Canterbury, spiritual leader of the 77-million-member Anglican Communion, said that the election raised ""very serious questions” for the Anglican family.
Delegates to the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America’s biennial Churchwide Assembly, held in Minneapolis, Minn., in August, pause for a moment of prayer before voting to adopt a resolution that opened the ministry to gay men and lesbians living in “committed relationships.
The move was criticized by leaders of the 2.4-millionmember Lutheran Church-Missouri Synod and the 390,000-member Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod.
A group called the Lutheran CORE , which had more than 80 member churches, announced in November that it was making plans for a new Lutheran synod for congregations that opposed the Churchwide Assembly’s action.
In May the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland voted in Edinburgh to defer action on this issue for two years and to bar church courts, committees, and ministers from commenting about it publicly.
In July more than 1,600 members of the Religious Society of Friends in Britain, popularly known as the Quakers, voted at their annual gathering in York, Eng., to approve marriages for same-sex couples and to ask the government to change the law to recognize such marriages.
The report found that Indonesia's Muslim population—203 million, or some 13% of the world’s total—was the largest of any country.
Among the contrasts turned up by the report were that Germany had more Muslims than Lebanon and that Russia was home to more Muslims than Jordan and Libya combined.
Barack Obama attempted to improve his country’s relations with the Islamic world in two major speeches.
In Scott Rennie, the Church of Scotland’s first openly gay minister, rehearses a sermon in Brechin Cathedral in May.
Dmitry Medvedev met in July with 12 Muslim leaders in the Congregational Mosque in Moscow to ask them to speak out against Islamic extremism.
A month later, at a meeting in Sochi, Russia, leaders from the North Caucasus told him that an Islamist insurgency had permeated all aspects of society in the region.
The perceived lack of media attention given to the killing in the West touched off anti-German protests in Egypt and Iran.
Wiens was found guilty of the murder in the same courtroom in November.
Nicolas Sarkozy endorsed an initiative by about 60 legislators to have a parliamentary commission study whether to ban the wearing of burkas in public in France.
In June in an address to Parliament, he declared, ""The burka is not a religious sign.
Farzana Hassan, a spokesperson for the group, asserted that the garment had ""absolutely no place in Canada” because it marginalized women.
His visit was controversial because of his support for abortion rights and government funding for embryonic stem-cell research.
Despite the controversy, a Gallup Poll released in March found that 4 in 10 American Catholics believed that abortion was ""morally acceptable” and 63% backed embryonic stem-cell research.
Two Vatican investigations of American nuns led to protests and expressions of concern by several women’s religious orders, which feared that the church might try to rein in nuns with more liberal beliefs or ways of life.
In May, Ireland's Commission to Inquire into Child Abuse released a 2,575page report documenting what it called a ""climate of fear” from the 1930s to the 1990s in schools run by the Irish Roman Catholic Church.
The report found that thousands of students had been systematically beaten and sexually abused by priests, nuns, and other staff members.
Metropolitan Kirill (see BIOGRAPHIES), who had headed the external relations department of the Russian Orthodox Church for nearly 20 years, was elected in January in Moscow to succeed the late patriarch Aleksey II as head of the church.
Viktor Yushchenko to recognize the Ukrainian Orthodox Church-Kiev Patriarchate, which had broken away from the Moscow patriarchate in the 1990s.
In a letter to Obama in June praising his speech in Cairo, a group of American Christian leaders warned that the Christian population in the Holy Land was “dwindling rapidly” and might cease to exist as a viable community unless there was an Israeli-Palestinian peace agreement.
The Evangelical Lutheran Church in America voted at its biennial assembly to share full communion with the United Methodist Church, which had previously approved the agreement.
The accord, which had taken 30 years to reach fruition, meant that the two churches recognized the validity of each others ministers, baptisms, and eucharistic services.
In May the murder in Vienna of Guru Sant Rama Nand, who was the leader of a Sikh offshoot movement called Dera Sach Khand, led to rioting in several northern Indian cities.
In Nigeria, Mohammed Yusuf, leader of an Islamic group called Boko Haram, died in July while he was in police custody.
The group had staged uprisings in northern Nigeria in an attempt to impose strict Islamic law throughout the country.
In the aftermath of this violence, the governors of 19 northern states set up a committee to regulate the activities of Muslim and Christian clergy.
Archbishop Williams spoke out in August against the persecution of Christians in Pakistan after eight Christians were burned alive as homes were set on fire in clashes with Muslims.
The violence had been touched off by reports that a Christian had desecrated the Metropolitan Kirill, who was elected in January to succeed the late patriarch Aleksey II as head of the Russian Orthodox Church, conducts a religious service in Moscow’s Christ the Saviour Cathedral.
The Anglican leader stated that Pakistan’s Christians were “disproportionately affected by the draconian laws against blasphemy,” which he said had been abused to settle personal grievances.
Several weeks later the Central Committee of the World Council of Churches charged that the Pakistani laws had become ""a major source of victimization and persecution” of religious minorities.
During a five-day pilgrimage to the Holy Land in May, Pope Benedict was criticized by several Israeli newspapers for not referring to his native Germany during a speech at the Yad Vashem Holocaust memorial.
The Tony Blair Faith Foundation joined with the U.K.’s Department for International Development and the charities Islamic Relief, Oxfam, and World Vision to sponsor a series of seminars exploring the role of religion in development work.
In April the Vatican denounced the arrests in China of several Roman Catholic leaders, including Bishop Giulio Jia Zhiguo of Zhengding, and said that such actions created obstacles to dialogue.
In May Afghan government leaders dumped more than 1,000 books from Iran into a river because their contents were allegedly offensive to the country’s Sunni Muslim majority.
In September Vietnamese authorities removed followers of Thich Nhat Hanh, a Vietnamese monk who had helped popularize Buddhism in the West, from the Bat Nha monastery in Lam Dong province.
Government officials, however, characterized the conflict as a dispute between two Buddhist factions, contending that the action was taken because the abbot of the monastery wanted the Nhat Hanh group to leave.
The French branch of the Church of Scientology was convicted of fraud and fined the equivalent of nearly $900,000 by a Paris court in October.
Six members of the group, which claimed to have 45,000 adherents in France, were also convicted of fraud, but the judges said that no jail sentences were imposed because the church had taken steps to change some practices.
Earlier that month the European Court of Human Rights had ruled that Russia’s ban on the Church of Scientology was illegal.
The court touched off a larger controversy in November when it ruled that crucifixes should be removed from classrooms in Italy because their display could be disturbing for non-Christian pupils and was a breach of the European Convention on Human Rights.
In a November referendum Swiss voters approved a constitutional ban on the construction of new minarets.
In December the Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life reported that nearly 70% of the world's people lived in countries with severe restrictions on religion.
It ranked Saudi Arabia as the most restrictive country and the Middle East and North Africa as the most restrictive regions.
A survey issued in April by the Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life found that about half of American adults had switched their religious affiliation at least once in their lives.
Atheist groups sponsored the placement of ads with the slogan ""There’s probably no God” on buses in Britain and Spain.
Eva Brunne, dean of the Stockholm diocese of the Church of Sweden, was elected Lutheran bishop of Stockholm; she was believed to be the first openly lesbian bishop in the world.
Lutheran Bishop Margot Kassmann of Hanover, Ger., was elected in October as chairman of the Evangelical Church in Germany , an umbrella group of 22 Lutheran, Reformed, and United churches.
Archbishop Vincent Nichols of Birmingham, Eng., succeeded the retiring Cormac Cardinal Murphy-O’Connor in May as leader of the Roman Catholic Church in England and Wales.
Prominent religious figures who died in 2009 included evangelist Oral Roberts, who pioneered religious broadcasting in the 1950s and founded the eponymous university in Tulsa, Okla.; the Rev.
Frederick J Eikerenkoetter II, a television minister known as Reverend Ike; Millard Fuller, founder of the Christian charity Habitat for Humanity International; Reform Rabbi Alfred Gottschalk, former president of Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion, who had ordained the first women rabbis in the United States and Israel; the Rev.
Richard John Neuhaus, a Lutheran convert to Roman Catholicism who had founded the journal First Things and cofounded the movement Evangelicals and Catholics Together; Stephen Cardinal Kim Sou-hwan, the first Roman Catholic cardinal of South Korea; the Rev.
Gerard Jean-Juste, a Roman Catholic priest and advocate for Haitian rights in the U.S.; the Rev.
John Bowen Coburn, a former leader of the United States Episcopal Church; Patriarch Pavle, leader of the Serbian Orthodox Church; and Cahal Cardinal Daly, a former leader of the Roman Catholic Church in Ireland.
Other losses were Elizabeth Clare Prophet, leader of the Church Universal and Triumphant, and Lutheran Bishop Albrecht Schonherr, who had headed the church of Berlin-Brandenburg in the former German Democratic Republic.
Comedy writer Ariane Sherine, who helped spearhead an atheist advertising campaign that involved the placement of ads with the slogan “There’s probably no God” on buses in Britain and Spain, poses in front of one of the buses in London in January.
Much of this information is uncovered in decennial governmental censuses; half the countries of the world have long asked their populations to state their religions if any, and they still do today.
The other major source of data each year consists of the decentralized censuses undertaken by many religious headquarters.
Each year almost all Christian denominations ask and answer statistical questions on major religious subjects.
A third annual source is the total of 27,000 new books on the religious situation each in a single country, as well Worldwide Adherents of All Religions by Six Continental Areas, Mid-2009 Africa Asia Europe Latin America Northern America Oceania World % Change Rate Number of Countries Christians 483,376,000 345,188,000 585,357,000 542,293,000 280,659,000 27,619,000 2,264,492,000 33.
These follow current UN demographic terminology, which now divides the world into the six major areas shown above.
Note that ""Asia"" includes the former Soviet Central Asian states, and ""Europe"" includes all of Russia eastward to the Pacific.
This column documents the annual change in 2009 in worldwide religious and nonreligious adherents.
Note that in 2009 the annual growth of world population was 1.17%, or a net increase of 78,362,400 adherents.
The last column enumerates sovereign and nonsovereign countries in which each religion or religious grouping has a numerically significant and organized following.
As defined in the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights, a person's religion is what he or she professes, confesses, or states that it is.
See the World Christian Database and World Religion Database for more detail.
A flurry of recent books have outlined the Western philosophical and scientific basis for atheism.
This term here denotes members of Christian churches and networks that regard themselves as postdenominationalist and neoapostolic and thus independent of historical, mainstream, organized, institutionalized, confessional, denominationalist Christianity.
Non-Chinese followers of Confucius and Confucianism, mostly Koreans in Korea.
Followers of local, tribal, animistic, or shamanistic religions, with members restricted to one ethnic group.
Followers of Asian 20th-century neoreligions, neoreligious movements, radical new crisis religions, and non-Christian syncretistic mass religions.
Persons professing no religion, nonbelievers, agnostics, freethinkers, uninterested, or dereligionized secularists indifferent to all religion but not militantly so.
Including a handful of religions, quasi-religions, pseudoreligions, parareligions, religious or mystic systems, and religious and semireligious brotherhoods of numerous varieties.
Together, these three major sources of data constitute a massive annual megacensus, although decentralized and uncoordinated.
This year there are two new publications both supporting and mapping the data below.
Second, the World Religion Database , offers sources and analysis of global religious dynamics.
This table extracts and analyzes a microcosm of the world religion table.
It depicts the United States, the country with the largest number of adherents to Christianity, the world's largest religion.
Each religion's Annual Change for 2000-2005 is also analyzed by Natural increase per year and Conversion increase (new converts minus new defectors) per year, which together constitute the Total increase per year.
The major categories in the United States are listed with largest (Christians) first.
Indented names of groups in the ""Adherents"" column are subcategories of the groups above them and are also counted in these unindented totals, so they should not be added twice into the column total.
All persons who profess publicly to follow Jesus Christ as God and Savior.
These two designations-italicized and enumerated separately here-cut across all of the six Christian traditions or ecclesiastical blocs listed above and should be considered separately from them.
The evangelicals are Christians of evangelical conviction from all traditions who are committed to the evangel and involved in personal witness and mission in the world.
Core Jewish population relating to Judaism, excluding Jewish persons professing a different religion.
In October the IOC announced that RIO DE JANEIRO would become the first South American city to host the OLYMPIC GAMES, in 2016.
His victory was one of the most surprising results in FI history, considering that the 29-year-old Button was without a team following the 2008 season after Honda Motor Co. announced that it was pulling out of the sport because of the global economic downturn.
Fortunately for Button, Brawn GP took over the Honda team a few weeks before the season-opening Australian Grand Prix on March 29.
Button started that race from the pole and came away with the win, just his second since joining FI in 2000.
Button, who finished the 2008 season in 18th place, went on to win the pole and the race at the Malaysian Grand Prix one week after his victory in Australia.
Following a third-place finish in the next event in China, Button posted wins in the next four races to become the first British driver to register four straight victories in one season since Nigel Mansell accomplished the feat en route to the 1992 drivers’ title.
Buttons amazing start in 2009 gave him an almost insurmountable 26-point lead over Brawn GP teammate Rubens Barrichello of Brazil with 10 races remaining.
Button did not win another race all season, but he did not need to after his dominant start.
He wrapped up the title on October 18 with a fifth-place finish in the penultimate event, the Brazilian Grand Prix, and went on to finish third in the season finale in Abu Dhabi, U.A.E., on November 1, to end the season with 95 points.
German driver Sebastian Vettel finished second in the season standings with 84 points, and Barrichello was third with 77.
Button and Barrichello helped Brawn GP become the first team to win the constructors' championship in its debut season and the first British team to take the title since McLaren in 1998.
Button also gave Britain consecutive FI titles for the first time since Graham Hill won in 1968 and Stewart in 1969.
Lewis Hamilton of McLaren took the trophy in 2008—the first English driver to do so since Damon Hill in 1996—and won two races in 2009, finishing fifth in the year-end standings with 49 points.
Ferrari’s Felipe Massa of Brazil, who won a season-high six races in 2008 on his way to finishing one point behind Hamilton, was involved in a near-fatal crash in July while attempting to qualify for the Hungarian Grand Prix.
Massa crashed into a safety barrier and suffered multiple skull fractures after a loose car part flew into him and knocked him unconscious.
He had surgery around his left eye and later had to have a metal plate inserted.
Seventime world champion Michael Schumacher of Germany, who had retired at the end of the 2006 season, offered to fill in for Massa, but the 40-yearold Schumacher ended his comeback bid because of lingering neck injuries from a motorcycle crash.
In October, Frenchman Jean Todt, a former Ferrari team principal, was elected to replace the outgoing Max Mosley of the U.K., who had been FIA president since 1994.
Mosley had refused to resign in 2008 after a British tabloid newspaper revealed his involvement in a sadomasochistic sex orgy, and he had won a vote of confidence to remain president through October 2009.
Todt, who was backed by Mosley and British FI boss Bernie Ecclestone, beat out Finnish candidate Ari Vatanen.
The sport was hit by another scandal in 2009 as former Renault team principal Flavio Briatore of Italy was given a lifetime ban by the World Motor Sport Council for having asked Brazilian driver Nelson Piquet, Jr., to deliberately crash at the 2008 Singapore Grand Prix in order to help teammate Fernando Alonso Spectators watch as British Fortnula One driver Jenson Button speeds through the streets of Monte Carlo during the Monaco Grand Prix on May 24.
Piquet was cleared of any wrongdoing, but Renault chief engineer Pat Symonds was suspended for five years, and two-time world champion Alonso left the team to join Ferrari in 2010.
The FIA announced budget caps and a ban on in-season testing, while the sport lost major sponsors such as ING, the Royal Bank of Scotland, and Credit Suisse.
The Canadian Grand Prix, run in Montreal since 1978, was dropped from the calendar, as was the French Grand Prix.
Toyota-owned Fuji International Speedway said in July that it would not host the Japanese Grand Prix beginning in 2010, and in November, Toyota followed fellow Japanese automaker Honda in withdrawing from the sport owing to financial considerations.
With Honda and Toyota gone, 2010 would mark the first time in eight years that there would be no Japanese FI team.
BMW, which had won only one race since it acquired the Sauber team in 2006, announced that it would not return in 2010.
Japanese company Bridgestone Corp., FI racing’s only tire supplier since 2007, reported that it would not supply tires for FI after its contract expired in 2010.
American stock car race driver Jimmie Johnson of Hendrick Motorsports won his fourth consecutive Sprint Cup championship in 2009.
The 34-year-old Johnson thus achieved a feat never before accomplished in the 61-year existence of the National Association for Stock Car Auto Racing , by most measures the world’s most lucrative racing series, with 45 drivers each earning more than $1 million.
Johnson won 7 of the 36 races in the series, beating 50year-old teammate Mark Martin, who won 5.
Jeff Gordon, a four-time former titlist, won once and finished third in the overall ranking.
It was team owner Rick Hendrick’s ninth title as Chevrolet fought off a determined bid from Toyota for manufacturer honours.
In a year in which all major American auto racing series were constricted because of difficult economic conditions, Johnson, who drove only in the Sprint Cup Series, earned $7,333,309 before sponsor and other ancillary awards.
Toyota’s top money-winning driver, 24-year-old Kyle Busch, did not qualify for the Chase for the Sprint Cup (comprising the final 10 races of the Sprint season), but he won 20 times, including the drivers’ crown in NASCAR’s subsidiary Nationwide Series, four Sprint Cup races, and seven races in the Camping World Truck Series.
Bad weather also delayed the longest race on the schedule, the Coca-Cola 600, by one day.
Indianapolis Motor Speedway, the second oldest race venue in the United States and the jewel of the single-seater Indy Racing League , staged the 93rd Indy 500, with a total purse of $14,315,315.
Driving for the Roger Penske team, Castroneves won the pole with a speed of 224.864 mph and then bested Dan Wheldon by nearly two seconds at an average speed of 150.318 mph in the IRL’s all DallaraHonda competition.
In third place was Danica Patrick of Andretti Green, her best finish at Indy.
Patrick signed with Earnhardt Ganassi Racing to finally attempt American stock cars for a limited schedule.
Colombian Juan Pablo Montoya led most of the race until NASCAR penalized him for driving too fast in the pit lane.
He faded to 11th, and Johnson won the $448,001 first prize over Martin.
Scotsman Dario Franchitti of the Target Chip Ganassi team, who had tried NASCAR unsuccessfully in 2008, returned to the IRL and won the season drivers’ championship.
He captured five events to edge on total points Scott Dixon, the defending champion and his teammate, who also won five.
Penske’s Ryan Briscoe (with three IRL victories) and Castroneves finished third and fourth for the season, respectively.
Though the title standings lead changed 15 times, two formerly successful teams, Andretti and Newman/Haas/Lanigan, had no victories in the 17-race series.
It was an upand-down world rally championship season for five-time champion driver Sebastien Loeb of France and his codriver, Daniel Elena of Monaco.
After skipping the Monte Carlo race (which was not part of the WRC in 2009), Loeb took the first five WRC events—in Ireland, Norway, Cyprus, Portugal, and Argentina.
A flat tire and a two-minute technical penalty dropped Loeb into fourth place in the Rally of Italy (Sardinia), which was won by Jari-Matti Latvala of Finland.
In the Rally of Australia in September, Hirvonen was awarded the victory after Loeb, the original winner, and other Citroen drivers were penalized for a technical infringement.
Loeb’s triumph in Spain put him only one point behind Hirvonen and set up a classic battle in the season-ending Wales Rally of Great Britain.
A mishap with his car hood in the penultimate stage cost Hirvonen more than a minute, and Loeb held on for the win, giving him his 54th career victory and a record sixth consecutive WRC drivers’ title—just one point ahead of his Finnish rival.
Citroen finished with a comfortable lead over Ford in the manufacturers' rankings.
In sports car competition, the two classic American endurance races again attracted drivers and manufacturers from around the world, but it was the closeness of the finishes that was notable.
In the 57th running of the 12 Hours of Sebring , four carmakers were represented in the most powerful LMP classes.
Matsui scored a record six runs batted in during the Yankees’ series-clinching victory. 2,280 km , and the average speed was 117.986 mph, the fastest ever for the event.
The defending champion team of Kristensen, Capello, and McNish, driving an Audi R15, struggled with mechanical problems and finished third overall.
It was pitcher Andy Pettitte’s third victory in as many clinching games during the 2009 postseason.
In game one at Yankee Stadium on October 28, Cliff Lee pitched a complete game and Chase Utley hit two home runs to propel the Phillies to a 6-1 victory.
Burnett, who pitched seven innings, and Mariano Rivera, who finished with two scoreless innings of relief.
When the Series moved to Philadelphia for game three on October 31, the Phillies jumped to a 3-0 lead off Pettitte, but they were overtaken and defeated 8-5 as three Yankees hit home runs—Alex Rodriguez, Nick Swisher, and Matsui.
In game four the Yankees scored three runs in the ninth inning to break a tie and forge a 7-4 victory.
Rodriguez drove in the winning run with a two-out double off loser Brad Lidge, and Jorge Posada followed with a tworun single.
The Phillies averted elimination by defeating the Yankees 8-6 in game five as Utley hit two more home runs in support of Lee, the winning pitcher.
With five home runs for the Series, Utley tied a record shared by former Yankees star Reggie Jackson.
The Phillies won the National League pennant by defeating the Los Angeles Dodgers 10-4 on October 21 in Philadelphia to capture the National League Championship Series four games to one and become the first team to reach consecutive World Series since the 2000 Yankees.
The Phillies advanced to the NLCS by defeating the Colorado Rockies three games to one in a best-of-five series.
In the AL Division Series, the Yankees swept the Minnesota Twins and the Angels swept the Boston Red Sox, both by three games to none in those best-of-five series.
Minnesota won the AL Central by defeating the Detroit Tigers 6-5 in a one-game play-off held in Minneapolis on October 6.
The Yankees won the AL East by eight games over the Red Sox, who qualified for the play-off wild-card berth with the best second-place record.
The Phillies captured first place in the NL East by six games; the Cardinals topped the NL Central by 7Vi games; and the Dodgers won the NL West by three games over the NL wild card, Colorado.
Joe Mauer of Minnesota batted .365 (the highest ever for a catcher) to claim his second consecutive—and his third in four years—AL batting title and the season MVP honours.
Hanley Ramirez of the Florida Marlins won the NL batting crown with .342.
The NL RBI leaders were Prince Fielder of the Milwaukee Brewers and Howard, both with 141.
Sabathia, Justin Verlander of Detroit, Felix Hernandez of the Seattle Mariners, and Adam Wain304 Sports and Games: Basketball wright of St.
Zack Greinke of the Kansas City Royals scored an MLB-best 2.16 earned run average and secured his first AL Cy Young Award.
Brian Fuentes of the Angels had 48 saves to lead the AL; the NL leader was Fteath Bell of the San Diego Padres, with 42.
On July 23 in Chicago's United States Cellular Field, Mark Buehrle of the AL White Sox pitched a perfect game, beating Tampa Bay 5-0.
The perfect game—all 27 opposition batters retired—was the 18th in major league history, and the 30-year-old left-hander became the sixth pitcher to record both a no-hitter and a perfect game.
Buehrle struck out six and was helped by a spectacular catch from centre fielder Dewayne Wise, who climbed the fence to deprive Gabe Kapler of a potential home run for the first out of the ninth inning.
Wise briefly lost control of the ball but then grabbed it as he fell to the ground.
San Franciscos Randy Johnson—who pitched the last perfect game for the Arizona Diamondbacks against the Atlanta Braves in 2004—recorded his 300th victory in June.
Jonathan Sanchez, a 26-yearold left-hander, pitched a no-hitter for San Francisco on July 10, defeating the Padres 8-0.
Rivera, the Yankees’ veteran relief pitcher, registered his 500th save.
Jason Giambi of the Oakland As hit his 400th home run, and Ichiro Suzuki of the Seattle Mariners smacked his 2,000th hit.
The AL continued its dominance in the midsummer event, extending its unbeaten string to 13 and thus securing home-field advantage in the World Series.
Curtis Granderson of the Tigers tripled in the eighth inning and scored on a sacrifice fly by Adam Jones of the Baltimore Orioles to break a 3-3 tie.
The Rays’ Carl Crawford was voted MVP of a game in which the NL scored all of its runs in the second inning.
Jonathan Papelbon of the Red Sox was credited with the victory, and Rivera claimed the save by pitching a scoreless ninth inning.
Chula Vista, Calif., defeated Taoyuan, Taiwan, 6-3 to win the Little League World Series on August 30 in South Williamsport, Pa.
Bulla Graft singled in the go-ahead run in the fourth inning, and Kiko Garcia pitched three-plus innings of scoreless relief for the victors, who secured a fifth consecutive LLWS title by United States representatives.
With Wen Hau Sung and Chin Ou hitting back-toback home runs in the third inning, Taiwan seized a 3-0 lead, but California replied with a run in the third before rallying in the fourth when Seth Godfrey drove in a run with a sacrifice fly and Nick Conlin scored on a wild pitch.
California advanced to the championship game by routing San Antonio, Texas, 12-2 with a nine-run outburst in the first inning that featured three home runs, including a grand slam by Andy Rios.
The Aragua Tigers , representing Venezuela, won the championship with a 5-1 record.
Puerto Rico’s champion, the Ponce Lions , and the Licey Tigers from the Dominican Republic tied for third.
Venezuela lost to South Korea by a score of 10-2 in the semifinals of the World Baseball Classic, held in Los Angeles in March.
Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Mexico, Panama, and Puerto Rico failed to reach the semifinal round of the 16-team tournament, which was won by Japan.
It was the first championship for Havana, which had defeated Isla de la Juventud four games to one in the quarterfinals and Pinar del Rio by four games to two in the semifinals to advance.
Isla de la Juventud infielder Michel Enriquez won the batting title with a .401 average.
Alfredo Despaigne from Granma set a new Cuban league home run record with 32.
Pinar del Rio pitcher Yuniesky Maya went 13-4 to lead the league in wins, while Yadier Pedroso from Havana posted a leagueleading 1.91 earned run average.
The Saltillo Sarape Makers (Saraperos) in August defeated the Quintana Roo Tigers four games to two to win its first Mexican League title after nearly 40 years in the league.
The Tigers, a team formerly based in Mexico City and Puebla , had won nine previous championships.
The Yomiuri Giants beat the Nippon-Ham Fighters 2-0 in game six at the Sapporo Dome, the Fighters’ home stadium, on Nov., 2009, to win the best-of-seven Japan Series by four games to two.
The Giants claimed their first Japan Series title in seven years and 21st overall.
Giants catcher Shinnosuke Abe was named the series Most Valuable Player after hitting .304 with two home runs and five runs batted in , including an RBI double in game six.
In the Central League Climax Series play-offs, the Giants downed the Chunichi Dragons four games to one in the decisive second stage after the Dragons eliminated the Yakult Swallows two games to one in the first stage.
In the Pacific League Climax Series, the Fighters beat the Rakuten Eagles four games to one in the second stage after the Eagles swept the Softbank Hawks in two games in the first stage.
Pitchers Kazuki Yoshimi of the Dragons and Shohei Tateyama of the Swallows tied for the CL lead with 16 wins.
In the second World Baseball Classic, Japan defended its 2006 title, defeating South Korea 5-3 in the final game in Los Angeles on March 23.
The Lakers’ Kobe Bryant, who earned his fourth NBA title—his first since 2001-02—was named the Most Valuable Player of the Finals after having averaged 32. points per game.
Basketball Bryant scored 30 points to go along with 6 rebounds, 5 assists, 4 blocked shots, and 2 steals.
One year after losing the championship to the Boston Celtics in six games, including a 39-point defeat in the final game, the Lakers became the first NBA team since the 1989 Detroit Pistons to win a championship the season after losing in the Finals.
Entering the playoffs, the Lakers ousted the Utah Jazz in the first round and then eked past the Houston Rockets in a hardfought seven-game series before dispatching the Denver Nuggets in six games in the Western Conference Finals.
The 2009 championship gave Lakers coach Phil Jackson his 209th postseason victory and a landmark 10th title, passing legendary Celtics coach Red Auerbach, who had captured nine titles.
Meanwhile, it was the first title for important role players such as forward Lamar Odom (10th season in the Kobe Bryant of the Los Angeles Lakers takes a jump shot past Courtney Lee of the Orlando Magic in the decisive fifth game of the 2009 NBA Finals.
Bryant scored 30 points in the game, which clinched the Lakers’ 15th NBA title. league) and forward Pau Gasol, who had been acquired from the Memphis Grizzlies 16 months earlier.
In the allimportant fifth game, Gasol had a double-double consisting of 14 points and 15 rebounds, Odom added 17 points and 10 rebounds, while Trevor Ariza had 15 points and Fisher 13.
The Magic, playing in the second championship round in the franchise's history and the first since 1995, connected on only 8 of 27 of their threepointers in the final game, although five players scored in double figures.
Orlando defeated the Philadelphia 76ers in the first round, upset the Celtics in a tough seven-game semifinal series, and reached the showdown with Los Angeles with a four-games-to-two victory over the Cleveland Cavaliers, led by regular-season MVP LeBron James (see BIOGRAPHIES), in the Eastern Conference Finals.
The Mercury won the first matchup of the five-game 2009 Finals and then lost two straight before coming back to defeat Indiana in games four and five.
The Mercury’s Diana Taurasi, the Finals MVP, scored 26 points, 6 rebounds, and 4 assists in the fifth game.
Going into the 2008-09 season, North Carolina was predicted to be the best team in college basketball, but when the Tar Heels lost their first two Atlantic Coast Conference games, the crowning looked to be premature.
By the time the teams arrived in Detroit for the National Collegiate Athletic Association Final Four in April 2009, however, Carolina was the big favourite again, and the team did not disappoint.
After being embarrassed in the 2008 semifinal game by Kansas, the Tar Heels played throughout the 2009 tournament like a team that could accept nothing short of winning the last game.
Carolina stars Tyler Hansbrough, Ty Lawson, and Wayne Ellington all passed on the 2008 National Basketball Association draft to make another run at a national championship.
Hansbrough ended his college career with more points than any previous player in ACC history.
Lawson had 21 points, 8 steals, 6 assists, and just 1 turnover in the championship game against Michigan State, while Ellington was named Most Outstanding Player of the Final Four.
Hansbrough, Lawson, and Ellington all were picked in the first round of the 2009 NBA draft.
Another Big East power, Villanova, also made the Final Four but had the bad fortune of drawing North Carolina in the semifinal.
In the womens NCAA tournament, Connecticut did not just win its sixth national womens championship; UConn dominated from start to finish, winning every game in the 2008-09 season by double figures.
Tina Charles, who scored 25 points and had 19 rebounds against Louisville, was named the Most Outstanding Player of the Final Four.
The 2008-09 team was clearly one of his best, with stars at every position.
No star was bigger than sophomore Maya Moore, one of the most versatile talents in the history of her sport, who won the Player of the Year award.
Meanwhile, every key UConn player except senior point guard Renee Montgomery would be back for the 2009-10 season.
The victory added credibility to Spain’s dream of defending its 2006 Federation Internationale de Basketball men's world championship in Turkey in 2010.
The team traveling to Turkey was expected to include Pau Gasol, Spains 2.13-m (7ft)-tall centre, who led his team against Serbia with 18 points, 11 rebounds, and 3 blocks—all game highs.
In addition to Spain and Serbia, the teams from Europe that qualified for the 2010 world championship included EuroBasket bronze-medalist Greece and fourth-place finisher Slovenia.
France and Croatia won classification games to join the other European qualifiers and host country Turkey.
With the United States having qualified for Turkey on the basis of its gold medal at the 2008 Olympics in Beijing, four slots were available from the Americas championship.
Canada rebounded from a string of defeats against Uruguay, Puerto Rico, Argentina, and Brazil by beating Panama and upsetting the favoured Dominican Republic to reach the semifinals and qualify.
Angola, Cote d’Ivoire, and Tunisia qualified from the African championship, played in August in Tripoli, Libya.
The Czech Republic and the United States (the 2008 Olympic champion) were the first names in the ring for the 2010 FIBA women’s world championship.
France upset defending champion Russia in the women’s EuroBasket final in June in Riga, Latvia, as they both qualified, along with Spain, Belarus, and Greece.
Brazil, Argentina, and Canada qualified from the Americas, and Oceania’s Australia joined Asian qualifiers China, South Korea, and Japan.
From Africa, Senegal and Mali went through to round out the 16-team tournament.
During the 2008-09 bobsleigh season, Russian pilot Aleksandr Zubkov finished atop the overall fourman and combined World Cup standings, having collected nine World Cup medals, three at Park City, Utah, and one at each other venue on the circuit.
At the 2009 world championships, held in February in Lake Placid, N.Y., however, he finished fourth in both disciplines.
Beat Hefti of Switzerland, with seven medals throughout the season, took the two-man title in overall World Cup standings and was second in combined standings, but, like Zubkov, he could not get on the podium at the world championships.
The four-man win at the world championships went to American pilot Steven Holcomb.
Andre Lange of Germany took silver, and Latvian Janis Minins secured the bronze.
In the twoman event, Switzerland's Ivo Rueegg and Germany’s Thomas Florschutz finished first and second, respectively, with Holcomb in third place.
On the women's circuit, Sandra Kiriasis of Germany won her seventh straight overall World Cup title, having collected seven medals in eight World Cup races.
She also contributed to Germany’s world championship team title but fell to a disappointing seventh place in the two-woman event in Lake Placid.
Fellow German Cathleen Martini finished second in the overall World German bobsleigh pilot Sandra Kiriasis and her brakewoman, Berit Wiacker, push off in the World Clip event in St.
The duo won the race en route to Kiriasis’s seventh consecutive overall World Cup title.
The world championship gold medal went to British pilot Nicola Minichiello.
Aleksandr Tretiakov of Russia showed consistency throughout the 2008-09 skeleton season and won the overall World Cup title.
He earned five podium finishes during the World Cup season and finished third at the 2009 world championships in Lake Placid.
British slider Adam Pengilly took second place at the event, his only medal of the year.
In women’s action, Marion Trott of Germany finished atop the World Cup rankings, Shelley Rudman of Great Britain took second, and American Katie Uhlaender was third overall.
Trott also earned the gold medal at the world championships, ahead of silver medalist Amy Williams of Great Britain and fellow German Kerstin Szymkowiak, who took the bronze.
At the luge world championships in Lake Placid, N.Y., in February 2009, American Erin Hamlin slid to gold, the first time since 1993 that a non-German slider had won the world crown.
The silver and bronze medals went to Germany’s Natalie Geisenberger and Ukrainian Natalia Yakushenko, respectively.
German slider Tatjana Hufner again dominated the World Cup season, finishing in the top two in all nine races and first in the overall standings, ahead of Geisenberger and Anke Wischnewski of Germany.
Italian Armin Zoggeler continued his men’s singles dominance, finishing in the top three spots in eight out of nine races and earning his eighth (and fourth straight) overall World Cup title.
Zoggeler, however, was defeated for the world championship gold by German slider Felix Loch, who did not compete in the first three races of the 2008-09 season but came on strong at the end.
Germany, Italy, and Austria dominated the podium throughout the men’s doubles season, with Italy’s Christian Oberstolz and Patrick Gruber earning the overall World Cup title.
At the world championships, Italians Gerhard Plankensteiner and Oswald Haselrieder upset Andre Florschiitz and Torsten Wustlich of Germany for the gold.
In December it appeared likely that the much-anticipated fight could take place in 2010.
Pacquiao continued to move from one weight division to another with spectacular results.
On May 2 he won The Ring magazine junior welterweight championship with a stunning secondround knockout of Ricky Hatton at the MGM Grand in Las Vegas.
The 16,262 fans in attendance and a payper-view audience of approximately 800,000 saw Pacquiao knock out Hatton with a left hand that crashed into the side of the Englishman's jaw with such a paralyzing impact that the recipient was unconscious before he hit the floor.
Mayweather, who had not fought since Dec., 2007, returned to action on September 19 and won a unanimous 12-round decision over Ring and World Boxing Association lightweight champion Juan Manuel Marquez at the MGM Grand.
Marquez’s titles were not at stake because the bout was fought in the welterweight division.
Although Mayweather knocked down Marquez in the second round, it was a rather uneventful fight, with Mayweather's speed and size advantages carrying him to an easy points verdict.
The crowd of 13,116 was several thousand fewer than capacity, but the 1.05 million pay-perview buys were significantly better than expected.
After taking some early punishment from his hardhitting adversary, Pacquiao knocked down Cotto in the third and fourth rounds to take control of the fight.
The grotesquely battered Cotto was rescued by the referee in the final round.
Approximately 1.25 million pay-per-view packages were sold, and a crowd of more than 16,200 packed the MGM Grand for the event.
For the second year in a row, Pacquiao was selected as The Ring magazine's Fighter of the Year.
The heavyweight division continued to be dominated by Ukrainian brothers Wladimir and Vitali Klitschko.
Vitali thrice defended the World Boxing Council title, stopping both Juan Carlos Gomez in the ninth round of a bout held on March 21 in Stuttgart, Ger., and Chris Arreola in the 10th round on September 26 in Los Angeles.
In his final bout of the year, Vitali tallied a 12-round unanimous decision over Kevin Johnson on December 12 in Berne, Switz.
Cricket when more than 60,000 fans filled the Veltins Arena in Gelsenkirchen, Ger., to see him stop previously undefeated Ruslan Chagaev in the ninth round.
The one-sided match was Wladimir's seventh successful defense of the International Boxing Federation title, and the victory also earned him the vacant Ring magazine heavyweight championship.
The former undisputed cruiserweight champion David Haye entered the heavyweight sweepstakes by winning the WBA belt via a 12-round decision over Nikolay Valuyev on November 7 in Nurnberg, Ger.
The flamboyant Haye was expected to add some much-needed colour to the drab heavyweight picture.
Tomasz Adamek , the reigning IBF and Ring magazine cruiserweight champion, made two successful defenses in 2009.
He knocked out Johnathon Banks in the eighth round on February 27 and battered Bobby Gunn on July 11 until the referee ended the fight in the fourth round.
Both bouts were contested in Newark, N.J., where a large Polish American population supported Adamek.
The Polish fighter returned to his homeland for his third bout of the year, stopping former heavyweight contender Andrew Golota in the fifth round on October 24 in Lodz.
Despite the fact that Golota was well past his prime, the so-called Polish Fight of the Century bout was a financial success.
It attracted a capacity crowd of 14,000 and was viewed by more than 10 million people on Polsat, Poland’s largest television network.
Following a ninth-round knockout of Marco Antonio Rubio on February 21 in Youngstown, Ohio, Ring and WBC middleweight champion Kelly Pavlik was sidelined for much of the year with a staphylococcus infection.
He returned to action on December 19, scoring a fifth-round technical knockout of Miguel Angel Espino in Youngstown.
Subscription cable TV network Showtime launched a round-robin tournament featuring six of the world’s top super middleweights.
In the first series of bouts, WBC titleholder Carl Froch won a close 12-round decision over Andre Dirrell , on October 17 in Nottingham, Eng.
On the same night in Berlin, Arthur Abraham knocked out former world middleweight champion Jermain Taylor in the 12th round.
On November 21 Andre Ward beat Mikkel Kessler via an 1 lth-round technical decision in Oakland, Calif.
Then former IBF super featherweight and WBC junior welterweight titleholder Arturo Gatti was found dead on July 11 in Porto de Galinhas, Braz., where he was vacationing with his Brazilian wife.
Finally, on July 25 reigning WBC junior middleweight titleholder Vernon Forrest was shot and killed during a robbery at a gas station in Atlanta.
CRICKET On March 3, 2009, the Sri Lankan cricket team bus was attacked on its way to the Gaddafi Stadium in Lahore, Pak., for the Second Test against Pakistan.
Six policemen were killed in the gun battle, and Pakistan umpire Ahsan Raza suffered bullet wounds in the chest.
Although the majority of the Sri Lankan players were unhurt, Thilan Samaraweera was hit in the left leg by a bullet and had to stay behind in the hospital as his teammates were immediately flown home.
It was the first time that the sport had been the target of a terrorist attack, and the cricket world reacted with shock.
Just three months earlier, in late November 2008, a terrorist attack on the Taj Mahal Palace hotel in Mumbai had resulted in the cancellation of the last two one-day internationals between England and India.
The England players, who had stayed at the hotel a fortnight before, flew home, and it was widely presumed that the Test series in December would be canceled.
The England players, however, under the captaincy of Kevin Pietersen, unanimously agreed to return to India to play the two Tests, and in the end their 1-0 defeat was less important than their gesture in defying the terrorists.
Pakistan became a ""no-go” area for international cricket, and the second season of the Indian Premier League had to be moved to South Africa at short notice after security officials in India said that they could not police both the IPL and the pending Indian general election.
It took a thrilling double-header series between Australia and South Africa in December and early January 2009 to lift the gloom.
For the first time in more than a decade, Australia lost its position as the number one team in the world after South Africa had claimed a 2-1 victory in Australia to move to the top of the rankings.
Inspired by its captain, Graeme Smith, South Africa won a series in Australia for the first time, while the former champions, depleted by the recent retirements of Shane Warne, Glenn McGrath, and Adam Gilchrist, lost to India and, most painfully, to England.
Australia did gain a measure of revenge, beating South Africa, also by 2-1, in the return Test series in South Africa.
Pietersen was dismissed from the captaincy after just three Test matches in charge because of a personality clash with coach Peter Moores.
Pietersen wanted Moores to go, but the selectors dismissed both, and a new captaincoach combination of Andrew Strauss and Andy Flower, respectively, was appointed for the series in the Caribbean.
West Indies, desperate to win back the Wisden Trophy from England for the first time since 1997, took the opening Test after a devastating spell of five wickets for 11 runs by fast bowler Jerome Taylor and, helped by lifeless pitches, largely played for draws thereafter.
The second Test in Antigua had to be abandoned after only a few balls because the outfield was deemed unfit for play.
The match was rescheduled for the Recreation Ground, the island's former Test ground.
England was unable to press home its advantage in the remaining Tests and lost the series 1-0.
Defeated in the return series in England, the West Indies team went on strike after a pay dispute with the West Indies Cricket Board.
When a scratch team of second-string players lost 2-0 to Bangladesh, which had a previous Test record of 59-1, it ranked as an alltime low for the game in the Caribbean.
The long-awaited Ashes series in England did not quite live up to the 2005 series, though the result—2-1 to the home team—was the same.
England held on for a thrilling draw in the opening Test in Cardiff, Wales, and then took the lead in the series at Lord’s, where an inspired spell of fast bowling by Andrew Flintoff conjured up memories of the 2005 Ashes.
Flintoff, a charismatic but injury-prone all-rounder, retired from Test cricket to concentrate on playing one-day and 20/20 cricket.
During the Third Test, Captain Ricky Ponting became the leading run scorer in Australian cricket, surpassing Allan Border’s career total of 11,174, but he was unable to avoid the ignominy of having lost two Ashes series.
Sachin Tendulkar of India became the leading run scorer in Test history when he passed former West Indian star Brian Lara's record of 11,953 runs in the Second Test against Australia at Mohali, India.
In women’s cricket, England's players, led by Charlotte Edwards, swept all before them, winning both the 50-over World Cup and the 20/20 World Cup and retaining the Ashes against Australia.
CURLING China won its first women’s world curling championship on March 29, 2009, when Wang Bingyu defeated Sweden’s Anette Norberg 8-6 in the final in Kangnung, S.Kor.
Denmark’s Angelina Jensen edged defending champion Jennifer Jones of Canada 7-6 for the bronze.
Switzerland, Germany, Russia, Scotland, the U.S., South Korea, Norway, and Italy.
On April 12, Scotland’s David Murdoch took the men’s world championship in Moncton, N.B., by stealing two points in the final end of an 8-6 victory over defending champion Kevin Martin of Canada.
Norway’s Thomas Ulsrud won his third bronze with a 6-4 victory over Ralph Stockli of Switzerland.
The order of finish for the rest of the men’s field was the U.S., Germany, Denmark, France, China, Japan, the Czech Republic, and Finland.
The world junior championship in March was a test event of the Olympic venue for the 2010 Vancouver Winter Games.
Denmark’s Rasmus Stjerne gained the men’s title with a 9-6 win over Canada's Brett Gallant in the final, while Scotland’s Eve Muirhead won her third straight gold medal and second as a skip in an 8-6 victory over Canada's Kaitlyn Lawes.
American Chris Plys took the men’s junior bronze, with Switzerland’s Martina Baumann earning the women's.
At the world mixed doubles championship in Cortina d’Ampezzo, Italy, in April, Switzerland’s Toni Muller and Irene Schori earned their second straight title with a 7-4 victory over Hungary's Gyorgy Nagy and Ildiko Szekeres.
Pat Sanders downed Switzerland’s Renate Nedkoff 10-1 to win the women's title; Ingrid Meldahl of Sweden took the bronze.
Eugene Hritzuk held off Paul Pustovar of the United States in a 4-3 victory for the men’s senior championship, with Scotland’s Kevin Prentice placing third.
CYCLING The return to competition of American cyclist Lance Armstrong after an absence of more than three years and his rivalry with Spanish teammate Alberto Contador in the sport’s premier road event, the Tour de France, dominated the cycling headlines in 2009.
Armstrong, who retired in 2005 after having won the threeweek Tour for a record seventh time, fractured his collarbone during a preparation race in March but was able to contest the Giro d’ltalia (Tour of Italy); he finished 12th overall behind the winner, Denis Menchov of Russia.
In the Tour de France, Armstrong failed by less than a second to take the yellow jersey (worn by the overall leader) from Switzerland’s Fabian Cancellara after the fourth stage; three days later the American fell behind Contador on the first mountain stage.
Contador won with a margin of 4 min 11 sec over Andy Schleck of Luxembourg.
Armstrong finished third to become, at 37, the second oldest rider to have stood on the podium.
The subject of doping reemerged during the final week of the Tour when the sport’s governing body, the Union Cycliste Internationale , announced that Italian rider Danilo Di Luca had failed two tests for continuous erythropoietin receptor activator during the Giro dltalia, in which he had finished second overall.
Tour de France stage winner Mikel Astarloza of Spain was later declared positive for EPO from an out-of-competition test taken on June 26.
Spanish cyclist Alberto Contador rides triumphantly through the streets of Paris on July 26 after winning the 2009 Tour de France.
Bas Czerwinski/AP Switzerland hosted the UCI world road championships and celebrated a home victory in the men’s individual time trial for Cancellara, who dominated the 49.8km test to take the title for the third time.
American Kristin Armstrong regained the women’s time trial title, which she had won in 2006.
Cadel Evans gave Australia its first men’s road race title, attacking in the closing stages to finish 27 seconds clear of his nearest rivals after almost seven hours of racing.
She recorded a time of 33.296 sec to take the title ahead of Australia’s Anna Meares, who had set the previous record of 33.588 sec in 2007.
Taylor Phinney of the United States won the men’s elite 4,000-m individual pursuit at the age of only 18, becoming the first American man to take a senior world track title since Marty Nothstein in 1996.
Two supremely talented female horses, Zenyatta and Rachel Alexandra, thundered their way through flawless campaigns to dominate the American Thoroughbred racing landscape in 2009.
Their respective history-making seasons set the stage for a battle between the two for Horse of the Year honours.
The win vaulted her career earnings to $5,474,580, surpassing Azeri as the leading money-winning North Americanbased female horse of all time.
Rachel Alexandra notched her eighth win of a perfect season by defeating older horses in the $750,000 Woodward Stakes at Saratoga Race Course in Saratoga Springs, N.Y., on September 5, becoming the first female in 56 editions of the race to do so.
Earlier in the year she won the Preakness Stakes, the second jewel of American racings Triple Crown.
The spring classic season began in stunning fashion when Mine That Bird, an unheralded three-year-old, won the 135th running of the Kentucky Derby.
Sent off at odds of more than 50-1, the bay gelding stormed from last in the field of 19 with about half a mile left to prevail by 6% lengths over Pioneerof the Nile and return $103.20 to win, second only to the $184.90 that bettors collected for Donerail's 1913 triumph in the race.
It was the second Kentucky Derby triumph in three years for Mine That Birds colourful 42-year-old jockey, Calvin Borel, who won in 2007 with Street Sense.
In a somewhat controversial decision, Borel gave up the mount on Mine That Bird to ride Rachel Alexandra in the Preakness two weeks later.
It proved the right move, however, as Rachel Alexandra held off the late charge of Mine That Bird, ridden by Mike Smith, to win by one length and become the first filly in 85 years to master the l 3 /i6-mi test.
When Rachel Alexandra was not entered to race in the third jewel, the Belmont Stakes, Borel was back up on Mine That Bird in his attempt to become the first jockey in history to win all three of the year’s Triple Crown races aboard different horses.
The H/ 2 mi classic went to the stretch as Summer Bird, ridden by Kent Desormeaux, charged past Mine That Bird, which faded to third in the field of 10 after having gained the lead in the stretch.
The year began on an ominous note when it was announced in January that wagering on racing in the United States in 2008 reported a more than $1 billion decline, or 7.2%, from the previous year.
Dwindling coverage of racing in the country’s daily newspapers was hit even further by the December 2008 layoffs of longtime turf writers Neil Milbert of the Chicago Tribune and John Scheinman of the Washington Post, as well as by the death on January 9 of Joe Hirsch, the ""dean of American turf writers,’’ at the age of 80.
Hirsch joined the staff of the Daily Racing Form in 1954 and remained there until his retirement in 2003.
Among notable milestones during the year was jockey Stewart Elliott's 4,000th career victory at Philadelphia Park on January 18.
Robby Albarado and Jose Flores reached the 4,000-win plateau on the same day.
Hall of Fame inductees in 2009 included trainer Bob Baffert, jockey Eddie Maple, and horses Silverbulletday and Tiznow.
Historic Churchill Downs in Louisville, Ky., experimented with night racing for the first time by presenting three summer racing programs in June and July under portable lights.
After the three night-racing cards attracted average attendance of 29,705, Churchill officials began accepting bids for the installation of permanent lighting for the track’s 2010 season.
An August 4 storm produced a record 15-cm rainfall in a little over an hour in Louisville, flooding the areas surrounding the track and creating an estimated $4 million in damage to the Kentucky Derby Museum, which was closed for the remainder of the year.
Magna Entertainment Corp. filed for bankruptcy in March and announced plans to auction off its racing properties.
Remington Park in Oklahoma City was sold for $80.25 million to a subsidiary of the Chickasaw Nation, while Thistledown in North Randall, Ohio, went to Harrah's Entertainment, Inc., for $89. million.
Controversy continued to swirl around synthetic racing surfaces when 12 horses died from injuries suffered on the Polytrack surface at Del Mar during the southern California track's 37-day racing meet, an increase from 6 in 2008 and 8 in 2007.
Thoroughbred horse racing prize money in Britain and Ireland fell in 2009.
Only in France did it remain strong, thanks to progressive reductions in the pari-mutuel takeout since 1999.
The Thoroughbred filly Rachel Alexandra charges to the finish line of the Preakness Stakes on May 16 as jockey Calvin Borel glances back at the trailing pack.
Equestrian Sports number of horses in training for flat racing in England fell, but the number of races increased.
Sea The Stars, ridden by Mick Kinane, was unbeaten in all six of his Group 1 races, including the 2,000 Guineas, the Derby, the Irish Champion Stakes, and the Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe in France.
Leger to race in the Arc, Mastery, winner of the Italian Derby in May, took the third jewel in the British Triple Crown series.
Scenic Blast became the fourth Australian winner of the Group 1 King’s Stand Stakes since 2003.
Wesley Ward, who brought six horses from Kentucky, won with two juveniles and was beaten by a neck with Cannonball in the Golden Jubilee Stakes.
In Canada, Eye of the Leopard won the Plate Trial and was the victorious favourite in the Queen’s Plate.
He lost his way thereafter, finishing third to Gallant in the Prince of Wales Stakes.
Perfect Shower completed the Canadian Triple Crown with a triumph in the Breeders’ Stakes.
Seven-year-old Viewed, which in 2008 secured veteran trainer Bart Cummings’s 12th Melbourne Cup victory captured Australia’s Caulfield Cup in October but fell to seventh behind 9-1 upset winner Shocking in the Melbourne Cup.
Another Cummings horse, three-year-old So You Think, won the Cox Plate, giving Cummings his 256th Group 1 career victory.
Kieren Fallon returned to the saddle on September 4 after having served an 18-month ban for taking cocaine.
The six-time British champion jockey was banned by the French authorities a month after his trial on race-fixing charges was dismissed in December 2007.
The British Horseracing Authority in July banned the other three professionals involved in that trial.
Karl Burke, who had trained his first Group 1 winner the previous month, was banned for a year.
Fergal Lynch, who was fined £50,000 (about $82,000), moved to ride in the U.S., where Philadelphia Park handed him a similar ban.
Darren Williams was suspended for three months and then was refused a license to ride again.
Sir Michael Stoute won his 10th training championship in Britain, and his retained jockey Ryan Moore was champion for the third time.
Most of his horses were ridden by Ioritz Mendizabal, who was named champion jockey for the third time, or by Christophe Lemaire, whose replacement of Christophe Soumillon as the Aga Khan’s retained jockey was announced in August.
Aidan O’Brien was champion trainer for the 12th time in Ireland, while his jockey Johnny Murtagh won his fourth title.
Vincent O’Brien, the greatest trainer produced by Ireland and one of the most influential anywhere in the second half of the 20th century, died on June 1.
Great Leighs racecourse, which opened in April 2008, ceased to operate after its meeting on January 15.
Ffos Las, with flat and jumping turf tracks constructed on what was once the largest opencast mine in Europe, opened on June 18.
France added a new all-weather track at Lyon, where La Soie was built on the site of the former turf course at Villeurbanne.
Nad al Sheba racecourse in Dubai , where the U.S.-trained Well Armed won the Dubai World Cup by 14 lengths on March 28, was demolished immediately thereafter.
Meydan racecourse was built on the same site, with a Tapeta all-weather surface replacing the dirt track.
Qatar joined the countries promoting international racing as Age of Reason, trained in Dubai, won the first Qatar International Cup on February 26.
The three-year-old trotter Muscle Hill dominated the North American harness racing news in 2009 by going undefeated in a dozen starts and earning $2,456,041.
His victories included the Hambletonian, the Kentucky Futurity, the World Trotting Derby and the Breeders Crown.
Muscle Hill was touted by many veteran horsemen as the greatest trotter ever, certainly the best in recent decades.
He never seemed to be working hard to win his races but always seemed to be well within himself even as his rivals were struggling across the finish line far behind him.
His victory in the Hambletonian was timed in 1:50 'Is for the mile, the fastest clocking ever in the U.S.'s greatest trotting classic, which was begun in 1926.
In two seasons on the track, Muscle Hill won 20 of 21 starts and a total of $3,273,342.
His only loss occurred in the first race of his life, when he was beaten by only a neck.
The top three-year-old pacer of 2009 was Well Said, a quicksilver colt with an amazing burst of speed.
He used that speed to win $1,982,654 and 10 of 14 starts, including the Little Brown Jug, the Meadowlands Pace, and the North America Cup, a sweep that had last been accomplished in 1991.
Well Said did not just defeat his rivals, however; he humiliated them by winning the Meadowlands Pace by 6 lengths and the North America Cup by 3V4 lengths.
His victory in the Little Brown Jug was closer, but he was clearly in control of that race.
Without question, the best turnaround horse of the year was the fouryear-old Lucky Jim.
He won 17 of his 18 starts during the season and earned $1,063,618 after having been winless in nine starts in 2008.
He had shown ability in his races as a twoand three-yearold in 2007 and 2008, respectively, but had won only twice in 20 starts over those two seasons.
Lucky Jim was moved to trainer Julie Miller in 2009 and was castrated, which allowed him to focus more on racing.
His only loss came in the Maple Leaf Trot, when he was caught behind a horse that slowed unexpectedly, causing Lucky Jim to lose ground.
He finished fast but was still three-quarters of a length short at the finish line.
In late January, French fans saluted Pierre Levesque for having trained three consecutive winners of the Prix d’Amerique, the greatest trotting race in France.
The 2009 race was taken by Meaulnes du Corta, trained by Levesque but driven by Franck Nivard.
Although Meaulnes du Corta was known to be a fast horse, he was also high-strung.
In the 2009 Prix d'Amerique, however, he was flawless as Nivard put him in front early in the 2,700-m race, and they won easily.
Levesque also finished fifth with Offshore Dream, a horse he had trained and driven to victory in the Prix d’Amerique in 2007 and 2008.
Sweden’s most prestigious race, the Elitlopp, was taken in late May by Torvald Palema, a trotter trained and driven by Ake Svanstedt.
The eightyear-old stallion sprinted down the long homestretch at the Solvalla track to win over Jaded of Sweden, Offshore Dream, and another French horse, Nimrod Borealis.
Football Michael Sohn/AP In the last UEFA Cup final, on May 20, Brazilian international Jadson kicks in the winning goal for the Ukrainian club Shakhtar Donetsk, which defeated Germany’s Werder Bremen 2-1 in overtime.
Mr Feelgood won the Inter Dominion Pacing Final in Australia in late March, becoming the first horse ever to win the Little Brown Jug in the United States and then the biggest race in Australasia.
A group of New Zealanders had paid $600,000 for Mr Feelgood in late 2008 and shipped him to their homeland.
The American import raced brilliantly, winning the Inter Dominion by a neck over three-time champion Blacks A Fake.
McCoy on Feb., 2009, became the first man to ride 3,000 winners over jumps when he charged to victory on Restless d'Artaix at Plumpton.
McCoy went on to secure his 14th consecutive British jockey championship, while Paul Nicholls was champion trainer for the fourth time.
Nicholls won the Cheltenham Gold Cup with Kauto Star , the Queen Mother Champion Chase with Master Minded, and the Hennessy Cognac Gold Cup with Neptune Collonges.
The 2008 Australian Grand National winner, Ginolad, finished sixth and was later sent to be trained by Williams.
In 2009 European national association football teams focused their attention on the qualifying matches for the 2010 Federation Internationale de Football Association World Cup.
Meanwhile, the world’s richest football clubs seemed to have escaped the global economic downturn.
Florentino Perez returned as president of Spains Real Madrid after a three-year absence, during which time the club dispensed with three coaches and five presidents.
His return prompted serious attempts to redress Real Madrid’s balance with rival Barcelona, which in 2009 won the Union des Associations Europeennes de Football Champions League and achieved a La Liga and Copa del Rey domestic double.
Real Madrid’s €411 million annual income was derived from television rights, ticket sales, and marketing, and in the summer of 2009 some €282 million was spent on eight additional players in trades, plus a new coach, Manuel Pellegrini.
Real Madrid twice broke the world transfer-fee record in the space of a few days in June, paying €76 million for Brazilian international Kaka from AC Milan and then topping this by paying €94 million to Manchester United for FIFA’s World Player of the Year Cristiano Ronaldo.
Major Spanish clubs already had a substantial quota of foreigners, with half of Barcelona’s squad hailing from abroad, as well as 15 of 25 players on Real’s first-team roster.
Athletic Club Bilbao, on the other hand, had none, having recruited mainly from the Basque region.
The UEFA, the European governing body, and its president, Michel Platini, expressed concern over the English Premier League clubs’ continued reliance on foreigners, questioning the teams’ ability or will to manage within their means.
While Manchester United was largely quiet in the 2009 marketplace, neighbouring Manchester City continued to spend freely on new players, paying out some £200 million during the year.
At the start of the 2009-10 season, English Premier League clubs had players from 68 different countries, with foreign imports representing nearly 60% of the 20 club rosters.
FIFA fined Chelsea and banned the club from signing players until January 2011; the London-based club had allegedly induced Gael Kakuta to sign with it in 2007 while he was under contract to the French club Lens, a breach of FIFA’s Status and Transfer of Players regulation.
After winning its third successive Premier League championship, Manchester United failed in its bid to retain the UEFA Champions League title.
In the final against Barcelona, held on May 27 in Rome, United started as the more confident team, moving the ball around with precision.
The first potential scoring opportunity came from a free kick by Ronaldo, but it was not one of his best attempts.
It did cause Spanish goalkeeper Victor Valdes to spill the ball, only for South Korean Park JiSung’s follow-up to be blocked for a comer kick.
Barcelona took the lead in the 10th minute when the ball was moved to Cameroonian forward Samuel Eto’o on the right wing.
He cut inside Serbia's Nemanja Vidic and, with just a glimpse of the goal, fired the ball in off Dutch goalkeeper Edwin Van der Sar’s hand inside his near post.
Eto’o’s goal had an uplifting effect on the Catalans, who settled down to dominate the match with close, accurate passing.
United switched to a 4-4-2 formation in the second half, but Barcelona remained the more dangerous side.
Football kick from Xavi Hernandez shaved the outside of the post, and it was not until the 70th minute that Barcelona was able to add another goal.
Xavi, orchestrating the strategy and pace of the game from midfield, found the United defense in some disarray.
His lofted pinpoint diagonal ball was perfectly timed by the Argentine international Lionel Messi , who twisted in the air and scored with a looping header for the 2-0 win.
A week earlier, on May 20, Shakhtar Donetsk of Ukraine and Germany’s Werder Bremen had faced off in the final of the last UEFA Cup.
The match took place in the Sukru Saracoglu Stadium in Istanbul, the first time that a UEFA final had been held in Asia.
Shakhtar adopted an attacking formation but with an isolated striker and took the lead in the 25th minute through a goal by Luiz Adriano.
A pass from Romanian international Razvan Rat had been aimed at Ilsinho, who collided with the referee.
Adriano then chipped the ball delicately over the advancing Tim Wiese into the German goal.
Werder tied the score 10 minutes later when Naldo’s strongly struck free-kick went straight at Ukrainian goalkeeper Andriy Pyatov, who fumbled the ball into his own net.
The score remained even at the end of regulation, but seven minutes into overtime Jadson scored from Croatian Darijo Sma’s low cross to give Shakhtar a 2-1 win and Ukraine its first European trophy.
For the first time since the English Premier League was formed in 1992, average attendance figures for the season were topped by those in the German Bundesliga, which averaged 42,565 spectators per game.
The game in Germany also reported success at intermediate international levels, with the teams at the Under-17, Under-19, and Under-21 levels winning European championship titles.
At the domestic level in Europe, teams witnessed the continuing spread of rotating the player squad system.
In the English Premier League, fewer than 2% of players were always present.
In the 2009 FA Cup final on May 30, Louis Saha scored the event’s fastestever goal in 25 seconds for Everton against Chelsea, but goals by Didier Drogba and Frank Lampard pushed Chelsea to a 2-1 victory.
Wolfsburg won its first German Bundesliga title, whereas Lyon failed to secure an eighth consecutive French League championship.
Standard Liege won its play-off against Anderlecht after a tie at the top of the Belgian League.
Marc Janko of Red Bulls Salzburg scored 39 goals in 34 Austrian League matches.
Martin Kamburov of Lokomotiv Sofia was signed halfway through the season but finished top scorer in Bulgaria with 17 goals.
Daniel Jarque, the 26-year-old captain of RCD Espanyol, suffered a massive heart attack and died on August 8 during a preseason tour in Italy.
Brazil comfortably won the South American qualifying tournament to retain its record of having participated in all World Cup finals.
Paraguay and Chile, both under Argentine coaches (Gerardo Martino and Marcelo Bielsa, respectively), also had no problems.
Argentina, however, coached by the controversial former World Cup star Diego Maradona, gained the fourth automatic qualifying place only on the last day, with below-par performances.
Meanwhile, Argentine star Lionel Messi, who played professionally for Barcelona, was named Federation Internationale de Football Association Player of the Year.
The United States qualified for the World Cup finals for the 6th straight time by winning the North, Central America and Caribbean zone, followed by Mexico (in its 14th finals appearance) and Honduras.
The United States also showed that it was becoming a power in soccer by reaching the Confederations Cup final, losing 3-2 to defending champion Brazil.
Argentina’s Estudiantes de La Plata won the South American club championship, the Libertadores de America Cup, for the fourth time by beating Brazil’s Cruzeiro 0-0, 2-1.
The CONCACAF (Confederation of North, Central American and Caribbean Association Football) club championship had an all-Mexican final for the third time in four years, with Atlante beating Cruz Azul 2-0, 0-0.
In the first womens Libertadores Cup, host Santos of Brazil, led by star player Marta Vieira da Silva, overwhelmed Paraguay’s Universidad Autonoma de Asuncion 9-0 in the final.
In the 2009 South American Recopa, Liga Deportiva Universitaria of Quito, Ecuador, the 2008 Libertadores Cup winner, defeated Brazil’s Intemacional, the 2008 South American Cup winner.
LDU also secured the South American Cup in a rematch against 2008 Libertadores finalist Fluminense, which just avoided relegation from the Brazilian championship won by popular Rio de Janeiro rival Flamengo.
Real Salt Lake, which was founded only in 2004, won the United States Major League Soccer title for the first time.
Salt Lake barely qualified for the play-offs but defeated the Columbus Crew and the Chicago Fire before beating the Los Angeles Galaxy on penalty kicks in the MLS Cup final that was held on November 22.
In the inaugural African Nations Championship, a competition designed for players regularly appearing in African association football leagues, the Democratic Republic of the Congo made a remarkable recovery to win the trophy beating Ghana 2-0 in the final on March 8, 2009, in Abidjan, Cote d’Ivoire.
Only eight days previously the DRC had been beaten 3-0 in a group match by the same Ghana team.
Kaluyituka Dioko and Mbenza Bedi settled the final for the DRC, scoring goals one minute into the second period and in the 74th minute, respectively.
In the Gulf Cup final in Oman, the host country defeated Saudi Arabia 6-5 in a penalty shoot-out after a scoreless draw.
During the tournament neither team had conceded a goal in 90 minutes of regular play.
Alabama knocked Texas star quarterback Colt McCoy out of the game early with an injured throwing shoulder, and the All-American did not return in his final game for the Big 12 champion Longhorns.
Ingram became the first player in Alabama history to win the Heisman Trophy, beating out Stanford running back Toby Gerhart by 28 points in the closest vote in the awards 75-year history.
The sophomore rushed for a schoolrecord 1,542 yd, gaining 6. yd per carry and scoring 15 touchdowns in the regular season.
News involving coaches dominated college football after the regular season.
Notre Dame fired Charlie Weis after the Fighting Irish lost their last four games and replaced him with Brian Kelly, who then left Cincinnati before the Bearcats’ loss to Florida in the Sugar Bowl.
Florida coach Urban Meyer was on the sideline during that game, just days after he said that he was taking a leave of absence to concentrate on his health.
After beating Cincinnati, however, Meyer said that he planned on returning to Florida for the 2010-11 season.
Leach was let go amid allegations that he had mistreated sophomore wide receiver Adam James after that player suffered a concussion.
McCoy won the Maxwell Award for most outstanding player, the Walter Camp Player of the Year award, the Davey O’Brien National Quarterback Award, and the Johnny Unitas Golden Arm Award as top senior quarterback.
Houston’s Case Keenum led the FBS with 44 touchdown throws and 5,671 yd passing, more than 1,400 yd better than second-place Levi Brown of Troy.
Gerhart won the Doak Walker Award as the top running back, having finished first in the FBS with 1,871 yd rushing and tied for first with 27 touchdowns on the ground.
Notre Dame's Golden Tate won the Fred Biletnikoff Award as outstanding wide receiver, with 93 catches for 1,496 yd and 15 touchdowns.
Nebraska defensive tackle Ndamukong Suh was a Heisman Trophy finalist and won the Chuck Bednarik Award and the Bronco Nagurski Trophy as defensive player of the year.
He also earned the Outland Trophy as outstanding interior lineman and the Rotary Lombardi Award as outstanding lineman.
Wide receiver Santonio Holmes won the Super Bowl Most Valuable Player award after making a spectacular 6-yd catch deep in the right New Orleans Saints quarterback Drew Brees scrambles to evade Dallas Cowboys defensive end Jason Hatcher in a National Football League game on December 19.
Brees led the Saints to a franchise-record 13-3 and a spot in the NFL play-offs.
Football Football Changes the Rules At the National Football League annual meeting in March 2009, the league's competition committee adopted a number of new rules to be put into effect during the 2009-10 season.
The most talked-about decision was not technically a new rule but rather a clarification of the existing ""roughing the passer'' regulation.
The clarification would prohibit a defensive player who is on the ground from lunging at the lower legs of the opposing quarterback, though hand tackles from the position would still be allowed.
Violation of the revised rule would trigger a 15-yd unsportsmanlike-conduct penalty.
The adjustment became known in the media as the ""Brady Rule"" after New England Patriots quarterback Tom Brady, who, in the first quarter of the first game of the 2008-09 season, famously suffered a torn anterior cruciate ligament and medial collateral ligament in his left knee when a defender dived forward from the ground to tackle him.
The loss of Brady—one of the biggest stars in the NFL—for the remainder of the season hurt both the Patriots and the league, and the NFL was determined to further protect its quarterbacks.
The critics noted that the clarification would make defenders try to act against their natural instinct to pursue the ball, which would be difficult to keep in check during the fast and furious play of a typical NFL game.
An offensive player may not use his helmet, forearm, or shoulder to deliver a blindside block (one that is delivered to someone who does not see it coming) to an opponent's head or neck.
Initial contact may not be made to the head of a defenseless receiver during a tackle.
On a kickoff, the receiving team may not use a blocking wedge (players standing shoulder-to-shoulder who run upfield in front of the kick returner) of more than two players.
During an onside kick, the kicking team cannot have more than five players on one side of the kicker pursuing the ball.
Another notable rule change, which had nothing to do with player safety, would allow replay officials to review whether a loose ball should be judged a fumble or an incomplete pass.
This change also stemmed from a prominent event of the 2008-09 season, when an apparent fumble by Denver Broncos quarterback Jay Cutler that was recovered by the San Diego Chargers was instead ruled an incomplete pass.
Denver scored a touchdown and the game-winning two-point conversion soon thereafter, and the loss nearly cost the Chargers a play-off spot. comer of the end zone with 35 seconds remaining in the game.
The Steelers, however, did not enjoy much success in the 2009-10 season and could not recover from a five-game losing streak late in the campaign, becoming the 13th defending Super Bowl champion to miss the play-offs.
Arizona went 10-6 for its first 10-win season since 1976 and clinched the NFC West title for the second consecutive season.
The Cardinals had last made the play-offs in back-to-back seasons in 1974 and 1975.
The Indianapolis Colts and the New Orleans Saints flirted with undefeated seasons, winning their first 14 and 13 games, respectively.
The Colts’ start gave them an NFL-record 23-game regular-season winning streak dating to the previous season.
Indianapolis finished with an AFC-best 14-2 and won the AFC South for the sixth time in seven seasons behind quarterback Peyton Manning, who won the league MVP award for a record fourth time.
New Orleans had the best record in the NFC at 13-3, setting a franchise record for victories.
New Orleans quarterback Drew Brees broke the NFL record for completion percentage in a season with 70.60.
The Minnesota Vikings finished with their best record since 1998 and won the NFC North in their first season with Brett Favre at quarterback.
Minnesota signed Favre in the off-season, and the 40-year-old veteran had one of the best years of his career.
Favre threw for more than 30 touchdowns for the ninth time in his 18-year career as a starter and for more than 4,000 yd for the sixth time, finishing with a careerlow seven interceptions.
Quarterback Tom Brady returned from a knee injury that kept him out for almost all of the 2008-09 season to lead the New England Patriots back to the playoffs and earn Comeback Player of the Year honours.
New England won the AFC East after having become the first team to finish 11-5 and still miss the play-offs in 2008-09.
The Dallas Cowboys opened their new $1.15 billion stadium and won their second NFC East title in three seasons by defeating the Philadelphia Eagles on the last day of the regular season.
Philadelphia, which signed quarterback Michael Vick after he spent 18 months in a federal prison for his role in a dogfighting ring, and Green Bay were the NFC wild cards.
The San Diego Chargers won their final 11 games and clinched the AFC West title for the fourth straight season.
The Cincinnati Bengals captured the AFC North for the first time since 2005.
Golf failed 43-yd field goal attempt by Montreal kicker Damon Duval in the game’s final moments triggered a premature celebration by the Saskatchewan players; however, an extra lineman on the field led officials to call a penalty against the Roughriders.
With no time left on the clock, Duval was given a second try at 33 yd and scored to give Montreal the win.
Cobourne and Cahoon were named the Most Valuable Player and the Most Valuable Canadian, respectively.
Calvillo, who led the league with 26 touchdowns and a 72.0% completion rate, was named the regular-season Most Outstanding Player for the second straight year and the third time overall.
Montreal also boasted the Most Outstanding Offensive Lineman, Scott Flory, and the Most Outstanding Special Teams Player, kick return specialist Larry Taylor.
Geelong won its second Australian Football League premiership in three years with a hard-fought 12. —9.14 victory over St.
Kilda in the Grand Final at the Melbourne Cricket Ground on Sept., 2009.
A crowd of 99,251 braved cold and wet conditions to see the favourites come from behind at three-quarter time to snatch victory in a thrilling last quarter.
The stars of Geelong’s victory were Paul Chapman, who was voted the Norm Smith medalist as best player in the Grand Final; Harry Taylor, who helped shut down St.
Ablett won the Brownlow Medal, for the AFL’s best and fairest player in the 22-round home-and-away season, and took home the Leigh Matthews Trophy, the AFL Players’ Association most valuable player award, for a record third straight year.
Among the other home-and-away individual honours, the Coleman Medal for leading goal kicker went to Carlton’s Brendan Fevola with 86 goals; he scored three more in the finals.
Daniel Rich of the Brisbane Lions received the Rising Star Award for best young player, and Riewoldt was named the All-Australian captain.
In 2009 the New Zealand All Blacks reclaimed their crown as the world’s best Rugby Union team, overtaking South Africa with a stunning finish to the year.
South Africa, the 2007 World Cup champion, beat the British and Irish Lions 2-1 in an epic three-Test series and then lifted the Tri-Nations crown in September.
The South Africans, however, failed to continue this form on their European tour in November, losing to both France and Ireland.
These defeats allowed New Zealand to end the year as the world's number one-ranked side, ahead of South Africa and Australia.
In many ways it was remarkable that the All Blacks managed to claim the top spot, as they had one of their worst years, losing four times in 12 months— three times to South Africa and once to France.
They finished strong, however, going unbeaten in Europe with wins over England, Wales, Italy, and France.
Before that match Australia had finished at the bottom of the Tri-Nations, failed to qualify a side in the Super 14 playoffs, and lost to Scotland for the first time in 27 years.
In Europe the game was all about Ireland, which finished the year ranked fourth.
Under the captaincy of Brian O’Driscoll, Ireland won its first Six Nations Grand Slam in 61 years.
O’Driscoll also led Leinster to that club’s first Heineken Cup victory before another Irishman, Paul O’Connell, led the Lions’ tour to South Africa.
Ireland went unbeaten through its three Tests in November to become the first major Test side since the game turned professional in 1995 to compete an entire calendar year without losing.
In January England prop Matt Stevens was banned for two years after having tested positive for cocaine, and then Justin Harrison was banned for eight months after he acknowledged having taken the drug.
This was followed by bans for three other players who refused to take drug tests.
One of English rugby’s most famous clubs, Harlequins, was embroiled in a scandal of its own.
Dean Richards, the team's director of rugby, was banned, along with wing Tom Williams, after they admitted to having used fake blood to pull off a substitution in a Heineken Cup match.
On the domestic front, the Pretoriabased Blue Bulls lifted the Super 14 trophy after beating the Chiefs from New Zealand in the final.
In Europe, Leicester was the English champion, and Munster picked up the Magners League.
First, rugby sevens was readmitted into the Olympic Games, beginning with the Rio de Janeiro Games in 2016.
Then Invictus, a Hollywood blockbuster movie about South Africa’s upset victory in the 1995 World Cup, had its premiere in Los Angeles in December.
GOLF One of the most dramatic golf stories to capture the public’s imagination in 2009 was the attempt in July by 59-yearold Tom Watson of the United States to win a record-equaling sixth British Open championship and thus become the sport’s oldest major winner by 11 years.
Nine months after having had hip-replacement surgery, Watson was one putt away from accomplishing this feat on the same Turnberry course in Scotland where he had beaten American Jack Nicklaus in 1977 for the second of his five victories.
On that occasion a closing birdie clinched the title for Watson, whereas this time a par four would have sufficed, but Watson’s approach went just over the green; he putted 3 m past the hole.
He missed his putt from there and fell into a tie with fellow American Stewart Cink at a two-under-par 278.
The four-hole playoff proved to be a one-sided affair, though, as Watson appeared to run out of steam and Cink captured his first major by six strokes.
In the Masters Tournament at the Augusta National Golf Club in April, 48-year-old American Kenny Perry almost rewrote the record books as well.
Perry was two strokes in front with two holes to play, but he bogeyed both and finished regulation play alongside compatriot Chad Campbell and Argentina's Angel Cabrera with an aggregate score of 276, 12 under par.
Golf Adrian Dennis—AFP/Getty Images CL In the British Open, 59-year-old golfer Toni Watson , who failed by one stroke to win in regulation play, ruefully watches as fellow American Stewart Cink putts for the victory on the final hole of a four-hole play-off on July 19. out at the first hole of sudden death, and on the next hole Perry bogeyed again to hand the title to 2007 United States Open winner Cabrera, who thus became the first South American golfer to win two majors.
The player to deny them all was another American, 29-year-old Lucas Glover, whose previous best performance in a major had been 20th place at the 2007 Masters.
The unassuming Glover took the title by two strokes with a four-under-par total of 276.
After reconstructive surgery following his 2008 United States Open victory, world number one Eldrick Woods had spent eight months recuperating and struggled in the first three majors of the season, finishing in a tie for sixth place in both the Masters and the United States Open and then in the British Open failing to make the cut for the first time since the 2006 United States Open.
In March he won his third event of the season, however, and after four more victories in his next 10 starts, he finally looked set to add to his major haul in the Professional Golfers’ Association championship at Hazeltine National in Chaska, Minn.
Woods was two strokes in front after 54 holes, and all of his previous 14 major successes had come when he was in the lead with a round to go.
On this occasion, however, he was overtaken by 37year-old South Korean Yang Yong-Eun, who scored one of the biggest upsets of the sporting year and became the first Asian male golfer to win a major.
Only 478th in the world at the start of the season, Yang had already risen to 110th by the time of the PGA championship.
A chip-in eagle at the 14th hole and a closing birdie—in which he hit a 190m approach over trees and a greenside bunker to within 4 m of the flag—were the defining moments of Yang's historic three-stroke eight-under-par victory.
Woods had a small measure of revenge two months later when he and Yang met again in the Presidents Cup singles at Harding Park in San Francisco.
A crushing 6 and 5 victory over Yang gave Woods a perfect five wins out of five matchups as the United States defeated the International side 19V4-14V4.
At the Mission Hills course in Shenzhen, China, in November, Italy captured its first World Cup as brothers Edoardo and Francesco Molinari rallied on the final day to beat Ireland and Sweden, tied for second place, by one point.
For the second time in three years, Woods captured the $10 million bonus on offer in the PGA Tour’s FedEx Cup play-off series; he finished the year as leading money winner for the ninth time with $10,508,163.
His victories included the World Golf Championships-Bridgestone Invitational for a seventh time.
On December 11, following revelations and his admission that he had engaged in marital infidelities, Woods announced that he would be taking an ""indefinite break” from professional golf.
Lorena Ochoa of Mexico continued to hold the world number one position throughout 2009, but the year saw four new Ladies Professional Golf Association major champions.
American Brittany Lincicome was successful at the Kraft Nabisco Championship in Rancho Mirage, Calif.
Annes in Lancashire, Eng., by Scotland’s Catriona Matthew just 11 weeks after she had given birth to her second child and only a week after she and her husband had had to flee an apartment fire in France.
Rookie of the Year Shin Ji-Yai of South Korea led the LPGA money list with $1,807,334 and nearly upset Ochoa for Player of the Year honours.
The United States and British men’s amateur championships were notable for the fact that both produced their youngestever winners.
In the British Amateur at Formby in England, Italian Matteo Manassero triumphed at age 16; a month later he finished 13th in the British Open.
At the United States Amateur at Southern Hills in Tulsa, Okla., 17-yearold South Korean An Byeong-Hun, the son of two Olympic table tennis medalists, was victorious.
The European Tour had seen only one amateur winner prior to the 2009 season, but two more arrived in the space of four months.
First, 18-year-old New Zealander Danny Lee—An’s predecessor as United States Amateur champion—captured the Johnnie Walker Classic in Perth, Australia, to become the circuit’s youngest-ever champion.
Ice Hockey onship for the leading 60 money winners, but economic pressures led to a 25% reduction (from $10 million to $7. million) in both the event prize fund and the season-ending bonus money.
A campaign to have golf included in the Olympic Games for the first time since 1904 was successful on the second attempt, with the International Olympic Committee voting in October to include the sport in the program for the Rio de Janeiro Games in 2016.
The plan was for men’s and women’s 72-hole stroke play events involving the world’s top 15 players and two representatives from different countries to make up 60strong fields.
GYMNASTICS At the 2009 artistic gymnastics world championships, held in October in London, China earned the most medals with nine, including six gold.
American teammates Bridget Sloan and Rebecca Bross battled for the women’s all-around title.
Bross led after the first three rounds of competition, but after she suffered a fall during her floor routine in the last rotation, it was Sloan who won the title with a score of 57.825 to Bross’s 57.775.
In the apparatus finals another American, Kayla Williams, won the gold medal in the vault; Switzerland's Ariella Kaeslin secured the silver, and France’s Youna Dufournet earned the bronze.
He Kexin of China, the uneven bars champion at the 2008 Olympic Games, defended her title, followed by Tsurumi in second place; Bross and Romania’s Ana Porgras tied for third place.
China’s Deng Linlin won the balance beam title, ahead of Lauren Mitchell of Australia and Ivana Hong of the United States in second and third place, respectively.
The floor exercise title went to British gymnast Elizabeth Tweddle; Mitchell was second, and China’s Sui Lu was third.
On the men’s side, Kohei Uchimura of Japan won the all-around title, scoring 91.500 points.
Britain’s Daniel Keatings took second, and Russia’s Yury Ryazanov was third.
Sadly, Koji Sasahara/AP Yevgeniya Kanayeva of Russia displays her flexibility in the ball event at the rhythmic gymnastics world championships in September.
Ryazanov, age 22, was killed in a car accident just days after the world championships concluded.
Gymnasts from China triumphed in four of the six men’s individual events.
Zhang Hongtao won the pommel horse, followed by Hungary’s Krisztian Berki and Australia’s Prashanth Sellathurai.
On rings Yan Mingyong edged out 36year-old former champion Iordan Iovtchev of Bulgaria and Ukraine’s Oleksandr Vorobiov.
Wang Guanyin took the parallel bars, with his teammate Feng Zhe in second place and Japan's Kazuhito Tanaka in third.
Finally, Zou Kai won horizontal bar, ahead of Dutch gymnast Epke Zonderland and Igor Cassina of Italy in second and third place, respectively.
At the rhythmic gymnastics world championships, held in Mie, Japan, during September 7-13, Russian Yevgeniya Kanayeva won all six events in which she competed.
She took the gold medal in all four apparatus finals (rope, hoop, ball, and ribbon) and in the individual all-around competition, as well as securing the highest personal score in Russia’s team gold.
Italy pulled ahead of Belarus and Russia to win the group allaround event.
In the National Hockey League , 21-year-old Sid (“the Kid"") Crosby, as captain of the Pittsburgh Penguins, played like a savvy veteran as he led his team to the 2009 Stanley Cup championship, his first NHL title and the third in the history of the franchise.
Capping a very entertaining postseason for the NHL, the Penguins met the Detroit Red Wings in a rematch of the 2008 final, which Detroit had won in six games.
The Wings were favoured to repeat and quickly won the first two games in the 2009 best-of-seven final.
Pittsburgh, however, led by Crosby and forward Evgeni Malkin, stormed back to win four of the next five games to capture the championship with a tense 2-1 victory in game seven.
The thrilling final was instantly hailed as a classic, and it was sweet redemption for Pittsburgh's Canadian-born captain and his relatively young squad.
Malkin became the first Russian to be presented with the Conn Smythe Trophy as the most valuable player in the play-offs.
Malkin was also the first player to lead the NHL in scoring in both the regular season and the play-offs since former Pittsburgh star Mario Lemieux did it in 1992.
It was the third time in four seasons that the flashy Russian had topped the 50-goal threshold.
Ovechkin was the runaway winner of the Hart Trophy, presented to the most valuable player during the regular season.
Ovechkin became the first repeat winner of that award since goaltender Dominik Hasek of the Buffalo Sabres won back-to-back Harts in 1997 and 1998.
Ice Hockey NHL history, with 1,641 points accumulated during his 20 seasons.
One of the more heartwarming stories of the regular season belonged to 35year-old goaltender Tim Thomas, an American who had bounced around the minors and Europe for almost a decade before finding a home in the NHL with the Boston Bruins.
Thomas had a remarkable season, leading the league in save percentage and goals-against average , and was presented with the Vezina Trophy as the NHL’s top goaltender.
Other individual trophy winners included Columbus goaltender Steve Mason, who was named Rookie of the Year; Boston’s Zdeno Chara, top defenseman; and Boston’s Claude Julien, Coach of the Year.
Another highlight from the season involved New Jersey Devils goaltender Martin Brodeur , who returned to the lineup after a long absence due to injury and promptly passed the legendary Patrick Roy for the most career victories by a netminder.
Brodeur recorded his 552nd victory on March 17, 2009, with a 3-2 victory over the Chicago Blackhawks.
The NHL staged another successful Winter Classic, a regular-season game played outdoors; this time the Blackhawks and Detroit played at Chicago’s Wrigley Field, a historic baseball park.
The Columbus Blue Jackets played well enough to qualify for a play-off berth for the first time in the eight-year history of the franchise.
On the downside, one of the most disappointing seasons belonged to the iconic Montreal Canadiens, a franchise that celebrated its centennial season but suffered through controversy on and off the ice.
There were reports that two of Montreal’s players were socializing with a gangster, and the owner had begun the process of selling the team.
Coach Guy Carbonneau was fired mid-season and replaced by general manager Bob Gainey, but the team was swept out of the playoffs in four consecutive games by Boston in the first round.
At the end of the season, the Phoenix Coyotes filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection, with owner Jerry Moyes saying that he had lost more than $200 million since 2001.
As a result, protracted legal proceedings ensued as the bankruptcy court had to decide who would take over the team and whether a new owner had the right to move the franchise.
July 1, the day that players without contracts became free agents, brought the usual frenetic roster changes.
Chris Pronger, one of the best defensemen in the league, was traded from Anaheim to Philadelphia.
Just as the Stanley Cup championship was a repeat of the previous year’s NHL final, so too was the International Ice Hockey Federation men’s world championship as Russia and Canada faced off in Bern, Switz., in May 2009.
Once again the Russians captured the gold, with a 2-1 victory in a thrilling, well-played game that careened from one end of the ice to the other.
Aleksandr Radulov scored the winning goal in the second period, finishing off a 2-on-l break.
Oleg Saprykin had tied the game after Jason Spezza put Canada into a short-lived 1-0 lead.
Both goaltenders, Ilya Bryzgalov for Russia and Canada’s Dwayne Roloson, were spectacular, and each made several tough saves to keep the game close.
Though he did not score, Russian forward Ilya Kovalchuk was a dominant force as he was doubleshifted throughout the final and spent more than half of the game on the ice.
Kovalchuk was named Most Valuable Player and top forward of the tournament.
Andrei Mezin of Belarus was honoured as the top goaltender at the championship, and Canada’s Shea Weber was named best defenseman.
In the bronze medal game, Sweden defeated the United States 4-2 as Carl Gunnarsson scored the winner in the third period.
It was a measure of redemption for Sweden, which had lost in the bronze medal match at the two previous world championships.
The Swedes won the medal with their backup goaltender, Stefan Liv, after the projected starter, Jonas Gustavsson, returned to Sweden to be with his ailing mother.
At the women’s IIHF world championship, which was played in Hameenlinna, Fin., in April, international powerhouses Canada and the United States again faced off for the gold medal.
For the second year in a row—and for the third time since the women's world championship was established—the Americans emerged victorious, pulling away in the third period en route to a 4-1 win.
The game, closer and more exciting than the final score might indicate, was clinched by Caitlin Cahow’s second goal of the game, which gave her squad Pittsburgh Penguins forward Evgeni Malkin maneuvers the puck away from Brian Rafalski of the Detroit Red Wings in game six of the NHL Stanley Cup finals on June 9.
Malkin won the Conn Smythe Trophy as the most valuable player in the tournament.
Ice Skating PCN Black/Alamy Gold, medalist Kim Yu-Na of South Korea displays her graceful style in the final free skate at the world figure skating championships in March. a 3-1 lead midway through the final period.
The United States goaltender Jessie Vetter finished with a spectacular 39 saves.
Her counterpart, Canadas Charline Labonte, was named the event’s best goaltender by the tournament directors, but Vetter was given the nod as the all-star netminder by the journalists on hand.
Finland’s Jenni Hiirikoski was acknowledged by the directors as the top defender, while Canada’s Hayley Wickenheiser was named top forward.
In the bronze medal game, Finland defeated rival Sweden 4-1 as Michelle Karvinen scored twice for the Finns.
Tavares finished the tournament with 15 points, second only to countryman Cody Hodgson’s 16 points, as Canada won its fifth consecutive gold medal, thanks to a 5-1 victory over Sweden on January 5 in the final in Ottawa.
Hodgson scored twice in the final game, which was played before a tournament record crowd of 20,380 spectators.
With the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver on the horizon, 2009 was an important year for figure skaters, and South Korea's Kim Yu-Na established herself as the one to beat in Canada.
At the International Skating Union world figure skating championships, held in Los Angeles in March, Kim had a record-setting performance to give her homeland its first senior-level world figure skating title.
Kim was a stunning 16. points ahead of silver medalist Joannie Rochette of Canada and nearly 20 points ahead of Asada, the defending champion, who finished fourth behind the 2007 winner.
Before her triumph in Los Angeles, Kim also posted victories at Skate America, the Cup of China, and the Four Continents event in February.
She failed to win her third straight Grand Prix title, however, finishing second to Asada.
While Kim dominated at the world championships, the American women failed to medal for a third straight year.
With Alissa Czisny finishing in 11th place and Rachel Flatt in 5th, the combined placement of 16 meant that the United States would be sending only two women to the Olympics for just the second time since 1924.
On the men’s side, Evan Lysacek, despite having a stress fracture in his left foot, became the first American man to win the world championship since Todd Eldredge in 1996.
Patrick Chan of Canada took the silver after having captured the gold at the Four Continents in Vancouver.
Former world champion Brian Joubert of France, who won the European figure skating championships in Helsinki in January, took the bronze in Los Angeles.
Ice dancers Oksana Domnina and Maksim Shabalin edged Tanith Belbin and Benjamin Agosto of the United States to win the gold medal, Russia’s first medal of any kind at the world championships since 2005.
Russia also won a bronze medal in pairs, with Yuko Kawaguchi and Aleksandr Smirnov finishing behind silver medalists Zhang Dan and Zhang Hao of China and Germany’s gold-winning duo of Aliona Savchenko and Robin Szolkowy.
Savchenko and partner Szolkowy also won the gold at the European championships.
American Shani Davis was again the star of the 2008-09 speed-skating season, defending his World Cup titles in the 1,000 m and 1,500 m while setting world records in both of those distances.
At the World Cup speed-skating final near Salt Lake City, Utah, in March 2009, Davis became the first skater to go 1,500 m in less than 1 min 42 sec, finishing with a time of 1 min 41.80 sec.
That win also gave Davis his second straight World Cup season title in the 1,500 m, well ahead of fellow American Trevor Marsicano in second place.
One day after establishing the 1,500m world record, Davis—along with Marsicano—skated in the 1,000 Marsicano set the world mark at 1 min 6.88 sec, but that record proved to be short-lived when Davis later finished in 1 min 6.42 sec.
Davis won the season title in the 1,000 m for the second straight year and the third time in four seasons.
Davis also set a track record with a time of 1 min 8.66 sec to win the 1,000 m and earn the overall title at the world sprint speed-skating championships, held in Moscow in January.
At the world single-distance championships in March, Davis and Marsicano won gold and silver medals, respectively, in the 1,500 m on the Richmond Olympic Oval, the speed-skating venue for the 2010 Vancouver Games.
He won both the 5,000and 10,000-m races in Vancouver and at the world championships in Hamar, Nor., in February and secured his third straight allaround speed-skating title.
Sailing Guilain Grenier—AFP/Getty Images On November 8 the trimaran 1’Hydroptere, under the command of French skipper Alain Thebault, surges to a world-record sailing speed of 50.17 knots over one nautical mile.
On the women’s side, a pair of Canadians won World Cup season titles; Christine Nesbitt took the 1,000 m, and Kristina Groves won the 1,500-m crown for the second straight year.
In July five-time Olympic gold medalist Claudia Pechstein of Germany received a two-year ban because of blood doping.
At the ISU short-track world championships, held in Vienna in March, South Korea’s Lee Ho-Suk won the 1,000-m and 1,500-m events and finished second in the 3,000 m to take the men's overall title.
Societe Nautique de Geneve , the defender, selected the emirate of Ras al-Khaimah, in the U.A.E., as the venue, but the court later ruled that under the Deed of Gift the race had to take place either in the Southern Hemisphere or in Valencia, Spain.
In November SNG issued the official notice that the Cup would take place in Valencia on Feb.-25, 2010.
At Key West Race Week in January 2009, entries were down 30%, but three racing circles provided the superb competition expected in this nearly ideal location for winter sailing.
A wide variety of boats participated, from the supermaxis to family-crewed Swans taking a break from recreational cruising.
The boats raced inshore between legs, adding points to their score in round-the-buoy events.
The Transpacific Race in July allowed the supermaxis to join the fleet, with their own prizes.
Predictably, a new course record was established by the 30.5-m Alfa Romeo in 5 days 14 hr 36 min.
In the Fastnet Race, held in August, the big boats dominated the results.
ICAP Leopard was first to finish, and the new 22-m IRC-handicapped RAN 2 won on IRC-corrected time.
Banque Populaire V, the world's largest trimaran at 40 m , set a Transatlantic sailing record in 3 days 15 hr 25 min 48 sec, achieving an average speed of 32. knots.
It also established a new 24-hour distance mark, logging 907. nautical miles at an average speed of 37. knots, with a top speed of 47 knots.
Michel Desjoyeaux won his second Vendee Globe race (solo nonstop circumnavigation) in a water-ballasted monohull IMOCA 60 and set a new record of 84 days 3 hr 9 min.
Wild Oats XI, which took its fourth consecutive first-to-finish-line honours in 2008, was second behind Alfa Romeo, a 30.5-m yacht from New Zealand.
Two True was declared the overall winner after a collision protest was dismissed.
The 2008-09 Alpine skiing season saw Norway’s Aksel Lund Svindal make a triumphant return to the top as the men’s overall International Ski Federation World Cup title winner.
Svindal had won the men’s overall crown in the 200607 series but missed most of the 200708 season owing to injuries.
American Lindsey Vonn won the women's overall World Cup and showed for the second straight year why she was considered one of the best skiers in the world.
Svindal held off Austria’s Benjamin Raich by only two points in 2008-09; he captured three World Cup races, and Raich won four.
Svindal also took the supergiant slalom season title and finished in the top five in both the downhill and the giant slalom standings.
Switzerland’s Didier Cuche secured his first GS season title after reigning as the downhill champion in 2006-07 and 2007-08.
In slalom, France’s Jean-Baptiste Grange cruised to his first season title by 87 points.
Carlo Janka of Switzerland earned his first World Cup season crown in combined.
She also dominated in downhill to take her second straight season title in that discipline and secured her first crown in super G after winning the final race of the season.
Overall in 2008-09, Vonn finished on the podium 16 times and won 9 World Cup races.
The women’s GS champion was not so clear-cut, but Finland’s Tanja Poutiainen, the 2005 season winner in the discipline, hung on to beat Kathrin Zettel of Austria by just seven points.
Sweden’s Anja Parson, a five-time Olympic medalist, won the combined discipline by 25 points over Vonn for her seventh career World Cup season title and her first since 2005-06.
Canada's John Kucera secured his first world championship title, in the downhill.
On the women's side, Vonn won the gold in downhill and super G, and Zettel captured the super combined, while German teammates Riesch and Kathrin Holzl took the gold in slalom and GS, respectively.
Dario Cologna of Switzerland earned the men’s overall cross-country World Cup title in 200809 by winning the last competition of the season.
Norway’s Ola Vigen Hattestad won the men’s sprint title for the second consecutive season and earned gold medals in individual sprint and team sprint at the 2009 FIS Nordic world ski championships in Liberec, Czech Rep.
Pietro Piller Cottrer of Italy won the World Cup season title in distance.
In the women's field, Poland’s Justyna Kowalczyk ended the two-year run of Finland’s Virpi Kuitunen as overall and distance champion by taking the season titles in both disciplines.
Petra Majdic of Slovenia won the sprint title for the second straight season.
In Nordic combined, Finland’s Anssi Koivuranta captured his first overall title, posting seven World Cup victories.
Magnus Moan of Norway finished second, and American Bill Demong placed third for the second straight season.
American Lindsey Van achieved the first women’s FIS ski jumping world championship in Liberec, with a winning jump of 97.
Canadian Alexandre Bilodeau won the 2008-09 World Cup moguls title after Australia’s Dale BeggSmith had taken the crown the previous three seasons.
Canada's Steve Omischl scored his third straight aerials World Cup title, and Lydia Lassila of Australia took the women’s crown after having finished second in 2007-08.
France’s Ophelie David won her sixth straight season title in ski cross; Tomas Kraus of the On February 20 American ski jumper Lindsey Van holds her skis aloft to celebrate after winning the gold medal in the first-ever women’s ski jumping world championship. bet-at»f £/ home Matthias Schrader/AP Czech Republic earned the men’s crown for the second season in a row.
Ski halfpipe titles went to France’s Kevin Rolland and Virginie Faivre of Switzerland.
Austria's Siegfried Grabner won the overall World Cup snowboard title in 2008-09, as well as the season crown in parallel.
The snowboardcross season title went to his compatriot Markus Schairer.
Ryo Aono of Japan won the halfpipe title, and Austria’s Stefan Gimpl took the big air crown for the second straight season.
American Lindsey Jacobellis finished second overall for the second consecutive season and won the SBX title for the second time in three years.
Germany’s Amelie Kober took the women’s crown in parallel, and Liu Jiayu of China was the halfpipe season champion.
SQUASH The highlight of 2009 was to have been acceptance of squash into the program for the 2016 Rio de Janeiro Olympic Games.
A strong bid had been mounted accentuating the universality, competitive structure, and other benefits that made squash a contender.
In the end, however, only golf and rugby sevens were accepted by the International Olympic Committee for the 2016 Games; as a result, squash would need to wait another four years to try again.
When the men’s world team championship took place in Odense, Den., in October, Egypt took the title for the second time, with a squad featuring three of the topfour-ranked players.
Defending champion England lost to France in the semifinals and to Australia in the play-off for the bronze medal.
One month later in Kuwait, there was an all-Egyptian final in the men’s World Open; Amr Shabana won his fourth World Open title when he beat defending champion Ramy Ashour 11-8, 11-5, 11-5.
Malaysia’s Nicol David, who was based in Amsterdam, won the women’s World Open, held in that city in September.
She beat Australian-born Natalie Grinham, who had recently gained Dutch citizenship, 3-11, 11-6, 11-3, 11-8 in the final.
This was the fourth World Open title in five years for David, the sport’s number-one-ranked woman since 2006.
Swimming At the junior level there was an Egyptian double in the world under-19 individual championships staged in Chennai , India, in August.
The women’s title went to 13-year-old Nour El Sherbini, who became the sports youngest-ever world champion when she beat countrywoman Nour El Tayeb in the final.
SWIMMING In 2009, 15 years after the sport of swimming was marred by widespread use of illegal performance-enhancing drugs, primarily on the part of Chinese competitors, swimming was again fraught with controversy—this time over the use of swimsuits made from high-tech materials that clearly enhanced performance in contravention of Federation Internationale de Natation rules.
The dispute, which led to the banning of nontextile swimsuits beginning in 2010, became so heated that it overshadowed the performance of the athletes in major meets around the globe, including the year’s premier long-course event, the 13th FINA world championships held in Rome on July 17-August 2.
It also forced the incumbent FINA president to abandon his reelection bid and led to serious discussion of a radical revision of FINA’s structure.
The championships produced no fewer than 43 world records in the 40 events that were contested.
By the time the meet ended, only a handful of prechampionship world records remained intact, and by year’s end 73 new long-course world records had been set and another 74 had been set in 25-m short-course competitions, though several of those were disallowed.
After taking a three-month break from the sport after the 2008 Beijing Olympic Games, American superstar Michael Phelps quickly got back into shape but opted to swim “only"" three individual events and all three relays.
Cavic was faster for the first 50 m, and his lead over the American was even greater than in Beijing.
That just meant a greater challenge for Phelps, however, and the two men became the first in history to crack the 50-sec barrier, with Phelps touching first in 49.82 sec, just 0.13 sec ahead of Cavic.
Phelps racked up more gold as a member of the three United States relay teams.
Despite Phelps’s superb performance, Germany’s Paul Biedermann proved the adage that on any given day, no one is unbeatable.
Cielo took the sprint double, charging through the 50-m freestyle in 21.08 sec, just off Frenchman Fred Bousquet’s world record but 0.13 sec ahead of Bousquet in the race.
Italy’s Federica Pellegrini and Germany’s Britta Steffen provided much of the fireworks in the women’s competition.
Pellegrini swam to two barrierbreaking victories in Rome and was narrowly selected over Steffen as Swimming World’s female World Swimmer of the Year.
Astonishingly, Kukors had not even made the United States team in this event at the national trials but was added to the event squad when another swimmer decided not to compete in it.
Tennis The Swimsuit War The sport of swimming faced one of its most difficult challenges in 2009 as athletes, coaches, swimsuit companies, and the Federation Internationale de Natation , swimming's international governing body, squared off over the growing use of performance-enhancing high-tech swimsuits.
The most radical version of this swimsuit line was a full bodysuit that covered the swimmer from neck to ankles.
Swimming had seen full bodysuits before the LZR, most notably when Australia's Ian Thorpe set world records in 2000-02 while wearing Adidas's bodysuit.
There was no convincing evidence that the suit made anyone faster, and in October 1999 FINA had approved the bodysuits for competition.
Several companies created new bodysuits for the 2000 and 2004 Olympic Games, but postOlympic analyses cast doubt on any claims of performance enhancement.
LZR-related world records were set within days of the swimsuit's introduction—the first in what became a torrent of increasingly meaningless records.
At the 2009 FINA world championships, 40 events were contested and 43 world records were unceremoniously overthrown.
By the end of 2009, the total number of world records broken in those 23 months stood at a staggering 255.
Critics, including some coaches and sportswriters, claimed that the suits undermined such values as hard work, superb conditioning, and technical mastery; rendered meaningless the great performances of the past; and, with records lasting only a few weeks— or even days—risked making the sport a laughingstock.
FINA officials dismissed the dissenters as misguided and pointed to innovations that transformed other sports—for example, the dapskate in speed skating and the fibreglass pole in pole vaulting.
Unlike those innovations, however, the high-tech swimsuits kept evolving, especially as more manufacturers entered the fray.
When the Congress convened on July 24, however, the United States delegation offered a carefully prepared motion to allow only textile swimsuits, to eliminate compression-enhancing features such as zippers, and to limit coverage to ""between the waist and knees for males, not beyond the shoulders or below the knees for females,"" with the arms remaining uncovered for both sexes.
The ban was to become effective on Jan.,2010, bringing to a close the era of the performanceenhancing high-tech suits.
Ultimately, Larfaoui withdrew from the contest, and Maglione, who promised to stay in office for only one term, was elected president in July.
Chinese divers won every international meet that they entered in 2009 and then overwhelmed the rest of the world's divers at the world championships in Rome, where they earned gold in 7 of the 10 events and took 14 medals of a possible 16.
Guo Jingjing reinforced her credentials as the greatest female diver in history by winning both 3-m springboard events—taking the individual and (with teammate Wu Minxia) the synchronized crowns—for the fifth consecutive world championship.
Chinese veterans Chen Ruolin and Wang Xin won the 10m synchronized event.
Mexico's Paola Espinosa won her country’s first-ever diving world championship gold medal, coming from eighth place to upset Chinese Olympic champion Chen Ruolin decisively in the 10-m final.
In the 1-m springboard—a non-Olympic event— Russia’s Yuliya Pakhalina scooped the gold.
Tom Daley, Britain’s 15-year-old sensation, pulled off the biggest upset in the men’s competition.
Daley jumped from fourth to first on his two final dives in the 10-m platform, receiving eight perfect 10s from the judges, to defeat China’s Qiu Bo and Zhou Luxin.
Qin Kai nipped teammate Zhang Xinhua and Australia’s Matt Mitcham to take the 1-m springboard.
He Chong proved his Olympic gold medal in the 3-m springboard was not a fluke by winning the event in Rome.
The synchronized events showcased the near-perfect technique of the Chinese divers.
In the 3-m event, Qin Kai and Wang Feng breezed to victory, and the 10-m contest saw China's Huo Liang and Lin Yue triumph as the United States nipped Cuba for the silver.
At the 13th FINA synchronized swimming world championships in Rome, Russian athletes captured six of the seven gold medals, nearly duplicating their sixgold, one-silver effort at the 2007 world championships in Melbourne.
Therefore, Spain, with a total of seven medals, topped Russia in the final standings.
China, led by the Jiang twins—Tingting and Wenwen— was a distant third with one silver and four bronze medals, followed by Canada and Italy.
In all, swimmers from 42 countries competed in the synchronized events in Rome, with athletes from 15 qualifying for at least one final, but 10 countries, including Japan and the U.S., failed to medal.
Three Russians, all veterans with long international careers, topped the individual medal count.
Gemma Mengual, a 32-year-old Spaniard, took home one gold and four silver medals.
TENNIS Across the board, on innumerable levels, Roger Federer of Switzerland was the 2009 Player of the Year in tennis, becoming only the sixth man in history to win all four Grand Slam events.
Tennis Clive Brunskill/Getty Images On September 14 Juan Martin del Potro of Argentina smashes the ball in the men’s singles final of the United States Open, where he upset five-time champion Roger Federer of Switzerland for the title. champion whom many experts considered the best player ever set an all-time record for men when he captured the All-England title, his 15th major men’s singles championship.
He then finished the year at number one in the world in the Association of Tennis Professionals rankings for the fifth time in a magnificent six-year span.
The towering 2-m (6-ft 6in) Juan Martin del Potro of Argentina garnered his first Grand Slam title at the United States Open.
Rafael Nadal became the first Spaniard to win the Australian Open, his first major tournament title on a hard court.
Serena Williams of the United States secured the Australian Open and Wimbledon crowns and ended a year as the Women’s Tennis Association number one player for only the second time in her illustrious career.
Russian Svetlana Kuznetsova took her second career major singles title, winning the French Open.
Meanwhile, Belgian Kim Clijsters came out of a 27-month retirement to win a second United States Open in only her third tournament back in action.
The highestpaid woman on the Sony Ericsson WTA Tour was Williams, with $6,545,586.
Federer was the top prize-money winner on the ATP World Tour, at $8,768,110.
Clashing for the seventh time in a Grand Slam final, Nadal and Federer put on a stupendous display of shot-making craftsmanship before the Spaniard recorded a 7-5, 3-6, 7-6 , 3-6, 6-2 triumph over his Swiss adversary.
It was the third time in a four-tournament span at the majors that Nadal had ousted Federer in the championship match, and the victory gave the Spaniard a 5-2 edge over his chief rival in Grand Slam finals.
Nadal was stretched to his limits against Fernando Verdasco in a semifinal showdown between Spanish left-handers.
Nadal was down at 4-4, 0-30 in the fifth set but rallied for a 6-7 , 6-4, 7-6 , 6-7 , 6-4 victory.
Number two seed Serena Williams crushed third-seeded Dinara Safina of Russia 6-0, 6-3 in the women’s championship match.
Williams was on the brink of defeat in her quarterfinal with eighth-seeded Kuznetsova, who served for the match in the second set, but Williams escaped to win the match 5-7, 7-5, 6-1.
Heading into his fourthround contest against Robin Soderling of Sweden, Nadal had never been beaten at Roland Garros and had yet to lose a best-of-five-set match anywhere on clay.
Federer, who had lost to Nadal four years in a row at Roland Garros (including three consecutive finals), also struggled in the fourth round.
Federer trailed by two sets to love and was down break point at in the third set against the seasoned German Tommy Haas, but an audacious forehand winner saved the Swiss champion, who rallied admirably to win in five sets.
He survived another five-set skirmish with del Potro in the semifinals and then took apart Soderling 6-1, 7-6 , 6-4 in the final.
Number seven seed Kuznetsova overcame second-seed Williams in the quarterfinal match of the tournament for the women, eclipsing the American 7-6 , 5-7, 7-5 in a match that featured one high-quality rally after another.
The topseeded Safina—appearing in a second straight Roland Garros title match— struggled with nerves in the final against Kuznetsova, who prevailed 6-4, 6-2.
On the fabled British grass courts, Federer collided with his old rival Andy Roddick of the United States for the third time in a Wimbledon final, though Roddick had taken only one set in their two previous title matches on the Centre Court.
Roddick played a strategically impeccable semifinal match, preventing 22-year-old Andy Murray from becoming the first British man to reach the final at Wimbledon since Bunny Austin lost to American Don Budge in 1938.
In the final Roddick gave one of the signature performances of his career, taking the opening set and leading 6-2 in a pivotal second-set tie-break before Federer collected six points in a row to salvage the set.
The 77-game match was the longest-ever final at Wimbledon, and the 30-game fifth set was likewise the longest-ever fifth set.
Federer served a career-best 50 aces as he collected his record 15th Grand Slam title, with American Pete Sampras, who had won 14 majors between 1990 and 2002, watching in the stands.
Serena Williams took her third championship singles title, beating her sister Venus in the final 7-6 , 6-2.
Serena, who did not lose her serve once in the match, defeated her older sibling for the sixth time in eight head-to-head clashes in the majors.
In the semifinals five-time champion Venus obliterated the top-seeded Safina 6-1, 6-0, and Serena battled back ferociously from match-point down to oust another Russian, fourth-seeded Yelena Dementiyeva, 6-7 , 7-5, 8-6.
Argentina’s quietly imposing del Potro lived up to the expectations of many authorities by securing the last major championship of the year.
In the semifinals he blasted Nadal off the court 6-2, 6-2, 6-2, and in the final he toppled Federer 3-6, 7-6 , 4-6, 7-6 , 6-2.
Track and Field knocked out that illustrious duo in the same Grand Slam event.
Federer, in pursuit of a sixth consecutive United States Open title, served at 5—4, 30-0 in the second set but was surprisingly broken.
In the fourth set, Federer was twice just two points away from prevailing, but del Potro held on to get the win.
The unseeded Clijsters—a wild card— played arguably the best tennis of her career to regain the crown that she had garnered four years earlier.
The captivating Belgian took out Marion Bartoli of France , Venus Williams , and Chinas Li Na en route to her meeting with second-seed Serena Williams in the semifinals.
Enraged, Williams verbally lashed out at the lineswoman who made that call, and her profanity-laden diatribe led to a point penalty because she had earlier been warned for racket abuse.
Williams was fined $10,000 by the United States Tennis Association for her tirade but was later assessed an additional $82,500 by the International Tennis Federation, put on probation for two years, and warned that another “major offense” in that span at any Grand Slam event would result in a larger fine and a suspension from the following United States Open.
In London, Russian Nikolay Davydenko took the Barclays ATP World Tour Finals, defeating Federer for the first time and then stopping del Potro in a straight-set final.
Serena Williams beat her sister Venus in the final of the Sony Ericsson Championships in Doha, Qatar.
In the Fed Cup final, held in Calabria, Italy—led by Francesca Schiavone and Flavia Pennetta—beat the United States 4-0.
Spain—propelled by Nadal and David Ferrer—won its second straight Davis Cup, overwhelming the Czech Republic 5-0 in the final in Barcelona.
TRACK AND FIELD SPORTS Usain Bolt of Jamaica made the 2009 track and field season his own, improving his individual sprint world records and winning three world championships golds.
Nine meet records were broken at the International Association of Athletics Federations world championships, held Aug.-23, 2009, in Berlin.
Bolt attributed his early jump to playful competition with his Antiguan training partner, Daniel Bailey, to see who could achieve a faster reaction time.
Bolt incurred no penalty, but a new rule to take effect in 2010 would trigger immediate disqualification for any false start.
With a legal 0.9m/sec wind behind him, Bolt propelled his 1.96-m frame from the blocks with phenomenal speed.
He led the field with his fourth stride, at which point his closest competitors had already taken five steps, and at 20 m held a 0.01-sec margin over the Olympic silver medalist Richard Thompson of Trinidad and Tobago as Gay ran in fourth place.
Over the next 20 m, Gay raced into second place but proved powerless to stop Bolt from widening his lead to more than 1. m (nearly 5 ft) at the finish.
Gay’s time of 9.71 sec left former world record holder Asafa Powell of Jamaica a thoroughly beaten third but paled behind Bolt's rush under the 9.60-sec barrier.
After comfortably leading 2004 Olympic champion Shawn Crawford at the halfway point with a split of 9.92 sec, Bolt shattered the record by 0.11 sec with a 6-m winning margin.
For the first time in history, five finishers bettered 20.00 sec in one race.
Bekele sprinted away from Zersenay Tadese of Eritrea on the last lap of the 10,000-m final to win in 26 min 46.31 sec, a meet record that lowered Bekele’s own standard set in 2003 in his first world championships appearance.
The victory earned the 27-year-old Bekele a clean sweep of all world and Olympic gold medals in the event since 2003, an achievement unmatched by any other athlete in any event during the decade.
In the 5,000 m, Bekele outkicked defending champion Bernard Lagat of the United States to match his double victory of the Beijing Olympics and become the first man to win the long-distance track double at a world championships.
Anita Wlodarczyk of Poland set the only women's world record in Berlin, in the hammer throw.
Germany’s Betty Heidler, the defending champion, raised At the IAAF world championships in August, Anita Wlodarczyk of Poland set the only women’s world record, a stunning 77.96 m in the hammer throw.
Volleyball the meet record by 7 cm in the qualifying round to 75.27 m (246 ft 11 in) and subsequently took the lead from Wlodarczyk in the first round of the final.
In the second round, however, Wlodarczyk spun the hammer out to 77.96 m to take gold and the world record.
While celebrating, Wlodarczyk stepped on the track's curb and sprained her ankle so badly that she was forced to skip the rest of the season.
Jepkosgei advanced to the semifinal on appeal and then earned a place in the final, but Semenya won the championship in 1 min 55.45, flexing her arms in a bodybuilder’s pose as she crossed the line.
Semenya skipped the postrace press conference and returned home to a heroine’s welcome.
A media frenzy began with a leaked report that the IAAF had conducted sex tests on the powerfully built 18-year-old Semenya to determine if she was really a woman.
As recriminations, apologies, and expressions of sympathy for Semenya passed in the press between her country's federation, Athletics South Africa , and the IAAF, ASA Pres.
Leonard Chuene angrily denied knowing that sex-verification testing was conducted on Semenya in South Africa before the championships.
The furor grew more heated after press reports alleged that testing had shown Semenya to have an intersex condition.
The unconfirmed accounts claimed that she had internal male genitalia and testosterone levels three times higher than normal for a woman, levels that could impart an athletic advantage.
The IAAF reserved comment on the reports until its council meeting in November.
Two days before that meeting, the IAAF issued a statement saying that medical testing of Semenya was not complete and that the council would not discuss the case until further notice.
A day later South Africa’s sports ministry announced that the IAAF had agreed to let Semenya keep her medal and prize money, but the IAAF declined to comment on the claim.
The Golden League series, in which athletes winning their event at each of six elite European invitational meets split a $ 1 million jackpot, had its swan song in 2009.
Bekele extended his unbeaten streak at 5,000 m to 17 finals and his streak at 10,000 m to 12 finals.
Women’s shot-putter Valerie Vili of New Zealand, the reigning Olympic and world champion, stretched her unbeaten skein to 25 finals, the longest at the elite level in any individual event.
The IAAF was to replace the Golden League and the WAF in 2010 with a new Diamond League, a series of 14 meets in Asia, Europe, the Middle East, and the U.S., with $6. million in prize money on offer and 32 disciplines.
Isinbayeva, who had not lost for six seasons, placed second behind Poland’s Anna Rogowska at the London Grand Prix meet in July, and at the world championships she no-heighted.
The result came from retesting of Beijing Olympic samples after a test for the previously undetectable drug had been developed.
Ramzi proclaimed his innocence, but in November the IOC stripped him of his medal.
For the first time since 2004, Ethiopia’s Haile Gebrselassie did not run the fastest marathon of the year.
That honour went to 31-year-old Kenyan Duncan Kibet, who narrowly defeated his countryman James Kwambai with the same time, 2 hr 4 min 27 sec, in Rotterdam, Neth.
No marathoner besides Gebrselassie had ever run faster, and the pair spearheaded an onslaught of fast times.
The 25 sub-2-hr 7-min marathons run in 2009 races accounted for a quarter of history’s total.
The women’s title went to Irina Mikitenko of Germany, a repeat series winner, who won in London and placed second in Chicago in 2009.
At the world cross country championships, held in Amman, Jordan, on March 28, Kenya and Ethiopia shared top honours.
Kenya won three of the four team titles, including the senior men’s and women’s, plus the senior women’s individual title, which went to Florence Kiplagat.
Ethiopia won the other three individual titles and the junior women’s team crown.
VOLLEYBALL Americans Jen Kessy and April Ross defeated Juliana Felisberta Silva and Larissa Franca of Brazil to win the women’s gold medal at the 2009 Federation Internationale de Volleyball beach volleyball world championships, held in Stavanger, Nor.
Talita Antunes and Maria Antonelli downed fellow Brazilians Ana Paula Connelly and Sandra Pires Tavares to earn the bronze.
Kessy and Ross had finished in 37th place at the 2007 world championships.
Brazil recaptured the world’s top position in both men’s and women's indoor volleyball.
It was Brazil's sixth title in the past seven World League competitions and its eight overall.
Sergio Dutra Santos of Brazil was named the tournament Most Valuable Player.
Brazil’s women won their eighth FIVB Grand Prix title after posting a perfect 5-0 record during the final round, which was held in Tokyo.
Brazil closed out the calendar with a victory at the FIVB Grand Champions Cup men’s tournament in Japan.
In the women’s competition an undefeated Italian team upset the defending Brazilians, who settled for second place.
WEIGHTLIFTING The 2009 International Weightlifting Federation world championships were held Nov.-29, 2009, in Koyang city, S.Kor.
Six senior world records were broken, four of them in the women’s division.
In the women’s competition the 63 medals were all won by athletes from Asia and Europe.
As in past years, China finished with the most medals, 16 , but Kazakhstan had more gold in addition to 1 bronze.
Other countries with multiple medals included Russia with 9, Turkey with 8, and Armenia and South Korea with 6 each.
In September 2009 Russia earned four gold medals and easily won the Federation Internationale des Luttes Associees men’s world freestyle wrestling championships, held in Heming, Den.
The gold-medal winners for Turkey were Selcuk Cebi at 74 kg and Nazmi Avluca at 84 kg.
Asashoryu began the year with a win in the Hatsu (New Year’s) Basho in January and took the Aki Basho in September.
Harumafuji, who had changed his shikona from Ama in late 2008 upon his promotion to ozeki rank, won the Natsu (summer) Basho in May.
Despite a mediocre win-loss record in 2009, popular ozeki Kaio completed his 98th basho, eclipsing the record that was formerly held by Takamiyama.
Takamiyama, born Jesse Kuhaulua, retired as sumo’s first Hawaiian stablemaster in June, handing his coaching duties to Ushiomaru.
Russian freestyle wrestler Besik Kudukhov throws Zalimkhan Huseynov of Azerbaijan in the 60-kg final at the world wrestling championships in September.
Indranil Mukherjee—AFP/Getty Images Lin Dan of China focuses on the birdie en route to his third straight world badminton title.
Angels Texas Seattle 97 87 85 65 75 77 10 12 2008 2009 Licey Tigers Aragua Tigers Dominican Republic Venezuela Toronto 75 87 28 Cleveland 65 97 2lVi Oakland 75 87 22 Baltimore 64 98 39 Kansas City 65 97 2V/2 NATIONAL LEAGUE East Division Central Division West Division Won Lost G.B.t Won Lost G.B.t Won Lost G.B.t ^Philadelphia 93 69 — *St.
Japan Series* Year Winning team Losing team Results 2007 Chunichi Dragons Nippon-Ham Fighters 4-1 2008 Seibu Lions Yomiuri Giants 4-3 2009 Yomiuri Giants Nippon-Ham Fighters 4-2 *CL—Central League; PL—Pacific League.
Clippers 19 63 46 *New Orleans 49 33 5 World Basketball Championship—Men Oklahoma City 23 59 31 Sacramento 17 65 48 Memphis 24 58 30 Year Winner Runner-up *Qualified for play-offs. tGames behind.
Lange United States/ S Holcomb S Kiriasis, R Logsch S Kiriasis, R Logsch N Minichiello, G Cooke G Stahli K Bromley G Stahli N Pikus-Pace A Huber M Trott Germany Germany Germany Luge World Championships* Year Men Women Doubles Team 2007 2008 2009 D Moller F Loch F Loch T Hufner T Hufner E Hamlin P Leitner, A Resch A Florschiitz, T Wustlich G Plankensteiner, O Haselrieder Germany Germany Germany *Artificial track.
Wang’s team upset Sweden in the final for China’s first world curling title.
Lemaire Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe Sea The Stars M Kinane Prix Jean-Luc LagardereGrand Criterium Siyouni G Mosse Prix Royal-Oak Ask R Moore Ireland Irish Two Thousand Guineas Mastercraftsman J Murtagh Irish One Thousand Guineas Again J Murtagh Irish Derby Fame and Glory J Murtagh Irish Oaks Sariska J Spencer Irish Champion Stakes Sea The Stars M Kinane Irish St.
Lemaire Hong Kong Gold Cup Viva Pataca D Beadman Singapore Airlines International Cup Gloria De Campeao T Pereira Canada Queen’s Plate Stakes Eye of the Leopard E Da Silva Prince of Wales Stakes Gallant C Fraser Breeders' Stakes Perfect Shower J Jones Woodbine Mile Ventura G Gomez Canadian International Stakes Champs Elysees G Gomez *Original winner demoted.
World Fencing Championships—Women Year Individual Foil Epee Sabre Foil Epee Sabre 2007 V Vezzali B Heidemann Ye.
Netchayeva Poland France France 2008* V Vezzali B Heidemann M Zagunis Russia France Ukraine 2009 A Shanayeva L Shut ova M Zagunis Italy Italy Ukraine *Olympic champions, except for team epee.
Year Winner Runner-up 1998 Netherlands Spain 2002 Germany Australia 2006 Germany Australia World Cup Field Hockey Championship—Women Year Winner Runner-up 1998 Australia Netherlands 2002 Argentina Netherlands 2006 Netherlands Australia Dimitar Dilkoff—AFP/Getty Images Gold medalist Mariel Zagunis of the United States , lunges at her opponent, Ukraine’s Olga Kharlan, in the women’s individual sabre final at the world fencing championships.
FOOTBALL FIFA World Cup—Men Year Result 1998 France 2002 Brazil 2006 Italy* 3 Brazil 0 2 Germany 0 1 France 1 *Won on penalty kicks.
FIFA World Cup—Women Year Result 1999 United States* 2003 Germany 2007 Germany *Won on penalty kicks.
Petersburg (Russia^ 1 2 Rangers FC 2008-09 FC Barcelona 2 Manchester United 0 2008-09 Shakhtar Donetsk f 2 Werder Bremen *Won on penalty kicks.
Libertadores de America Cup Copa America Year Winner Runner-up Scores Year Winner Runner-up Score 2007 Boca Juniors Gremio 3-0, 2-0 2001 Colombia Mexico 1-0 2008 Liga de Quito Fluminense Rio de Janeiro 4-2, 5-5 2004 Brazil Argentina 2-2, 4-2* 2007 Brazil Argentina 3-0 2009 Estudiantes La Plata Cruzeiro 0-0, 2-1 *Winner determined in penalty shoot-out.
World Gymnastics Championships—Women Year All-around team All-around individual Balance beam 2007 United States S Johnson N Liukin 2008* China N Liukin S Johnson 2009 not held B Sloan Deng Linlin Year Uneven parallel bars Vault Floor exercise 2007 K Semenova Cheng Fei S Johnson 2008* He Kexin Hong Un Jong S Izbasa 2009 He Kexin K Williams E Tweddle *Olympic champions.
ICE HOCKEY Mark Ralston—AFP/Getty Images Ice dancing champions Oksana Domnina and Maksim Shabalin go for the gold at the world figure skating championships.
Islanders 26 47 9 Tampa Bay 24 40 18 WESTERN CONFERENCE Central Division Northwest Division Pacific Division Won Lost OTL* Won Lost OTL* Won Lost OTL* fDetroit 51 21 10 fVancouver 45 27 10 fSan Jose 53 18 11 fChicago 46 24 12 fCalgary 46 30 6 fAnaheim 42 33 7 fSt.
Louis 41 31 10 Minnesota 40 33 9 Dallas 36 35 11 fColumbus 41 31 10 Edmonton 38 35 9 Phoenix 36 39 7 Nashville 40 34 8 Colorado 32 45 5 Los Angeles 34 37 11 *Overtime losses, worth one point. tQualified for play-offs.
Kyodo/AP Shani Davis of the United States races to a 1,000-m world record of 1 min 6.42 sec at a speed-skating World Cup event in Salt Lake City, Utah, in March.
In 2009 Davis set three world records and won the men's world speed-skating sprint championship.
World Judo Championships—Women Year Open weights 48 kg 52 kg 57 kg 2005 2007 2009 M Shintani M Tsukada Tong Wen * Y Bermoy R Tamura Tani T Fukumi Li Ying Shi Junjie M Nakamura Kye Sun-Hui Kye Sun-Hui M Ribout Year 63 kg 70 kg 78 kg +78 kg 2005 2007 2009 L Decosse D Gonzalez Y Ueno E Bosch G Emane Y Alvear Y Laborde Y Laborde M Verkerk Tong Wen Tong Wen Tong Wen Competition held separately in December 2008.
World Rowing Championships—Women The Boat Race* Year Single sculls Min:sec Coxless pairs Min:sec Winner's time Margin of 2007 Ye.
Cambridge 79, Oxford 75, 2008* C Evers-Swindell, 7:07.32 Belarus 6:39.89 1 draw.
G Evers-Swindell 2009 M Fularczyk, J Michalska 6:47.18 Netherlands 6:31.34 Year Quadruple sculls Min:sec Eights Min:sec 2007 Great Britain 6:30.81 United States 6:17.20 2008* China 6:16.06 United States 6:05.34 2009* Ukraine 6:18.41 United States 6:05.34 *Olympic champions, except coxless fours.
RS:X N Dempsey Great Britain tWinner under Offshore Rating Rule scoring.
RS:X M Alabau Spain Year Winning yacht Owner/Skipper tWinner under IRC scoring.
Jensen Australia 2. metre J Ruf United States *Overall winner based on corrected time.
Aamodt A Parson J Mancuso M Dorfmeister 2007 M Matt A Svindal P Staudacher S Zahrobska N Hosp A Parson Austria 2009 M Pranger C Janka D Cuche M Riesch K Holzl L Vonn canceled *Olympic champions.
World Alpine Skiing Championships—Downhill World Alpine Skiing Championships—Combined Year Men Women Year Men Women 2006* A Deneriaz M Dorfmeister 2006* T Ligety J Kostelic 2007 A Svindal A Parson 2007 D Albrecht A Parson 2009 J Kucera L Vonn 2009 A Svindal K Zettel *Olympic champions.
World Nordic Skiing Championships—Men Year Sprint Team sprint Double pursuit 15 km 30 km 50 km Relay 2006* B Lind Sweden A Veerpalu Ye.
Nordic World Cup Snowboard World Cup Year Men Women Year Men Women 2007 T Angerer V Kuitunen 2007 S Schoch D Krings 2008 L Bauer V Kuitunen 2008 B Karl N Sauerbreij 2009 D Cologna J Kowalczyk 2009 S Grabner D Gunther 2007 D Begg-Smith J Heil 2008 S Omischl O David 2009 A Bilodeau O David Alpine skier Aksel Lund Svindal of Norway with the gold medal he won at the world championships.
Taylor, J Warmer, K Clement, A Felix, M Wineberg, S Richards) A Felix, L Demus, S Richards) J Warmer) L Merritt) high jump B Vlasic B Vlasic high jump D Thomas Y Rybakov pole vault Ye.
Gushchina, O Krasnomovets, T Levina, N Nazarova, N Antyukh) O Zykina) high jump Ye.
Joe Raedle/Getty Images ible o con el antebrazo. > siempre utiliza cuchara World Affairs SUFFERING from the effects of a global RECESSION, many countries STRUGGLED with high UNEMPLOYMENT and SHRINKING budgets.
While CHINA mounted ELABORATE celebrations to mark the 60TH ANNIVERSARY of the founding of the People’s Republic, Germany too prepared festivities in remembrance of the fall of the BERLIN WALL 20 years earlier.
UNITED NATIONS he United Nations in 2009 continued its efforts to deal with important global issues on many fronts but was forced to do so in the context of the continuing global economic and financial crisis.
It was the UN Year of Climate Change, but little progress toward a comprehensive global climate change agreement emerged.
The global food crisis persisted, but few new concerted global actions were targeted for dealing with it coherently.
Afghanistan rose to the top of the global security agenda as insecurity and the death toll there mounted significantly during the year.
Progress toward attainment of the Millennium Development Goals stagnated along with the global economy.
On a more positive note, 2009 marked the return to greater engagement in multilateral affairs of the United States, led by the new administration of Pres.
The wars in Iraq and Afghanistan continued to dominate global peace and security news.
Much of the violence centred on the lead-up to and the follow-up to the presidential elections.
This fact was highlighted when on October 28 five staff members of the UN Assistance Mission in Afghanistan were killed in a suicide attack in Kabul.
UNAMA estimated that Afghan civilian deaths exceeded 2,000 during the first 10 months of the year.
The UN Assistance Mission for Iraq continued its work in support of political reconciliation, institution building, and establishment of the rule of law in the country.
At the end of the year, the UN fielded 17 peace missions comprising more than 117,000 troops, police, and civilians, with a total annual budget of nearly $7. billion.
Highlighting the situation in Africa, the UN Security Council in January authorized the deployment of 5,500 uniformed personnel to replace the European Union EUFOR military force.
By the end of November 2009, the hybrid United Nations/African Union Mission in Darfur had been increased to 19,588 uniformed personnel.
The primary mandate of the force remained the protection of civilians and humanitarian assistance providers as well as the monitoring of the implementation of agreements, assistance in the development of political processes, and promotion of good governance.
As in 2008, UNAMID’s work remained hampered by the lack of transport and aviation assets and logistic support.
The UN Mission in the Sudan continued its main mandate to help resolve core issues that stood in the way of implementation of the 2005 Comprehensive Peace Agreement.
By December UNMIS, with 9,955 uniformed personnel in the field, had nearly reached its authorized level of 10,000.
In November 2008 the Security Council authorized the expansion of the force by 3,000 military and police, and as of Nov., 2009, 20,255 uniformed personnel were in the field.
Meanwhile, the UN Operation in Cote d'Ivoire stood at more than 8,000 in October 2009.
At year’s end the Security Council approved sanctions on Eritrea for aiding Somali insurgents and continuing its conflict with Djibouti.
United Nations Preventative diplomacy and the use by Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon of special and personal representatives and envoys became ever-increasing tools in the UN’s peace-building efforts.
In 2009 such special envoys were actively engaged in more than 30 countries or regions, and more than two dozen other UN emissaries were assigned to deal with specific global policy issues, such as climate change, financing for development, human rights, humanitarian aid, and so forth.
The importance placed on postconflict peace building also grew in recent years.
By April 2009 the UN’s Peacebuilding Fund had received more than $300 million in contributions and had allocated more than $131 million to 12 countries for 65 projects.
The review process for the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons picked up momentum, and a formal review conference was in the works for 2010.
Nuclear and conventional weapons proliferation remained an important agenda item, with particular focus on North Korea and Iran.
The former conducted a second nuclear test in May 2009 in violation of Security Council resolutions, and concern continued over Iran’s evolving nuclear program.
On October 30, UN member states agreed to a timetable for negotiating an arms trade treaty by 2012.
In September 2008 the UN General Assembly renewed its commitment to the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy that it had adopted two years earlier.
A UN Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force had been established in 2005, and Secretary-General Ban was requested to make the necessary institutional changes to enhance the organization’s support of the task force’s work, which was organized around eight working groups focusing on cross-cutting themes.
On Dec., 2009, the UN Security Council passed a U.S.-sponsored resolution to revise the content and process of the UN 1267 Committee’s sanctions list, making it more transparent and fair and providing recourse for individuals and firms wrongly included on the UN sanctions list.
The primary purpose of the UN list was to serve as a tool for governments to deny terrorists access to funding, weapons, travel, and other resources.
UN humanitarian relief efforts reached near-record levels in 2008, responding to 55 emergencies, including natural disasters, the global food crisis, and civil conflict.
In late November 2009 the UN launched a $7. billion appeal for contributions for 2010 to assist 48 million people in 25 countries.
In addition, another 839,000 individuals filed claims for asylum or refugee status, and 827,000 cases awaited determination at the end of the year.
Nearly half of the refugees who were receiving assistance from UNHCR were from Iraq and Afghanistan; another 20% were from Africa.
More than two-thirds of the world's displaced peoples remained inside their own countries.
The number of internally displaced persons remained around 26 million for the second consecutive year.
Nineteen African countries accounted for 11. million IDPs, and The Sudan, Colombia, and Iraq were home to the largest number of internally displaced persons.
Reversing the administration policy of former president George W Bush toward the UN Human Rights Council, the United States sought and won election to the world’s highest human rights body in May 2009.
Upon taking office, President Obama moved to ban the use of torture by the United States military and issued an executive order to close the infamous Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, detention centre within one year.
A military judge at Guantanamo and later the United States Senate moved to block the order, however.
The measure would need approval by the United States Congress, however.
UNHCR expressed concern over excessive use of force and human rights violation by Iranian security forces and called on the government to halt these activities.
Only six years remained until the 2015 target deadline for achieving the MDGs.
The global economic downturn had a significant impact on the MDG process.
Progress toward achieving the goals was slowed in many areas and even reversed in others.
In regard to MDG 1—reducing extreme poverty— the strides made during the preceding decade and a half were blunted, and although overall poverty rates continued to decline, the UN estimated that 55 million to 90 million more people would be living in extreme poverty than had been anticipated prior to the economic crisis that began in late 2008.
Women continued to be much more vulnerable with regard to sustainable livelihoods, and four years after the MDG target date for reaching gender parity in primaryand secondary-school education, girls lagged behind.
Maternal health—the MDG on which there was the least progress to date—remained an elusive quest.
The UN reported that the gap between the goal of creating an international trading system that was rule-based, predictable, equitable, and nondiscriminatory and the reality of the 2009 global trading system was widening.
In 2008 official development assistance reached its highest level ever, increasing by 10% in real terms over 2007.
Over the previous decade, assistance to less-developed countries —especially sub-Saharan African countries—had increased substantially.
The world food crisis that had significantly worsened in 2008 remained one of the world’s greatest challenges in 2009.
Despite a decrease in prices in late 2008, food costs continued to be high.
A World Food Summit on food security was held in Rome on Nov.-18, 2009.
The final conference document, while calling on governments to reinforce efforts to meet the MDG target of reducing hunger by half by 2015, contained no new financial commitments for doing so.
On a more positive note, the World Bank announced in late November that it had launched a $1. billion trust fund to promote agricultural production in poor countries.
By year’s end 12,220 deaths had been reported worldwide, and the World Health Organization had declared the pandemic on the decline.
As a result largely of global and regional immunization campaigns, especially in sub-Saharan Africa, deaths from measles dropped 74% from 2000 to 2007.
The global campaign against malaria made inroads, but nearly a million people died annually of the disease.
Malaria deaths were highly regionalized, with 89% in sub-Saharan Africa in 2008; the overwhelming majority of fatalities were children.
To frustrate matters, in late December 2009, news broke of a new drug-resistant strain of malaria in the Cambodia-Thailand border region.
Globally, the number of people living with HIV/AIDS continued to hover around 33 million.
In Eastern Europe and Central Asia, for example, HIV prevalence rates had doubled since 2001, and the number of persons living with HIV/AIDS had ballooned from 630,000 in 2001 to 1,600,000 in 2007.
Two-thirds of persons living with HIV were located in sub-Saharan Africa, and most of these were women.
Maternal mortality continued to plague the LDCs worldwide; in 2005 (the year for which the most recent statistics were available), more than half a million women and girls died annually from birth-related complications—representing 99% of such deaths globally.
Half of all maternal deaths occurred in sub-Saharan Africa, and another third occurred in South Asia.
In October 2008 the UN Environment Programme called for a '‘Global Green New Deal” and launched the Green Economy Initiative to provide a long-term strategy for dealing with global environmental degradation.
Two months later Secretary-General Ban reiterated this call and challenged member states to provide investment to create millions of green jobs.
A series of major international conferences were held, culminating in a final global agreement in Copenhagen in December to replace the Kyoto Protocol, which was scheduled to expire in 2012.
Secretary-General Ban’s restructuring of the UN’s peace and security operations—including the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Department of Field Support, the Office of Rule of Law and Security Institutions, and Integrated Operational Teams—continued during the year.
In an attempt to revitalize the UN Secretariat, the General Assembly agreed to streamline the organization’s personnel and service-delivery systems.
EUROPEAN UNION The European Union faced a series of daunting challenges as 2009 opened.
At the top of the list—and the most urgent—was how to respond to the global economic crisis.
The bloc’s drive to reform its own institutions so they could perform better with an enlarged membership of 27 remained in deep trouble.
The EU’s Lisbon Treaty—the product of eight years of painstaking work—had been drawn up with the intention of pooling more powers at the European level, in part by creating the new posts of EU president and a more powerful foreign policy chief and by reducing the right of one country to veto the wishes of the rest.
The idea was that if Europe could speak as one, rather than as 27, it would be far better able to punch its weight in global negotiations, whether on trade and the economy, foreign affairs, or the environment.
Yet some member states were determined not to back the deal, arguing that too much power was being transferred from national governments to Europe.
It was just these kinds of concerns that had led Ireland to reject the treaty in a referendum in June 2008.
Countries such as the Czech Republic were also showing a reluctance to sign up.
If just one of the 27 states refused to agree, the treaty would be dead.
Somehow, Ireland had to be persuaded to vote again, and the other doubters had to be won round.
There were also divisions over plans to expand the community farther eastward by admitting new member states in years to come.
The question of whether Turkey should win admission continued to split the union.
Moreover, rather than forge a spirit of unity, the economic crisis opened up deep divisions.
By early February the Czechs, who held the rotating presidency of the EU for the first six months of 2009, had become involved in a damaging spat with France, which Czech leaders accused of having pushed protectionist policies to help its own car industry at the very time Europe should have been acting together as one.
Nicolas Sarkozy responded to the economic downturn by criticizing French car companies that relocated plants to Eastern European countries in an effort to cut costs, and these countries cried foul.
Czech Prime Minister Mirek Topolanek accused Sarkozy of having adopted ""beggar thy neighbour” policies to protect France’s interests.
It seemed that the economic difficulties were forcing some countries to look to their national interests, not the broader European one.
The arguments spilled over into discussions of whether the EU should back big fiscal stimulus packages or keep a tight rein on borrowing.
European Union Zeng Yi—Xinhua/Landov On December 1 the European Union’s circle of stars logo is projected onto Lisbon's historic Belem Tower as fireworks light up the sky in celebration of the entry into force of the EU’s Lisbon Treaty after eight years of negotiations. agree to disagree and to launch their own fiscal stimulus packages if they so desired.
In June the EU staged elections to the increasingly powerful, but still fledgling, European Parliament.
Centre-right parties enjoyed the greatest success, and in July conservative former Polish prime minister Jerzy Buzek was elected the body’s president.
Centreleft parties in power in countries such as the U.K., Spain, and Portugal took a battering in the June elections because they were blamed for the economic downturn.
Most alarming was the success of far-right parties, which took advantage of rising nationalist sentiment and suspicion of remote government.
It was the first time that the party had ever gained a foothold in Europe’s emerging legislative assembly.
Far-right parties also increased their votes dramatically in several other countries, including Austria, The Netherlands, Hungary, Denmark, and Finland.
It was another alarming sign that the people of Europe were splintering off from a political elite intent on centralizing its power base at a European level.
By early summer, however, the EU was renewing its enthusiasm to drive forward with political integration and expansion.
Turkey expressed its continued eagerness to join the union, although its bid met with intense resistance from countries such as Austria and France.
Both Albania and Iceland formally applied for membership in the EU in 2009.
Iceland had long stood aloof from the EU, believing it could thrive on its own, but the economic crisis that had ravaged its banking system left it feeling vulnerable.
Carl Bildt, foreign minister of Sweden, which had assumed the presidency of the EU in June, welcomed Iceland’s newfound community spirit.
The country’s existing level of economic integration with the rest of Europe, Bildt said, would allow it to be placed on a “shorter track’’ for membership than states that were economically and politically less prepared, such as countries in the Balkans.
Meanwhile, the bloc’s leaders tried to reinvigorate the union's stalled reform process.
They agreed to measures designed to make the Lisbon Treaty more acceptable to the Irish.
New guarantees ensured that Ireland would retain its military neutrality and the right to determine its own taxes and policies on issues such as abortion.
Ireland held a second referendum in October, and this time Irish voters backed the treaty by 67.1% to 32.9%—a swing of 20.5% to the ""yes” camp since the summer of 2008.
The only country left to put its name to Lisbon was the Czech Republic.
Eventually, after receiving some further guarantees for his country, Czech Pres.
Vaclav Klaus, a strong Euroskeptic, reluctantly ratified the treaty in November.
There was no time for self-congratulation, however, since arguments had already begun over who should fill the top posts created under the Lisbon Treaty, particularly that of first permanent president of the European Council.
Although the role was not clearly defined in the treaty, it was obvious that it would carry huge power and prestige.
The occupant would represent the EU in global meetings and serve as the face of Europe.
For weeks there was discussion about whether Tony Blair, the former U.K. prime minister, should be given the role.
Many member states, however, objected to Blair, mainly because of his support for the war in Iraq and the U.K.’s failure to adopt the euro during his tenure as prime minister.
At a summit in late October, it became clear that even France and Germany—the “big two” of the EU—had profound doubts about Blair.
Other names were floated, but as agreement proved elusive, the decision was postponed to another meeting in midNovember.
Blair was rejected by EU leaders in favour of Belgian Prime Minister Herman Van Rompuy.
Rather than opting for a world-renowned figure who would have overshadowed the 27 EU heads of government, the decision was made to appoint a low-key figure, an effective organizer who was little known outside Belgium—and who was uncontroversial.
The appointment of British Baroness Ashton (see BIOGRAPHIES), the EU trade commissioner, as the first high representative for foreign affairs and security policy was also something of an anticlimax.
In deciding on these appointments, the European Union had shown, however, that it was pressing ahead after an eight-year struggle to modernize.
Multinational and Regional Organizations John Thys—AFP/Getty Images Baroness Ashton, the new European Union high representative for foreign affairs and security policy, departs from an EU summit meeting held in December in Brussels, where discussions focused on climate change. targets to cut greenhouse-gas emissions.
The EU had taken a lead role in pushing for firm commitments backed by international law and had set its sights on a deal that would have committed countries to a 30% cut in emissions, compared with 1990 levels, by 2020.
When a deal finally came, much of the detail was struck by the United States and China, and this left an impression that the EU had been bypassed.
The accord contained aspirations to cut emissions and finance measures to mitigate the effects of climate change in poorer countries—but there was nothing legally binding.
While some form of unity was achieved after two weeks of haggling, the accord fell far short of the EU’s hopes and showed that in China it had an increasingly powerful force to confront in global affairs.
MULTINATIONAL AND REGIONAL ORGANIZATIONS The global financial crisis that began in 2008 set the agendas for many multinational and regional organizations in 2009.
The focus of many such groups was on stimulating recovery, providing greater regulation of financial institutions, and increasing cooperation.
In April and September, G-20 leaders met to discuss the economic crisis and the reform of financial regulatory systems and to jump-start the Doha round of World Trade Organization negotiations.
The summits largely produced agreements to continue talking about the issues.
The September summit, however, approved the “Pittsburgh Pact,"" which signified the G-20’s new role as the primary forum for global economic cooperation.
The leaders adopted broad outlines for stronger capital standards for banks and greater voting power in the IMF and World Bank for China and other fast-growing developing countries.
In June the BRIC countries (Brazil, Russia, India, and China) held their own, inaugural summit.
Accounting for about 15% of the world economy and 40% of global currency reserves, they were drawn together by their dissatisfaction with the U.S.'s role in the global financial system, especially the dollar's status as the world reserve currency.
The BRIC countries were a disparate group, however, and their summit produced more rhetoric than substance.
At the year's two summits of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization , the financial crisis took precedence over the usual regional security issues.
Summit communiques stressed the priority of speeding the implementation of plans to increase international cooperation within the region—particularly regarding infrastructure and communication to counter threats to stability.
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation celebrated its 20th anniversary in 2009.
The November summit was short on substance and long on rhetoric about recovering from the financial crisis, fostering sustainable economic growth, strengthening regional integration and global regulatory policies, resisting protectionism, and concluding the Doha negotiations.
The October summit of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations was attended by leaders from China, Japan, South Korea, Australia, India, and New Zealand.
Their agenda included discussing the expansion of regional trade, finding new paths to growth that were independent of United States and European markets, and addressing the poor transportation infrastructure in parts of the region.
The organization’s leaders asserted that they were on track to implement the ASEAN Free Trade Area in January 2010, which would initially eliminate tariffs on more than 87% of imports within six of the member countries.
In late October ASEAN also inaugurated its Intergovernmental Commission on Human Rights to help promote social development and justice.
The commission, however, encountered charges that it would be a “toothless” body, given ASEAN members’ strong adherence to the norm of noninterference.
Along with calling for increased economic cooperation and reforms of global financial architecture, organizations in Latin America and Africa also dealt with challenges to democracy.
The Organization of American States , the South American Common Market , and the Union of South American Nations were all involved in a crisis in Honduras, where the elected president was ousted in a coup in June.
These groups called for his reinstatement, and the OAS also suspended Honduras and led efforts to mediate a solution—efforts that produced agreement among the parties but little movement toward implementation.
In a major step, the OAS voted to lift Cuba’s long suspension from the organization, provided that Cuba met certain conditions.
The African Union , the Southern African Development Community , and the Economic Community of West African States were involved in political crises in Madagascar, Zimbabwe, Niger, Guinea, and Guinea-Bissau.
Both the AU and the SADC suspended Madagascar, and the AU led mediation efforts concerning that country’s transitional government and elections.
Following an extraordinary summit in October, ECOWAS suspended Niger and appointed mediators to address the situations in both Niger and Guinea.
The AU continued to bear a significant burden for peacekeeping in the Darfur region of The Sudan and in Somalia.
Along with the Arab League, it had been vocal in rejecting the International Criminal Court’s arrest warrant against Sudanese Pres.
Bashir was welcomed at both the AU and Arab League summits, but both organizations supported the creation of a hybrid tribunal of Sudanese and foreign judges appointed by the AU in order to try Bashir.
Dependent States ing military operations there in late 2008 and early 2009.
In September, following publication of a UN fact-finding commission's report, the league’s secretary-general submitted a request for an International Criminal Court investigation of war crimes committed in Gaza.
Although the league faced problems with unity in 2009, members were united in their decision to call for a freeze on the expansion of Jewish settlements in the Israeli-occupied territories as a prerequisite for both further peace talks between Israel and the Palestinians and formal recognition of Israel.
During a day of festivities, Denmark’s Queen Margrethe II handed over the official self-rule documents in a ceremony in Greenland’s capital, Nuuk, attended by dignitaries from 17 other countries and territories.
In October an unexpected source of rare-earth metals was discovered in Greenland that could challenge China’s domination of world supplies of rare-earth metals.
Under the new agreement with Denmark, Greenland would keep half of the income from oil and minerals, with the ultimate goal of full financial and political independence.
On July 21 Spanish Foreign Minister Miguel Angel Moratinos arrived in Gibraltar for talks with his British counterpart, David Miliband, and Gibraltar Chief Minister Peter Caruana.
Former governor Anibal Acevedo Vila was acquitted in March on several corruption charges, which had dogged him throughout his unsuccessful 2008 reelection campaign against Fortuno.
United States President-elect Barack Obama reassured Puerto Rico in early January that its current Commonwealth status would be examined again during his term in office, and in July the United States House of Representatives approved another referendum for Puerto Rico.
Referenda on the territory’s constitutional status had been held previously in 1967, 1993, and 1998, all of which rejected the options of statehood or independence.
The Dutch territory of Curasao in a nonbinding referendum in May narrowly approved the 2006 agreement designed to elevate Curasao to the status of autonomous territory within The Netherlands.
Civil unrest returned to the French dependency of Guadeloupe in February, with at least one death reported, following violence and looting against the background of a general strike that began in January and also spread to Martinique.
Union leaders blamed high prices and “inadequate” wages for their withdrawal of labour.
The strike was called off in March after agreement was reached on a new wage deal for lowerpaid workers.
In August the U.K. government suspended parts of the constitution of its Turks and Caicos colony, removing the premier and cabinet and dissolving the 21-member House of Assembly.
The day-to-day running of the colony was transferred to the U.K.-appointed governor, Gordon Wetherell.
The action, which had been announced in March, was taken following the interim report of a commission of inquiry set up in July 2008 to investigate allegations of corruption against elected officials.
The commission found that corruption was “endemic,” and in July 2009 the U.K. said that it was considering a criminal investigation of former premier Michael Misick and four of his cabinet ministers.
Dependent States Ricardo Arduengo/AP A masked protester displays a Puerto Rican flag during a peaceful demonstration in San Juan on October 15.
Thousands of demonstrators gathered to protest the layoff of some 20,000 government workers in the financially strapped territory. eral election in the U.K.’s Cayman Islands, taking 9 seats in the 15-member Legislative Assembly.
The Movement for Change and Prosperity regained office in Montserrat in September when its leader, Reuben Meade, led the party to victory in the general election, winning six out of nine Legislative Council seats.
Bermuda Premier Ewart Brown’s decision to give sanctuary to four Chinese Muslim Uighurs on their release in June from the United States prison at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, triggered a motion of no confidence against him in the Bermuda parliament, which he survived.
The U.K. government expressed displeasure that the premier had not discussed the matter with the Britishappointed governor beforehand.
That same day the resulting tsunami struck American Samoa, killing more than 20 people and causing extensive damage in the capital, Pago Pago.
American Samoa already faced economic problems, as a mandated increase in the United States federal minimum wage was blamed for cutbacks at two tuna canneries that provided the majority of private-sector employment in the territory.
In September the government sought a loan in a last-minute bid to retain 2,000 jobs by purchasing one cannery, which was scheduled to close at month’s end.
In September the first United States military and related personnel arrived in Guam from the Japanese island of Okinawa.
Japan, which was funding a significant part of the bill for the relocation of 8,000 United States marines and 9,000 dependents, had provided $740 million for rebuilding Guam’s aging infrastructure.
A United States congressional report suggested that this funding would not be sufficient to cover the costs of the realignment agreed to in 2006.
An Asian Development Bank report in August asserted that in the Cook Islands lending to business was down, import demand and export volumes were low, and tax revenue was falling.
The local economy received a boost in the second half of the year from the Pacific Mini Games and aggressive marketing of tourism in regional markets.
The Cook Islands also submitted a claim in the UN to 400,000 sq km of extended continental shelf that might contain valuable manganese nodules.
Gaston Tong Sang, facing a vote of no confidence, resigned on February 7 after only nine months in office.
The territory’s Assembly elected its own speaker, former president Oscar Temaru, as Tong Sang’s replacement.
On November 24, however, Temaru's coalition government— the fourth since the 2008 election—fell to a no-confidence motion and was replaced by one led by Tong Sang.
In September former president Gaston Flosse was convicted on the first of several charges of corruption and ordered stripped of his Senate seat.
Flosse appealed the loss of his seat, and thus his immunity, to the French constitutional court.
This loss of immunity allowed the prosecutor to detain Flosse while the corruption inquiry proceeded.
The territory received some $232 million in aid from the French Development Agency in 2008 to offset the declining economic conditions and to generate growth.
A Council of State in Paris annulled a French Polynesia Assembly vote to suspend a controversial pearl export tax until December 2009.
After provincial elections in May, the New Caledonian Congress named Philippe Gomes as the new head of government.
Tension arose in the territory in May as members of the Kanak USTKE union confronted local aviation interests and French police at the domestic airport, and six union leaders were jailed for up to one year.
Antarctica sponse, the French sent additional paramilitary forces to the territory.
The union suspended its strike in June, but after a Court of Appeal rejected its appeal in September, the union resumed the general strike and prepared to appeal the imprisonment of its leaders to Frances highest court.
On March 29, 2009, voters on Mayotte (the only one of the four islands in the Comoros group that voted in 1974 to remain a French dependency) participated in a referendum on the islands future relationship with France.
More than 95% approved a change of status from that of a departmental collectivity to an overseas departement of France.
This would necessitate replacing the local Muslim legal system, including the practice of polygamy, with French law.
Comoros, which did not recognize French rule in Mayotte, protested the vote and criticized the treatment of Comoran immigrants to Mayotte.
Civil unrest in French Caribbean dependencies flared over high prices and inadequate wages and spread in early March to Reunion, where protesters called for a general strike on March 10.
In early 2009 the Chagos Conservation Trust and other environmental groups called for the creation of a marine reserve in the uninhabited British Indian Ocean Territory coral atoll.
Australian Immigration Minister Chris Evans was forced to double the size of the Australian detention centre on Christmas Island to house 2,300 people.
This followed a sharp increase in the arrival of asylum seekers on boats sailing into Australian waters.
Late in the year the Australian government transferred some asylum seekers to mainland Australia for processing.
Evans rejected claims by the new Australian opposition leader, Tony Abbott, that the government had abandoned offshore processing of asylum seekers and reiterated that the government was committed to mandatory detention of unauthorized boat arrivals.
There is no indigenous human population, and there is no land-based industry.
The 47-nation Antarctic Treaty is the managerial mechanism for the region south of latitude 60° S, which includes all of Antarctica.
The treaty reserves the area for peaceful purposes, encourages cooperation in science, prescribes environmental protection, allows inspections to verify adherence, and defers the issue of territorial sovereignty.
They also agreed to support the International Maritime Organization’s efforts to ensure the safety of Antarctic shipping and to petition the IMO to extend the boundary of the organization’s Antarctic Special Area northward to the Antarctic Convergence in order to protect the region’s marine ecosystem.
At the meeting the representatives also recognized the 50th anniversary of the signing of the Antarctic Treaty in December 1959.
In a declaration they acknowledged the treaty’s contribution to promoting peace and international cooperation in the Antarctic region and reaffirmed their commitment to the objectives and purposes of the treaty.
In a second declaration they recognized the role of polar science in understanding climate change and encouraged participants in the most recent International Polar Year program (which ran from March 2007 to March 2009) to continue their cooperation and scientific research.
During the ATCM the Committee for Environmental Protection discussed or proposed for discussion 2 new and 11 revised management plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas.
The committee also discussed the impact of nonnative species in the region and new guidelines for managing historic sites and monuments and agreed to study the environmental impacts of tourism and nongovernmental activities in Antarctica.
During the 2008-09 austral summer, 37,858 tourists visited the continent, with some 37,585 arriving by ship.
The red represents areas where temperatures increased the most over the period, and the dark blue represents areas with a lesser degree of warming.
Antarctica New Zealand was to lead the estimated $6 million project and cover most of the cost as part of its contribution to the shared logistics pool with the United States Antarctic Program, which transported most fuel, personnel, and materials to the continent for both national programs.
The project would cut fuel consumption by about 463,000 litres every year, and wind-generated electricity would reduce greenhouse gas production by 1,242 tons of carbon dioxide annually.
The wind-generated electricity, which would flow into the United States distribution system at McMurdo Station, would supply about 15% of McMurdo’s annual demand; the smaller New Zealand station would draw about 87% of its electricity requirements from the United States distribution system.
The two countries expected the wind farm to be operational in February 2010.
The United States Antarctic Program was to complete the modernization of the Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station during the 2009-10 austral summer.
The final phase would be the demolition and removal of the South Pole geodesic dome.
Early in the 2008-09 austral summer, a fire destroyed a building, killed one person, and injured two others at the Russian station Progress, located in East Antarctica.
The injured, who were part of a 10-person construction team, were taken to China’s nearby Zhongshan station.
Kunlun station, which was China’s third Antarctic station, was located in East Antarctica at Dome A, about 4,093 m above sea level.
Researchers who had participated in the five-nation Antarctic Geological Drilling Program announced in October that they had found unexpected evidence of a remarkably warm period in Antarctica 15. million years ago.
The evidence found in a sedimentary core, drilled from the seafloor underneath the Ross Ice Shelf, indicated that even a slight rise in atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide affected the stability of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet.
Because the dynamics of ice sheets were not well understood, discoveries such as this one improved scientific understanding of the mechanisms that controlled the growth, melting, and movements of ice.
The authors predicted that seas would rise unevenly because the shift in a huge mass of ice away from the South Pole would subtly change the strength of gravity locally and the rotation of the Earth.
In October, NASA scientists reported in the journal Science that satellite observations showed that over the past seven years ice sheets in Greenland and Antarctica appeared to be shrinking faster than originally thought.
The Arctic Ocean, 14.09 million sq km in area, constitutes about two-thirds of the region.
International organizations concerned with the Arctic include the Arctic Council, the Barents Euro-Arctic Council, the Inuit Circumpolar Council, and the Indigenous Peoples' Secretariat.
Arctic Regions Arctic summer sea ice hit its 2009 annual minimum on September 12.
At 5. million sq km of coverage, the 2009 minimum was the third lowest on record, 24% below the 1979 to 2000 average.
The countries bordering the Arctic region (the U.S., Canada, Denmark , Norway, and Russia) continued their interest in the more open and accessible Arctic Ocean.
Much of the ongoing undersea mapping work carried out in 2009 was done jointly by pairs of countries.
Russia and the United States conducted collaborative research in the Chukchi Sea; the United States and Canada worked together in the Beaufort Sea; and Canada and Denmark worked cooperatively in the high Arctic.
During the year the countries bordering the Arctic continued the process of establishing rights to territory and undersea resources under the aegis of the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea.
In April the UN confirmed Norway’s claim to extend the boundary of its continental shelf, based on undersea mapping submitted in 2006.
The decision added some 235,000 sq km to Norway's continental shelf area.
Russia’s claim for Arctic undersea rights was submitted in 2007, and the country continued to carry out research to support its claim.
Canada was expected to submit a claim by 2013, and Denmark was to make its proposal by 2014.
In August the United States introduced a moratorium on commercial fishing in its exclusive economic zone off the Arctic coast of Alaska.
The moratorium was announced to provide time to determine the level of fish stocks, the role of Arctic fish in the ecosystem, and their response to the changing sea ice conditions.
Fishing fleets worldwide had expressed interest in expanding their operations into the newly opening waters of the Arctic.
The Arctic Council released a major report on Arctic marine traffic in spring 2009.
Transport activity was expected to increase from fishing, resource development, tourism, research, and commercial shipping.
The report made recommendations for search-and-rescue capabilities in the event of accidents and spills.
Just weeks before the report was released, a Russian nuclearpowered ice breaker collided with an unladen oil tanker in the Kara Sea.
Two German cargo ships successfully completed the transit in September 2009.
The new Russian ice breakers 50 Let Pobedy and Rossia accompanied the ships along the most northerly section of the passage.
In July the United States introduced bills to build two new ice breakers for use in polar waters and to coordinate shipping infrastructure with other Arctic countries.
Russia also had plans to add another six nuclear-powered ice breakers by 2020.
In May Russia began construction on the world's first nuclear power plant on an offshore platform.
An additional three offshore nuclear plants were in the plans for coming years.
The platforms were intended to have multiple uses, one of which was to supply power for exploration for and development of petroleum and natural-gas reserves.
Earlier in the spring, Norway had launched two new offshore semisubmersible rigs designed for harsh environmental conditions and ultradeepwater drilling.
In 2008 the United States Geological Survey had determined that the Arctic contained 13% of the global oil reserves and that it contained 30% of the global gas reserves, with the majority of these reserves located along the Russian continental shelf.
Progress was modest in 2009 on two major pipeline projects in North America to connect hydrocarbon reserves in the Arctic to United States and Canadian markets.
Interest in northern gas, however, had diminished as a result of technological innovations in drilling.
Improvements in steam-extraction technology, known as hydraulic fracturing, were revitalizing natural gas reserves that were closer to markets.
It had been known that methane, the principle component of natural gas, also exists in the Arctic permafrost, both in the tundra and in the undersea frozen layer of the continental shelf.
New studies in 2009 focused on determining how much methane and carbon dioxide was stored in the Arctic and what quantity of these greenhouse gases might be released as the Arctic warms.
The concern was that the addition of large amounts of the two gases could create a feedback loop that would accelerate climate change.
One of these studies, coauthored by the executive director of the Global Carbon Project by the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization, estimated that some 1. trillion tons of carbon dioxide were stored in frozen soils, twice what had been previously estimated.
Studies in the Arctic and elsewhere were also conducted into developing technologies that could harvest methane hydrates to use as a fuel rather than allowing the methane to escape into the atmosphere.
The result from such harvesting could be significant, since methane is 20 to 25 times more potent than carbon dioxide as a greenhouse gas.
A Canadian study revealed that caribou and reindeer herds across the Arctic had declined by some 60% over the previous 30 years.
Caribou and reindeer were considered a cornerstone species for the subsistence economy of the Arctic’s indigenous peoples.
Polar bears, also critical to the economy and culture of indigenous peoples, had been under threat from climate change as well, and in 2008 the United States government had listed them as a threatened species.
These and other issues were discussed at the Indigenous Peoples' Global Summit on Climate Change hosted by the Inuit Circumpolar Council in Anchorage, Alaska, in April 2009.
Late in the summer, UN SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-Moon traveled to the Arctic before attending the World Climate Conference in Geneva in September.
His pronouncements added urgency to the UN Climate Change Conference that convened in December in Copenhagen to negotiate the treaty that would succeed the Kyoto Protocol.
Leaders at the conference, however, were unable to arrive at a treaty to succeed the Kyoto Protocol, but they did reach agreement on an accord that would see negotiations continue in 2010.
Afghanistan AFGHANISTAN Area: 645,807 sq km Population : 28,150,000 (including Afghan refugees in Pakistan and Iran) Capital: Kabul Chief of state and head of government: President Hamid Karzai The war in Afghanistan assumed a higher global profile in 2009 as Taliban attacks inside Pakistan demonstrated the international character of the Islamist insurgency in both countries.
United States and NATO troop levels in Afghanistan rose above 100,000, most of them American.
He authorized higher troop levels and replaced NATO’s commander in Afghanistan.
Economic reconstruction and the training of Afghan forces became high priorities.
In recognition of the regional nature of the opposition, United States policy would view Taliban activity on both sides of the Afghanistan-Pakistan frontier as a whole.
There was a new willingness on the part of the United States to reach out to moderate Taliban, especially to those fighting for money rather than ideology.
Many Western policy makers saw the insurgency in Afghanistan as composed of three groups.
The first, the Taliban group led by Mullah Mohammad Omar, was loosely organized and active mostly inside Afghanistan.
Many of this group’s members were Pashtuns who fought for local or tribal issues and might respond to programs addressing their concerns.
A second Taliban group, led by members of the Haqqani family, was credited with having introduced suicide attacks and bombings of public buildings to Afghanistan and was said to be connected with both al-Qaeda and elements of Pakistan’s military.
Finally, the group led by the warlord Gulbuddin Hekmatyar remained independent of the Taliban while sharing their Islamist orientation.
It was not known whether Hekmatyar might find common ground with the government of Pres.
Throughout the year interest focused on Afghanistan’s second presidential election, in which Karzai stood for reelection.
Registration was under way in the winter for a vote anticipated in the spring.
According to Afghanistan's constitution, Karzai’s term would end on May 22.
In January, however, the Independent Election Commission, appointed by Karzai, announced that the election would be delayed until August 20 because of security and weather concerns.
Although it was backed by the UN, the U.S., and other international leaders, this decision was rejected by many Afghan politicians, who argued that it was illegal.
The controversy continued until the end of March, when the Supreme Court announced that Karzai could hold office until the August election.
An Electoral Complaints Commission, which included UN observers as well as Afghans, was charged with investigating and ruling on reported irregularities.
The election provoked thousands of complaints of ballot fraud, and counting continued for two months.
The first count gave Karzai enough votes to avoid a runoff, but several hundred thousand ballots in his favour were eliminated when convincing evidence of mass fraud was brought to light.
A runoff between Karzai and former foreign minister Abdullah Abdullah was ruled necessary.
Abdullah demanded that officials overseeing the election be replaced to prevent further fraud, but he was ignored.
On November 1 he withdrew his participation, and Karzai was declared the winner without the need for a second vote.
The president immediately pledged to remove the taint of corruption from his government.
New strategies could not disguise growing tensions between the Afghan government and its international defenders.
Despite NATO’s revised rules of engagement, its air strikes continued to cause civilian casualties.
Many Afghans, including Karzai, openly criticized the foreign troops for not protecting the population.
International leaders, whose own populations were becoming discouraged by so few signs of success, pointed to the corruption and inefficiency in Afghanistan’s government and demanded reform.
In March the parliament passed, and Karzai signed, a bill legalizing the traditional family law of the Hazara, a law that was to apply only to this Shi'ite miDavid Goldman/AP United States Army soldiers wait to be evacuated by helicopter after their armoured vehicle struck an improvised explosive device in Afghanistan’s Vardak province in August. nority.
Shi'ite parliamentarians argued that it was legal recognition of Hazara culture, but many inside and outside Afghanistan denounced the law for infringing on women's rights.
In July, however, Karzai enacted a revised version of the Hazara family law, which, among other provisions, forbade a woman to work outside the home without her husband’s permission and allowed a man to withhold food from his wife if she refused to have sex with him.
The year saw a shift in Russian and Central Asian attitudes toward NATO shipments to Afghanistan, from allowing only nonlethal supplies to cross their countries to opening routes to arms shipments.
Several Asian countries voiced new warmth and friendship toward Afghanistan’s government.
China offered expanded economic cooperation but remained noncommittal on requests to open the border of Afghanistan’s Vakhan region to trade.
India too was eager to participate in Afghanistan’s development, and even Japan offered extensive financial aid to the country.
On another bright note, in April Afghanistan established its first national park, Band-e-Amir, in a region renowned for the intense, clear blue of its mountain lakes.
Algeria ALBANIA Area: 28,703 sq km Population : 3,191,000 Capital: Tirana Chief of state: President Bamir Topi Head of government: Prime Minister Sali Berisha Albania was admitted to NATO at the alliance’s summit in Strasbourg, France, on April 4, 2009, and formally applied for full EU membership on April 28.
The EU considered the general elections held on June 28 to be a litmus test of the country’s progress.
By having introduced a new electoral system in which seats were allocated proportionally by districts, legislators had significantly diminished the chances of small parties to win seats.
This marked a turning point in postcommunist Albania’s polarized political culture; it was the first coalition government that included parties from both the left and the right.
In Berisha’s new cabinet, which took office on September 17, LSI leader Ilir Meta became foreign minister.
A trial opened on October 29 of 29 persons accused of negligence and murder in connection with the blast.
They included former army chief of staff Luan Hoxha and four senior executives of the Alba-Demil Co., which operated the facility in Gerdec.
The opposition PS, led by Tirana Mayor Edi Rama, boycotted the constitutive session of the parliament on September 7, arguing that there had been irregularities in the electoral process.
The EU stated that although Albania had made progress in its voting system, its political parties should end the ""politicization” of the electoral process.
In one such case, just three days before the elections, Berisha and his Turkish counterpart, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, held a ceremony to inaugurate a central stretch of highway linking the KosovoAlbania border with Albania’s main road system.
The entire highway, which was expected to be finished in the spring of 2010, would reduce the travel time between Kosovo and the Albanian capital from up to eight hours to only about three.
The event highlighted the importance that Berisha placed on developing ties with Kosovo.
Bamir Topi and his Montenegrin counterpart, Filip Vujanovic, pledged to strengthen ties between their countries and to build a highway along the Adriatic coast.
Berisha proposed to legalize same-sex marriage and to adopt the euro as Albania’s currency.
In the second quarter of 2009, the unemployment rate was 12.7%, and GDP growth was estimated at 5.3% year-on-year.
The ground had been well prepared; constitutional amendments that favoured the incumbent had been promulgated by presidential decree on Oct., 2008, and approved overwhelmingly by the parliament on Nov.
The amendments removed the bar on a president’s serving more than two consecutive terms and made the government answerable to the president rather than Algeria’s bicameral parliament, although the parliament reserved the formal right to reject the prime minister's program.
Abdelaziz Bouteflika (see BIOGRAPHIES) announced that he would stand for reelection.
Observers believed that the actual turnout was probably about 30%, with the president receiving about half of the vote.
Bouteflika was believed to be grooming his younger brother, Said, as his successor.
A new political party loyal to the president was being formed, and Said was expected to lead it.
The February announcement that Bouteflika would seek a third term was greeted by a wave of violence, normally suppressed in winter because of the severe weather.
An attack near Jijel killed nine security guards and injured two others.
Then, in June, eight policemen and two civilians died in a bombing in Boumerdes province, followed by the deaths of 19 gendarmes in an attack on a Chinese construction project near Bordj Bou Arreridj.
At the end of the month, five communal guards were killed and two others kidnapped in Khenchela province.
In late July the security services killed a would-be suicide bomber in Dellys.
Five more people died in an attack in Jijel province at the end of the month, and three soldiers were killed in September in a shootout between security forces and a terrorist group in the town of Boumerdas.
Although the number of violent deaths had diminished slightly, the geographic range of the attacks widened over northern Algeria in 2009.
Andorra Salafist Group for Preaching and Combat) continued to be a cause for concern in Algeria.
At the start of June, the group killed a British hostage in neighbouring Mali, although it later released a Swiss hostage it had held in Mali for a $4 million ransom.
Because of such violence, Algeria joined a new 25,000strong security force initiative with Sahel countries and the United States.
Algeria canceled the purchase from France of four frigates for its navy, looking to Italy and Britain instead for major arms purchases.
Measures introduced by Algeria to increase control over foreign investment, including a demand that Algeria serve as the majority stakeholder in joint ventures, were beginning to scare off investors in 2009.
The new policy was the result of the president’s personal resentment of the failure of foreign investors, particularly oil companies, to reinvest profits.
In parliamentary elections held on April 26, the PS claimed 45.03% of the vote and 14 of the 28 seats in the General Council.
Bartumeu was a founding member of the PS and had been a leader of the opposition in the General Council since 2005.
As head of the government, he vowed to improve fiscal and banking transparency, and toward that end Andorra and France signed an agreement in September aimed at facilitating the exchange of tax information.
Andorra was reported to be discussing similar agreements with a number of other countries.
Aiming to maintain Angola’s place as one of the world’s 10 fastest-growing economies, despite the global recession, the government pledged to implement plans for national reconstruction, macroeconomic stability, poverty reduction, and the revival of agricultural production.
Angola had become sub-Saharan Africa’s largest oil producer, ahead of Nigeria and Libya, and was China’s largest oil supplier; however, the nonoil sector of the economy had grown even more rapidly than oil, a positive step toward diversification.
Angola’s role in the African Union, the Southern African Development Community, and the UN Human Rights Council became increasingly important, underscored by Italy’s invitation to Angola to participate in the Group of Eight summit on the world economy.
Angola’s continued economic success, political stability, and importance in southern African power relations attracted significant investment overtures from China, the U.S., and Europe.
President dos Santos’s 30 years of experience as head of state accounted for his administration's skilled and tough negotiation with international financial agencies, multinational firms, and governments.
Angola secured at least $13 billion in oil-backed loans from China, a key participant in reconstructing Angola after its prolonged civil war.
Bilateral trade volume between China and Gianluigi Guercia—AFP/Getty Images During his trip to Angola in March, Pope Benedict XVI waves to the crowd gathered at a stadium in Luanda.
China also pledged to help devise and implement agricultural-development programs in Huila and Uige provinces.
In September Angola and the IMF settled their differences and resumed talks about loans.
By year’s end the constitution remained unfinished, and a presidential election that should have occurred in 2009 had not been scheduled.
In March heavy rains caused devastating floods in Luanda, Cunene province, and elsewhere; 220,000 farmers were displaced.
Aid agencies warned that the damage of 130,000 ha of farmland, especially in Cunene province, might result in serious food shortages.
Demining operations in 18 provinces continued along the railways, telephone networks, and electricity lines, making train travel more secure and expansion of the infrastructure possible.
The year was punctuated by an unusual number of high-profile official visits by international leaders, testimony to Angola’s emergence as a continental power.
They included Chinese Minister of Commerce Chen Deming , Pope Benedict XVI , Russian Pres.
While Medvedev and Castro reinforced their countries’ historic ties with Angola’s liberation movement and postindependence development, Malloch-Brown and Clinton were intent on securing favourable trade positions in the face of growing competition from china.
One of the main charges involved the sale of about $8 billion in certificates of deposit that were issued with the promise of improbably high interest rates.
Antigua-based Stanford International Bank was Antigua and Barbuda's second biggest employer, after the government.
Prime Minister Baldwin Spencer described the situation as having “profound implications” for the country.
Stanford’s impact on Antigua and Barbuda and the Caribbean as a whole also extended to the region’s most popular game, cricket, into which he had poured millions of dollars in the past few years.
The Stanford debacle was expected to have repercussions for the country’s reputation as an offshore financial centre, especially in light of the Group of 20 decision at its summit in April to impose sanctions on financial centres that failed to comply with internationally agreed-upon standards.
Cristina Fernandez de Kirchner began 2009 with low public approval ratings, rising dissent within her governing Peronist movement, and serious economic difficulties stemming from a combination of the global recession and her government's mismanagement of economic policy.
In the face of this growing crisis, in March Fernandez de Kirchner unexpectedly reformed the electoral law in order to set June 28 as the date for midterm congressional elections in which one-half of the seats in the Chamber of Deputies and one-third of the seats in the Senate (24 of 72) were to be elected.
Fernandez de Kirchner’s spouse, former president Nestor Kirchner (who after leaving office in 2007 continued to be the country’s de facto political leader), squared off against dissident Peronist Francisco de Narvaez as well as a nonPeronist opposition alliance led by Margarita Stolbizer.
The Chamber list headed by Kirchner utilized copious amounts of government resources to support its campaign.
The independently wealthy de Narvaez matched Kirchner’s campaign spending to a considerable extent, while Stolbizer’s impoverished campaign struggled to gain traction among voters.
In the federal capital district, the Kirchners’ list placed fourth , while in Santa Fe and Cordoba, the country’s two other large provinces, the Kirchners’ Chamber lists came in third and fourth , respectively, behind dissident Peronist lists.
These four districts jointly accounted for 62% of the population, and the Kirchners failed to achieve victory in a single one.
Overall, government supporters won 47 and 8 seats in the Chamber and Senate, respectively.
The days in which the Kirchners could rely on a disciplined legislative majority to obediently approve their legislative initiatives were clearly in the past.
While many hoped that the Kirchners’ electoral defeat would lead them to adopt a more consensual governance style, to the contrary the Kirchners ratcheted up their level of conflict and antagonism with a host of groups, including the principal agricultural organizations, the major media companies, the non-Peronist opposition, and dissident Peronists.
In addition, immediately following the election, Health Minister Graciela Ocana resigned, and several Cabinet moderates, in particular Cabinet Chief Sergio Massa, were replaced.
Serzh Sarkisyan in June 2008 to assess the findings of the ad hoc parliamentary commission that was investigating Yerevan’s postelection clashes—suspended its activities in early May 2009 owing to friction between government-appointed and opposition members.
On September 16 the ad hoc parliamentary commission ruled that the police had acted correctly in using force against opposition demonstrators.
Under pressure from the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, on June 19 the Armenian parliament declared an amnesty for dozens of opposition supporters jailed for their imputed role in the postelection violence.
The HAK protested that the voting was marred by largescale fraud, and its members collectively rejected their municipal council mandates.
The country’s GDP plummeted by 18.5% during the first seven months of 2009 but began to stabilize after Armenia received emergency loans from international financial institutions.
In June the United States cut aid to Armenia by one-third owing to concern over the handling of the 2008 presidential elections and subsequent protests.
On April 22 the Turkish and Armenian governments announced that they had reached an agreement on a framework for normalizing relations.
Shortly thereafter the HHD formally quit the fourparty governing coalition to protest what it termed Sarkisyan’s overly conciliatory Turkish policy.
On August 31 Armenia and Turkey made public two protocols on establishing diplomatic relations and opening their mutual border.
The Armenian and Turkish foreign ministers signed those protocols on October 10, but neither country’s parliament immediately ratified them.
Shortly thereafter President Sarkisyan visited Turkey to attend an association football match between the two countries’ teams, responding in kind to a similar visit to Armenia by Turkish Pres.
In early 2009 Australia was devastated by bushfires, with many homes in the state of Victoria razed to the ground, and some homeowners were burned alive in their houses.
The general public rallied behind the survivors; appeals for donations were successful; and these funds combined with major government assistance to speed up the rebuilding process, which began as soon as it was safe to reenter the burned-out zones.
Although coal was the country’s biggest export and Australia had the highest per capita carbon emissions in the developed world, Prime Minister Kevin Rudd’s government introduced legislation to launch a carbon-trading scheme to tackle global warming.
In August Parliament rejected the plan to introduce carbon permits costing $A 10 per ton from July 2011, with opposition senators defeating the bill by 42 votes to 30.
The legislation was defeated a second time in December when it was reintroduced.
Rudd was forced to reshuffle his front bench in June after Joel Fitzgibbon resigned as minister of defense amid allegations of misconduct.
The plight of Aboriginal Australians was in the news in August when James Anaya, a UN special rapporteur on indigenous rights, criticized Northern Territory intervention.
In addition, more than 2,000 homes were destroyed, and experts estimated that the number of affected wildlife could climb well into the millions.
With its abundant forests and hot dry climate, Australia had often suffered from deadly bushfires, most notably the 1939 ""Black Friday"" blaze in Victoria, in which 71 people were killed, and the 1983 ""Ash Wednesday"" fires in Victoria and South Australia, where 75 people perished.
The scale of the recent fires—attributed to extreme weather conditions coupled with a severe and protracted drought that had created tinder-dry vegetation across the state— was unprecedented and left the country in a state of shock.
On February 7, Victorians were told to brace for the ""worst day"" in the state's history; weather forecasters warned of a record heat wave with temperatures soaring to 46.
That day more than 47 major fires erupted across the state, 14 of them claiming lives or causing significant damage.
The flames quickly jumped a major highway and roared into a forest where they turned into a giant fireball, dwarfing the resources of local firefighters who could only flee in its path.
Aided by steep slopes and powerful winds, this fire raced through a series of townships, including Kinglake (where 38 people died), Strathewen , and St.
Andrews (12 were killed), catching residents by surprise and trapping many in their homes.
Some sought to escape by car as the fires approached, but dozens died on the roads as they were overtaken by the fire.
Late in the afternoon a sudden change in wind direction pushed the fire to the northeast, bringing new towns into its path.
A parallel fire, known as the Murrindindi fire, also blew to the northeast, swallowing the unsuspecting tourist town of Marysville, where 34 people lost their lives.
Fire experts said that these two fires alone released energy equivalent to 1,500 Hiroshima-sized atomic bombs.
Fires also ravaged other parts of the state, including the eastern region of Gippsland, where 11 people were killed.
In some townships there was no more than a handful of survivors after the fires swept through.
The township of Flowerdale, 65 km north of Melbourne, was razed to the ground.
The government immediately announced that a Royal Commission would be formed to look into the disaster but declared that the emergency services had done the best that they could in the face of an unprecedented natural phenomenon.
In particular, the report disclosed that the public warnings given by the Country Fire Authority to the communities in the fire's path were inadequate and in some cases nonexistent.
It revealed that the CFA personnel in charge of managing the fires failed to issue timely warnings, with the result that many people did not know that they were in danger until the fire was upon them.
In addition, serious deficiencies were pinpointed in the command and control systems of the emergency services agencies, a problem that led to confusion, inertia, and poor decision making at crucial times.
Among the 51 recommendations included in the report were changes to the ""stay or go"" policy that, before February 7, had advised residents to choose between remaining and defending their property against a fire or leaving the property early.
The Victorian government pledged to implement all of the Royal Commission's interim recommendations in time for the beginning of the 2009-10 fire season.
The Commission's final report was expected in July 2010. alcohol were discriminatory and breached Australia’s treaty obligations.
Rudd authorized ministerial priority to find ways to reduce the numbers of Aborigines in prison and to improve Aboriginal life expectancy.
At the beginning of 2009, Australia's national accounts were in a relatively healthy condition, largely because of mineral exports to China.
In April the national airline Qantas announced that 1,750 jobs were to be eliminated and deferred new aircraft delivery.
In the May budget the government followed up its previous policies of cutting interest rates and giving handouts to appropriate sectors of the population, including pensioners, the unemployed, and Aborigines.
Treasurer Wayne Swan expected growth to fall by 0.5% and unemployment to rise to 8.25%, low by international standards but unacceptably high in Australia.
As a result, fiscal 2009 saw a record deficit and unprecedented revenue losses.
The stunning rebound of Chinese industrial production helped Australia shrug off the global financial crisis better than anyone expected, however, and on October 6 Australia became the first major world economy to raise interest rates since the crisis began.
In a series of disputes with China, the Rudd government faced its most serious foreign crisis since it took office in 2007.
Shortly afterward, Stem Hu, a Chinese-born Australian citizen and head of Rio Tinto's iron ore operations in China, was arrested for industrial espionage and bribery, together with three senior Chinese employees of Rio.
Relations remained frosty, as Canberra declined to refuse a visa to the exiled Uighur leader Rebiya Kadeer , even when asked to do so by Chinese Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi, and Beijing canceled a scheduled visit to Australia by Vice Minister He Yafei.
Dieter Nagl—AFP/Getty Images public-opinion polls, the SPO and OVP both had about 31% support in August.
Support for the FPO rose to 21%, and the party seemed poised to remain one of the largest forces in Austrian politics.
The FPO campaign in the European Parliament elections was highly provocative, however, as a result of its anti-Muslim and anti-Jewish statements.
This made it difficult for the OVP to find domestic or international acceptance for a possible partnership with the FPO, and, for the time being, left no viable alternative to an SPOOVP grand coalition.
While the BZO remained popular in Carinthia, its support dwindled elsewhere in Austria following the sudden death in October 2008 of its popular leader, Jorg Haider.
Austria's economy contracted sharply in 2009, largely owing to a significant fall in investment and exports.
In the first half of the year, investment was severely restrained by a dramatic drop in manufacturing output, which stabilized midyear and began to recover very slowly thereafter.
Investment also contracted owing to low business consumer confidence and tight credit conditions.
Exports declined drastically in 2009, largely as a result of a contraction in GDP growth in Germany (Austria's main trading partner), the rest of the euro area, Russia, and Central and Eastern Europe.
In response to these ongoing problems, Chancellor Werner Faymann’s SPO-led government accelerated the tax cuts originally planned for 2010 to take effect in 2009 and introduced an economic-recovery program to ameliorate the impact of the global economic recession on consumers and businesses.
Other measures that were implemented to boost domestic demand included abolishing student fees, extending family allowances, increasing care subsidies, allowing for accelerated investment into infrastructure, promoting research and development, providing special loan guarantees to facilitate lending to medium and large companies, and enabling companies to employ people on short working hours for up to two years.
Finance Minister Josef Proll of the OVP reported that the government expected the deficit to reach 3.5% of GDP in 2009 and 4.7% of GDP in 2010.
As a result, the European Commission announced in late June that before the end of the year it would initiate procedures against Austria for having exceeded the 3% of GDP threshold established in the EU’s Stability and Growth Pact.
By mid-2009 most of the country’s largest banks had received state aid.
On March 18 voters approved sweeping amendments to the constitution, one of which empowered Pres.
Ilham Aliyev to seek additional terms as president after the expiration of his current term in 2013.
In August draft amendments to the law on political parties were announced that, if voted into law, would impose new restrictions on party registration and funding.
On January 1 a radio ban took effect that barred international broadcasts from being featured on national frequencies.
Journalists and nongovernmental organization workers were denied entry to the hearing proceedings, and individuals who appeared outside the courthouse in a show of support were arrested.
In mid-August Azerbaijani security services summoned for interrogation several of the 43 people who voted for Armenia in the Eurovision Song Contest.
In early November, after a four-month trial, 26 men accused of having engineered an August 2008 explosion in Baku’s Abu-Bakr mosque were sentenced to between 2 and 15 years’ imprisonment.
On October 5 four Azerbaijanis and two Lebanese citizens were jailed for planning a terror attack on the Israeli embassy in Baku.
The economy—in particular, the financial, construction, and petrochemical sectors—was badly affected by the global financial crisis.
GDP growth slowed dramatically, reaching only 2.7% during the first seven months of the year.
In 2009 President Aliyev met several times with his Armenian counterpart, Pres.
Serzh Sarkisyan, to discuss the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, but the two failed to reach a formal settlement.
In April the announcement of the incipient Armenian-Turkish rapprochement— and the subsequent commitment by those two countries in October to establish diplomatic relations—occasioned official protests from the Azerbaijani government.
President Aliyev, who declined to attend a UN-sponsored conference in Istanbul in early April, hinted in October that Azerbaijan could choose Russia, rather than Turkey, as the route for future gas exports.
On June 29 Azerbaijan had signed a deal that gave Russia’s Gazprom the right to purchase gas from the Shah Deniz field beginning in 2014-15.
Negotiations on the proposal with other countries would be required; the area claimed overlapped into U.S., Haitian, Cuban, and Turks and Caicos waters.
Cuba reportedly was preparing to drill in the Cay Sal Bank area that The Bahamas regarded as its own, moreover adding urgency to the need to settle maritime boundaries on a permanent basis.
Like elsewhere in the Caribbean Community region, The Bahamas was moving ahead as fast as it could to expand the role of renewable energy in its energy matrix.
By midyear the Bahamas Electricity Corporation had short-listed as many as 13 proposals for various types of renewable-energy projects (including solar, wind, biomass, and ocean wave), and in December it was still considering renewable-energy bids by six companies.
Privatization of government-owned assets was still on the agenda in the Caribbean, and The Bahamas proved no exception.
The labour sponsorship system, which was riddled with corruption, had been criticized by international human rights groups as operating in a mode little short of slavery.
Most of the remaining Gulf countries subsequently indicated that they would revise their own sponsorship laws.
Bangladesh the Bahraini government imposed severe restrictions on live entertainment and the consumption of alcohol in most of its hotels.
Bahrain, which had traditionally been known as an oasis of tolerance surrounded by mostly conservative Islamic countries, faced a possible impact on its tourism industry.
The construction of the long-awaited 40-km -long “Friendship Causeway"" linking the island of Bahrain to Qatar was scheduled to begin in 2010.
The estimated $2. billion project was expected to take four years to complete.
The election that had taken place on Dec., 2008, was important for many reasons.
First, it marked the end of the two-year rule of an unelected militarybacked interim government; the parliament had been suspended during this time, and many political leaders were jailed on charges ranging from graft to the illegal possession of liquor.
More significant, however, was the fact that the election witnessed the overwhelming defeat of the pro-Islamist rightwing alliance that had ruled for five years prior to the interim government.
Prior to the election, a number of detained politicians were released on bail, and charges against many of them—including Hasina— were eventually dropped.
During the insurrection at least 74 persons, including 57 senior military officers, were killed by the guards, who reportedly had been upset over their pay and living conditions.
The mutiny ended after the government offered the mutineers an amnesty deal, though Hasina later rescinded amnesty for those directly responsible for the killings.
The government seemed to be teetering on the edge of collapse in the wake of the mutiny as the army accused it of having failed to protect the lives of military personnel.
Though the army wanted the suspects in the killings to be tried under military law, the government decided to create a special civil tribunal to handle the prosecutions.
The year also saw a sudden increase in extrajudicial killings carried out by police and the Rapid Action Battalion, the country’s elite anticrime and antiterrorism force.
In the first nine months of the year, 97 such killings took place, which prompted criticism of the battalion by human rights organizations.
In April the government announced plans to investigate and prosecute persons for war crimes committed during Bangladesh’s 1971 liberation struggle.
Bringing war criminals to trial was a popular campaign pledge made by the Awami League, but the move was strongly opposed by the country’s pro-Islamist parties, several of which had allegedly collaborated with Pakistani forces in 1971.
On the economic front, imports declined by 20% and exports by about 3% in July-August compared with the same period a year earlier.
Agricultural output growth reached 4.6%, and the ready-made-garment sector remained strong, with export growth of more than 20% during the first half of the year.
The expansion of renewable and alternative energy would also be a key part of the program.
In May Barbados removed the death penalty as the mandatory sentence for murder, applicable since colonial times.
Henceforth, judges would be able to determine the type of sentence to be imposed on convicted murderers, taking into account the circumstances of each case.
Barbados’s ""get-tough” immigration policy upset many of its fellow Caribbean Community member states, which regarded it as inconsistent with regional principles.
Nevertheless, in July, Prime Minister David Thompson announced that the policy would remain in place.
Thompson repeatedly asserted that Barbados’s economy had weathered the economic storm better than most Caribbean countries and was experiencing an “unacceptably high” level of immigration.
In May, Thompson decreed that Caricom nationals living illegally in Barbados had six months to prove that they had resided in the country for at least eight years prior to Dec. 31, 2005, and needed to pass a security background check and provide evidence of employment.
Those who did not regularize their status would be deported when identified.
On January 2 the official currency, the Belarusian ruble , was devalued by 20.5% against the United States dollar.
Export of heavy transport vehicles to Russia fell by 55.3% between January and August, and trade with Russia declined by more than 40% overall.
On October 28 the government abandoned its regulation of retail prices other than for “socially important products’’ such as milk, meat, salt, and sugar.
The country's complex relationship with Russia overshadowed other events.
In May Russia refused to provide Belarus with the remaining $500 million of a $2 billion loan that had been negotiated in 2008.
On June 6, after Belarus had held talks with the EU on dairy exports, Russia instituted a ban on all Belarusian milk products—a move that had a deep impact on Belarus, which sells 95% of its dairy exports to Russia.
The ban was eventually lifted on June 17, but not before Belarus had expressed its anger by skipping a meeting of the Collective Security Treaty Organization in Moscow, at which it was scheduled to take up the rotating chairmanship.
Alvaksandr Lukashenka also maintained that his country would not be pressured by Russia into recognizing the breakaway Georgian republics of South Ossetia and Abkhazia.
On July 31 Lukashenka did participate in a CSTO meeting in Kyrgyzstan, but he refused to sign documents creating a collective rapid-response force to meet regional security threats.
He eventually signed in October and committed 5,000 troops to the force.
Russia also provided funding and expertise for the construction of a nuclear plant at Astravets in Belarus’s Hrodna region.
In mid-September Lukashenka made a highly publicized visit to Lithuania, where he declared that Europe's policy of isolating Belarus had failed.
The goal of the project was to promote economic integration and enhance political links between EU border countries.
The results of the accounting were expected to be released in February 2010.
The government contained the same five political parties—both the Frenchand Dutchspeaking Liberals and Christian Democrats and the French-speaking Socialists—as its predecessor.
That government had been forced to resign after ministers were accused of having intervened in the judiciary.
While the federal coalition held firm, after elections in June different combinations of political parties were formed to govern the three regions.
A bitter row between Francophone Liberals and Socialists ruled out any partnership between them in French-speaking Wallonia and the bilingual Brussels-Capital Region.
Yves Logghe/AP Museumgoers in Louvain-la-Neuve, Belg., trek toward the entrance to a newly opened museum devoted to the cartoonist Herge, the creator of the comic-strip character Tintin.
After having been forced to resign as prime minister in December 2008, Yves Leterme returned to the government in the summer of 2009 as foreign minister.
Former prime minister Guy Verhofstadt became the leader of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe in the European Parliament.
King Albert gave Leterme a second chance at the prime ministership, appointing him to succeed Van Rompuy as Belgium's head of government.
Belize sary in each of the next four years if the annual budget was to be balanced by 2013.
In the first quarter of the year, there were a record number of bankruptcies, and in April the IMF predicted that the country’s economy would shrink by 3.8% in 2009—the biggest decline since 1939.
In February angry Fortis shareholders narrowly rejected a government-backed plan to sell 75% of the Belgian bank to France’s BNP Paribas.
After further negotiations between the Belgian government and the prospective French purchaser, the sale was ultimately approved in April.
Two weeks later the federal government provided the Flanders-based banking and insurance group KBC with an initial loan guarantee of about $31. billion, after the company had reported first-quarter losses of about $5 billion.
In foreign affairs, a 2005 agreement between Belgium and The Netherlands about a Dutch estuary continued to remain controversial.
The Dutch had promised to widen the estuary, which provided Antwerp with access to the North Sea, but the work had not yet begun.
Museums dedicated to two of Belgium's most famous citizens debuted in 2009.
In June a museum devoted to Herge, the pen name of Georges Remi, opened in Louvain-la-Neuve to honour the 80th year of his creation of the comic-strip character Tintin.
In other news, Belgian tennis fans were given a major treat when the country’s two leading women players, Kim Clijsters and Justine Henin, decided to come out of retirement.
The government, however, was engaged in many litigations, including some with groups challenging its constitutional amendments and others with Mayan leaders who sought to prevent the granting of lands in their villages, but most of them involved billionaire Michael Ashcroft.
The new government rejected the terms of a 2005 secret Accommodation Agreement (signed with the former administration of Said Musa) that guaranteed the telecommunications company Belize Telemedia Ltd. a 15% rate of return or a tax holiday.
To end the legal struggles, the government nationalized the Ashcroft-owned Telemedia on Aug., 2009.
The fall in the price of petroleum, the loss of tourists' dollars, and debt servicing added to the downturn.
Meanwhile, the Belizean government remained committed to pursuing the process of resolving a territorial dispute with Guatemala.
In 2008 Belize had signed a special agreement with Guatemala, subject to simultaneous referenda, to refer the latter’s claim to the International Court of Justice.
In early August cheering citizens welcomed home the men’s national basketball team.
Aboubacar Aboudou, former director of the program, blamed inadequate controls that allowed unscrupulous intermediaries to take advantage of borrowers.
Since its inception in 2007, the scheme had made more than 500,000 loans.
In February the Ministry of Energy and Water blamed corrupt public officials for the slow progress in implementing multination donor projects designed to bring safe water to the people.
Thomas Yayi Boni suspended Minister for Urban Affairs Franqois Noudegbessi, pending an investigation into the disappearance of €9. million that had been allocated to finance the summit of the Community of Sahel-Saharan States held in 2008 in Cotonou.
The government announced on February 3 that substantial offshore oil reserves, estimated at 14,000 bbl a day, had been found.
On February 7 the World Bank granted Benin $30 million for the creation of small businesses and the provision of electricity to less-developed parts of the country.
On May 31 Germany awarded Benin €50 million for improvements in infrastructure.
The hospital ship Africa Mercy docked in Cotonou in February for a 10-month stay to provide free surgery and other essential medical care.
In July, following massive flooding that displaced more than 20,000 people throughout the country, various UN agencies stepped up efforts to assist the cashstrapped government.
The European Union on April 8 added Benin's air carriers to its aviation blacklist.
Airliners considered unsafe were forbidden to fly to any EU member country.
Following the official visit in June of Bhutanese Prime Minister Lyonchen Jigmi Thinley to India—where discussions focused on the exportation of hydropower to India and the final list of 10 hydropower projects to be constructed in Bhutan—Indian Home Minister P Chidambaram paid a threeday visit to Thimphu.
Discussions focused on security issues along the border and the activities of militants in the northeast.
Though Bhutan enjoyed robust economic growth of more than 8%, according to the country’s Labour Ministry, the unemployment rate jumped to 4% in 2009, from 3.7% in 2007.
An important milestone occurred in Bhutan; all 20 of its districts became connected to the rest of the world through broadband Internet access.
In an effort to attract foreign aid and investment, Prime Minister Thinley visited Japan in September.
Bhutan also liberalized its foreign-direct-investment laws to attract Indian investors.
Evo Morales was reelected to a five-year term in December 2009, and his Movement Toward Socialism party made major gains in legislative elections, capping a year of major political and institutional reform.
The stage for Morales’s victory had been set in January when Bolivians approved a new constitution.
The charter, drafted with the help of Spanish legal scholars, gave sweeping rights to BoAizar Raldes—AFP/Getty Images Demonstrators in La Paz, Bol., display signs condemning Leopoldo Fernandez outside the jail where the former governor of Pando province was being held on charges of having orchestrated the killings of several supporters of Bolivian Pres.
Evo Morales. livia’s Indian majority, including guaranteed political representation, recognition of communal forms of property, and the right to employ indigenous justice systems.
The charter won 62% voter approval in a nationwide referendum, but four provinces in the eastern lowlands rejected it, underscoring the division between the economically rich eastern region and the impoverished Indian-dominated highlands.
The referendum result reaffirmed Morales’s popularity and strengthened his hand in Bolivia’s internal political battles.
The extent of these battles was underscored when in April police burst into a hotel in Santa Cruz, shot three men dead, and arrested two others; the police claimed that they had thwarted a plot by allies of powerful separatist businessmen in the eastern region to kill Morales.
The businessmen denied the allegation, saying that the affair was a ruse by Morales to boost his chances of reelection.
One of those killed was a Bolivian Hungarian who had fought in the Balkan wars of the 1990s; the victim had told an interviewer that he was returning to Bolivia to fight for a breakaway state.
Meanwhile, Leopoldo Fernandez, former governor of Pando province, remained in jail, accused of having been involved in the killings of several Morales supporters during opposition protests that had occurred in 2008.
The United States maintained its suspension of tariff exemptions, saying that Bolivia had failed to cooperate sufficiently with antinarcotics efforts.
The last of some 38 agents of the Drug Enforcement Agency who had been ordered out of Bolivia left in January, and a United States diplomat was expelled in March, the second in six months.
President Morales drew a sharp distinction between the growing of coca leaf, a legal crop traditionally chewed to ward off hunger and altitude sickness, and the illegal production of cocaine.
Annual cocaine seizures had doubled between 2006 and 2008, and police raided several clandestine drug laboratories, which they said were among the largest ever discovered.
Morales strengthened Bolivia’s ties with Russia by signing agreements on drug eradication and military cooperation, including the acquisition of a presidential jet and of helicopters.
Rising temperatures wiped out the Chacaltaya glacier near La Paz, which threatened the city’s water supply.
The most exciting development in natural resources concerned lithium, which is used in the batteries that power electric automobiles.
About half of the world’s known lithium deposits were located in the Salar de Uyuni, a salt desert in southwestern Bolivia.
The government continued construction of a pilot plant to process the mineral and held talks with French, Japanese, and South Korean firms on development.
Prime Minister Nikola Spiric Threats of secession and political infighting between the three main ethnic groups in Bosnia and Herzegovina renewed speculation among observers in 2009 about a fresh round of violence prior to the September 2010 general election.
The Muslim-Croat Federation was criticized for having lacked a consensus, and the Republika Srpska (RS; Bosnian Serb Republic) for having resisted the international community’s efforts to strengthen federal institutions.
Paddy Ashdown, who served in the UN-appointed post of high representative in Bosnia and Herzegovina, stated that he had seen a dramatic reversal of progress in the entities.
On October 1 the RS parliament voted to withdraw from participation in all state institutions A Bosnian Muslim woman from Srebrenica watches a television broadcast of the genocide trial of former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic that began in late October in The Hague; on the wall behind her are photographs of victims of the 1995 Srebrenica massacre, which Karadzic was accused of overseeing.
Amel Emric/AP unless the OHR reversed a decision concerning control of the national electric company.
High Representative Valentin Inzko, who replaced Miroslav Lajcak in March, wanted to keep the energy grid operational under a powersharing agreement, but Bosnian Serbs wished to keep electric power distribution locally controlled.
Worsening economic conditions unleashed an unprecedented wave of labour and social discontent.
During the first 10 months of 2009, more than 50,000 Bosnians lost their jobs, and remittances sent from workers abroad declined because of the downturn in the global economy.
The arrangement called for a 10% cut to the Federation and RS budgets—some €207 million (about $292 million) and €73 million (about $103 million), respectively.
Muslim-Croat Federation Prime Minister Mustafa Mujezinovic faced public protests as the budget cuts called for the lowering of public-sector salaries and wages by 10% as well as reduced payments to social-entitlement programs.
After the IMF approved the 36month stand-by arrangement in July, nearly all unions and veterans' associations staged daily two-hour strikes over a two-week period.
According to IMF data, Bosnia and Herzegovina’s GDP was expected to drop 3% in 2009.
In October, Bosnia and Herzegovina submitted an official application for the NATO Membership Action Plan, which prepares candidates for full NATO membership.
Although NATO foreign ministers did not offer Bosnia a formal plan in December to join the alliance, the country still expected to join NATO by 2015.
The government responded to the recession by making drastic cuts in its recurrent expenditures while boosting capital spending on infrastructure projects— leading to an unprecedented budget deficit covered by a $1. billion loan from the African Development Bank.
Ian Khama came under fire from privately owned media outlets for his alleged authoritarianism and ""militarization"" of the state.
He presented himself, however, in a more flattering light in consulting rural masses over urban elites and in issuing directives to negligent government officials.
The issue that generated the most controversy was the killing by state security agents of reputed master-crook John Kalafatis, who was shot eight times while sitting unarmed in his limousine.
The political debate stimulated high voter registration and a 74% turnout; young people aged 18 to 29 voted in notably high numbers.
The BDP was returned to power again, gaining one more seat in the National Assembly over its 2004 total of 44.
Botswana pledged $75 million toward that country’s economic reconstruction, starting with the restoration of the Bulawayo city power station.
Several other senators and more than two dozen federal deputies also changed political parties during the year as a means of improving their chances of holding on to office.
In addition, a number of members of Lula’s cabinet were expected to resign their posts by April 2010, a mandatory step for cabinet ministers who wished to run in the elections.
New oil discoveries continued to be made by the Brazilian state oil company, Petrobras, and its partners in the ultradeepwater subsalt areas of the Santos basin.
Multiple discoveries over the previous three years of multibillion-barrel reserves raised Brazil’s profile as a top future oil producer and gave impetus to increased investment in ports, shipyards, naval construction, refineries, and oil and gas exploration.
On August 31 Lula unveiled the federal government’s plan for a new regulatory regime to manage this new oil wealth.
He proposed the creation of a new government enterprise, called Petrosal, to manage and oversee the contracts for subsalt exploration and production.
Under this regime Petrobras would be the only operator with a guaranteed stake of 30% in each concession.
Moreover, current royalty distributions would be changed, and a social and environmental fund would be created to spread oil revenues to other states outside the production areas.
These provisions caused fiery debate from the producer regions, which stood to lose revenues from royalties, as well as from those who viewed the new regulatory body as a redundant bureaucracy.
Through its Growth Acceleration Program, which aimed to boost the country’s economic growth to 5% annually, the federal government continued its funding of social and educational projects, rural-electrification efforts, housing initiatives, and infrastructure development.
The Brazilian Congress, however, was prevented from advancing on any meaningful reforms by a corruption scandal that embroiled the Senate for much of the year.
Agaciel Maia, who had served as the director general of the Senate since 1995, resigned his post in early March after allegations emerged that he had hidden ownership of a mansion in Brasilia from federal tax authorities.
An ensuing investigation linked Maia to the operation of a secret Senate bank account and to the awarding of lucrative patronage jobs and pay raises via hundreds of secret acts that were passed by the Senate during Maia’s tenure as director general.
Also implicated in the scandal was the president of the Senate, Jose Sarney, who was accused of having approved the secret acts and of having secured jobs for a number of his family members and political allies.
As Sarney and others faced mounting evidence of corruption, many in Congress called for his ouster.
On August 19, however, the Senate Ethics Committee absolved Sarney of all accusations.
Also in August, Sarney’s son, Fernando, who faced allegations of money laundering, won an injunction from Federal District Court Judge Dacio Vieira that prohibited any reporting of accusations against him by one of Brazil’s leading daily newspapers, O Estado de Sao Paulo.
The newspaper sought to overturn this injunction, but on December 10 Brazil’s Supreme Court ruled against the newspaper’s appeal of Vieira’s decision.
By a vote of 10 to 1, the Supreme Court in March ruled in favour of a continuous demarcation of the Raposa Serra do Sol Indian reservation, located in northern Roraima state near the Venezuelan and Guyanese borders, and ordered all non-Indians to exit the reserve and end economic activities there by April 30.
Brazil also moved forward with infrastructure investments in the country’s Amazon region.
Three major hydroelectric power plants were planned for the region; these included the Santo Antonio and Jirau projects in Rondonia state and the Belo Monte project in Para state.
The Brazilian Environmental Institute on June 3 approved an economic-impact study for the Jirau project, clearing the way for construction on the project to begin.
Brunei would become the first city in South America to host an Olympics.
The IOC decision came just months after the May 31 selection by the Federation Internationale de Football Association of 12 Brazilian cities to host World Cup matches in 2014.
On October 17, however, Brazil was reminded of the major public safety challenge it faced ahead of these events as violence in Rio de Janeiro between drug gangs and police left at least 26 people dead.
This was underscored by a nationwide blackout that occurred on November 10 as transmission problems at the Itaipu hydroelectric power plant spurred a prolonged power outage.
The year saw Brazil emerge relatively unscathed by the global economic crisis.
The central banks Open Market Committee reduced the benchmark discount interest rate from 13.75% to 8.75% at year’s end, affording Brazil an opportunity to cut barriers to credit and help stimulate domestic consumer spending.
The Lula administration also extended and granted tax breaks on consumer purchases of automobiles, motorcycles, and appliances.
Accumulated inflation as measured by the National Consumer Price Index was 3.93% through November.
This represented a slight improvement over 2008, when GDP fell by 1.9%, owing largely to the decline in the oil and gas sector’s performance based on constant prices.
The country’s oil and gas sector had declined by 6.3% in 2008, In January 2009 the worst floods and landslides in memory were witnessed in Brunei.
As a result of the cutting off of electricity and water supplies, the overflow from drains caused temporary havoc in some parts of Bandar Seri Begawan, the capital.
In March 2009 outgoing Malaysian prime minister Abdullah Ahmad Badawi announced that his country and Brunei had reached a landmark agreement in resolving their border disputes; a settlement could clear the way for exploration in potentially oiland gas-rich waters shared by both countries.
Nevertheless, one of the main and contentious issues—the long-standing border dispute over Limbang, Malay.— remained unresolved.
In August the new Malaysian prime minister, Najib Tun Razak, announced that Malaysia's national oil company, Petronas, would have a role in a joint oil-extraction venture with Brunei within the framework of the Malaysia-Brunei Letters of Exchange signed in March.
In 2009 it was disclosed that the much-touted ""Visit Brunei” campaign in 2008—designed to attract visitors from abroad, especially from neighbouring Southeast Asian countries— had met with little success.
Looking forward to 2010, however, Brunei would play host to the ASEAN Tourism Forum.
During January, which was an extremely cold month, thousands of Bulgarians did not have electricity or heat, and production was halted in major enterprises across the country.
The crisis highlighted the weakness of Prime Minister Sergey Stanishev’s Socialist-led government, which was already struggling to deal with the effects of the global recession; the government also faced mounting allegations of corruption and the misappropriation of EU funds and saw its approval ratings plummet to 20% in the months before the July parliamentary elections.
In March, after the government’s continued failure to fulfill the European Commission’s corruptionand crime-reduction requirements for the unfreezing of Special Accession Programme for Agricultural and Rural Development funds to Bulgaria, Stanishev requested that European diplomats be involved in the implementation of legal and structural changes in the country.
This proposal, however— viewed by many observers as a final attempt by the Socialist party to gain some credibility with voters—was rejected by the European Commission.
In the parliamentary elections, the centre-right Citizens for European Development of Bulgaria , led by former Sofia mayor Boiko Borisov, emerged as the undisputed winner.
In September the country’s new minister of justice, Margarita Popova, presented the European Commission with a comprehensive plan for reforming the judicial system and for dealing with corruption.
In response, the European Commission unblocked a portion of the SAPARD funds for Bulgaria that it had frozen a year earlier.
Although its long-term economic outlook improved over the year, Bulgaria dropped two spots, to 44th, on the World Bank’s ranking of countries based on their attractiveness to foreign investment.
Projected inflation for 2009 was 1.8%, owing in part to lower oil and raw-material prices.
The country’s current account deficit was estimated at $4. billion, compared with $7. billion a year earlier.
Tourism revenues, which contributed 14% of GDP, declined 25% from 2008.
During the year Bulgarians were reminded once again of their ancient past when archaeologist Nikolay Ovcharov unearthed the remains of the original St.
Excavations offered evidence that the Bulgarian aristocracy was not destroyed by the Ottoman invasion in the 14th century.
Cambodia Area: 267,950 sq km Population : 15,757,000 Capital: Ouagadougou Chief of state: President Blaise Compaore Head of government: Prime Minister Tertius Zongo Under a new government initiative announced in May 2009, more than 5 million Burkina Faso citizens would be issued birth certificates free of charge.
This program was expected to be completed before the scheduled 2010 presidential elections.
A population growth rate of 3.1% threatened to offset strong increases in economic growth.
In February the UN World Food Programme launched a food-voucher scheme designed to benefit 20,000 Ouagadougou households.
On August 10 the WFP called for expansion of the emergency program, calling attention to the continued high prices and empty shelves in their warehouses.
At least 30,000 more families in the capital alone were estimated to be in dire need of help.
September floods left more than 150,000 residents homeless, most of them in Ouagadougou's suburbs.
In February the United States had given Burkina Faso military equipment worth $17 million in preparation for the deployment to that troubled region.
The 40th annual Ouagadougou PanAfrican Film and Television Festival was held in late February and early March.
Despite some organizational and funding problems, FESPACO proved a great success with both the participants and the public in general.
The Ethiopian film Teza was awarded the Golden Stallion of Yennenga, the festival’s grand prize.
Nearly 3,500 former FNL soldiers were demobilized in April and May and integrated into the national army and police force.
By the end of 2008, most refugee camps in Tanzania had closed and about 63,000 Burundians had returned home in that year alone.
In 2009 nearly 36,000 refugees continued to live in the one remaining camp.
The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees estimated that over the six-year-long repatriation effort, more than 470,000 refugees had returned to Burundi.
In addition, about 165,000 refugees sought citizenship in Tanzania, under a special agreement between the two countries.
While great strides in protecting human rights were made—in February the Burundian Senate passed draft legislation that abolished the death penalty and rejected a proposed amendment that would have outlawed homosexuality—in April the lower house voted for the abolition of the death penalty and pushed for the passage of the latter amendment.
The International Monetary Fund and the World Bank canceled 92% of the country’s debt, which totaled more than $1. billion.
The move freed up more than $40 million annually over the next 20 years, funds that would be earmarked for social and development programs.
In March the Paris Club of creditor nations canceled the entire $134 million debt owed by Burundi.
Diplomatic negotiations early in the year broke down, and a brief clash in April resulted in the death of at least one Thai soldier (Cambodians claimed to have killed four), several injuries, and the destruction of a Cambodian market.
Tensions surged again in July, with further reported troop buildup around the date of the one-year anniversary of UNESCO's declaration of Preah Vihear as a World Heritage site.
At the same time, partly for bureaucratic reasons, UNESCO ignored Thailand’s petition that the declaration be reconsidered or that both countries jointly administer the site; Cambodian authorities proclaimed this a major victory.
As in Thailand, the standoff figured in Cambodian nationalist discourse and was used politically.
Iconography of Preah Vihear became widespread, appearing on T-shirts and in music videos and pictures in hotel lobbies.
Schools and temples were asked to ring bells to celebrate the anniversary, and a massive concert was broadcast live.
Further talks led to some troop withdrawals in August and optimism for a settlement.
The trial of 67year-old Kaing Guek Eav (better known as Duch), who headed the notorious S21 prison during the 1975-79 Pol Pot regime, began on February 17 and drew to a close in November, but a verdict was not expected until 2010.
Witnesses included scholars, S-21 prison staff, and the few surviving victims.
Early in the trial Duch dramatically confessed his responsibility for the crimes.
Proceedings were broadcast on television; observers complained of only moderate Cambodian public interest, although the numbers of courtroom spectators grew throughout the trial.
The four remaining defendants in ECCC custody were to be tried jointly.
ECCC was considered a “hybrid"" court in that it was within the Cambodian legal system but included international jurists.
A call by the international jurists for indicting more Khmer Rouge leaders was initially resisted by the courts Cambodian judges—mirroring the position of Prime Minister Hun Sen, who said that such a move would cause unrest.
In September, however, the court formally opened up the possibility of more indictments, and the prosecution submitted five names.
The tribunal continued to be plagued, however, by a lack of funding and charges of corruption.
Human rights organizations complained about the increasing number of lawsuits being brought against the political opposition.
One notable case involved a speech made by Hun Sen in April in which he allegedly attacked parliamentarian Mu Sochua, using phrases with sexual innuendo.
Hun Sen countersued both Mu Sochua and her lawyer, who eventually abandoned the defamation suit.
After being stripped of parliamentary immunity, Mu Sochua was fined 16. million riels for defamation in August.
He named lawyer Philemon Yang, a member of the ruling Democratic Rally of the Cameroon People, as prime minister.
Corruption in the public sector remained widespread, despite the government’s efforts to eradicate it.
Concerns over Cameroon’s human rights record continued to make headlines.
On January 9, Reporters Without Borders strongly protested the threeyear prison sentence given to Lewis Medjo, managing editor of an opposition weekly journal.
Amnesty International published a report on January 29 accusing the government of having committed severe human rights violations, especially in its efforts to crush political dissent.
On August 12, the government’s own human rights commission published a damning report on prison conditions.
More than 23,000 prisoners, many of them awaiting trial, were in facilities designed for a maximum occupancy of 16,000.
On March 19, on his first stop of a weeklong African trip, Pope Benedict XVI celebrated mass before some 60,000 people in Yaounde’s football stadium.
A charity football match between Cameroon and Cote d’Ivoire was held on June 13 in Abidjan, Cote d’Ivoire, where, on March 29, 19 people had been crushed to death in a stampede during a World Cup qualifying match between Cote d’Ivoire and Malawi.
Canada entered 2009 still reeling from a constitutional crisis that had threatened the months-old Conservative minority government.
Prime Minister Stephen Harper’s newly reelected centre-right government had introduced a much-maligned economic update on Nov., 2008, that projected a series of small budget surpluses in spite of the worldwide economic downturn.
The budget update also contained new policies, including the suspension of programs to achieve pay equity between women and men, the temporary suspension of the federal public sector’s right to strike, and the elimination of public financing for political parties.
The new coalition would have had guaranteed support on confidence matters from the separatist Bloc Quebecois for 18 months.
Michaelle Jean to prorogue Parliament on Dec., 2008, only weeks after the new session had begun, in an attempt to find time to introduce a revised budget that would win support from at least one of the opposition parties.
Jean acceded to his request, and a new session of Parliament was scheduled to begin in late January 2009.
Parliament resumed on January 26 with a short new speech from the throne, in which the government briefly presented a six-point economic plan to stimulate the economy.
The following day Finance Minister Jim Flaherty introduced the revised federal budget, which projected the first deficit since the 1997-98 fiscal year.
The budget document also predicted that the federal government would remain in a deficit for at least four years before returning to balanced budgets.
Although falling corporate and personal tax revenue contributed to some of the shortfall, a massive fiscal stimulus plan aimed at helping the country weather the global recession accounted for the bulk of the red ink.
New spending initiatives included public and private investment, an infrastructure program, enhanced benefits for low-income and unemployed Canadians, worker-retraining programs, new funding for aboriginal peoples, and support for the ailing forestry and auto sectors.
Personal income tax cuts worth approximately Can$4 billion over two years and an individual home-renovation tax credit of up to Can$ 1,350 were also introduced as a part of the budget.
These reports would be confidence matters before the House of Commons and an opportunity to bring down the government if progress was not seen.
During a fiscal update held on September 11, Flaherty revised his forecast deficit for the 2009-10 fiscal year upward to an estimated Can$55. billion.
He suggested, however, that budget deficits could be eliminated without future tax increases.
When the surprise Liberal-NDP coalition emerged as a potential government, Dion said that he would become a caretaker prime minister until the Liberal leadership was decided; however, with Parliament prorogued and the possibility of a new election if the government’s new budget was defeated, the Liberals sought to have a more permanent leader in place immediately.
His leadership was confirmed by 97% of the delegates at a party convention on May 2, 2009.
Two other expected candidates for the leadership, Bob Rae and Dominic LeBlanc, had announced earlier that they were withdrawing from the race to leave Ignatieff, a former academic, the presumptive winner.
The party also voted to adopt a one-member, one-vote policy for future leadership conventions.
The Liberals had been the last national party to use a delegate system at leadership conventions.
Following the release of the second scheduled budget report, on June 11, the Liberals demanded the establishment of a bipartisan six-member panel to review the employment insurance program.
The Liberals wanted to implement a national standard of eligibility in place of the existing complex system of regional considerations.
When the panel failed to reach agreement on such a reform to the program, Ignatieff announced during a national caucus meeting (August 31-September 2) that his party would put forth a vote of no confidence at the earliest possible date.
A seemingly imminent election was averted when the Bloc Quebecois and the NDP agreed to support the government temporarily in exchange for some modest concessions.
On December 30, Parliament was again prorogued at Harper's request and was to remain shut down until early March 2010, following the Olympic Winter Games in Vancouver.
In the provinces the governing centreright Liberals in British Columbia were reelected on May 12 to a third consecutive majority government under Premier Gordon Campbell.
On June 9 Nova Scotia elected the province's first New Democratic government; the centre-left NDP won 31 of 52 seats as the incumbent centre-right Progressive Conservatives, who had governed for 10 years, fell to third place behind the centrist Liberals.
Manitoba’s Gary Doer, Canada’s longest-serving premier, announced on August 27 that he would leave office once his centre-left New Democrats had selected a new leader; the following day he was designated Canada’s next ambassador to the United States Former Manitoba finance minister Gary Selinger was selected as the new NDP leader and premier-designate.
The unexpected shutdown of the nuclear reactor at Chalk River, Ont., on May 14 precipitated a crisis in the medical community, as well as political repercussions.
Cape Verde Chalk River Reactor Shutdown Canada's 52-year-old nuclear reactor at Chalk River, Ont., experienced a sudden and unexpected shutdown on May 14, 2009, owing to a local power outage, and in the early morning of May 15 a leak of heavy water was detected.
Although the reactor was originally forecast to be offline for one month, by August officials had revealed that the reactor would not resume production of medicalquality isotopes until the spring of 2010 at the earliest.
The shutdown resulted in the delay or cancellation of numerous diagnostic appointments as well as other medical imaging procedures that utilize isotopes.
Members of the medical community suggested that the temporary loss of the reactor's production was a ""catastrophe,"" as the reactor supplied one-third of the world's supply of medical isotopes.
Following a decision to split up and sell off the publicly owned Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd., on June 10 Prime Minister Stephen Harper announced that the federal government would eventually pull out of the the medical-isotope-production industry altogether.
Lisa Raitt, minister of natural resources, came under fire on June 3 for her handling of the isotope case when it was revealed that she or a member of her staff had left classified briefing papers about the nuclear reactor at a television station following an interview.
Although she offered her resignation to the prime minister, it was not accepted.
Days later Raitt once again faced criticism from the opposition after a journalist based in Halifax, N.S., reported on the contents of a privately taped conversation between the minister and her former director of communications, Jasmine MacDonnell, in which Raitt described the story about nuclear radiation leaks and cancer as ""sexy"" and questioned the political acumen of Leona Aglukkaq, the minister for health.
Raitt eventually offered a tearful apology to cancer survivors and their families for her remarks and noted that she had lost her own father and brother to cancer. lion for Lhe 2009-10 fiscal year.
Only one year earlier the federal government and all provincial and territorial governments had initially proposed balanced budgets for fiscal 2008-09.
In spite of growing deficits, surging personal bankruptcies, and the loss of nearly 400,000 jobs from peak employment in October 2008 to August 2009, Canada remained in the best financial situation of the Group of Eight industrialized countries, according to the federal government and some economists.
The country's conservative riskaverse banking system, which had strictly controlled cash-to-credit ratios, was able to emerge from the 2008 credit crisis relatively unscathed and without the bank bailouts and extensive credit guarantees that were common in the United States Other industrial sectors faced much more difficult conditions, however.
Prime Minister Harper and Ontario Premier Dalton McGuinty announced on June 1 that the federal and Ontario provincial governments would buy a 12% stake in General Motors in exchange for Can$10. billion.
Up to 85,000 jobs would be lost, mostly in southern Ontario, if GM did not undergo government-backed restructuring.
The agreement between the governments and the automaker precluded GM’s Canadian operations from entering court-approved bankruptcy protection.
A ruling by Canada’s Immigration and Refugee Board, which had granted a white man refugee status in Canada on the basis of the racial prejudice and violence that he claimed to have experienced in South Africa from the black majority there, prompted the federal Ministry of Immigration to announce on September 3 a plan to appeal that decision in the face of international outrage.
South African officials condemned the original ruling, made by a quasi-judicial and independent board, as one that would serve to perpetuate racism.
The refugee claimant had been living in Canada illegally since leaving South Africa.
The South African government noted that the government had made efforts to fight violence and crime against all people, regardless of ethnicity or creed.
Trade negotiations between Canada and the European Union were launched at a leaders summit on May 6 in Prague.
Topics up for discussion included facilitating the freer trade of agricultural goods, enhancing investment opportunities and government contract procurement, permitting temporary movement of workers between Canada and the EU member countries, and trying to better harmonize regulations concerning animal safety and intellectual property.
The talks, which could take up to two years to complete, were hailed by Canadian free-trade proponents as a hopeful counterbalance to Canada's dependence on the U.S.’s economy and market.
The ban— which was lodged as a protest to an annual hunt of some 300,000 harp seals that some environmentalists and EU legislators had labeled as cruel and inhumane—affected only products from Canada’s Atlantic region and excluded seal products produced by the Canadian Arctic’s indigenous Inuit peoples.
Canada defended the hunt as being conducted in a humane manner and as essential to the livelihoods of people living in rural and isolated areas on Canada’s East Coast.
The EU had imported Can$2. million worth of seal products from Canada in 2008.
She noted the progress that the government was making toward greater accountability and transparency and that Cape Verde was the only country in Africa where women made up more than half of the government’s cabinet ministers.
Cape Verde remained heavily dependent on the remittances sent home by people who had left, 500,000 of whom lived in the U.S., and on donor money from the European Union and elsewhere.
Cape Verde’s ties with China continued to grow, as did those with Angola; Pres.
Cape Verde was, with Angola, active in the Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries , and ties between the ruling parties of the two countries were close.
In February government troops were accused of having carried out violent reprisals in the Ndele region against civilians who were thought to be supporting rebels.
UN peacekeepers took over responsibility for the troubled cross-border area on March 15, amid fears that the Ugandan Lord’s Resistance Army was preparing to move across the CAR border from its bases in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
After CAR rebels burned surrounding villages on June 6, they struck a military base in the northern town of Birao.
In late July, the LRA attacked towns in CAR, killing at least 10 people and causing hundreds to flee their homes.
That same month UN officials called for immediate and urgent humanitarian aid to be sent to the world’s second poorest country.
Fighting on April 12 between farmers and cattle traders killed an estimated 20 people in a livestock market near Bangui.
Dozens were injured when clashes erupted over the ownership of cattle stolen a week earlier by bandits.
Under pressure from the Vatican, two senior prelates resigned in May, triggering a one-day strike by priests.
The departure of the archbishop of Bangui and the bishop of Bossangoa followed an investigation into charges of moral laxity among the capital's priests.
Prime Minister Youssouf Saleh Abbas Chad’s chronic instability persisted throughout 2009.
The governments of The Sudan and Chad again agreed not to provide support to each other’s rebel movements, but this had little effect.
One of the rebel movements in the wartorn Sudanese region of Darfur continued to launch operations from Chad and was thought to receive much of its funding from Pres.
Idriss Deby; meanwhile, Chadian rebels continued to operate from Darfur.
Government forces in Chad were able to rebuff a rebel attack in May, and by mid-2009, despite a steep decline in fighting in Darfur that led some observers to declare that the region should no longer be considered a war zone, some 250,000 refugees from the region remained in eastern Chad, where a small UN peacekeeping operation was stationed.
Deby’s highly authoritarian government refused to enter into dialogue with the president’s internal opponents.
Chad's oil revenues did not bring the social and economic benefits promised by the government to local communities, but instead the revenues were used to build up the military and to facilitate corruption.
Chad’s main allies—France, Libya, the U.S., and China—did little to challenge the country’s abuse of human rights, though United States Pres.
Barack Obama’s special envoy to The Sudan, retired air force general J Scott Gration, did meet with Chadian officials.
Nicolas Sarkozy might abandon France's military bases in Chad, but the bases remained, and the United States continued to train Chadian soldiers, allegedly to fight alQaeda-affiliated terrorists.
Michelle Bachelet neared the completion of her four-year term in office having become the most popular president in contemporary Chilean political history.
Since her election in January 2006, Bachelet had promised to bring an openness and accessibility to the presidency and to focus public policies on helping the poor and the marginalized—especially women, children, and the elderly.
China Aliosha Marquez—AP A day after winning the first round of voting in Chile’s presidential election, Sebastian Pihera holds up a replica of La Moneda, the country's presidential palace, during a campaign event in Santiago on December 14. ened in a set of constitutional reforms approved during the previous administration of Ricardo Lagos.
Moreover, as the fourth successive president to belong to the centre-left Concertacion coalition, Bachelet had to battle a growing sense of political exhaustion among Concertacion supporters; by the time she was to leave office in March 2010, the coalition would have been in power for 20 years.
The political contest to succeed Bachelet was lively, with four candidates vying for the presidency.
For the first time, the political centre-left fielded three presidential candidates, thus splitting that vote.
The Concertacion’s official candidate was Eduardo Frei RuizTagle, who had previously served as president.
Frei’s inability to generate enthusiasm among Concertacion supporters, however, led to the upstart candidacy of Marco EnriquezOminami, who ran as an independent.
In contrast to Frei, Enriquez-Ominami was young and charismatic, and he centred his campaign on a critique of Frei and the old-style politics that he represented.
On the political right, Sebastian Pinera, who lost to Bachelet in the 2006 runoff election, was vying again for the presidency.
Unlike in his first attempt, however, when Pinera had to best Joaquin Lavin to become the right’s candidate against Bachelet, Pinera was now the consensus candidate of the right-wing alliance and waged a campaign that highlighted the need for greater governmental efficiency rather than one that presented a more fundamental critique of Concertacion policy.
Polling consistently put Pinera in first place among the four candidates.
As expected, no candidate gained an absolute majority of more than 50% in the December 13 election; as a result, a second round of voting was scheduled to take place on Jan 17, 2010.
Although the combined vote total for the three centre-left candidates was 56%, it was unclear whether Frei could capture all of those votes, especially those that went to Enriquez-Ominami.
On the economic front, the country weathered the global recession relatively well, in large part because Bachelet had not bowed to political pressure early in her administration to spend the unexpected financial windfall that had resulted from the high price of copper, one of Chiles main exports.
Instead, the government saved this revenue and was able to draw on these reserves when the country’s export-driven economy slowed and the value of Chilean exports dropped by 30% during the global downturn.
At the same time, though, the strong performance of China’s economy despite the global economic crisis gave the country unprecedented prominence on the world stage.
Foreshadowing a year of dissent, prominent Chinese dissidents and intellectuals issued Charter 08 in December 2008 after nearly a year of planning.
This manifesto demanded that human rights, democracy, and constitutional government replace the Chinese government’s program of authoritarian modernization and expressly linked its demands to the approaching 20th anniversary of the 1989 crackdown on the Tiananmen Square pro-democracy demonstrators.
Liu Xiaobo, a well-known writer who helped write and circulate the charter, was detained around the time of the manifesto’s initial release, and he remained in custody throughout 2009, though his formal arrest on charges of subversion was not approved until June.
He was found guilty on December 23 and on December 25 was sentenced to 11 years’ imprisonment.
In the aftermath of the May 2008 earthquake in western Sichuan province that killed about 80,000 people—including up to 5,000 schoolchildren—a local activist, Huang Qi, attempted to investigate accusations that shoddy school construction had led to a disproportionate number of deaths.
Huang was arrested and in November received a three-year prison sentence for possessing state secrets.
Ai Weiwei, a prominent artist and activist, was severely beaten by police in August before he could testify at the trial of Tan Zuoren, another activist who had been arrested after having attempted to investigate the student deaths in Sichuan.
China Imaginechina/AP Entertainers perform a dance routine during China’s first public gay pride week, which took place in Shanghai in June. owned steel conglomerate to take over and modernize the Jilin province steel plant.
In August rioters in central China clashed with public security officials after more than 2,000 children whose schools were in close proximity to smelting facilities were found to have elevated levels of lead in their blood.
In addition to demonstrating decreased tolerance for dissent, the Chinese government also cracked down on lawyers who defended dissidents.
Barack Obama as the president paid a state visit to China in November, Gao’s whereabouts remained unknown.
Another blow was dealt to the emerging legal profession in July when the Beijing city government revoked the licenses of 53 lawyers who had taken on various cases against the state.
In early June the anniversary of the Tiananmen Square incident passed largely uneventfully as a massive police presence patrolled the site of the student demonstrations and popular Internet services such as Twitter were blocked.
Wu’er Kaixi, a student leader during the Tiananmen protests who eventually resettled in Taiwan, attempted to return to China for the anniversary, but his effort was unsuccessful.
On October 1 Chinas leadership celebrated the 60th anniversary of the founding of the People’s Republic of China with a mass celebration featuring the weaponry of the country’s modernizing armed forces and an affirmation by Pres.
Despite this display of power, the CPC suffered a number of challenges to the legitimacy of its rule.
In May the memoirs of former premier and CPC general secretary Zhao Ziyang were published posthumously in Hong Kong.
In his memoirs, Zhao—a party insider who nonetheless spent years under house arrest after the Tiananmen Square incident—called for a reevaluation of Tiananmen and for China to become a parliamentary democracy.
The report concluded that the deadly riots that occurred in Tibet in March 2008 were caused by Chinese government policies that had disrupted the Tibetan economy, culture, and religion.
By far the most serious challenge to the CPC’s authority, however, was the unrest that was sparked by the ethnically motivated killings of two migrant Uighur workers in late June at a factory in southern Guangdong province.
Dissatisfied over the investigations in Guangdong, Uighurs began rioting in the streets of Urumqi, the capital of the Uygur Autonomous Region of Xinjiang in western China.
Authorities moved quickly to restore order, but the secretary of the CPC Urumqi City Committee, Li Zhi, was removed from office in early September for his failure to protect the provincial capital’s citizens.
Exiled Uighur activist Rebiya Kadeer was accused by authorities of having stoked the unrest.
In November nine men who took part in the Urumqi rioting were executed in Xinjiang.
On December 3, death sentences were handed down by the Intermediate People’s Court of Urumqi to five other individuals involved in the violence.
That same month Xinjiang party secretary Wang Lequan was replaced by Meng Jianzhu, China’s minister of public security, who had distinguished himself with his management of security at the Beijing Olympics.
In deference to the sensitive anniversaries of Tiananmen and the founding of the republic, Chinese politics during 2009 was even more carefully scripted than usual.
In particular, Wu Bangguo, the country’s top-ranking legislator, said that the NPC’s core value was to uphold the leadership of the party and that China's political system did not and should not adopt separation of powers between the executive, legislative, and judicial branches of government.
In areas other than politics, Chinese society continued its remarkable opening.
Another historic development in Shanghai was the cautious steps made toward loosening the one-child policy that had been in place in China since the late 1970s; under new rules some couples in Shanghai would be allowed to have two children.
Internet censorship appeared to advance with the announcement that all new PCs would need to be loaded with filtering software, known as Green Dam, that would block certain types of objectionable content, such as pornography.
Nonetheless, public outrage forced a delay in universal implementation of the policy.
After the disturbances in Xinjiang, however, the Internet was blocked throughout China’s vast western frontier and remained largely so through the end of the year.
The strength of China’s economy was credited with helping stave off a worldwide economic collapse.
Colombia 20 million migrant workers found themselves unemployed after tens of thousands of factories closed in 2008 in the Pearl River Delta.
By the end of 2009, however, 10 million new urban jobs had been created.
Much of the economic growth and job creation was driven by a massive $586 billion stimulus package and the extension of easily available credit, especially to state-owned or state-affiliated enterprises.
Despite Chinas accelerating economic growth as the year progressed, cumulative annual exports, which were dominated by the private sector, were just $113. billion—some $20 billion less than in 2008.
China's efforts to secure more access to vital mineral resources in developed countries did not fare well.
Chinalco attempted to buy the Australian-based mining conglomerate Rio Tinto for $19. billion in February, but by June the deal had collapsed under political pressure from the Australian public not to sell control of strategic minerals to China.
In July Chinese authorities arrested and detained four Rio Tinto employees on charges of espionage and theft of Chinese state secrets; Australian officials maintained that the arrests were in retaliation for the aborted Rio Tinto deal.
The four employees remained in custody at year’s end and were awaiting trial.
In the spring, though, Chinese concerns successfully acquired stakes in two Australian mining companies, investing $438 million in Fortescue Metals Group and $1. billion in Oz Minerals.
In December President Hu celebrated another remarkable Chinese engineering feat when he helped to open a pipeline that would transport natural gas some 1,835 km from Turkmenistan to China.
On December 26, the $17 billion Wuhan-Guangzhou railway opened to create a high-speed link through 20 cities.
China’s relations with the United States got off to an inauspicious start in 2009 when the United States lodged a protest with Beijing in March about what it claimed was harassment of a United States naval intelligence vessel, the USNS Impeccable, by five Chinese ships in international waters.
China argued that the vessel was within its territorial waters and had no right to be there.
Throughout the year the United States cautiously pressed China to allow its currency, the renminbi, to appreciate.
In September the United States announced higher tariffs on Chinese tires, and in November it placed higher tariffs on Chinese steel pipes.
At the same time, the administration of President Obama carefully avoided the kinds of open conflicts that had characterized his two predecessors’ early months in office.
In particular, neither Obama nor the secretary of state, Hillary Clinton, publicly rebuked China on human rights.
An image of the president stepping off his plane in Shanghai holding his own umbrella impressed many ordinary Chinese citizens, who were used to the Chinese leadership’s practice of having aides carry their umbrellas.
Obama’s speech was carried over the Internet but not on Chinese television.
Many critics, however, called the Obama visit largely unsuccessful because he failed to extract commitments from China on issues of importance to Washington, such as sanctions against Iran, policy toward North Korea, or cooperation on global warming.
The failure to achieve consensus on global warming became evident in December at the UN Climate Change Conference in Copenhagen.
Chinas representatives argued that the United States and other developed countries should subsidize less-developed countries such as China in the effort to reduce carbon dioxide emissions.
The United States maintained that China was in a special category among less-developed countries and had the resources to pay for cuts itself.
Xi Jinping visited Japan in December and met with the new prime minister, Yukio Hatoyama , and Emperor Akihito.
In response to North Korea’s long-range ballistic missile test in April and its nuclear test in May, China joined the other permanent members of the UN Security Council in imposing sanctions on North Korea.
China's defense minister, Li Guangjie, also visited Pyongyang in November to promote defense exchanges between the longtime allies.
China joined Russia in continuing to urge that no sanctions be placed on Iran for its nuclear activities, although China did agree to the International Atomic Energy Agency’s censure of Iran in November.
For a time in the first half of 2009, Iran was the leading exporter of oil to China, sending 700,000 bbl of oil a day in the month of May alone.
Tensions increased between China and India over India’s Himalayan province of Arunachal Pradesh, which China claimed as part of Tibet.
In June India increased its troop levels along the Chinese border in Arunachal Pradesh, and the Indian government in November permitted the Dalai Lama to make a visit to the province—a move that prompted diplomatic protests by China.
China’s relations with France recovered slightly after diplomatic tensions over Tibet in 2008.
Nicolas Sarkozy met with President Hu twice at international summits in 2009.
In February Wen visited the U.K., where he signed three economic agreements with the government of Prime Minister Gordon Brown.
China and the EU held an inconclusive summit in Nanjing in November at which the EU pressed China to appreciate its currency and Wen asked the EU to remove trade barriers.
The constitution had been revised once to allow him to run for a second term, and a movement was under way to permit him to run for a third term in 2010.
Before the referendum could be held, however, it had to be approved by Congress and reviewed by the Constitutional Court.
The referendum received congressional approval in September and was passed to the Constitutional Court.
If the court took the maximum time allowed to make a decision, Uribe would be prevented from running.
The delay put Uribe’s allies in limbo as they refused to declare their candidacies until his status was decided.
Uribe’s popularity appeared generally impervious to a number of government scandals.
In the so-called parapolitics scandal, more than 70 members of Congress—most of them supporters of the president—were placed under investigation for alleged connections to right-wing paramilitary groups.
A second scandal involved allegations that soldiers had killed innocent citizens and—in an attempt to boost the soldiers’ chances for promotion—had recorded those killed as guerrillas or drug traffickers.
In yet another scandal, the Department of Administrative Security , a secret police unit, was accused of having tapped the phones of human rights workers, journalists, judges, and opposition politicians.
Uribe responded to the latter scandal by proposing to liquidate the DAS and replace it with a new intelligence unit.
The president and the Supreme Court were in conflict on several fronts.
It was the court’s duty to investigate charges that the legislators who supported the referendum to allow Uribe's reelection bid had acted illegally because the proposal did not have the prior approval of the National Electoral Council.
In an unprecedented move, the Supreme Court in July rejected as unfit all three of the candidates put forward by Uribe for consideration for the office of attorney general.
The government's close relations with the United States continued to cause trouble for it in the region.
The announcement that the United States military would be allowed to use seven Colombian military bases as part of the battle against drug trafficking met with varying levels of opposition from other governments in the region.
More alarming to Colombia, however, was the fact that Venezuela borrowed $2. billion from Russia to buy arms, including tanks and antiaircraft missiles.
Brazil also announced major arms purchases from France, including jet fighters and attack submarines.
The Centre for Human Rights and the Displaced estimated that 4. million Colombians had been displaced since 1985 by the armed conflict between the government, left-wing guerrillas, and right-wing paramilitaries.
The violence pushed more than 380,000 Colombians from their homes in 2008 alone.
In 2009 the government began compensation payments to 220,000 victims of the violence, offering families about $9,500 each.
Two quarters of negative growth put the economy, technically, into recession.
As many as four million people in Colombia lost their savings when such firms closed or collapsed in late 2008.
Curfews were imposed in several cities in an effort to control protesters seeking the return of their money.
Congo, Democratic Republic of the Roberto Schmidt—AFP/Getty Images During her August visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, United States Secretary of State Hillary Clinton purchases a shirt from patients at a clinic in the eastern city of Goma.
Comorans voted in a controversial referendum to modify the framework of the power-sharing government that had been in place since 2001.
The constitutional change pared down the governmental structure; federal presidents became governors of the semiautonomous Grande Comore, Anjouan, and Moheli islands, and the term of the union presidency was extended (from four) to five years.
More than 95% of Mayotte balloters taking part in a referendum held on March 29, 2009, on Mayotte (the only one of the four Comoros islands that remained a dependency of France), approved a change of status with France from that of a departmental collectivity to an overseas department.
Both the African Union and Comoros, which viewed Mayotte as occupied by France, rejected the outcome of the vote.
In the worst air disaster in Comoros’s history, a lone survivor was rescued from wreckage in the Indian Ocean.
Despite vast mineral wealth, mining production severely declined owing to mismanagement, corruption, endemic civil unrest, the global recession, and a lack of new investment.
In March 2009 the IMF lowered its projection of GDP growth in the DRC for the year to 2.5% from 6% in 2008.
Desire Kamanzi led a faction of the National Congress for the Defense of the People to break away from its ruthless leader, Gen.
Laurent Nkunda, and transform the militia movement into a political party.
Meanwhile, the government forged an unexpected alliance with Rwanda to conduct a joint military operation in the DRC’s North Kivu province to eliminate the influence of the Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda ; the FDLR had been a major factor in destabilizing the area for 12 years.
Though the five-week campaign (January 20-February 25) had limited success, it forced Nkunda to flee into Rwanda, where he was arrested and faced possible charges for war crimes.
On March 23 the government signed separate peace agreements with the CNDP, the North Kivu armed groups, and the South Kivu armed groups; as part of the pact, each group committed to converting its organizations into political movements in return for the integration of rebel soldiers and officials into the FARDC, national police, and other administrative units.
To quell FDLR rebellion in Kivu, in March the FARDC, supported by UN peacekeeping forces, launched Operation Kimia II, which, like the January-February operation, failed.
In a joint operation with the Ugandan government, the DRC forces engaged Lord’s Resistance Army insurgents near the border, but that mission also met with limited success.
Unfortunately, the national army, which incorporated former rebels, did little to reduce antigovernment rebel activity or improve the situation.
In North and South Kivu, 800,000 civilians were displaced by internecine fighting in the first half of the year.
The UN estimated that the number of internal refugees reached two million.
By 2009 the use of rape as a war tactic against women, children, and men by all armed forces had doubled or tripled in nine eastern conflict zones.
According to Human Rights Watch, 65% of known rape cases in North Kivu were committed by the FARDC soldiers.
In recognition of his work in treating thousands of victims of sexual abuse, Congolese gynecologist Denis Mukwege was awarded several international prizes in 2008.
In August, United States Secretary of State Hillary Clinton visited the DRC as part of her African tour.
She urged the government to do more to protect civilians and to bring military offenders to justice and announced a $17 million plan to help achieve these efforts.
Costa Rica CONGO, REPUBLIC OF THE Area: 342,000 sq km Population : 3,683,000 Capital: Brazzaville Head of state and government: President Denis Sassou-Nguesso, assisted until September 15 by Prime Minister Isidore Mvouba The reelection of Republic of the Congo Pres.
Denis Sassou-Nguesso in the July 12, 2009, presidential poll took place amid considerable controversy.
SassouNguesso, who had ruled for much of the past 30 years, took 78% of the vote.
The government claimed that 66% of the 2. million eligible voters cast ballots, but many international observers considered that figure to be grossly exaggerated, especially because the major opposition parties boycotted the election and many people entitled to vote had not been issued voting cards.
In September, Sassou-Nguesso named a new government and abolished the post of prime minister, which he had created in 2005 in violation of the constitution.
On February 10 the government launched a program to purchase and destroy weapons from the former rebels known as “Ninjas” in the southern Pool region.
The operation was considered a success when on March 2 officials in the city of Kinkala burned nearly 3,000 guns turned in by former Ninja fighters.
Those still possessing illegal arms were given another week to sell their guns to the government for as much as $200.
A vaccination campaign began in February to inoculate children and pregnant women in the northern Enyelle district against such diseases as diphtheria, tetanus, polio, meningitis, and whooping cough.
In addition, 2,000 treated mosquito nets were to be distributed as part of efforts to control malaria, which was the primary cause of death of children under age five.
On March 7 ground was broken for a water purification plant, financed by China, in Brazzaville.
On a positive note, a food and nutrition security program was initiated in February, designed to provide new incentives for farmers to increase production for the market.
Notwithstanding various development projects in the past, only 5% of the country’s arable land was currently under cultivation.
Negotiations with South African farmers to lease some 200,000 ha (about 494,200 ac) of Congolese farmland for the production of food and fibre crops were successfully concluded in October.
On January 8 a major earthquake struck the country, with its epicentre 6. km east of the Poas Volcano in Alajuela province.
The shock waves were felt throughout the country, and 23 persons were killed, with another 13 missing.
International emergency assistance and special government funding were quickly appropriated to deal with the aftereffects of the disaster.
National elections were set for Feb., 2010, and the political parties spent 2009 in nominating conventions.
The winner, Laura Chinchilla Miranda, had served in the incumbent government as vice president and minister of justice; she defeated Johnny Araya, former mayor of San Jose.
In line with the worldwide economic downturn, the Costa Rican economy contracted sharply, with manufacturing, construction, exports, and imports especially affected.
Oscar Arias turned his negotiating talents to the political crisis in neighbouring Honduras, where Pres.
Denis Sassou-Nguesso attend an election rally in Brazzaville on July 10.
Cote d’Ivoire Al Dia, Manuel Vega/AP Houses He destroyed in Cinchona, Costa Rica, after a major earthquake in early January triggered deadly landslides in the area. was ousted in June by that country’s military and exiled to Costa Rica but returned to Honduras in September.
On October 5 former Costa Rican president Rafael Calderon was sentenced to five years in prison for having embezzled $520,000 in 2004.
Prime Minister Guillaume Soro announced on May 14 that the poll would occur on November 29.
Laurent Gbagbo and his ruling Ivorian Popular Front of having conspired to delay the electoral process.
On May 18, Gbagbo met with leaders of the major opposition parties to discuss the voterregistration program and to seek confirmation that no boycott would take place.
When the registration process was completed on June 30, more than six million names were on the lists.
On August 8, Gbagbo appointed his associate Paul Yao N’dre as head of the Constitutional Council, which would have primary responsibility for conducting and validating the election.
On October 30, however, Gbagbo announced that the vote would be postponed.
On March 29, just prior to the start of a World Cup qualifying match between Cote d’Ivoire and Malawi at Houphouet-Boigny Stadium in Abidjan, stampeding fans caused a wall to collapse.
An official inquiry concluded that poor security efforts and the provision of many more tickets than the stadium’s capacity would allow were the major factors in the tragedy.
Four people, including the organizer of the match, were charged with involuntary manslaughter.
On June 13 the Ivorian team beat Cameroon in a charity match designed to raise funds for the victims’ families.
On January 15, Sotra, the state-owned engineering branch of the country’s transport corporation, placed the first three commuter buses built entirely in Cote d’Ivoire into service in Abidjan.
In other economic news, on April 1 the IMF agreed to cancel one-quarter of the country’s $12. billion national debt, and in May the Paris Club restructured the country’s foreign debt and wrote off some of its scheduled loan repayments.
French journalist Jean-Paul Ney, imprisoned in Abidjan for 16 months, was released on May 6.
Accused of having been involved in an attempted coup planned for Christmas 2007, Ney was never tried but was arrested following the appearance on the YouTube Web site of his video that appeared to support former rebel Ibrahim Coulibaly, the leader of several earlier attempted coups.
In December 2008 Slovenia had begun blocking Croatia’s bid owing to an ongoing dispute over the countries’ shared border, particularly the maritime boundary in the bay of Piran.
Croatia had submitted to the EU accession documents that Slovenia charged were prejudicial to the settlement of the border issue.
Slovenia was particularly concerned about losing direct access to the high seas, and as an EU member it was entitled to veto Croatia’s accession talks.
Croatia was accused of having failed to hand over documents needed in the trial of a Croatian general indicted for war crimes allegedly comNewly installed Croatian Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor arrives for a meeting at the European Commission headquarters in Brussels in July.
Cuba mitted during Operation Storm, a 1995 battle in which Croatia reclaimed land occupied by Serb rebels.
The Croatian government claimed that certain documents had been stolen and that it had sent all the relevant papers it had.
The government in June set out its program for restructuring and privatizing the six state-owned shipyards.
The EU accepted the plan and thereby allowed Croatia to open accession talks on competition policy.
The privatization of the shipyards got off to a bad start, however, when the government received only two bids, both from Croatian companies, in its first international tender.
July brought an unexpected political shake-up when Ivo Sanader announced his resignation as prime minister and retirement from politics.
He had garnered support from 83 parliamentarians for his chosen successor, Jadranka Kosor, and her nomination was approved on July 6.
The change of leadership kick-started the stalled EU accession process.
By mid-September Kosor had agreed to Slovenian demands that Croatia treat the documents it had submitted to the EU as irrelevant to the border dispute, and Ljubljana lifted its veto.
In fact, the European Commission announced in October that Croatia could complete its accession talks in 2010.
In November Croatia and Slovenia signed an agreement to send the border dispute to international arbitration.
Exports declined in Croatia, as they did elsewhere in Europe, owing to the global recession, although the country’s critical tourism sector did not suffer as badly as expected.
Facing a major drop in revenues, the government revised the budget three times and also increased the value-added tax, introduced a “crisis tax"" on higher earners, and levied a luxury tax on yachts, cars, and villas.
Planned spending on infrastructure was also postponed, a measure that was expected to increase unemployment.
Moreover, the government’s fiscal package was criticized for purportedly making it harder for businesses to operate and for failing to address the long-term burden on the budget posed by the public administration and social support systems.
Greater political courage, however, was unlikely from Kosor’s fragile minority government.
Political parties were also increasingly in campaign mode owing to the approach of presidential elections in January 2010.
Raul Castro visited the eastern city of Santiago to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the Cuban Revolution of 1959.
Fidel Castro issued a brief note to ""congratulate our heroic people,” but he was otherwise absent from the anniversary celebrations.
During the course of the year, however, he appeared to be recuperating from the serious stomach illness that forced him to relinquish power in 2006; he wrote weekly newspaper columns and occasionally appeared in photographs and video clips looking healthier and rested.
The Cuban economy slid into a period of dire crisis that halted the process of tentative reform that Raul Castro had initiated upon assuming the presidency.
The global economic slowdown, triggered by the collapse of the United States real-estate and financial markets, sharply dimmed the island’s future growth prospects, and Cuba struggled to recover from damaging hurricanes that struck the island in 2008.
Official predictions that Cuba would achieve 6% growth in 2009 were later slashed to 2%, and several academic economists predicted that growth could turn negative.
The Cuban government began to distribute land grants to workers seeking to harvest agricultural lands, but other key aspects of the reform agenda stalled.
In the summer the Cuban government rolled out emergency measures to conserve energy in an effort to prevent electricity blackouts, a problem that had been the scourge of the Cuban population in the 1990s.
Air conditioning was rationed to five hours a day; amusement parks and office buildings scaled back their hours of operation; and electric baking ovens and cold storage units were required to be given mandatory power time-outs.
Cuba’s heavy dependence on imports led to a shortage of foreign exchange, forcing layoffs across many state enterprises while others closed outright.
Cuba's economic downturn contributed to simmering tensions within the government.
Carlos Lage and Foreign Minister Felipe Perez Roque; the dismissals came amid the most dramatic cabinet shake-up in years.
In all, at least 10 cabinet officials were replaced and the Ministries of Foreign Trade and Foreign Investment were merged, as were the Ministries of Fishing and Food.
U.S.-Cuban relations began to experience a greater degree of openness after Colombian pop singer Juanes performs during the “Peace Without Borders” concert in Havana on September 20.
Cuba The 50th Anniversary of the Cuban Revolution On Jan.,2009, the Cuban Revolution that brought the regime of Fidel Castro to power marked its 50th anniversary.
A half century had passed since Castro led a small band of rebels to triumph during the 1959 revolution that ousted the unpopular and corrupt regime of Fulgencio Batista.
Castro's embrace of communism and his alliance with the Soviet Union soon provoked conflict with the United States In response to Castro's actions, United States Pres.
Dwight D Eisenhower imposed economic sanctions on Cuba in 1960 and broke off diplomatic relations with the country in January 1961.
John F Kennedy, backed the Cuban exile-led Bay of Pigs invasion, which backfired badly when Castro's forces easily repelled the assault.
In early 1962 Kennedy placed a wide-ranging United States embargo on the island that remains the central element of United States policy toward Cuba.
That October the Cuban missile crisis was set in motion when Kennedy learned that Castro had entered into a secret agreement with then Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev to install nuclear missiles in Cuba.
The incident brought the world to the brink of nuclear war before it was peacefully resolved.
The dramatic events of the 1960s proved to be only the beginning of decades of tensions in U.S.-Cuban relations.
In the years that followed, the Cuban Revolution reshaped United States priorities in Latin America.
During much of the Cold War, the Castro government promoted wars of liberation in Latin America and Africa and established itself as a significant global actor.
Castro faced off against a succession of American presidents, including Lyndon Johnson, Richard Nixon, and Gerald Ford.
Jimmy Carter to normalize relations with Cuba ultimately failed to bear fruit, and during the 1980s Pres.
Ronald Reagan forcefully embraced sanctions against Cuba as a means of containing communism in Latin America.
The collapse of the Soviet Union and the end of the Cold War appeared to create a brief moment of opportunity in the early 1990s for the United States and Cuba to set their relationship on a new path.
By 1992 the Cuban economy was reeling owing to the loss of nearly $4 billion in annual Soviet subsidies, and the country descended into a severe economic crisis.
Instead of extending an olive branch to Cuba, however, the United States passed legislation to ratchet up the sanctions, including the Cuban Democracy Act of 1992 and the Helms-Burton Act in 1996.
George W Bush further tightened the embargo on Cuba, and most diplomatic contacts were frozen.
Despite the occasional opportunities to reconcile their estranged relationship, the United States and Cuba never seized on them and instead littered their history with diplomatic failures.
When Fidel Castro fell ill with a serious stomach ailment in the summer of 2006, there was ample speculation that his death was finally at hand and that this would pave the way for a restoration of democracy and a subsequent rapprochement in U.S.-Cuban relations.
Instead, Fidel lived on, though he was forced to pass power to his younger brother, Raul Castro, on a provisional basis before formally resigning Cuba's presidency in February 2008.
Raul, who had served as Cuba's minister of defense for more than 45 years, implemented a limited number of economic reforms and repeatedly stated his willingness to engage in dialogue with the United States Fidel's continued presence and his frequent writings on domestic and international topics, however, served to check Raul's power and inevitably slowed the pace of change.
In the early 21st century, Cuba strengthened its ties with other Latin American countries and established a major alliance with Hugo Chavez's Venezuela, agreeing to send tens of thousands of doctors to serve in Venezuela's poor neighbourhoods in exchange for nearly 100,000 bbl of oil a day at discounted prices.
Cuba also enjoyed warm relations with Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Bolivia, and Ecuador—countries each led by left-leaning politicians.
In 2009 Costa Rica and El Salvador both reversed their Cold War-era policies and extended full diplomatic relations to Cuba; as a result, the island now boasted normal ties with every country in the Western Flemisphere except the United States The inauguration in January 2009 of Barack Obama as the 44th United States president initially generated renewed optimism about setting U.S.-Cuban relations on sounder footing, but there was a lack of boldness on both sides.
Although the United States and Cuba initiated lowlevel diplomatic discussions on issues related to migration and direct postal service, the Obama administration vowed to maintain the embargo, and the Castro government rebuffed American requests to free political prisoners and hold competitive multiparty elections.
Perhaps the greatest legacy of the Cuban Revolution was the impressive ability demonstrated by its leaders to survive and to adapt during the tumultuous decades since its inception.
Obama was the 11th United States president to confront the foreign policy challenges posed by the Cuban Revolution, and if history was any guide, he would not be the last.
Barack Obama was inaugurated in January as president of the United States In April the United States repealed all restrictions on the ability of Cuban Americans living in the United States to visit Cuba or send money to their relatives living on the island.
In June the United States joined with the other countries in the Western Hemisphere to approve a path for Cuba’s entry into the Organization of American States, but the Castro administration rebuffed the measure.
Still, diplomatic contacts between the United States and Cuba increased.
Bilateral migration talks that had broken down in 2003 were restarted, as were negotiations on the resumption of direct postal service between the two countries.
The Obama administration’s outreach to Cuba was backed by a majority of Cuban Americans, whose support for the embargo had dramatically waned, according to a number of opinion polls.
Vehement anti-Castro voices remained prominent, however, and ensured that Obama would not move to overturn the embargo, although the United States Congress debated several bills that would allow all Americans to travel to Cuba without restriction.
The concert, which provoked controversy in Miami—where some exiles denounced it as a propaganda coup for the Cuban government—drew more than one million Cubans to Havana’s Plaza de la Revolution and was widely hailed as a landmark cultural event.
The two Cypriot presidents met during the year under the aegis of the UN to discuss a range of issues that included power sharing and governance, land tenure arrangements, security, and the future of the Turkish force in Northern Cyprus.
The first round of meetings ended in August; a second round of talks scheduled for September was postponed for several days following a border-crossing incident in which hundreds of Greek Cypriots on a religious pilgrimage were reportedly delayed by Turkish Cypriot authorities.
Although talks between the two leaders resumed, both expressed disappointment that their meetings had not produced more concrete results.
While the presidents dealt with the island’s political future, opinion polls on both sides of the dividing line showed Cypriots more concerned with economic matters than politics.
Greek Cyprus had a slight increase in GDP, while all other EU members showed decreases.
Turkish Cyprus experienced a drop in tourism, most notably a decline in the numbers of visitors from Turkey.
Turkish Cyprus's five universities also experienced lower enrollment from Turkey.
Other economic problems in Turkish Cyprus were the large number of houses for sale—approximately 10,000—and a negative trade balance with Greek Cyprus.
To assuage the island’s chronic water shortage, Turkish Cyprus planned to construct a pipeline from Turkey, while Greek Cyprus planned to build a desalination plant; both projects were expected to go on line in the following several years.
The cabinet’s dismissal was especially embarrassing, since it occurred during the Czech Republic’s first-ever term holding the rotating presidency of the European Union.
On the economic front, the country performed relatively well, despite the global recession; however, automobile manufacturing, a key industry, suffered, and fiscal deficits increased because of an increase in expenditures used to avert a financial crisis.
The dismissal of Prime Minister Mirek Topolanek’s cabinet was not surprising; the government had been on shaky ground ever since its appointment in January 2007.
That vote, which followed several unsuccessful attempts by the CSSD to bring down the cabinet, was encouraged by Czech Pres.
After the government’s collapse, the ODS and CSSD rallied together to support a nonpartisan consensus candidate as interim prime minister.
Jan Fischer, who had previously headed the Czech Statistical Office, was sworn in as prime minister on May 8.
The ODS and CSSD had also called for early parliamentary elections (to be held in October), and several opinion polls gauged the contest as neck and neck.
In early September the country received a shock when the Constitutional Court declared the parliamentary law and presidential decree on early elections invalid.
That decision was sparked by a complaint by an unaffiliated parliamentary deputy, who claimed that the early polls violated his right to serve a full term in office.
Responding to the court's verdict, deputies approved a constitutional amendment allowing the parliament to dissolve itself, and elections were planned for November.
The CSSD suddenly changed its position in mid-September, however, arguing that the polls should be held in line with the original schedule, in May 2010.
The official justification for the shift was that the new constitutional amendment could be subjected to legal questions, causing further deadlock and delay.
Denmark conservative Tradition Responsibility Prosperity 09 party, which split from the KDU-CSL shortly after the EP elections and rose unexpectedly in opinion polls.
The election delay gave Fischers interim government the responsibility to move forward with highly unpopular but necessary decisions, particularly relating to the 2010 budget deficit, which was projected to rise sharply if no action was taken.
The parliament unexpectedly backed a package of austerity measures on September 25 and thereby strengthened the mandate of Fischer, who had threatened to resign if they were not approved.
From an international perspective, Czech relations with Brussels were damaged not only by the country’s political instability during its EU presidency but also by its delay in approving the Lisbon Treaty to reform EU institutions.
Klaus initially refused to sign the treaty, even after it was backed by the Czech lower and upper houses in February and May, respectively.
He finally backed down in early November, however, allowing the treaty to take effect throughout the EU on December 1.
In relations with the United States, Prague received a much-publicized visit from United States Pres.
In September the Obama administration canceled the controversial missile defense shield that was to have been built in the Czech Republic and Poland.
Turkey had iniDominique Faget—AFP/Getty Images New Danish Prime Minister Lars L 0 kke Rasmussen appears at a press conference in Brussels on May 13. tially opposed Rasmussen's candidacy, largely over his handling of the Prophet Muhammad cartoon scandal in 2006.
The objections were ultimately lifted, however, reportedly after Turkey was promised top positions within the alliance.
Back home, Lars Lokke Rasmussen, finance minister in the centreright Liberal-Conservative minority government, took over as prime minister on April 5.
The new prime minister (who was not related to his predecessor) was intent on garnering public support in a country that had been hard hit by the recession.
The unusually high turnout of 60% was attributed to the inclusion on the ballot of a referendum on granting women equal rights in the succession to the Danish throne.
The measure passed; Danes voted 45% in favour of allowing the monarch’s firstborn child the rights of accession regardless of its gender.
In June the number of Danish troops killed in Afghanistan since 2001 reached 25—one of the highest per capita death tolls among coalition forces.
Denmark was sharply criticized by both the UN High Commissioner for Refugees and Amnesty International for the government’s plan to forcibly repatriate rejected Iraqi asylum seekers.
In August police ousted about 20 such Iraqis from the crypt of the Copenhagen church where they had been living for three months.
Violent clashes broke out between protesters and the police as the Iraqis were arrested and bused to an asylum centre, where they faced deportation.
In a rare visit to Copenhagen by an incumbent United States leader, Pres.
Barack Obama met in early October with Danish political leaders and the royal family.
Obama was in Denmark during a hectic five-hour stopover while (unsuccessfully) lobbying the International Olympic Committee for Chicago to host the 2016 Games.
East Timor began in April 2008 when Eritrean troops occupied the Ras Doumeira area just over the border in Djibouti.
In January 2009, after months of stalemates, the UN Security Council passed Resolution 1862, which ordered both countries to engage in negotiations and called for an immediate withdrawal of Eritrean troops from Djibouti.
In late September, Djibouti petitioned the UN Security Council to enforce its earlier resolution; meanwhile, Eritrea refused to acknowledge that it was encroaching on Djibouti land.
Djibouti entered into separate agreements with the European Union and Japan to help stave off pirate attacks.
The EU agreement, the Atalanta mission, was mandated by the UN World Food Programme to protect food-aid shipments into Somalia; EU forces would be based in Djibouti.
Food prices on the continent had spiked, owing in large part to the increased number of pirate attacks on ships off the coast of Djibouti and Somalia.
The crisis deepened as a result of continuing drought as well as the global increase in food prices.
By October more than 23 million people in the Horn of Africa were in need of food assistance, an increase of some 4 million since early in the year.
The government indicated that it would aim for a target of 3% of GDP, which was not an easy goal to achieve under current conditions.
Opposition parties protested in March in the capital, Roseau, demanding electoral reform, including what they called a “clean” voters list.
On November 19, however, during Skerrit’s address to the country, he announced that the elections would be held on December 18.
Following several years in which Dominica and other smaller Caribbean states had voted alongside Japan to overturn the International Whaling Commission’s ban on commercial whale hunting—which had caused critics to suggest that Japan was “buying” their vote with aid—Prime Minister Skerrit insisted that he was a convert to environmental preservation.
In 2008 Dominica had abstained from the vote at the IWC's annual meeting, and Skerrit announced in March 2009 that Dominica would no longer support Japans efforts to reestablish commercial whaling.
Inflation closed out the year at 5%, and tourism numbers were resilient, with figures similar to those in 2007.
Leonel Fernandez was shaken, however, by his perceived failure to address debilitating social and infrastructure crises.
Government commitments to tackle endemic corruption, the erosion of educational standards, increasing drug addiction, and lingering extreme poverty rang hollow.
A low minimum daily wage of $2.52—which was lower by 10 cents than that of Nicaragua, the second poorest country in the Western Hemisphere—exacerbated labour tensions.
A constitutional reform package negotiated by Fernandez and PRD leader Vargas Maldonado was passed that eliminated consecutive presidential reelection.
Also in the package was a provision that criminalized abortion, including therapeutic abortions (those performed in cases of rape or incest or when a pregnancy threatened the life of a mother); the measure was considered highly draconian.
The Dominican Republic's chronically fragile relations with neighbouring Haiti were jarred by strong Haitian reaction to a new Dominican policy that stipulated that children born to Haitian parents residing illegally in the Dominican Republic were not entitled to Dominican citizenship.
In March Fernandez demonstrated exceptional skill when he brokered negotiations that cooled an incendiary dispute involving Ecuador, Venezuela, and Colombia that arose following an attack by the Colombian military on a rebel base located within Ecuador.
Mario Carrascalao thanked the international community for creating peace in his country and underscored that East Timor had one of the lowest per capita crime rates in the world.
He added, however, that the country’s roads remained in the same condition that they had been in when Indonesia left East Timor.
Luta Hamutuk, an organization that monitored foreign aid given to East Timor since independence, estimated that most of the roughly $8 billion donated to the country since that time had been spent on the salaries of foreigners and on administration and imports, while only 10% of foreign aid ended up in the local economy.
President Ramos-Horta was equally concerned that too little aid money was going to the people of East Timor.
A ceremony was held in Dili to celebrate the independence anniversary and was attended by representatives of East Timor’s most important neighbours, Australia and Indonesia.
Among those at the festivities were Indonesian Foreign Minister Hassan Wirajuda and Australian Gov.-Gen.
President RamosHorta reassured Indonesia of his opposition to the establishment of an international tribunal to bring to justice those said to be responsible for human rights abuses during the struggle for independence.
Ramos-Horta called on the United Nations to disband its serious crimes unit.
He also awarded retired Australian general Peter Cosgrove the Order of East Timor in recognition of Cosgroves leadership of the multinational peacekeeping mission that had kept order in the country at the time of independence.
Vowing to push ahead with his vision of “21st century socialism,” Correa expanded programs aimed at improving life for the poor and challenged foreign resource companies and investors to accept new terms of engagement with Ecuador.
A new mining law that imposed minimum royalty rates and limited the scope of exploration concessions was generally welcomed by foreign companies, but some Indian groups opposed it.
A clash in late September between Shuar Indians and police seeking to break up an antimining road blockade left at least one Indian dead.
In the petroleum sector, the government seized the assets of the French firm Perenco in a dispute over taxes and pressed foreign firms to exchange joint production-sharing agreements for service contracts with state-owned Petroecuador.
As a result, some firms put investment plans on hold, and the output of crude oil, Ecuador’s chief export, declined.
Meanwhile, the judge hearing a $27 billion oil-pollution lawsuit against the United States multinational corporation Chevron was forced to step aside after the company produced evidence that he had discussed the eventual verdict with government officials.
Ecuador expected economic growth to slow to 2% in 2009, mainly because of weaker oil prices and a decline in remittances from Ecuadorans living abroad.
To compensate, the government imposed new tariffs and import restrictions, said that it would double the tax on capital outflows, and negotiated advance payments from China for crude oil.
It also repurchased, at 35 cents on the dollar, nearly $3 billion in defaulted bonds that it said had been illegally issued under a former administration.
Relations with the United States and neighbouring Colombia continued to be strained in 2009.
Colombia maintained that Ecuador provided tacit support to After meeting with Ecuadoran Pres.
Rafael Correa in Quito on October 5, Indian leaders review the draft of a proposed agreement that addressed many of their concerns over new water and mining laws in the country.
In July Colombian authorities released a video in which a senior FARC commander said that Correas reelection campaign had received funds from the rebel army.
In September the last United States personnel left the military base at Manta on the Pacific coast after Ecuador declined to renew a lease allowing them to conduct antidrug operations; these were then shifted to Colombian bases.
Two United States diplomats were expelled in February after the government said that they had threatened to suspend United States aid in an attempt to influence local police appointments.
Despite these irritants, the United States renewed a longstanding package of duty exemptions and other trade benefits for Ecuador.
These crises were exacerbated within Egypt by local issues, including a spate of strikes, human rights concerns, and disagreement with the Nile River basin countries over the management of water resources.
There were also mass arrests of senior members of the banned Muslim Brotherhood organization.
The impact of the international financial crisis on the Egyptian economy was harshest during the first half of the 2008-09 fiscal year.
Panic struck as cases of H1N1 flu (a respiratory disease caused by an influenza virus) were reported in Egypt.
Precautionary measures by the government included the slaughter of the Nasser Nouri/AP Slaughtered pigs are heaped onto a pile in Egypt following the government’s order that the country’s estimated 350,000 pig population be killed in an effort to prevent the spread of the H1N1 vims. country's estimated 350,000 pig population, a one-week delay in the start of the school year, and the installation of feverdetecting instruments at ports of arrival.
Barring a major global outbreak, however, Egyptian health authorities decided that pilgrims could proceed to Mecca and Medina for the hajj in late November as scheduled.
By December 20 there were more than 7,300 reported cases of infection and 89 deaths.
The former chairman of al-Ghad party, Ayman Nour, was released from jail the same month and pledged to continue his political activism.
In a wave of protests launched in mid-February, pharmacists, truck drivers, public transport bus operators, real-estate-taxation employees, and other workers initiated strikes or sit-in protests over financial incentives and other grievances.
In September the government-sponsored National Council for Human Rights delivered its five-year report on Egyptian human rights practices to the Geneva-based UN Human Rights Council.
The Egyptian council called for reconsideration of the electoral system and its electoral supervisory mechanism in expectation of the 2010 parliamentary elections, pointing to irregularities in the past presidential and parliamentary elections that had put into question the integrity of the process.
It also highlighted the rise in the rates of poverty and called for measures to ensure transparency, combat corruption, and strengthen antitorture measures.
In addition to urging an end to the state of emergency, it also called for guarantees to check interference by the executive with the judiciary.
It noted improvements in the military justice system that tries civilians under the state of emergency law, including the right to appeal.
In mid-August some 31 leaders of the Muslim Brotherhood were detained on charges of funding an international organization of the group, while 26 Egyptians and other nationals went on trial in August on charges of having organized a cell of Hezbollah to carry out subversive activities in the Suez Canal zone and attacks on Israeli targets in Egypt.
In July ministers of irrigation and water resources of the Nile River basin countries met in Alexandria to discuss a legal framework agreement regulating the distribution of water and conditions for future projects.
Despite persistent campaigning and intense lobbying, in September Egypt's candidate for the post of UNESCO director general, Minister of Culture Farouk Hosni, narrowly failed to secure the required 30-member majority vote of the 58-member Executive Board.
El Salvador Area: 21,041 sq km Population : 6,192,000 Capital: San Salvador Head of state and government: Presidents Elias Antonio Saca Gonzalez and, from June 1, Mauricio Funes Cartagena Following a hard-fought campaign, television journalist Mauricio Funes (see Biographies) of the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front won the presidential election in El Salvador on March 15, 2009.
Funes, who was the first FMLN presidential candidate not to have participated in the guerrilla warfare of the 1980s, defeated the National Republican Alliance candidate, Rodrigo Avila, by a margin of 51.3%-48.7%, ending ARENA’S long control of the Salvadoran government.
Although sympathetic to other leftist governments in the hemisphere, especially that of Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva in Brazil, Funes emphasized that he did not want ideological confrontation with the United States and that he was not a part of the more extreme left represented by Venezuelan Pres.
One of Funes’s first acts upon taking office was to restore relations with Cuba.
In July the Salvadoran government also announced its support for Honduran Pres.
In the realm of domestic policy, Funes began implementing dramatic improvements in education and children’s health benefits, especially for the poor; he provided not only free education, but also meals and uniforms for poor publicschool students.
He also launched new aid programs for the elderly poor and moved against widespread corruption in the government.
The global recession exacerbated already-serious economic difficulties for the new government, with widespread unemployment and a sharp decline in exports and imports.
In addition, remittances from Salvadorans in the United States dropped more than 10% during the first seven months of 2009.
Standard & Poor’s Ratings Services in May lowered its credit ratings for El Salvador to BB, two levels below investment grade.
Funes promised considerable economic Luis Romero/AP Residents of Verapaz, El Sal., survey the damage caused by deadly flooding and mud slides that occurred throughout El Salvador in early November. advancement, and his social programs maintained his support.
French filmmaker Christian Poveda, whose 2008 film La Vida Loca reflected the hopeless lives of members of the Mara 18 street gang, was killed in September as he drove back from filming in La Campanera, a poor suburb of San Salvador.
Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, assisted by Prime Minister Ignacio Milam Tang In 2009 few outside Equatorial Guinea’s ruling circle celebrated the 30th anniversary of the coup d’etat that brought Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo to power in August 1979.
While Equatorial Guinea was one of the largest oil producers in sub-Saharan Africa, and Obiang was one of the world’s richest men, the majority of the country’s population remained very poor and without access to any social services.
While Obiang spent a fortune on cars and houses, infant and child mortality increased.
A Human Rights Watch report released in July detailed the misappropriation of oil revenue by Obiang, and two months earlier a French judge agreed to launch a formal investigation into issues raised in a lawsuit filed by the global anticorruption organization Transparency International, which accused Obiang and two other African presidents of having misused public funds, embezzled, and engaged in money laundering.
Amid allegations of vote rigging, Obiang was overwhelmingly reelected president on November 29.
Earlier that month Obiang had made headlines by pardoning British mercenary Simon Mann, who in 2008 had received a 34year prison sentence for plotting a 2004 coup attempt against Obiang.
Equatorial Guinea remained involved with the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative , which it had joined in 2008, though transparency in the country’s oil revenue was not immediately forthcoming.
The maritime border dispute with Gabon over the island of Mbanie in the Gulf of Guinea, where oil had been discovered, remained unresolved.
Ethiopia country also earned the distinction of being one of the worlds most militarized countries.
Isaias Afwerki continued to rule with the hard-line stance he had adopted upon the country’s independence in 1991.
He attracted scorn at home and abroad as his government persisted in detaining without trial opposition figures and critics, including several politicians and journalists who had been arrested in 2001.
The Afwerki regime also stuck to a strict program of military conscription aimed at maintaining high troop levels at its disputed border with Ethiopia.
Tensions remained high at the frontier, over which the country had fought a two-year war with Ethiopia that ended with a shaky cease-fire in 2000.
During the year Kenya and Western countries, including the United States and the U.K., accused Eritrea of having aided Islamist insurgents involved in a civil war in Somalia.
In May the African Union asked the United Nations to impose sanctions on Eritrea, alleging that the country was destabilizing the Horn of Africa.
The UN Security Council voted to impose sanctions on Eritrea in December.
Drought and high food prices abroad exacerbated the situation and particularly hurt the approximately 1. million people—nearly 30% of Eritrea's population—who were living below the international poverty line.
The dire economic and political situation forced many of its citizens to undertake perilous and sometimes fatal journeys to flee the country.
In August about 70 such refugees perished at sea near the Italian coast when their small boat ran out of fuel and capsized.
In efforts to alleviate the suffering in Eritrea, the European Commission in May allocated about $4. million to the country.
The amount was part of about $71. million in humanitarian aid that the organization granted to five African countries.
In September the European Commission approved about $174 million in development funding for Eritrea for the 2010-13 fiscal years.
That month the country also completed consultative talks with the International Monetary Fund.
The organization concluded that the Eritrean economy would continue to be hampered by debt and inflation, despite some gains from new mining industry construction.
There was a massive decline in GDP and real-estate values, while unemployment rose to double digits during the first quarter of the year.
In addition, state revenue, wages, retail sales, and foreign direct investment all fell considerably.
The government sought to take advantage of the drop in inflation to move closer to adoption of the euro, making painful budget cuts—including politically sensitive ones in social services—in an effort to keep the budget deficit below 3% of GDP as required by the EU for euro adoption.
Estonia continued to be an active participant among the NATO forces in Afghanistan, but its reputation in the alliance was blemished by the revelation that Herman Simm, a senior Estonian defense official, had spied for Russia for more than a decade.
Despite the Simm case, relations with Russia thawed slightly, though for both environmental and political reasons, Estonia remained critical of the Russian-German Nord Stream pipeline project—a gas pipeline that was to be built across the Baltic Sea.
Fiji compared with the years of political turmoil that followed the disputed 2005 national and regional elections.
One of the leaders of the main political opposition party, however, Birtukan Mideksa, was rearrested in December 2008.
The government accused her of having violated the conditions of the 2007 political pardon, and her life sentence was reinstated.
In April, 32 military and former military leaders were arrested and accused of having planned illegal acts in the name of the party Ginbot 7, which was headed by opposition leader Berhanu Nega from exile.
The main legal opposition parties repeatedly accused the government of harassment and intimidation.
The Ethiopian economy was expected to grow at a rate of about 6.5% in 2009, down from 8% in 2008, with most of its exports coming from the agricultural sector, particularly coffee, tea, spices, and cereals.
The decline in global demand for important exports had a negative impact on the Ethiopian economy, as did rising prices for fuel.
Furthermore, the combination of high inflation and rising food prices—together with stagnant wages and employment opportunities, decreases in remittances from the Ethiopian diaspora, and increasing internal migration to Ethiopian cities—meant that urban citizens faced increasing economic hardships in 2009.
Meanwhile, more than 47% of the country’s rural population lived below the poverty line.
Power rationing and critical supply shortages in items such as cement were persistent problems, as were periodic droughts and food insecurity.
At least 6. million Ethiopians were in urgent need of food assistance during the year, with a total of 12. million people in need of some type of food aid.
A highly controversial law that severely limited the actions of civil society organizations was passed in January.
In particular, it prohibited foreign organizations and those that received more than 10% of their funding from foreign sources from participating in activities such as conflict resolution and human rights-related work.
It also empowered a government agency to closely monitor all organizations and impose extremely harsh penalties for violation of the law’s provisions.
The border dispute with Eritrea largely remained at a stalemate in 2009.
Neither country had taken steps to demarcate the border in line with the 2002 ruling of the Eritrea-Ethiopia Boundary Commission, which Ethiopia had rejected.
In August the Haguebased Eritrea-Ethiopia Claims Commission ruled that compensation should be paid by each country to the other for damages inflicted during the 1998-2000 war.
In early 2009 Ethiopia formally withdrew its armed forces from neighbouring Somalia, where they had been serving since December 2006 in support of the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia, but reports of Ethiopian troop activity inside the country continued throughout the year.
Ratu Josefa lloilovatu Uluivuda did not have the power to dismiss the previous government in 2007 or to install the interim government that had seized power in 2006 and that the latter move was therefore invalid.
President Iloilo immediately abrogated the 1997 constitution, dismissed the judges, and appointed himself head of state with power to rule by decree.
With the backing of the military, he announced that he would install an interim government for a five-year period, during which time the reforms contained in the People’s Charter for Peace, Change and Progress would be implemented, and the country would be prepared for elections under a new nonracial electoral system by September 2014.
The president reappointed the interim prime minister, Commodore Voreque Bainimarama, who in turn reappointed his interim ministers.
Torsten Blackwood—AFP/Getty Images Members of Fiji’s pro-democracy movement hold a kava ceremony in front of the venue for the Pacific Islands Forum summit meeting held in Cairns, Australia, in August.
These moves created international tensions for Fiji; on May 1 the Pacific Islands Forum suspended the country’s membership, and in September, Fiji’s membership in the Commonwealth was also suspended.
On July 28, Bainimarama announced that the ailing 88year-old Iloilo was retiring from office; he was succeeded as acting president by Vice Pres.
Tourism, a mainstay of Fiji’s economy, was assisted by a 20% devaluation in the Fijian dollar as the country continued to open new hotels and to attract visitors from Australia and New Zealand.
In April, Fiji filed claim with the UN for recognition of an extended continental shelf in the hope of securing rights to seabed minerals in the South Fiji Basin.
The economy was heavily dependent on exports, which had accounted for 44% of GDP in 2008.
The value of exported goods alone dropped a historic 35% in the first quarter of 2009 from the same period a year earlier.
Accordingly, industrial production was at its lowest in 10 years, registering a 37.3% drop in August year-on-year.
GDP was 9.2% lower in July than it had been a year earlier; the unemployment rate grew to 8.8% in August; and inflation dropped to -1% in September.
In June, Finns elected five men and eight women to the European Parliament.
Timo Soini, chair of the tiny True Finns, garnered the most votes and secured a seat for his party, which was sharply critical of immigration.
The True Finns gained the most proportionately, capturing 9.8% of the vote, up from 0.5% in 2004.
The 2008 scandal over unannounced campaign contributions unraveled further in 2009.
Several stateowned or publicly funded entities chaired by politicians were found to have donated funds to the campaigns of said politicians.
The foundation had received funding from the state gambling monopoly RAY , whose rules prohibit it from giving aid for political purposes.
The downturn's impact was softened by the French state’s traditionally large role in the economy of spending and providing welfare.
Yet with only a weak parliamentary opposition to air their complaints, many French took part in national street demonstrations to protest the government’s inability to do even more to protect jobs and wages.
The French model of regulated capitalism was hailed for steering the country clear of the excesses of Anglo-Saxon lending and borrowing.
Nicolas Sarkozy discarded the 43-year-old Gaullist model of semidetachment from NATO, however, and brought France fully back into the Atlantic alliance.
The popularity of Sarkozy, who had been elected in 2007 to a five-year presidential term, had increased by the beginning of 2009, partly owing to the stabilization of his personal life through his marriage to singer and model Carla Bruni.
His very active governing style, however, invited people to lay the blame for most problems at his door rather than that of the government of his centre-right Union for a Popular Movement , led by Prime Minister Francois Fillon.
Although this decline was smaller than that in many other countries, it was the first drop in France’s annual GDP since 1993.
As the unemployment rate began to increase toward the 10% mark, both the government and workers began to adopt unorthodox tactics to stem its rise.
Days before authorizing loans to Renault and Peugeot-Citroen to sustain their car businesses, Sarkozy urged Peugeot to close its factories in the Czech Republic or Slovakia rather than in France.
This caused a minor furor among his European Union partners and led the Czech Republic, which held the presidency of the EU in the first part of 2009, to convoke a special EU summit that condemned such job protectionism.
For their part, some French workers revived the practice of “bossFormer employees of a Sony plant in the French village of Pontonx-sur-lAdour protest in front of the factory in April by symbolically planting crosses that bear the names of workers whose jobs had been eliminated.
Gabon napping,” or detaining their bosses, usually just overnight, to try to get them to alter settlement deals.
About 10 such boss-nappings occurred, including at plants owned by Molex of the United States and Sony of Japan.
This practice declined somewhat, however, as the economy improved in the second quarter, partly as a result of the French government's relatively small but swift stimulus program of about $33 billion.
Sarkozy also planned a “national bond” issue for investment of more than $50 billion in long-term research projects and the national infrastructure.
The financial issue of the year was the regulation of banks and bankers’ bonuses.
Sarkozy took a stand with German Chancellor Angela Merkel in EU and Group of 20 negotiations for tougher international controls on bonuses.
At home he persuaded French bankers to agree to a code of practice linking bonuses to the longer-term performance of their banks.
The French government did, however, provide banks with $56 billion in fresh capital and guaranteed $450 billion of their lending.
Elected on a promise to allow people to ""work more to earn more,” Sarkozy finally persuaded Parliament, after nearly two years of debate, to pass legislation easing the Sunday trading laws.
The new law allowed all retail stores in certain areas to open for business on Sundays.
It was to take effect in 20 commercial zones around Paris, Lille, and Marseille and in hundreds of smaller cities and towns that were often visited by tourists—but not in Lyon, the country's second largest urban area, where UMP deputies objected.
Sarkozy also returned to the issue concerning the veiling of Muslim women.
In 2004 he had been instrumental as interior minister in passing a measure forbidding students in French public schools to wear ostentatious religious symbols, such as Muslim head scarves.
In a June 2009 speech to Parliament, Sarkozy attacked the wearing of burkas by Muslim women as being a symbol of servitude unsuited to a republic dedicated to equal rights, though he proposed no legislation to ban the garments.
In the June 7 European Parliament elections, the UMP became the first political party of a sitting French president to win since elections to that parliament started in 1979.
This result confirmed the splintering of the Socialists that began when Segolene Royal, their presidential candidate in 2007, lost the election to Sarkozy and then lost her bid to become the party’s leader to Martine Aubry, the mayor of Lille.
Sarkozy continued to foster this splintering by giving cabinet jobs to Socialists, including in 2009 the nephew of Francois Mitterrand, the last Socialist president.
A few months after Frederic Mitterrand was appointed culture minister, a controversy erupted over his confession in a 2005 autobiography to having engaged in sex tourism in Asia.
Dominique de Villepin, a former prime minister and Sarkozy’s rival within the neo-Gaullist movement, went on trial in September, accused of having slandered Sarkozy in the so-called Clearstream affair.
Of still greater political, even constitutional, importance was the October 2009 decision by a judge that former president Jacques Chirac should stand trial on charges of embezzlement for having allegedly used, during his long tenure as mayor of Paris, the city payroll to pay national political party operatives.
The trial of Chirac, who had enjoyed immunity from prosecution during his 12 years as president, was expected to take place in 2010.
Carrying on the momentum of his very active EU presidency in 2008, Sarkozy started 2009 by attempting to mediate a cease-fire in Israel’s offensive in the Gaza Strip.
In the past, Mideast tensions had reverberated in France— which has the biggest Muslim and Jewish communities in Western Europe— and they did so again in 2009.
During the Gaza conflict, several synagogues and other Jewish sites in France were attacked or vandalized.
In contrast to some of his predecessors, Sarkozy had no desire to displace the diplomatic role of the U.S., particularly under Pres.
Charles de Gaulle's 1966 decision to leave NATO's integrated military command.
France fully rejoined the alliance at the April 2009 NATO summit, held in the French city of Strasbourg.
The immediate military significance of this move, involving the dispatching of a few more French officials to NATO committees and commands, was limited; France had always sent troops to NATO operations.
It ended, however, the long-running ""European” versus ""Atlanticist” political tension in the alliance and constituted French acceptance of NATO as a European institution.
Nonetheless, Sarkozy was criticized from several quarters for purportedly throwing away France’s freedom of diplomatic maneuver.
Sarkozy was also criticized, however, by some in his own UMP ranks as “Sarko the American,” a charge that could pose him some difficulty, depending on events, in the presidential elections of 2012.
Omar Bongo died on June 8, 2009, after he suffered a fatal heart attack while abroad for cancer treatment.
In power for 41 years, at the time of his death he was Africa’s longest-serving head of state.
His body was flown to Gabon on June 11, and the state funeral took place in Libreville on June 16.
Nicholas Sarkozy, in attendance, was jeered by crowds protesting a French government investigation launched in May into Bongo’s finances.
On June 10 Rose Francine Rogombe, the speaker of the Senate, was sworn in as interim president.
His nearest rivals, former interior minister Andre Mba Obame and longtime opposition leader Pierre Mamboundou, each took approximately 25% of the poll.
Calling the election fraudulent, demonstrators took to the streets in Port-Gentil, Libreville, and other cities; violent protests ensued.
In October the results of a recount requested by the opposition were released; the results upheld Bongo’s victory, and he was inaugurated on October 16.
On April 19 Gabonese activist Marc Ona Essangui was awarded a share of the 2009 Goldman Environmental Prize.
He was honoured for his battle to save the rainforest of Ivindo National Park.
Yahya Jammeh In 2009 The Gambia continued to receive bad publicity for suppressing freedom of expression and for arbitrary kidnappings and beatings of citizens by state agents.
The editor of The Point, a privately owned daily, was charged for having reported the arrest of a Gambian diplomat.
The fate of Ebrima Manneh, a journalist who had been arrested in 2006, remained unknown, though the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights, which was based in Banjul, urged the Gambian government to release him.
In March, Amnesty International reported that approximately 1,000 Gambians had been detained and tortured in statesanctioned witch hunts.
Though these were halted and the prisoners released, the government did not condemn what had happened.
The Community Court of the Economic Community of West African States heard a case of torture brought by a Gambian journalist against operatives of The Gambia’s National Intelligence Agency.
Several journalists were arrested in June and put on trial for having criticized President Jammeh’s smear campaign against Deyda Hydara, an editor brutally killed in 2004, and for having suggested that the government was responsible for his murder.
They received two-year jail sentences in August, but after international criticism, they were given a presidential pardon in September.
Whether the Coalition for Human Rights in The Gambia, formed by Gambians living in Senegal with international connections, could exert any influence on the Gambian government remained to be seen.
Mikheil Saakashvili to resign and appealed for free and fair preterm parliamentary and presidential elections.
On April 9 the opposition launched a series of demonstrations, but Saakashvili still refused to step down.
On May 11 Saakashvili met with opposition representatives and, as a compromise, offered to hold early local elections in May 2010 and to form commissions tasked with electoral and constitutional reform.
On May 18 the opposition responded with further demands, which Saakashvili rejected.
On May 5 some 40 military personnel were arrested and charged with plotting a coup d’etat; their trial began on August 21.
After three months of service, on January 30 Grigol Mgaloblishvili resigned as prime minister owing to health problems.
Several rounds of talks in Geneva failed to yield a breakthrough on the deployment of international observers in Abkhazia and South Ossetia.
In May opposition parties were barred from participating in South Ossetia’s parliamentary elections, and in August Russian businessman Vadim Brovtsev A Georgian opposition protester stands in a makeshift jail cell outside the official residence of Pres.
In violation of the previous year’s armistice agreements, on September 15 Russia signed military cooperation pacts with Abkhazia and South Ossetia.
On September 30 an international group tasked with evaluating the events that had culminated in the August 2008 war concluded that Georgia had begun the hostilities but condemned Russia’s disproportionate response and its failure to prevent ethnic cleansing by South Ossetian forces.
One positive sign came in late December when Georgia and Russia struck a deal to reopen their main border crossing, which had been closed since 2006.
Joe Biden visited Tbilisi to reaffirm Washington’s support for Georgia’s territorial integrity.
Although the year’s NATO summit was held jointly by Germany and France, the German women's association football team won the European championships for the fifth time running, and a German economic recovery was predicted, all paled against the backdrop of the elections.
The intense concentration on the battle between the parties was forcefully disrupted, however, by such events as failing businesses, violence in schools, and political as well as religious scandals.
These assaults were the latest in a series of six attacks at German schools over eight years.
In a country in which violence in schools was virtually unheard of prior to 2000, the incidents led to a reconsideration of the role of guns in society and the pressures placed on teenage boys.
The increase in violence by teenagers of both genders had been much lamented in recent years, but the Winnenden shooter’s apparent targeting of females and the seemingly easy access that both teenagers had to weapons gave the discussion new fuel.
Proposals to restrict the types of guns that hunters could own, to limit young people's access to violent computer games, and to reduce violence on television were debated.
None of those measures was realized, though some gun-control laws were tightened.
On a more positive note, the year brought success in Germany’s fight against age discrimination in the workplace.
According to EU guidelines, all references to age had to be removed from job applications and advertisements.
Reports in 2009 from both employers and unemployment agencies showed an increase in employment of those aged 50 and above.
The slight increase in the fertility rate in 2007 and 2008 was attributed to a new measure that encouraged fathers as well as mothers to take time off from work to care for their newborns.
Statistics released in 2009 indicated that about 20% of new fathers were choosing to remain at home for a time so that the mothers could return to work sooner.
This trend was expected to have long-term impacts on the German economy, because it was hoped to increase the likelihood that working women would have children.
A rise in the number of births would also require the expansion of the day-care system, which was underdeveloped in many German regions.
The policy encouraging the greater involvement of men in the upbringing of their children was the product of the minister for family matters, Ursula von der Leyen of the Christian Democratic Union , who had also increased funding and expanded facilities for child care.
All these policies were historically atypical for the conservative CDU and were symptomatic of the broad identity struggle that had been occurring within the party for a few years.
This identity crisis was highly visible in the election campaign and diminished the CDU’s lead over the other parties in opinion polls.
Prior to the general elections, elections were held for five state parliaments.
The state elections were staggered throughout the national legislative period and were therefore thought to be good indicators for the national election.
The first vote of the year took place in January in Hessen, where early elections had been called after coalitionbuilding negotiations collapsed.
The state’s 2008 election had created a situation in which only a grand coalition would have been viable.
This was inauspicious, since these parties were ruling together in a grand coalition at the national level.
The Social Democrats suffered a loss in the 2009 Hessen elections, which allowed the Christian Democrats to form a coalition with one of the smaller parties.
This seemed like good news for Chancellor Angela Merkel and her Christian Democrats, who began the election year anticipating a win.
This optimism was shaken on various occasions throughout the following nine months.
Many of the CDU’s policies relating to the economic crisis and to gender and social politics seemed to be more in keeping with the traditional political philosophy of the Social Democrats.
This led to the impression, among voters as well as parliamentarians, that the Christian Democratic political program was diffuse and undefined, even that close to the election.
Additionally, the party had to weather strife and mishap in the months leading up to September 27, the day of the national election.
While the CSU slipped farther toward the social conservative side of the spectrum, the Christian Democrats increasingly moved in the opposite direction.
In its desire to raise its profile, the CSU was more than vocal in its protest and critique of its sister party—a tactic that the CDU did not appreciate in a year when it was standing for national reelection while the CSU did not have to face any elections in Bavaria.
Saarland, Saxony, and Thuringia did, however, hold state elections one month before the national election, which gave them national importance.
In two of the three states, the ruling Christian Democrats lost percentage points in the double digits and were therefore forced to consider forming grand coalitions.
This seemed to throw into question the party's expected win in the national election, and national opinion polls showed the Social Democrats gaining ground.
Of all the election campaigns, the one in Thuringia proved to be the most turbulent.
The states minister president had suffered a serious skiing accident, and though his party insisted that he would be ready to stand for election in August , many doubted as late as May that he would be able to do so.
Traditionally, the national election campaigns had almost always been carefully neutral and nonconfrontational until after the state elections, and this held true in 2009.
Even the so-called ""TV duel"" between Chancellor Merkel and the SPD candidate, Frank-Walter Steinmeier, was not highly antagonistic.
Differences other than in rhetoric emerged mainly in relation to the minimum wage and to nuclear energy, which the SPD opposed vehemently and the CDU embraced as an intermediate measure.
The CDU and CSU together captured 33.8% of the vote, and Merkel was reconfirmed in her role as chancellor, while the SPD received 23% of the vote.
The success of the Christian Democrats could be at least partially attributed to the first signs in August that the German economy was improving.
The election was again notable for the poor turnout, which at 71% was the lowest in the history of the Federal Republic of Germany.
The state elections in Brandenburg and Schleswig-Holstein, held on the same day as the national election, passed almost without notice.
Schleswig-Holstein had to undergo early elections because its grand coalition had failed in July.
As a result of these elections, a government of the CDU and the FDP was formed, mirroring that of the national government.
International affairs were largely ignored in Germany because of the elections.
While 2008 had been dominated by international climate change summits and economic accords, 2009 was marked by a withdrawal of attention to the domestic front, except in the few instances when the magnitude of global affairs forced the country to take heed.
The country had for 30 years registered a steady decrease in believers; the percentage of adherents in the Roman Catholic and Protestant faiths each dropped from about 50% of the population to only some 30%, and atheists and the nonreligious accounted for about 30% of the population by 2009.
This decline halted with the election in 2005 of a German pope, and the resulting short-lived euphoria even led to an increase in Catholic church attendance.
The scandal surrounding the pope’s decision in January 2009 to withdraw the excommunication of a bishop who openly denied the Holocaust shattered this euphoria, however, and drove people from the churches again.
The Constitutional Court's decision on the Lisbon Treaty did not come as a large surprise.
In the spring both houses of the German parliament voted to ratify the treaty, which would reform certain EU institutions.
The court ruled in June, however, that the ratification process could not proceed until the country passed new legislation giving the German parliament more oversight over and greater participation in the implementation of EU treaties in Germany.
In its Maastricht decision, the court had ruled that as long as the fundamental makeup of the Federal Republic was not violated, EU treaties did not violate the country’s Basic Law.
It had warned, however, that if Germany’s democratically elected bodies did not have more oversight over and input into EU treaties, there could come a time when the treaties would become unconstitutional.
Ghana September the German parliament passed the new legislation required by the court, and the country completed its ratification of the treaty.
While the Group of 20 summit held in April in London escaped the country’s attention almost entirely, the NATO summit held that same month in Strasbourg, France, and Kehl, Ger., did intrude on German introspection.
The NATO summit was noticed mainly because the protests against the alliance, which turned 60 years old in 2009, were smaller and generally less intense than expected.
The economic crisis, preoccupation with domestic affairs, and widespread admiration of United States Pres.
It was hard for most Europeans to protest against the man who had replaced United States Pres.
In February the German government approved a second economic stimulus package of more than $65 billion.
Many parliamentarians criticized their government for this action, which they thought pushed Germany too far into debt and would be of dubious efficacy.
Later decreases in unemployment and reports from economic research institutes that the German economy was emerging from recession seemed to prove the doubters wrong.
It could be argued, however, that it was too early to judge the matter, because the second round of governmental measures could not yet have had any real influence.
In early 2009 Opel requested financial aid from the government because it was facing the possibility of plant closures.
The government granted the aid, and the CDU then had to address doubts about the coherence of its political philosophy.
Traditionally, the party was opposed to national subventions of failing businesses, but the loss of Opel would have cost thousands their jobs.
The government’s decision to provide funding and to involve itself in the negotiations with GM was one instance in which traditional CDU voters did not recognize their party.
Another such instance was the nationalization of the Hypo Real Estate bank.
In both cases the CDU argued that the companies were vital to the health of the economy and therefore had to be supported for the greater financial good of the country.
In the case of Hypo Real Estate, this might not have been the end of the debate.
Its nationalization opened the door to a number of court cases relating to the legalities of the German government’s dispossession of the shareholders— court battles that would have to be fought over the following few years.
John Agyekum Kufuor hand over power, marking the second time in the country’s history that the presidency had been transferred to an opposition politician.
The outgoing president had warded off potential violence by persuading his party to accept the electoral results.
This welcome sign of political stability and democracy in a region beset by armed conflict, political turmoil, and corruption underscored Ghana’s status as a model of democracy and civil society.
Barack Obama highlighted Ghana’s importance as an emergent democracy when he decided to make it the destination for his first official state visit to sub-Saharan Africa.
Deliberately bypassing other influential African states, notably Kenya and Nigeria, he made it clear that he chose Ghana because it promoted democratic principles, transparency, and sustained prosperity.
The International Monetary Fund , concerned about possible negative consequences of the world economic crisis on new democracies, approved a $600 million three-year loan in July to Ghana.
The funds were designed to reduce its budget deficit and to protect its currency.
Ghana’s two leading exports, cocoa and gold, maintained their value in world commerce.
A crowd, gathers in Cape Coast, Ghana, on July 11 in anticipation of the arrival of United States Pres.
Barack Obama, who made Ghana the destination for his first official state visit to sub-Saharan Africa.
Greece GREECE Area: 131,957 sq km Population : 11,285,000 Capital: Athens Chief of state: President Karolos Papoulias Head of government: Prime Ministers Konstantinos Karamanlis and, from October 6, Georgios Papandreou In 2009 the government of Greek Prime Minister Konstantinos Karamanlis struggled with eroding public trust due to a series of corruption scandals, the effects of the global economic crisis, and fallout from the riots in Athens in late 2008.
On January 7 Karamanlis reshuffled his cabinet; the most notable change was the removal of Georgios Alogoskoufis, who was replaced as finance and economy minister by Ioannis Papathanassiou.
Former foreign minister Antonis Samaras returned to the government as culture minister.
On May 4-5 the opposition failed to muster the required parliamentary majority to indict former Aegean minister Aristotelis Pavlidis, who was accused of having solicited bribes in return for granting subsidized shipping contracts.
The Coalition of the Radical Left and the Ecologists Greens, which won 4.7% and 3.5%, respectively, each claimed one seat.
Early parliamentary elections took place on October 4—only halfway through the Greek parliament’s term.
The ND turned in its worst-ever performance in parliamentary elections, taking 33.5% of the vote and 91 seats.
On election night Karamanlis announced his resignation as ND president.
On October 6 PASOK president Georgios Papandreou was inaugurated as Greece’s new prime minister.
Several ministries were merged or restructured, and an Environment, Energy, and Climate Change Ministry was created.
In foreign affairs Greek relations with Turkey remained cool as Turkish military planes and warships repeatedly violated Greek airspace and territorial waters throughout the year.
There was no breakthrough in the UN-mediated negotiations with Macedonia over that country's name, as several proposals by UN mediator Matthew Nimetz failed to secure the approval of both sides.
In 2009 Greece held the rotating chairmanship of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe.
The global economic crisis seriously weakened the Greek economy, in particular two of its key sectors—tourism and shipping.
On the social front, the influx of illegal immigrants continued, but there was no consensus among the political parties on how to address the issue.
In December the government announced tough measures to deal with the country’s high deficit, including major cuts in government spending.
In a high-profile case involving German electronics giant Siemens AG, which apparently paid large bribes over an extended period of time to secure Greek government contracts, former senior PASOK official Theodoros Tsoukatos admitted to having received some $600,000 in 1999 on behalf of his party.
A Greek request to the German authorities to extradite former Siemens Hellas CEO Michalis Christoforakos was approved by several German courts, but Germany’s Federal Constitutional Court overturned such rulings on two occasions.
A number of terrorist attacks occurred, including one bombing attack in early September on the Athens Stock Exchange, for which elusive urban guerrilla groups, including the so-called Revolutionary Struggle and the Conspiracy of the Cells of Fire, claimed responsibility.
In late September four alleged members of the latter group were arrested, and warrants for another six suspects were issued.
Georgios Papandreou, leader of the Panhellenic Socialist Movement, celebrates his party’s win in the Greek parliamentary elections on October 4.
Grenada In March the flight operations, technical base, and ground handling operations of the ailing state carrier Olympic Airlines were sold to the Greek financial conglomerate Marfin Investment Group.
The new Olympic Air started flight operations on October 1 with a significantly reduced fleet and network.
Offshore banking was suspended in 2002 after a massive fraud scheme led to the collapse of a major financial institution.
As part of its efforts to reopen offshore banking, the government instituted a number of reforms aimed at increasing oversight of the sector, including the creation of a new regulatory financial agency.
In March the World Bank's International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes ruled in favour of the Grenadan government in a dispute with RSM Production Corp., a small United States oil company.
RSM claimed that it was denied an offshore oil exploration license because it had refused to bribe a government minister in 1996.
In June Grenadan Prime Minister Tillman Thomas defended a proposed union between Trinidad and Tobago and the nine members of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States.
The proposal called for the establishment of an economic and political union by 2013.
On September 5 the government released Bernard Coard and the remaining 13 imprisoned leaders of the 1983 military coup that resulted in the death by a firing squad of then prime minister Maurice Bishop along with several of his cabinet ministers and supporters.
In the video, Rosenberg also claimed knowledge of Colom’s involvement in two other killings as well as in money laundering and corruption.
Colom denied the accusations, refused to resign, and invited the UN and the United States to assist in the investigation of the murder.
In September seven arrests were made, including those of several police officers, but few details were released in order to avoid compromising the ongoing investigation.
A CID-Gallup Poll in June showed that only 8% of Guatemalans blamed President Colom for the murder.
Tax revenue declined, and the Guatemalan quetzal lost value against the United States dollar.
When Guatemala urged the United States to slow the flow of deportations, Pres.
Barack Obama responded with a proposal for a new “temporary worker"" program for Central America that would provide agricultural labourers to the United States In May the Guatemalan government launched an austerity plan to cope with the recession; it received a $935 million loan from the IMF to help stabilize the country's finances.
With malnutrition already serious, famine caused by drought and crop diseases created additional suffering, especially in the eastern departments of Jutiapa, Zacapa, and Chiquimula and in the highland departments of Huehuetenango, Quiche, and San Marcos.
In September the government declared ""a state of public calamity” because of the shortage of com and beans and began a program of food packages for needy families.
Guatemalan attorney Rodrigo Rosenberg, who was murdered in May, appears in the video in which he accuses Pres.
The murder of bus drivers and kidnappings, especially in the capital, prompted President Colom in June to launch a new campaign to reduce criminality and increase security in schools.
Violence in the country increased in part because of the Mexican crackdown on drug traffickers.
As a result, heavily armed Mexican drug gangs moved south and began to operate in Guatemala, especially in the border area.
One group in particular, “Los Zetas,” described as a hit squad for the Mexican drug cartels, made several death threats against President Colom.
Moussa Dadis Camara and, from December 5, Sekouba Konate ; assisted by Prime Ministers Ahmed Tidiane Souare and, from January 2, Kabine Komara Within hours of Pres.
On Jan., 2009, the newly formed National Council for Democracy and Development officially took over all functions of the state.
Despite Camaras promise to hold elections within a year, Guinea was suspended from both the African Union and the Economic Community of West African States.
On March 16 a coalition of political leaders met with the military rulers, offering a plan for a return to civilian rule and a plea that both legislative and presidential elections be scheduled.
On August 17 Camara announced that the presidential poll would be held on Jan. 31, 2010, and that members of the junta had agreed not to stand.
Despite this, rumours that Camara planned to run for president sparked a massive demonstration on September 28, when 50,000 opposition supporters took to the streets.
Moussa Dadis Camara, appears in Conakry on October 2 as Guinea marks its 51st anniversary of independence. the death toll at 57.
In a television speech on September 30, Camara warned that rioters would be severely punished, and all further opposition meetings were banned.
On January 22 the CNDD called 14 former government ministers and business leaders to appear at televised hearings investigating corruption.
Three of the former ministers, including former prime minister Ahmed Tidiane Souare, were arrested on March 23 and charged with having embezzled $5. million of state funds.
Camara was shot and wounded in Conakry on December 3 in an assassination attempt that was blamed on one of his top aides, Lieut.
Camara was reportedly taken to Morocco for medical treatment while authorities launched a search for Diakite.
Guinea’s vice president, Sekouba Konate, took over as acting president on December 5.
According to government officials, Camara's injuries were not life-threatening.
Batista Tagme Na Waie, the head of the armed forces and longtime rival of Pres.
Joao Bernardo Vieira, Vieira himself was shot dead on March 2 by renegade soldiers in an apparent revenge attack.
No one was arrested for the assassination, but the expected political chaos did not follow, and the military did not seize power.
Guyana allow for voter registration to be completed, and during the campaign one of the candidates running for president was shot dead by security forces; nevertheless, the election took place on June 28, followed by a runoff on July 26.
Malam Bacai Sanha of PAIGC— who campaigned on the slogan ""The time is now!”—defeated the other leading candidate, former president Kumba Iala, and was inaugurated as the new president of a country ranked third from last on the United Nations 2008 Human Development Index and one that remained a transit point in the cocaine trade for shipments sent from South America en route to Europe.
Synergy, which missed its first-quarter deadline for starting work on the project, blamed the global financial crisis for its problems.
In party elections held in August by the main opposition People’s National Congress Reform , Robert Corbin was reelected party leader.
Khan had pleaded guilty to drug-related charges in a United States federal court in March.
Janet Jagan, the American-born former president of Guyana, died in March at the age of 88.
She was South America’s first elected female president and was credited with helping the PPP maintain its hold on power.
This was a result of stability within Haiti, intensified international attention to the country, and hiatus from another year of devastating natural disasters.
Rene Preval and Prime Minister Michele Pierre-Louis effectively managed resources at their disposal toward recovery from storm devastation.
Transportation and communications networks were largely restored; disaster-mitigation planning increased; and the number of those suffering from food insecurity diminished from roughly one-third to onefifth of the population.
Elections to renew more than one-third of Haiti’s 30-member Senate were held in April—albeit with only 11% voter turnout—and fiscal-reform legislation enabling Haiti’s eligibility for debt relief was passed.
More problematic was legislation to raise Haiti’s daily 70 gourde minimum wage.
Haiti’s parliament initiated steps toward constitutional reform, following recommendations of a nonpartisan presidential commission.
Stability and recovery received a large boost from intensified international attention.
Responding to the Haitian government’s proposal for a “new paradigm for cooperation,"" donors met in mid-April and pledged $353 million toward government-identified priority needs, enhancing significant bilateral and private aid flows.
Former United States president Bill Clinton, UN special envoy to Haiti, initiated efforts to coordinate donors, nongovernmental organizations, and the Haitian government and to attract international investment.
Priorities also focused on energy, environmental rehabilitation, and increased food production and rural investment.
Despite these developments, social and economic conditions among Haitians—56% of whom survived on less than $1 a day—did not improve significantly.
In late October, parliamentarians voted to remove PierreLouis from office, citing a lack of economic progress.
Her successor, Jean-Max Bellerive, promised greater foreign investment and job creation.
Despite 9.7% inflation and declining remittances, the economy grew by 2.4% largely owing to disaster-recovery funding.
Manuel Zelaya for raising the minimum wage during the global economic crisis.
Zelaya came in for further criticism when Congress accused the executive branch of having attempted to illegally influence its appointment of new Supreme Court justices.
Hungary Esteban Felix/AP Supporters of ousted Honduran president Manuel Zelaya clash with security forces near the presidential palace in Tegucigalpa on June 29. selected until January 25, the day mandated for the new court to take office.
In March Zelaya publicly announced his desire to continue in office, which was not possible under the current constitution.
He issued an order to hold a referendum on June 28 to ask whether voters when casting ballots in the general elections in November also wanted the government to convoke a constituent assembly to reform the constitution.
The Supreme Court, Congress, and the country’s electoral tribunal declared the referendum illegal.
Zelaya dismissed the head of the military for refusing to distribute the ballots, but the court overturned the dismissal.
The election was ready to take place on June 28, but that morning military and police officers arrested Zelaya and transported him by plane to Costa Rica.
Although Honduras’s constitution lacked clear means for impeaching a president, Congress appointed its leader, Roberto Micheletti, to complete Zelaya’s term, and the Supreme Court charged Zelaya with having violated the constitution.
The Organization of American States, after demanding that Zelaya be restored to office, suspended Honduras.
Barack Obama resisted cutting off humanitarian aid to the country, fearing harm to Honduras's poor population.
United States Secretary of State Hillary Clinton eventually persuaded Zelaya and Micheletti to accept Costa Rican Pres.
Arias proposed a plan that would return Zelaya to the presidency but also would require him to form a national unity government and abandon efforts to change the constitution, but this proposal failed.
Zelaya returned to Honduras on September 21, taking refuge in the Brazilian embassy in Tegucigalpa.
On December 2, Congress voted against restoring Zelaya to office for the final two months of his term.
Gyurcsany announced in March that he would stand aside, and Economy Minister Gordon Bajnai became prime minister in mid-April.
Bajnai accepted only a symbolic salary of 1 forint for taking on this crisis-management role but said that he would step down after the general elections in the spring of 2010.
Bajnai inherited an economy on the verge of collapse, a public debt standing at 77% of GDP, and a set of strict IMF conditions.
The forint had lost 20% of its value against the euro, which made it difficult for the government to service its foreign-currency-denominated debt.
The financial crisis also directly affected the 1. million citizens—more than a sixth of the population—who had taken out foreign-currency mortgages and loans.
A nonparty technocrat himself, Bajnai created a government of experts, cut ministerial salaries by 15%, and announced an austerity program, which included radical cuts in all areas of public spending and a reform of the health care, pension, and education systems.
He overhauled the tax system by cutting personal income tax rates and employers’ social security contributions and by increasing the valueadded tax and excise and business taxes.
His government also introduced a new “wealth” tax on property and luxury items.
Although Hungary’s credit ratings were downgraded in the spring, Bajnai’s achievements later eased investors’ fears about the country’s prospects for riding out the global financial crisis.
In the June European Parliament elections, the opposition Fidesz-Hungarian Civic Alliance (widely known as Fidesz), which was critical of the new government, secured a sweeping 56% of the vote.
The biggest election surprise was the success of the far-right fringe party Jobbik, which had campaigned on an antiJewish and anti-Roma platform.
Iceland Attila Kisbenedek—AFP/Getty Images Protesters in Budapest demand the holding of new elections in Hungary following Prime Minister Ferenc Gyurcsany's offer of resignation on March 21. and disillusioned Socialist voters, Jobbik won 15% of the vote and became the most popular extremist party in Hungary since the fall of communism in 1989, even though no powerful politicians or public figures were associated with it.
A disconcerting shift toward extremism in Hungary was also indicated by a string of attacks on the country’s Roma community and growing public support for the Jobbik-allied paramilitary organization known as the Hungarian Guard.
The black-uniformed group was banned during the summer by a Budapest court but was later reconstituted under a different name.
In the autumn bilateral relations between Slovakia and Hungary hit rock bottom after the Slovak parliament approved amendments to its state language law that criminalized the use of minority languages, including Hungarian, in public.
All of Hungary's parliamentary parties condemned the law, and Bajnai’s government turned to Brussels for help in defending the rights of Slovakia’s Hungarian-speaking community, which made up some 10% of the population.
Though no banks collapsed, the Bajnai government spent more than 3% of GDP on bank bailouts and loan-guarantee programs.
Real GDP contracted by an estimated 8-10%; unemployment increased to more than 10%; and the country became heavily indebted abroad.
A $2. billion line of credit was extended to Iceland by the IMF and was supplemented by additional loans from the other Nordic states as well as from Poland and the Faroe Islands.
In July the Icelandic government announced a plan to recapitalize the country’s three largest banks—Landsbanki, Glitnir, and Kaupthing—which the government had seized after the failure of those institutions in October 2008.
Landsbanki's situation posed particular problems for Iceland, since more than $3 billion in deposits in the bank’s branches in the U.K. and The Netherlands could not be withdrawn following the bank's collapse.
The U.K. and The Netherlands responded by compensating depositors for most of their losses; in return, Iceland agreed to assume up to $5. billion of debt from Landsbanki and to repay the sum over the next 7-15 years.
Street demonstrations outside the Althingi took place that eventually led to the government’s downfall.
The new government decided to apply for EU membership and filed Iceland’s formal application on July 17.
Anxiety about the economy was compounded by renewed concern about terrorism in the region, sparked by the vicious terrorist attacks in Mumbai in late November 2008.
Despite these problems, the ruling coalition, the United Progressive Alliance , succeeded in returning to power in the general elections of May 2009, improving its seat tally in the Lok Sabha, the lower house of parliament.
India The Indian Elections of 2009 India's 15th general elections to the lower house of parliament, the Lok Sabha , were conducted over a fourweek period from April 16 to May 13,2009.
No single political party had been able since 1984 to secure a majority in the parliament.
As a result, the country's oldest and largest party, the Indian National Congress, had led a coalition known as the United Progressive Alliance to form governments since May 2004.
Because Singh was elected to the parliament as a member of the Rajya Sabha, the upper house, the party's seniormost leader, Pranab Mukherjee, continued as leader of the party in the Lok Sabha.
While the triumvirate of Sonia Gandhi, her son, Rahul, and Manmohan Singh ran the party, the government was headed by Gandhi, Singh, and Mukherjee.
Mukherjee, a longtime cabinet member, became finance minister in 2009 and remained the government's principal troubleshooter and problem solver.
More political parties contested the election than in previous years, and some newly founded parties, such as the Praja Rajyam (in the state of Andhra Pradesh), registered their presence; in most constituencies the battle was fought mainly between three or four major contenders.
Among its several leaders, the main contenders for the prime ministership were thought to be the Uttar Pradesh chief minister, Mayawati Kumari; the former UP chief minister, Mulayam Singh Yadav; and the former Andhra Pradesh chief minister, Chandrababu Naidu.
The ideological platforms of Indian political parties were traditionally trifurcated into left, right, and centre.
Such sharp distinctions based on Western political thought tended to break down in India, however, with parties often adopting diametrically opposite policy platforms while in opposition and in government.
A growing number of regionaland caste-based parties also tended to adopt shifting platforms.
In the 2009 elections as well, it was difficult to classify the election manifestos of the three major coalitions neatly along this left, right, and centre axis, however apparent the nature of the political divide.
The left had a more traditional political platform, echoing its favourite political positions on domestic and global affairs.
Most opinion polls and several exit polls had forecast a ""hung"" parliament, with no coalition capable of forming a stable government.
The BJP and the parties of the left were dealt a severe blow, with the left facing particularly ignominious defeats in West Bengal and Kerala.
The BJP found itself engaged in a prolonged fratricidal war, with party leader Advani facing severe criticism; his position remained unchallenged, however, owing to internal divisions on the naming of his successor.
Although government reform was not a key issue in the elections, government failures lay at the root of many of India’s problems with law and order, civil strife, and insurgency.
After an unprecedented five-year run of a nearly 9% average annual rate of growth, the Indian economy slowed to a growth rate of 7.1% in 2008-09 and was expected to record an even lower rate of 6.3-6.5% in 2009-10.
An equally important factor was the poor monsoon rains in 2009, the weakest in more than 35 years, which had a negative impact on agricultural output.
The Indian banking and financial system had virtually no direct exposure to American subprime-mortgage assets or to the financial institutions in the United States that were at the heart of the crisis.
The early prudent and risk-averse regulation of the financial system helped to limit the impact of the trans-Atlantic financial crisis on the Indian financial sector.
The economy was negatively affected, however, by various other channels.
Second, Indian corporations’ access to foreign commercial loans was curtailed, and this resulted in the cost of credit going up, since interest rates were higher in India.
Finally, reduced portfolio investment in Indian equities by international institutional investors pushed Indian stock market indexes down.
To counter the impact of the slowdown, the government unveiled fiscal stimulus packages in late 2008 and in the first quarter of 2009.
This additional public spending contributed to an increase in the governments fiscal and budgetary deficits.
A liberal fiscal policy along with insufficient monsoon rains and an expected downturn in agricultural production contributed to inflationary pressures.
Managing relations with Pakistan in the aftermath of the 2008 terrorist attacks in Mumbai emerged as a major foreign-policy challenge in 2009.
Equal attention had to be paid to India’s relations with the United States, where a new administration took charge, and with China.
India officially accused Pakistan’s chief spy agency of having conspired to stage the terror attacks in Mumbai.
The Indian government provided information to Pakistan showing links between the terrorists who attacked Mumbai and militants based in Pakistan, claiming the latter were “clients and creations’’ of Pakistan's Inter-Services Intelligence agency.
Pakistan denied the charge, initially refusing to accept any link to the Mumbai attacks and later conceding that some “nonstate actors” based in Pakistan might have been involved in planning them.
The action taken against those identified by India and the United States as coconspirators also became a contentious issue.
Pakistan had charged India with having aided Baloch rebels, while India maintained that the Baloch nationalist movement was an entirely homegrown resistance movement.
Even as Pakistan dominated the headlines, renewed differences between India and China on the border issue, especially regarding the status of the Indian state of Arunachal Pradesh, caused some friction between the Asian giants.
India consistently rejected this claim, having held regular elections to the provincial government, including in October 2009.
India’s plans to step up infrastructure development in the state met with strong Chinese disapproval on the board of the Asian Development Bank, which India had approached for a loan to fund this investment.
India-China trade and business relations continued to flourish nonetheless; China emerged as India’s biggest trade partner, despite Indian allegations of dumping and nontransparent pricing of Chinese goods.
India and China continued to work together in international forums, such as the World Trade Organization, the World Bank, and the IMF, and tried to coordinate their positions in the negotiations on climate change.
The summit of the Group of 20, of which India was a member, emerged as a major global decision-making body in 2009; this was a high point of Indian diplomacy during the year.
India remained concerned, however, about the slowing of the pace of its interaction with the United States under the administration of Pres.
While Prime Minister Singh enjoyed a cordial meeting with Obama during Singh’s state visit to the United States in late November, Obama’s preoccupations with domestic economic issues and United States relations with China and the Muslim world reduced India’s salience in United States foreign policy, compared with what it had been under his predecessor, Pres.
India also concluded free-trade agreements with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and South Korea.
Simultaneous elections were held in April for the national, provincial, and district legislatures, and those were followed by direct presidential elections in July.
The elections were largely peaceful and, in the opinion of most observers, reasonably fair, despite some administrative bungles by the Election Commission.
Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono (commonly known as SBY) dominated with 21% of the vote.
In their worst-ever election result, Indonesia’s Islamic parties together gathered just 29% of the vote, down from the roughly 37% that the parties had received in both the 1999 and 2004 elections.
Two new political parties, Gerindra and Hanura, led respectively by prominent former generals Prabowo Subianto and Wiranto, returned vote totals of less than 5%, despite expensive advertising and voter-mobilization campaigns.
After trailing Megawati in opinion surveys in mid2008, the president was able to regain the ascendancy, and polls from early 2009 consistently showed him to be by far the most popular and trusted politician in Indonesia.
SBY's revival was due in large measure to voter approval of his government’s economic policies, which were credited with offsetting the worst effects of the global financial crisis.
Indeed, Indonesia had one of the strongest-performing economies in the region, with an annual growth rate of 4.2% that ranked behind only China and India.
Robust domestic consumer demand and high export commodity prices were chief drivers of Indonesia’s economic expansion.
What proved particularly popular with voters was a range of direct government payments to lowerincome families to compensate for the effects of rising prices.
The commencement of these payments coincided with the rally in the president’s support.
Corruption continued to command public and media attention during 2009.
Numerous high-level officials were convicted and jailed for graft, including Aulia Pohan, the father-in-law of SBY’s son and a deputy governor of Bank Indonesia, the country’s central bank.
In May KPK chairman Antasari Azhar was arrested and charged with graft and with having ordered the murder of an executive at one of Indonesia’s state-owned enterprises.
Prosecutors allege that Antasari wanted the executive killed because he had threatened to expose Antasari’s affair with the executive’s wife and his protection of high-level officials involved in corruption.
His case rendered great harm to the standing of the KPK, previously Indonesia's most respected institution, according to opinion surveys.
The commission suffered further damage to its reputation after another two of its five commissioners were forced to stand down after becoming the focus of corruption investigations.
The KPK’s critics used these events to argue for a reduction in the commission’s powers.
On July 17 Indonesia experienced its first terrorist attack in almost four years when two suicide bombers struck the luxury JW Marriott and Ritz-Carlton hotels in Jakarta, killing 9 people and injuring 50 others.
Responsibility for the bombing was claimed by Noordin Top, a former member of the Jemaah Islamiyah terrorist organization.
A string of arrests followed, culminating in the shooting of Noordin and several of his top associates at their hideout in Central Java.
Noordin’s death was a heavy blow for violent jihadism in Indonesia; he had been a key figure in all of the major terrorist bombings in the country since 2003.
In late September and early October, several earthquakes struck western Indonesia, causing devastation and heavy loss of life in the Padang region of West Sumatra.
The confirmed death toll exceeded 600, with estimates that more than 1,000 people may have perished.
The collapse of many public buildings prompted calls for tighter construction standards, particularly given that scientists were warning of more severe quakes over the next two decades.
Election officials dressed as wayang characters stand guard at a polling station in Solo, Java province, during Indonesia’s presidential elections in July.
Iran IRAN Ben Curtis/AP Supporters of Iranian opposition leader Mir Hossein Mousavi rally in front of the Azadi tower in Tehran to protest the outcome of Iran’s June presidential election.
In the run-up to the election, a power struggle developed between key individuals critical of Pres.
Ahmadinejad, aligned with the country’s Revolutionary Guards, was confronted by an array of reformists, clergy, conservatives, and progressive intellectuals who hoped to ensure his defeat in the election scheduled for June 12.
As the election drew closer, Ahmadinejad’s opposition coalesced around one main challenger, Mir Hossein Mousavi.
For the first time, the hierarchy of the Islamic Republic was split in public on the course of future action.
The announcement on June 13 that Ahmadinejad had won outright was therefore greeted by many with surprise.
Official results indicated that the turnout was 85% but that only 34% of the vote was won by Mousavi, who demanded that the results be investigated.
The failure of Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei to respond to election irregularities led to a week of unrest among those frustrated by Ahmadinejad’s dubious success.
On June 19 Khamenei issued a public call for unity but also increased police and Basij militia antiriot action against demonstrators.
In July the riots gradually abated, but agitation for a new election remained.
Nevertheless, Ahmadinejad was sworn in as president on August 5 with Khamenei’s blessing.
The rupture caused by the disputes damaged the cohesion of the ruling elite, making Iran politically less stable in spite of declarations that no erosion had occurred in regard to the principles of the Islamic republic.
Political maneuvering continued after the midyear unrest with neither side entirely dominant.
Ahmadinejad won control of most ministries in the new cabinet, although there were areas that were taken over by opponents.
Among these were the judiciary, which was headed by Sadeq Larijani, the brother of Majles speaker Ali Larijani.
Talks between Khamenei and former president Hashemi Rafsanjani in August brought relief from overt infighting within the regime.
The unity of the regime was again severely tested when the death of Grand Ayatollah Hossein Ali Montazeri, who had opposed the election results, was announced on December 19.
The event sparked further uprisings in Tehran on December 27 in which five protesters were killed.
The government was much taken aback by this recurrence of violence and by the size of the opposition clustered around Mousavi, whose nephew was among those killed during the riots.
There was no sign at any stage that the regime would change the decision concerning the legitimacy of the election, however.
The political unrest in June and July interrupted a slight easing of relations with the United States Although United States Pres.
Barack Obama had sent a Noruz (New Year) message to the Iranian people and had offered wide-ranging diplomatic dialogue with the regime, the harsh treatment of peaceful demonstrators following the elections evinced a sharp rebuff from Obama.
The United States also claimed a direct role in negotiations over Iran’s nuclear program.
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton responded to Iran's continuing failure to desist from developing nuclear capacity and promised United States protection to the Arab states of the Persian Gulf against any Iranian threat.
The meeting of the UN General on September 24 endorsed Obama's proposals for an end to the proliferation of nuclear weapons.
Nevertheless, Iran pressed on with its nuclear program, including plans to inaugurate the Bushehr atomic power station, expand capacity at Natanz, and secretly create a new underground facility near Qom.
Negotiations with the EU toward external monitoring of the nuclear program made little progress.
Ahmedinejad’s government continued its support for militant groups such as Hamas and Hezbollah, adding to friction with the U.S., the EU, and Israel.
Discontent with the Ahmadinejad government, caused partly by its poor economic performance, contributed to the June rioting.
GDP stood at $344. billion in March, with per capita income about $4,837.
Meanwhile, the oil sector’s earnings totaled $81. billion but were scheduled in the 2009-10 budget to decrease to about $30 billion-$36 billion as the oil price dipped on the international market.
A key reform expected to be introduced in the 2010-11 budget was a contentious plan to gradually eliminate subsidies on fuel, food-stuffs, and medical equipment.
Iraq IRAQ Area: 434,128 sq km Population : 30,747,000 (including about 2,000,000 Iraqi refugees, of which about 1,200,000 are in Syria and about 450,000 are in Jordan) Capital: Baghdad Head of state: President Jalal Talabani Head of government: Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki Iraq’s provincial elections of Jan., 2009, produced some unexpected results with significant implications.
Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki’s State of Law coalition list emerged as the big election winner.
Arab Sunnis participated broadly for the first time since the national elections of 2005.
The results revealed a turn by Iraqis away from sectarianism and indicated approval of Maliki’s tilt toward the political centre.
The provincial elections, however, did not include the three Kurdish provinces in the north or the disputed city and province of Kirkuk.
All parties were quick to absorb the theme of the election results—a popular desire for reconciliation—and to reflect this message in their campaign programs in preparation for the national parliamentary elections of 2010.
After repeated delays, on November 8 the Iraqi Council of Representatives adopted the long-awaited new election law.
The law had been held up largely by the explosive dispute over the oil-rich province of Kirkuk, where Arabs, Kurds, and Turkmen each claimed a majority.
The parliament resolved the contention, temporarily, by agreeing to use voter rolls from 2009 and not 2005; although national elections had been last held in 2005, many displaced Kurds had not yet moved back into the region by that year.
The new election law provided for an open list, in which voters could choose candidates by name, rather than a closed list, in which voters would not know the names of individual candidates.
He sought more seats in the parliament for some 2. million Iraqi refugees, most of whom were Sunni.
A new amendment, backed by Shi'ite and Kurdish members, shuffled the new distribution of seats by reverting to the 2005 voter rolls and adding seats for a 2.8% annual increase in the population.
Finally, after more negotiations, on December 6 lawmakers, pressured by the United States and the UN, reached a compromise on seat distribution, which gave a slight increase to the Sunni provinces.
The date for the 2010 elections was rescheduled from January 16 to March 7.
Although Iraq still suffered from a lack of security, the year saw an improvement in that situation compared with previous years.
The reduction in violence helped the United States to withdraw its troops from Iraqi urban areas by June 30 and to regroup in less-visible camps in the countryside.
A Status of Forces Agreement concluded in 2008 between Iraq and the United States specified that the Iraqi army and police would assume the responsibility for manning checkpoints and patrolling city streets in Baghdad and elsewhere.
Some joint U.S.-Iraqi military operations continued against al-Qaeda and other insurgents, especially in and around Baghdad and the northern province of Nineveh.
Corruption remained very high, as did common crime—robbery, murder, and kidnapping for ransom.
All those social ills created a deep sense of discontent and unease among Iraqis and prevented many Iraqi emigrants from returning from neighbouring Syria and Jordan.
Hakim had been the most powerful Shi'ite political figure in Iraq and the leader of the ISCI, the main Shi'ite political party.
In the semiautonomous Kurdish region of northern Iraq, the Kurds continued to build their own institutions.
On July 25 parliamentary and presidential elections were held in the three provinces that constituted the Kurdistan Regional Government—Al-Sulaymaniyyah, Arbil, and Dahuk.
A new party, Change, which had split from the PUK, came in Iraqis gather at the site of a massive bomb attack near the Ministry of Justice in Baghdad on October 25.
In the presidential elections Mas'ud Barzani, head of the KDP, won with 69.6% of the vote.
A coalition government, dominated by the KDP and the PUK and headed by Barham Salih , was formed.
Despite repeated delays by the parliament in approving a new oil law, the Iraqi government signed an important agreement on November 3 with a consortium of BP and the China National Petroleum Corp. to develop the giant oil field of Al-Rumaylah in southern Iraq, a step forward for the Iraqi oil industry.
BP had been expelled from Iraq in 1972 when the former Ba'th regime nationalized the oil industry.
The government worked with neighbouring countries Syria, Turkey, and Iran to increase the amount of water they allowed to flow into Iraqi rivers.
Water shortages and water pollution were particularly felt in Basra and elsewhere in southern Iraq.
On October 13 the Iraqi parliament approved an Iraqi-British security pact, despite the protest of some lawmakers.
Relations with Syria deteriorated when Iraq accused the Syrian government of tolerating al-Qaeda militants and former Ba'thists living in Syria whom Iraqi officials blamed for major explosions in Baghdad.
These explosions, on August 19 and October 25, killed hundreds of Iraqis and severely damaged several government buildings.
Syria denied any involvement in the bombings, but Iraq insisted on a UN investigation and rejected any mediation by Arab or other countries.
Iraq had been hoping for the cancellation of some $25 billion in UN-required reparations for Iraq's 1990 invasion of Kuwait.
Those requests had been systematically rejected by Kuwait, which insisted on full payment.
By fall 2009 Kuwait had become more inclined to accept a UN-sponsored solution suggesting that Kuwait invest those reparations in diverse development projects in Iraq.
Iraq had also asked other Arab countries, including Saudi Arabia, to cancel its outstanding debts.
Settling the Kuwaiti reparations issue was essential to removing Iraq from obligations imposed under Chapter VII of the UN Charter after the country’s failed invasion of Kuwait, which in turn was vital to Iraq’s ability to trade freely with the rest of the world.
The scale of the damage caused by the crisis would previously have been unimaginable.
Early in the year Ireland’s two major financial institutions, Allied Irish Banks and the Bank of Ireland, were on the brink of default; lending had stopped, unfinished construction sites were boarded up, and drastic job cuts occurred as businesses slashed expenses.
In February the government agreed to provide Allied Irish Banks and the Bank of Ireland each approximately $5.25 billion in recapitalization funds, and in September it proposed legislation to set up a staterun “bad bank”—known as the National Asset Management Agency—to absorb nonperforming loans from a number of domestic commercial banks and thereby enable those institutions to resume normal commercial lending.
A government advisory committee, the Special Group on Public Service Numbers and Expenditure Programmes, chaired by economist Colm McCarthy, published a report in July that identified $7. billion in possible public spending cuts, including a 5% reduction in social welfare payments and the elimination of more than 17,000 public-sector jobs.
In setting out a menu of options for the 2010 annual budget, the McCarthy report included numerous measures that would be politically difficult to implement.
Among the more controversial suggestions were cuts in health care spending, the closure of half of all police stations, and sharp reductions in payments to farmers.
Prime Minister Brian Cowen had a torrid first 18 months in office, receiving blame for the country’s economic problems and for squandering the budget surplus.
Local government and In Dublin, supporters of the EU’s Lisbon Treaty celebrate the overwhelming passage of the measure by Irish voters in a referendum held in October.
Israel European Parliament elections held in June gave no comfort to the ruling coalition.
Sinn Fein, however, was unable to capitalize on the economic travails, losing its sole EP seat and failing to make expected gains elsewhere.
The recently formed pan-European Libertas party, which had campaigned against the Lisbon Treaty on EU organization, also disappointed its supporters, failing to win a single EP seat.
After having initially rejected the Lisbon Treaty in a 2008 referendum, Irish voters passed the measure by a margin of 67% to 33% in a new referendum held in October.
The Commission to Inquire into Child Abuse, which was established in 2000 to investigate the abuse of children in Catholic-run residential institutions in Ireland from the 1930s onward, published its final report in May.
The report concluded that beatings and neglect were routine and that sexual abuse was “endemic” in many institutions and also that church authorities were often aware of the abuse and made efforts to protect offenders from legal charges.
A separate inquiry into child-abuse allegations against clergy members in Dublin ended in July; the inquiry focused on allegations made against 46 priests between 1975 and 2004 and on how those complaints were handled by the archdiocese of Dublin.
The inquiry’s findings caused considerable public disquiet over the role of senior churchmen, who were criticized for not pursuing allegations of child sex abuse by clergy with sufficient vigour.
In November the Consumer Price Index showed prices down 5.7% over a 12-month period.
From January to November the seasonally adjusted rate was 12.5%—almost double that of a year earlier.
Net emigration resumed, with an estimated 65,100 people emigrating during the 12 months ended in April—an increase of more than 40% over the previous 12month period—while the number of immigrants declined from 83,800 to 57,300.
The number of births reached 74,500 during 2009, the largest figure attained since 1896.
The election of Benjamin Netanyahu to a second term as prime minister, a more vigorous United States Middle East peace policy, and the international fallout from Israel’s 22-day military operation in the Gaza Strip from late December 2008 to mid-January all had potentially far-reaching consequences.
After taking office on March 31, Netanyahu distanced himself from the internationally accepted two-state model for peace with the Palestinians but, under heavy pressure from Washington, soon backtracked.
The Palestinians, who had been offered far more by outgoing prime minister Ehud Olmert, were reluctant to engage on this basis and demanded that Netanyahu first freeze Jewish settlement construction in the West Bank as a sign of good faith.
Barack Obama led a dynamic United States resolve to promote comprehensive Israeli-Arab peace, which he saw as the key to stability and the restoration of United States standing in the region.
But the mooted freeze-for-normalization deal failed to materialize, and in late October, after months of intensive shuttle diplomacy, special United States Middle East envoy George Mitchell acknowledged that little progress had been made.
Promising peace negotiations under the previous Israeli government had broken down in December 2008 when Israel launched a major military operation against the radical Hamas government in the Gaza Strip.
Italy Uriel Sinai/Getty Images Demonstrators in Jerusalem hold up cardboard cutouts of Gilad Shalit, a captive Israeli soldier, during a December protest held outside Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s office to demand Shalit's release.
Shalit had been held prisoner by Hamas militants since June 2006. rocketing of Israeli towns and villages in the Gaza periphery, the Israeli Defense Forces struck with overwhelming power, first bombing Flamas military and government targets from the air and then sending in ground forces and using heavy fire to advance in booby-trapped urban areas.
Although Hamas fighters launched hundreds of rocket attacks during the operation, Israel lost only 10 soldiers and 3 civilians.
The disparity between the death tolls and the widespread destruction in Gaza led to claims that the IDF's response had been disproportionate and indiscriminate.
Israel argued that its soldiers, faced with the problem of fighting militants who were embedded in heavily populated urban areas and deliberately using civilians as human shields, had operated strictly within the laws of war and had made strenuous efforts to warn civilians to move out of harm’s way before impending attacks.
In early April the UN Human Rights Council established a fact-finding commission under South African judge Richard Goldstone to investigate violations of human rights and humanitarian law in the Gaza fighting.
The commission heard testimony mainly from Palestinians, as Israel—charging that the commissions mandate was inherently biased—refused to cooperate.
Netanyahu accused the commission of having applied ""twisted standards"" and of having played into the hands of radicals who hoped to defeat Israel by delegitimizing it on the international stage.
He warned that if Israel was denied the right to defend itself against future rocket attacks, it would not be able to take risks for peace.
The United States characterized the Goldstone report as biased and deeply flawed, but it urged Israel to conduct an independent investigation of its own, partly as a means of removing the report from the international agenda and paving the way for renewed Israeli-Palestinian peacemaking.
Although the Gaza operation hurt Israel’s international image, it also seemed to establish a strong deterrent balance, at least in the short term.
Nine months after the war, there was virtually no rocket fire from Gaza.
Behind the scenes Israel and Hamas—through German mediation—were negotiating a deal for the release of Gilad Shalit, the Israeli soldier held prisoner by Hamas militants since June 2006.
Although both Hamas and Hezbollah used the lull to build up huge rocket arsenals, Israeli leaders were far more concerned by the strategic threat posed by Iran.
Addressing the UN General Assembly on September 24, Netanyahu urged the international community to prevent the ""tyrants of Tehran” from acquiring nuclear weapons.
In late October Barak expressed Israel’s concern that Iran would exploit talks with the Western powers to gain time while continuing to pursue a clandestine nuclear weapons drive.
Nevertheless, despite differences over the efficacy of diplomacy with Iran, Israel and the United States continued to coordinate defensive measures in the event of a military showdown with Tehran.
On the economic front, 2009 saw Israel emerging from the global economic crisis relatively unscathed.
The government passed a two-year budget with increased spending to counteract growing unemployment, and the Bank of Israel lowered interest rates to encourage business activity.
By the beginning of the fourth quarter, Israel seemed to have turned the corner.
The Tel Aviv Stock Exchange had gained more than 60% over the lows of December 2008; the Composite State-ofthe-Economy Index had risen for a fourth consecutive month; and the Bank of Israel was optimistically forecasting growth of 3% for 2010.
A devastating earthquake and allegations of sexual impropriety leveled against the country’s billionaire prime minister, Silvio Berlusconi, riveted Italians in 2009.
On April 6 an earthquake with a magnitude of 6. devastated a mountainous stretch of the Abruzzi region.
Aftershocks from the country’s worst earthquake in 30 years rippled through central Italy for more than a month, fraying both public and political nerves.
Two days after the quake, Prime Minister Berlusconi seized the media limelight by visiting homeless victims and promising a swift and thorough reconstruction of the affected areas.
At Berlusconi's insistence, the Group of Eight summit that had been scheduled to take place on Maddalena Island, off the coast of Sardinia, was moved to L’Aquila.
The summit was held there in July under makeshift conditions to focus global attention on the catastrophe.
Barack Obama, visiting Italy in an official capacity for the first time, toured the city’s rubble-strewn neighbourhoods, shaking hands and rallying local residents.
By September vigorous assistance efforts had succeeded in moving some of the dispossessed into new homes, though thousands remained housed in temporary facilities.
Scientists remained concerned about the high potential for future seismic activity along Italy's geologically vulnerable eastern spine, the Apennine Mountains, where the quake had occurred.
Though seismologists reiterated the need for stricter adherence to building codes, there was little immediate evidence that their counsel was being heeded.
Italy had thousands of centuries-old structures that were difficult to modify.
Subject to numerous corruption and conflict-of-interest probes over the years, the 72-year-old Berlusconi, a longtime business and media tycoon, suddenly found himself embroiled in corrosive sex scandals.
He allegedly had given Letizia a gold and diamond necklace as a birthday gift.
Letizia responded by saying that Berlusconi was merely a friend and benefactor whom she knew as ""Papi,” a version corroborated by an unapologetic Berlusconi.
He insisted that he had attended Letizia’s celebrations as a favour to her father, a businessman friend.
Soon after the Letizia controversy, 42year-old escort Patrizia D’Addario publicly announced that she had been recruited by a middleman to spend the night with Berlusconi.
She also alleged that the prime minister had later promised that she could stand for election to the European Parliament as one of his party’s candidates.
This time an enraged Berlusconi blamed unnamed political enemies for spreading malicious rumours and invading his privacy, dismissing D’Addario's account as defamatory gossip.
In a remarkable series of rebuttals, Berlusconi also declared that, while he was ""no saint,"" he was still ""the best prime minister” Italy had ever had and a man whose status and character most Italians sought to emulate, though dips in public opinion polls suggested otherwise.
These tawdry scandals also damaged Berlusconi’s already shaky reputation among the country’s Roman Catholic leaders, producing a rare public skirmish between the government and the Vatican.
Essays critical of Berlusconi’s moral judgment by Dino Boffo, the editor of Avvenire, the newspaper of the Italian Bishops’ Conference, led to a fierce counterattack by II Giomale, a daily owned by Berlusconi’s brother, pointing out that Boffo was once embroiled in a sexual harassment case.
The embittered Boffo eventually resigned, and Berlusconi met hastily with Pope Benedict XVI in an effort to mend the growing rift.
Berlusconi experienced a major setback in October when the Constitutional Court ruled that a 2008 law granting the prime minister and other leading officials immunity from prosecution while in office was unconstitutional.
Although he had threatened to resign if the law was overturned, Berlusconi pledged instead to continue as prime minister and to defend himself in court, where he was expected to face trial in a few outstanding corruption and tax-fraud cases.
A September suicide bombing that killed six Italian paratroopers stationed in Afghanistan intensified the debate over Italy’s participation in NATO-led efforts to pacify that country.
In October Berlusconi angrily denied reports that Italy had paid Taliban leaders and other warlords in order to keep the peace in areas of Afghanistan where Italian soldiers were deployed.
Meanwhile, a rift between two key Berlusconi allies became nearly unbreachable.
The recommendation of Gianfranco Fini, president of the lower house of parliament, to make legal immigrants eligible for Italian citizenship and to grant them voting rights was bitterly rejected by Umberto Bossi, the leader of the Northern League, a party that had been outspoken in its resentment of immigrants.
The ongoing government debate over immigration policy came as Italian naval patrols continued to turn away new waves of would-be arrivals on Italian shores.
Jamaica away, despite protests from the European Union and humanitarian officials.
In March, Berlusconi traveled to Tripoli to mark Libyan ratification of a 2008 cooperation deal that had called for the widening of business ties between the two countries in exchange for Libya's promising to help reign in Italy-bound migrants.
Muammar alQaddafi paid his first visit to Rome, where the two nations agreed on further measures to police immigration.
The immigration controversy was fueled by the poor performance of Italy’s economy, which was in recession partly because of the global economic crisis.
In September the European Commission dampened hopes of an immediate recovery by announcing that it expected a 5% drop in Italy’s 2009 GDP rather than the 4.4% decrease forecast earlier in the year.
The IMF’s assessment was similar; it predicted a 5.1% drop in GDP in 2009, followed by a marginal 0.1% recovery in 2010.
Meanwhile, on its business-confidence index for April, the Rome-based Institute for Studies and Economic Analyses recorded a level of 59. for Italy, the lowest for the country since the institute was founded in 1986.
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development predicted that Italy's jobless figures would reach into the double digits if the economy failed to regain momentum.
What most troubled the OECD was rising unemployment among 15to 24-year-olds, which had increased by 5% in 2008 to 26.3%, meaning that more than a quarter of the country’s youth were out of work.
Some social critics suggested that Letizia’s alleged affair with Berlusconi represented the revival of a trend for young women to seek dalliances with successful men in the political, sports, and entertainment worlds as a means to escape poor job prospects.
Despite the precarious economy, Italian politics appeared all but bereft of a functional opposition.
His successor, Dario Franceschini, made little immediate impact and was soon replaced by political veteran Pier Luigi Bersani.
Melancholy was echoed even in the sports world, where rabid soccer fans were forced to reckon with a national team whose performances, while successful, were generally lacklustre.
Fans also watched the exodus of some of the top soccer league’s best players.
Zlatan Ibrahimovic of Sweden, the star of Serie A titleholder Inter Milan, explained his defection to FC Barcelona of the Spanish La Liga in terms of salary and his belief that Spain offered the opportunity for more creative play.
Kaka of Brazil, AC Milan’s hallmark midfielder, said much the same, though more diplomatically, as he packed his bags for Real Madrid.
Owners also acknowledged that they had reduced spending as a result of the poor economy, and no Italian team made it past the quarterfinals in the European championships.
In Formula 1 auto racing, Italy’s bestknown international brand, Ferrari, was repeatedly humbled by teams with far less know-how and cash.
The OUR hoped that at least 15% of the total power required by 2020 could be derived from renewable energy sources.
Jamaica reaffirmed in June that it was not averse to going against the grain of international opinion by retaining the death penalty as part of the country’s judicial system.
In late 2008 both houses of Parliament had voted in favour of hanging as the method of execution.
In July the Jamaican government confirmed that it had made a formal application to the IMF to borrow $1. billion under a stand-by agreement.
The IMF and Jamaica agreed on “key elements” of a $1. billion loan in December.
After leading the DPJ to a landslide victory on August 30, Hatoyama took office as Japan’s prime minister in September.
Before he could do so, however, the global financial crisis hit Japan hard, causing a sharp contraction of economic activity that saw GDP shrink by 8.4% year-on-year in the first quarter of 2009.
Aso's government responded to the crisis with three stimulus packages amounting to roughly $275 billion, but this stimulus failed to reverse the unemployment rate, which crept steadily upward from 4% in mid-2008 to a postwar high of 5.7% in July 2009.
Aso postponed plans for the election while waiting for an economic turnaround to commence.
The announcement in March that prosecutors were investigating a violation of the Political Funds Control Law involving DPJ leader Ichiro Ozawa gave Aso hope that the opposition might be so distracted by the scandal that it could not take advantage of the weak economic situation.
Indeed, the DPJ's approval rating dropped to 18% in April as Ozawa considered how to respond.
His chief secretary, Takanori Okubo, had been arrested and then prosecuted for having directed a donor, Nishimatsu Construction, to circumvent the ban on corporate donations to individual politicians by funneling money to Ozawa’s fund-raising organization via a pair of political front groups.
Ozawa claimed ignorance and refused for two months to resign, even as his party continued to slip in the polls.
Ozawa himself was never charged, but on May 11 he announced his resignation as party leader—just two days before he was scheduled to debate Aso in the Diet.
This turned out to be the nadir in the DPJ's poll standings; the party quickly began to recover once it had put the scandal behind it.
Just five days after Ozawas resignation, the DPJ held a leadership vote, in which Hatoyama bested Katsuya Okada.
Both men had served as party leader before, with Okada presiding over the DPJ’s defeat in the previous lower house election in 2005 and Hatoyama serving as leader from 1999 to 2002.
Although Hatoyama was closely associated with Ozawa, he was able to prevail in part because the party’s rank-and-file members realized that they still needed Ozawa, who continued to lead the DPJ's efforts to plot election strategy.
The DPJ defeated the combined forces of the LDP and the New Komeito party in the Tokyo assembly elections on July 12.
With Tokyo voters having demonstrated that they were willing to elect little-known DPJ candidates over veteran LDP assemblymen, it was clear by July— when Aso finally announced that the general election would be held on August 30 (by law the election had to be held by September)—that the LDP would be facing an uphill battle.
As the election campaign got under way, however, the DPJ’s appeal for a ""change of government”—the slogan plastered on every campaign poster— attracted many more supporters than expected.
The DPJ proposed to pay for these measures by slashing what it characterized as pork-barrel spending by the LDP on public-works projects.
Although in the previous 54 years the LDP had been pushed out of office once before—for 11 months in 1993-94— that brief interlude had been brought about by a split in the party.
Almost all LDP incumbents had held onto their seats in the 1993 election.
He named Okada as foreign minister and found places in his new cabinet for representatives of all of the various groups that made up the DPJ, including former Socialists who had helped form the party in 1996.
Ozawa was not offered a portfolio but was instead named DPJ secretarygeneral.
Hatoyama chose to do so even though those parties’ votes were not needed to pass legislation in the lower house; their votes were, however, needed in the upper house, where the two parties held nine seats.
If the DPJ did well in the upper-house elections scheduled for July 2010, Hatoyama would have the leeway to form a new DPJ-only cabinet.
Land, Infrastructure, Transport, and Tourism Minister Seiji Maehara announced on September 17 that he was suspending construction already under way on the $5. billion Yamba Dam in Gunma prefecture.
Because the LDP had many political backers in the construction industry and in rural areas who had long been involved in dam building, Maehara’s announcement was viewed as a direct assault on the LDP’s old patronage system.
The ministry later suspended work on another 47 centralgovernment-funded dams.
Japan similar commitment to restraint as it turned to the fiscal 2010 budget process.
In October, Health, Labour, and Welfare Minister Akira Nagatsuma announced that he would be increasing the child-allowance budget from $11. billion to $30. billion, a move that would enable monthly child-allowance payments to be raised to $141.
The government maintained that it would take additional steps in 2010 to boost the allowance payments to the sum promised by the DJP during the campaign.
Of the world's major economies, Japan’s was most deeply affected by the global recession.
By the second quarter of 2009, however, the economy had begun to show some signs of life, posting a positive growth figure of 0.7% that raised hopes that the country had put the worst behind it.
Adding to the cautious optimism was a downtick in the unemployment rate from a record 5.7% in July to 5.5% in August.
Nevertheless, most economists continued to worry about the ability of the Japanese economy to return to robust growth.
The recession was stanched with the help of massive deficit spending, which was projected to total $521 billion in fiscal year 2009 , but with Japan’s public debt already totaling 170% of GDP, there was tremendous pressure on the DPJ government to move toward greater fiscal restraint.
The decision to trim the third fiscal stimulus package and put a limit on bond issuance in the 2010 budget suggested that the government was responding to that pressure.
Also working against a resumption of robust growth was the steady strengthening of the yen.
The currency’s value went from ¥105 to the dollar for most of 2008 to ¥90 to the dollar by November 2009.
With the Chinese renminbi pegged to the dollar throughout most of this period, the strengthening of the yen against the dollar meant that the Japanese currency was also strengthening against the renminbi.
The combination of the economic crisis and adverse currency movements severely weakened Japanese exports, which fell by 26% in the first quarter of 2009.
Although Japan was able to recoup some of that decline in the second quarter— when exports were up 6.3%—the currency environment gave little reason to expect exports to become the engine of sustained growth for Japan.
Japanese monetary policy remained unchanged in 2009 after the Bank of Japan lowered the uncollateralized overnight call rate to 0.1% in late 2008 to deal with the onset of the economic crisis.
Toyota Motor Corp. reported multibillion-dollar losses in the early part of the year, projecting at one point that it would lose $5 billion for the year.
By the third quarter, however, Toyota reported that it was earning profits again and reduced its projected losses for the year to $2. billion.
On the foreign policy front, developments continued to revolve around Japan’s relations with the United States During the first half of the year, the Japanese adjusted to the transition in the United States from the administration of Pres.
Barack Obama, while later in the year the United States was forced to accommodate the priorities of a new party in power in Japan.
As the year began, Prime Minister Taro Aso remained frustrated with the U.S.’s decision in 2008 to remove North Korea from its list of state sponsors of terrorism despite the absence of progress on a major subject of Japanese concern—the fate of Japanese citizens who had been abducted by North Korean agents during the 1970s and '80s—and continuing concerns regarding North Korea's nuclear weapons program.
With Obama announcing his intention to move United States foreign policy away from a confrontational approach to one that placed an emphasis on engagement with countries that had been accused of human rights abuses, Japan made efforts early in the year to ensure that the new administration understood its worries over North Korea.
During her visit Clinton met with families of the Japanese abductees and pledged to push North Korea “to be more forthcoming with information” regarding the kidnappings.
Subsequent decisions by the North Koreans to detain two American journalists in March, launch a long-range missile in April, and conduct a second nuclear test on May 25 (the first test had occurred in October 2006) led Japan and the United States to agree to work more closely together to pressure the North Koreans to change their behaviour.
The two countries pushed for a new UN resolution following the missile launch but faced opposition to such a move from Russia and China; initially the UN Security Council issued only an official statement condemning the launch, but in the wake of the second nuclear test, the Security Council unanimously passed a resolution on June 12 that imposed additional sanctions on North Korea.
In response to the earlier condemnation by the UN, North Korea in April announced its withdrawal from the six-party talks on denuclearization.
Amano expressed his hope that the six-party talks would be revived and that North Korea would allow IAEA inspectors to return to the country.
The DPJ victory on August 30 posed other challenges for the U.S.-Japan alliance.
The DPJ had campaigned on a platform that called for improved relations with China and a ""more equal"" partnership with the United States In its early days in office, Hatoyama’s administration declared its intention to end Japan’s naval refueling mission in the Indian Ocean, which involved the use of Japanese vessels to refuel United States ships engaged in the war in Afghanistan.
The new administration also indicated its desire to renegotiate a deal on relocating a United States military base in Okinawa that the two governments had reached earlier in the year.
The Okinawa base relocation dispute proved too difficult to resolve, so the two leaders announced that they would set up a “high-level working group"" to reconcile their differences.
In early January, amid Israel’s 22-day war on Hamas militants in the Gaza Strip, King 'Abdullah II voiced concern over the future of the Palestinians and spoke of a ""conspiracy” against the Palestinian people.
His statements were interpreted as a warning against an earlier Israeli scenario that entailed passing administrative control of the Gaza Strip to Egypt and forcibly transferring Palestinians in the West Bank to Jordan, thus achieving a purely Jewish state.
Concern over this prospect was triggered anew by the victory of the right-wing Likud party leader Benjamin Netanyahu in Israel’s February elections.
An estimated 60% of Jordan's population was of Palestinian origin, and a transfer of the West Bank's 2. million Palestinians to Jordan by force posed a daunting prospect.
In May members of the Knesset (Israeli parliament) presented a draft law proposing Jordan as the alternative homeland for Palestinians.
This sparked protest demonstrations in Amman, while the Jordanian government summoned the Israeli ambassador to convey its rejection of the proposal.
Tension continued as rumours circulated that the Jordanian government had approved a secret United States plan to rescind the rights of Palestinian refugees to return Salah Malkawi/Getty Images During a visit to Jordan in May, Pope Benedict XVI prays on the bank of the Jordan River, believed to be the site where John the Baptist baptized Jesus. to their homeland.
This coincided with the Jordanian government’s adoption of a decentralization plan to divide the kingdom into three administrative regions, a plan that was associated—in the rumours—with a political scheme to create an alternative Palestinian state in Jordan.
At a speech in August, King ‘Abdullah denied the rumours and warned unnamed parties against their ""private and suspicious agendas,” emphasized Jordan’s commitment to and support of Palestinian rights, and denied bowing to external pressure.
Jordan's economy continued to suffer the effects of the global financial crisis, with the budget deficit climbing to $534. million, compared with the $103. million budget surplus in the first eight months of 2008.
In September Jordan signed grant agreements with the United States Agency for International Development , bringing United States economic assistance to Jordan for 2009 to $513. million.
Reportedly dissatisfied with the pace of economic reforms, King ‘Abdullah on November 23 dissolved the parliament midway through its term and called for new elections, and in December he replaced the country’s prime minister, Nader Dahabi, with a former palace aide, Samir al-Rifai.
In May Pope Benedict XVI visited Jordan in an effort to improve ties with the Muslim world; there he was boycotted by Islamists for refusing to apologize for previously quoting a text criticizing Islam.
In September Jordan announced plans to embark on an ambitious $2 billion project to build a canal that would replenish the dwindling Dead Sea with water from the Red Sea.
Nursultan Nazarbayev called for acceleration of the two-year anti-crisis program adopted by the government in October 2008; the program emphasized support for the country’s financial sector, including mortgage restructuring, and higher priority for the construction industry.
In late August the former CEO of the Alyans Bank was arrested on a charge of having embezzled $1. billion; the former chief of another major bank had fled the country in February to avoid prosecution on a similar charge.
Some political observers suggested a link between the actions against the bankers and the financial crisis.
In addition to coping with an economy weakened by the economic downturn, in 2009 Kazakhstan’s government prepared to assume the annual chairmanship of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe in 2010.
Kazakhstan would be the first Commonwealth of Independent States member—and the first Asian state—to assume the position.
Keny: a spite of Kazakhstan’s promise to strictly adhere to its OSCE commitments, however, questions arose during 2009 about specific actions taken by Kazakh authorities.
In June the OSCE representative on freedom of the media called on Nazarbayev to veto a bill that would restrict Internet freedom (and limit media freedom in general) by expanding the list of justifications for suspending the operations or distribution of any media outlet.
In spite of the protest and recommendations for revisions that would have brought the draft law in line with international standards, Nazarbayev signed the law.
A survey published by an international group monitoring freedom of religion found that Kazakhstan continued to violate its human rights commitments by placing legal restrictions on freedom of belief, expression, and association.
On September 3, leading human rights activist Yevgeny Zhovtis, who had been convicted for vehicular manslaughter as a result of a July traffic accident, was sentenced to four years of detention in a resettlement colony.
The sentence caused an outcry in domestic and international human rights communities, and even the former head of the national traffic police asserted that the sentence was too harsh.
Prime Minister Raila Odinga had only limited success in pushing forward his reform agenda and in April accused Pres.
Claiming that cabinet ministers belonging to the ODM were being left out of decision making—particularly with regard to Drought-stricken cows He in a paddock at a slaughterhouse east of Nairobi, Kenya, in September.
Thomas Mukoya—Reuters/Landov setting the legislative agenda in the parliament—Odinga announced a boycott of cabinet meetings.
Two weeks later the Women’s Development Organisation, backed by the prime minister’s wife, Ida Odinga, launched a unique strategy to protest the political deadlock by declaring a weeklong boycott on sex.
In July there were signs of rapprochement between the factions when Kibaki toured Nyanza province, Odinga’s political stronghold, and met with Odinga at the prime minister's home.
In November the Kenyan government published a new draft constitution that would curtail presidential powers and allow the prime minister to oversee routine government business; the draft constitution was to be subjected to a referendum, which was expected to take place in March 2010.
Calls for judicial and electoral reform were largely ignored, despite strong prodding by the UN and other international agencies as well as by United States Secretary of State Hillary Clinton during her visit to Kenya in early August.
Corruption scandals mounted, with numerous government officials facing accusations of graft in connection with the grain, oil, and tourism industries.
Alston also called on Kibaki to dismiss Kenya’s police commissioner, Mohammed Hussein Ali, for permitting systematic police violence and urged the resignation of Attorney General Amos Wako, whose 18 years in office had yielded few prosecutions of suspects in extrajudicial killings.
Efforts to investigate and prosecute cases stemming from the widespread violence that followed Kenya’s disputed December 2007 presidential election were halfhearted, largely because some perpetrators occupied key positions in the government.
In February the parliament voted against a special tribunal composed of Kenyan and international judges.
In July the cabinet also decided against a special tribunal, opting to use local courts instead.
National and international civil rights organizations campaigned for the International Criminal Court to intervene.
Meanwhile, former UN secretary-general Kofi Annan submitted to the ICC a list of names of persons suspected of having instigated the postelection violence.
The global recession impeded export growth and reduced tourism receipts, remittances, and private capital flows.
The UN World Food Programme estimated that nearly four million Kenyans—some 10% of the population—required emergency assistance, which was slow to materialize.
In the northern pastoral districts, massive cattle deaths caused widespread hunger and spawned interethnic hostilities.
Throughout the droughtaffected areas, rising prices of food and water bred antigovernment sentiments, which led many observers to fear the possible resurgence of armed militias.
The worsening situation led to large drawdowns from the Revenue Equalization Reserve Fund to finance budget deficits.
The fund was already shrinking; its investments in offshore financial markets posted negative returns, and this led to warnings that government expenditures would need to be cut to ensure that the fund could continue to finance development in Kiribati.
One bright spot was the performance of Kiribati Shipping Services Ltd., which signed an agreement to provide much-needed and profitable regular shipping services for its small neighbours, including Tuvalu, Nauru, and the French collectivity of Wallis and Futuna.
Anote Tong signed into law an act creating the Phoenix Islands Protected Area , which covered more than 400,000 sq km and was the largest marine reserve in the world.
The PIPA was largely uninhabited, and its remote location ensured that the unique marine wilderness had one of the most unspoiled coral reefs in the world.
The government was hoping to secure a United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization World Heritage site listing for the pristine area.
In another environmental success story, Kiribati’s waste-recycling program, begun with funds from nongovernmental organizations, eliminated large amounts of garbage along roads around the capital and reached the point at which it was to be spun off as a sustainable private business.
The government appointed a four-person committee to review a series of immigration permit decisions that had resulted in rapid growth of the immigrant business community and had begun to create some domestic political tension.
He also seemed to be grooming his third son, Kim Jong-Un (believed to be about 27), to be his successor, but Chang Song-Taek, Kim Jong Il’s brother-in-law, appeared poised to serve as a caretaker if the younger Kim was not ready to rule.
Kim Jong II celebrated his renewed vigour with a long-range missile test and satellite launch in April; the effort failed.
The following month North Korea appeared to conduct its second underground nuclear test, which seemed to have been more successful than its first test, in 2006.
Most analysts believed, however, that it would be at least a decade before the country could marry its missile and nuclear programs.
North Korea also began rebuilding a nuclear reactor that it had partially dismantled as part of a 2005 nuclear accord and resumed plutonium production.
In December a United States envoy visited the country bearing a letter from United States Pres.
Barack Obama in an attempt to revive the moribund nuclear talks, but North Korea appeared to be in no hurry to return to the negotiating table.
Days later Thai authorities interdicted a 35-ton North Korean arms shipment believed to have been bound for the Middle East.
Under UN Security Council Resolution 1874 , North Korea was prohibited from exporting heavy weapons.
Not only did the denominations mostly stay the same and the designs look somewhat similar, but the total amount of the old currency that each person could exchange for the new was severely restricted.
Despite promises of a “strong and prosperous nation"" by 2012, haphazard reforms and a recent sharp decline in humanitarian assistance suggested the real possibility of renewed famine.
North Korea appeared before the UN Human Rights Council for its first “universal periodic review” on December 7.
Relations with the United States continued to warm, while ties with North Korea remained frosty.
Meanwhile, two South Korean athletes made their mark on the world stage.
After three straight quarters of yearon-year decline, the South Korean economy came back to life in the second half of the year.
The Hyundai-Kia Automotive Group led the way in economic growth, with the partners expanding their global market share from 6.5% to 7.8% in the first nine months of 2009.
Hyundai-Kia and South Korea’s three other biggest conglomerates—Samsung, LG, and SK—also made preparations for power to be passed to the next generations of their founding families.
Kosovo Korean Central News Agency—Korea News Service/AP North Korean leader Kim Jong II is flanked by Hyundai Group chairwoman Hyun Jeong-Eun and her daughter, Chung Ji-Yi.
The two women met with Kim in August. take over in what was anticipated to be Korea’s first mother-daughter corporate succession.
The two met with North Korean leader Kim Jong 11 in August to discuss North-South cooperative projects.
Koreans mourned the passing of two former presidents within three months of each other.
Roh Moo-Hyun jumped from a cliff to his death in May, despondent over the widening corruption investigation that targeted his family members.
Roh’s predecessor in office, Kim Dae-Jung, succumbed to multiple organ failure in August.
Both politicians were longtime democracy activists who also tried to promote reconciliation and cooperation with North Korea.
International developments included the selection of South Korea to host the November 2010 Group of 20 summit and the decision of Pres.
Lee MyungBak to redeploy several hundred troops and reconstruction personnel to Afghanistan.
Meanwhile, Pyongyang gave Seoul the cold shoulder for much of the year, but rumours swirled that a North-South summit could take place in 2010.
In July the opposition blocked GNP members from the legislative chamber to prevent a controversial media-reform bill from coming to a vote, and the bill was passed only after GNP members sneaked into the chamber through a side door.
Lawmakers also clashed over plans to relocate the central government from Seoul to the countryside and to revive four of Korea’s major rivers in what would be the country’s biggest hydroengineering project.
The GNP passed the annual budget in a last-minute vote on December 31, over opposition protests.
Han Myung-Sook, who was the first woman to have served as South Korea’s prime minister , was indicted for having received a $50,000 bribe from a job seeker.
In March, Kim Yu-Na became the first South Korean to win a world figure skating title.
Golfer Yang Yong-Eun pulled off one of the year’s greatest upsets, beating Tiger Woods at the Professional Golfers’ Association championship in August.
Yang became the first Asian-born male golfer to win a major tournament.
The report noted that freedom of expression was not fully guaranteed and that efforts to provide an institutional framework for reconciliation between the majority Albanians and minority communities were lacking.
Progress was reported in education; the first attempts were made to tone down nationalism and hate mongering in history schoolbooks.
Kosovo held its first elections since it declared independence from Serbia in February 2008.
Some 45% of the 1. million registered voters cast ballots, electing mayors and members to city councils in 36 municipalities.
In December the ICJ heard testimony by Serbia, Kosovo, and 27 UN member states that either supported or opposed Kosovo's independence.
The country’s trade deficit from January to July was about $1.25 billion.
Remittances from Kosovo’s diaspora fell 8%; these sums constituted 14.1% of Kosovo’s GDP, 2.7% more than exports.
Al-Awadhi was one of the first four women ever elected to the 50-member legislative body and one of two who did not wear a Muslim head scarf.
On March 18, 2009, continued tensions in Kuwait between the parliament and the cabinet led the emir, Sheikh Sabah al-Ahmad al-Jabir alSabah, to dissolve the National Assembly—the third such dissolution since 2006—and call for new elections.
The elections, which were held on May 16, resulted in a historic outcome; in the balloting four highly educated women won election to the National Assembly in spite of objections from conservative Islamists.
Although Kuwaiti women were given the right to vote and to run for office in 2005, none had previously been able to win a National Assembly seat.
Meanwhile, representatives from the Shi'ite community, which constituted about onethird of the Kuwaiti population, rose from five to nine; by contrast, Sunni Islamists saw their representation in the National Assembly decline significantly, from 21 seats to 11.
The emir also reappointed his nephew, Sheikh Nasir al-Muhammad al-Ahmad al-Jabir al-Sabah, prime minister for the sixth time since 2006.
During 2009 some leading Kuwaitis were advocating for the appointment of a prime minister from outside the ruling family as a means of providing more stability.
Since 1992 the role of the National Assembly had been slowly changing from a consultative body to a genuine legislature.
A critical issue was the total accountability of the entire cabinet to the National Assembly; the prime minister had always been a member of the al-Sabah family, which, as the ruling family, was not held accountable.
The government was obliged to shore up Gulf Bank, the country’s second largest bank, and fully guarantee all bank deposits.
The Kuwait stock exchange and real-estate prices tumbled, but by the beginning of the third quarter of 2009, the Kuwaiti economy was showing signs of recovery.
Tense relations between Kuwait and Iraq continued over border issues, shared oil fields, and war reparations owed by Iraq to Kuwait.
While Kuwait insisted upon fulfillment of Iraq’s international obligations, including payment of reparations, Iraq sought the cancellation of about $25 billion of the UNmandated reparations for destruction wrought by Saddam Hussein’s 1990 invasion of Kuwait.
Efforts were made by the UN to help find a solution to the impasse; among the most promising plans was the proposal to let Kuwait invest the money owed to it within the Iraqi infrastructure.
Kurmanbek Bakiyev won an overwhelming majority (official figures awarded him 86% of the vote) in spite of opposition efforts to unseat him by rallying behind a single candidate, Almazbek Atambayev.
Bakiyev’s victory was followed by opposition charges of massive electoral fraud, including claims that Atambayev had actually received 60% of the vote.
At his inauguration Bakiyev appealed for tolerance and civil accord and promised broad political reform, starting with public administration.
The reform process included the appointment of a new cabinet of ministers and prime minister in late October and the dismissal of a number of presidential advisers.
Dmitry Medvedev, Bakiyev announced that the agreement that permitted United States and NATO forces fighting in Afghanistan to use Kyrgyzstan’s Manas airfield would be terminated.
The Kyrgyz parliament voted to end United States and NATO use of the base, but the promised Russian aid was slow to materialize.
On June 22 an agreement was signed under which the United States would continue to use Manas as a transit shipment centre for nonmilitary deliveries to forces in Afghanistan.
The Russian Foreign Ministry commented that such an agreement was Kyrgyzstan’s sovereign right.
Negotiations between Kyrgyzstan and Russia over the basing of a Russian battalion in southern Kyrgyzstan remained inconclusive.
Although Kyrgyzstan was affected by the global financial crisis, it was one of the few countries in the Commonwealth of Independent States to maintain a positive growth rate in 2009.
In September, however, a mission from the IMF warned that the country was likely to face greater difficulties in 2010 because the Kyrgyz government was countering the effects of the crisis by devoting essential funds to supporting the national budget.
Prime Minister Igor Chudinov noted in March that the country’s capital inflow was down, along with the import of goods and the level of demand.
With no mortgage lending system, however, the main impact of the crisis on the Kyrgyz economy was generated by the effects of the crisis on neighbouring countries, particularly Kyrgyzstan’s main trading partners, Kazakhstan and Russia.
This blueprint, commonly known as the Northern Plan, called for the development by 2020 of “backbone industries"" in northern Laos; these industries included mining, energy, agriculture, and tourism.
The plan was drafted by the Northern Laos Industrial Economic Development and Cooperation Planning Preparation Group in cooperation with authorities in China’s Yunnan province and received substantial financial support from the Chinese government.
It appeared likely that Chinese private and state companies would play a leading role in implementing many of the plan’s proposals.
China continued to invest heavily in several of Laos’s key economic sectors.
Chinese investments in the country were valued at about $3. billion by late 2008.
The fast-growing Chinese presence, however, raised concerns among local residents and international organizations.
In recent years the Lao government had granted a large number of land and mining concessions to Chinese companies.
Many observers worried about the social, economic, and environmental impacts of these companies' activities on Laos's rural areas and urged the government to explore the implications of its policies— first and foremost, from the point of view of the residents who were most directly affected by them.
The Sepon copper and gold mine located in southeastern Laos laid off hundreds of workers in December 2008; the mine’s heavily indebted owner, the Australian company OZ Minerals, Ltd., sold the mine in April 2009 to the Chinese state company China Minmetals Corp.
The economic slowdown also affected the tens of thousands of Lao migrant workers in Thailand; in January the Lao Ministry of Labour and Social Welfare estimated that approximately 14,000 of these workers were at risk of losing their jobs because of the economic downturn.
Laos hosted the 2009 Southeast Asian Games, which were held in Vientiane on December 9-18.
This event reflected the country's further integration into the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
Though the Ministry of Finance estimated that GDP could fall by about 18% for the year and unemployment climbed to nearly 20%, there were signs that the decline was leveling off during the second half of the year.
The principal source of political discord and popular discontent was balancing the budget so as to avoid bankruptcy and to meet the preconditions for borrowing $10 billion from the IMF, the EU, the World Bank, and other sources.
This required restructuring the economy, including raising taxes, curtailing spending, cutting welfare payments and public workers’ salaries, systematically repaying loans, and meeting the requirements for the adoption of the euro by 2014.
Unable to cope effectively with mounting public dissatisfaction and political intrigues, the coalition government of Prime Minister Ivars Godmanis fell on February 20.
Valdis Zatlers entrusted Valdis Dombrovskis of New Era, heretofore a vocal opposition party, to form the new government.
Needing parliamentary support for the unpopular decisions that would have to be made, Dombrovskis opted for a coalition cabinet comprising members of some of the parties represented in the previous two governments.
The result was an inharmonious government whose stability was tested not only by the opposition but On June 18 fighting breaks out between women at a union-organized rally in Riga, Latvia, where demonstrators protested against government budget cuts that included a 10% reduction in old-age pensions.
After the 2010 budget was adopted on December 1, the chances that the government would last until the parliamentary elections in autumn 2010 seemed to improve.
On June 6, voters elected representatives to the European Parliament and members of the newly created regional governments.
Latvia continued to fulfill its international obligations despite belt-tightening at home.
It completed its peacekeeping mission in the Balkans in October and beefed up its forces in Afghanistan.
In autumn Latvia successfully fielded Andris Piebalgs, a respected EU energy commissioner, for another term in the European Commission.
Amal movement leader Nabih Berri was again chosen as speaker of the parliament.
In late June, Saad al-Hariri (see BIOGRAPHIES), son of former prime minister Rafiq al-Hariri, was nominated by a majority of deputies-elect to form a new cabinet.
In mid-September, however, Hariri declared his inability to form a national unity government and stepped down as prime minister-designate, blaming Hezbollah and its Christian allies for this failure.
Hariri was able to form a longawaited national unity government on November 9.
In early August Druze leader Walid Jumblatt withdrew from the March 14 bloc and declared his independence from both major blocs.
He stated that he regretted his previous animosity toward the Syrian regime and his alliance with the United States Analysts reasoned that the American opening toward the Syrian regime and Britain’s dialogue with Hezbollah had reshuffled the local agenda and changed the orientation of some political actors.
Lebanon’s external debt and fiscal deficits remained high at above $50 billion, but the country reduced the debtto-GDP ratio from 180% to 154% by the end of 2009.
Industrial exports decreased by 25% in July because of the global financial crisis.
In spite of increased spending on electricity— which accounted for $1. billion annually and continued to drain the budget— revenues in the first half of 2009 reached $4.27 billion, up 23.4% from the same period in 2008.
The main sources of revenue were customs duties, income taxes, and telecom services.
Lebanon’s defense and security spending was expected to increase by 22% in 2009.
Defense spending, which accounted for 42% of total expenditures, was expected to drop from 15.7% of government spending in 2008 to 13.5% in 2009.
The banking sector continued to show significant resilience to the ongoing global financial crisis.
Primary liquidity stood at 51.5% at the end of 2008, against 28% in the Middle East and 30% globally.
An IMF report said that Lebanon averted a fullblown crisis because banks could resort to their large liquidity buffers to hold on to government debt.
The IMF warned, however, that “the wrong set of circumstances could easily translate into severe financial troubles” and urged the government to reduce the public debt and impose fiscal discipline.
The World Bank put the per capita income in 2008 at $10,880, which made Lebanon ranked 94th among world countries and 6th among Middle Eastern and North African countries.
At least three assailants were killed by the police, and a South African and a Mozambican were arrested.
Government officials accused the main opposition party, the All Basotho Convention, of having been behind the attack, but that remained unproved.
Though the Southern African Development Community was asked to review the system, its mediation did not solve the problem.
The South Africa-Lesotho Joint Bilateral Commission announced in April that the South African government had approved 7. billion rand (about $950 million) for the second phase of the massive Lesotho Highlands Water Project, but the economic downturn in South Africa put this at risk, while a South Africa decision on textiles threatened to undermine Lesotho’s clothingmanufacturing sector, which had employed almost 40,000 people in more than 20 factories.
In October Lesotho’s Child Grants Programme was launched to supplement the income ($48 quarterly) of households with orphaned children.
Liberia LIBERIA Area: 97,754 sq km Population : 3,955,000 Capital: Monrovia Head of state and government: President Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf In Liberia the year 2009 began inauspiciously with a massive plague of Achaea catocaloides rena caterpillars.
Described as the worst pest infestation in the country in 30 years, the plague caused widespread panic among villagers in northern and central Liberia, many of whom fled their homes.
Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf declared a national emergency and invited assistance from international agencies.
A team of agricultural experts concluded that while Dahoma trees had suffered severe damage, food crops such as com and millet had survived mostly intact.
The slow disbursement of relief funds to the affected areas raised questions of corruption in government and led to the resignation of the minister of agriculture in April.
Liberia’s economy grew; public services noticeably improved; and progress was made in the regulation of the rubber, timber, and diamond trades.
In its annual “Doing Business” survey, the World Bank named Liberia best global and regional reformer, citing it as a model for how other postconflict countries should use the private sector to rebuild markets.
Nevertheless, more than 10,000 UN peacekeepers remained in the country—a constant reminder of the fragile political situation.
In February, Johnson-Sirleaf apologized to the Tmth and Reconciliation Commission ""for being fooled” into providing financial support to now-imprisoned former president Charles Taylor at the beginning of the country’s 14-year civil war in 1989.
The TRC later recommended that she, along with influential former warlords and their supporters, be banned from holding elective office for 30 years.
Immediate local and international response, however, demonstrated widespread support for the president.
During the August visit of United States Secretary of State Hillary Clinton to Monrovia— the second to last stop on her sevencountry African tour—she emphasized her unstinted support for Johnson-Sirleaf and praised her achievements in economic reconstruction.
Secretary of the General People's Committee Al-Baghdadi 'AM al-Mahmudi Only a ruler such as Libyan Col.
The nationally celebrated anniversary was the subject of international media scrutiny, as it was also an occasion to mark the abortion of the reform narrative previously advocated by Qaddafi and his son Sayf alIslam.
Sayf al-Islam—viewed by the West as a possible heir-in-waiting or a catalyst for change—had previously campaigned for a Libyan constitution, which he said would pave the way for the country’s first general elections before September 2009.
These promises soon faded following his 2008 decision to withdraw from politics.
While Qaddafi remained in power, he appeared to have abandoned his anticorruption, reform-driven discourse, including his promise to share the country’s oil revenues with the Libyan population.
Al-Libiya, affiliated with Sayf al-Islam, was nationalized after one of its shows criticized Egypt; Sayf al-Islam later moved the channel to London.
Scottish officials said that Megrahi’s release was arranged on compassionate grounds, as he suffered from terminal cancer.
Sayf al-Islam, however, who appeared to be instrumental in Megrahi’s release, told the Libyan media that Liberia in early 2009 faced a massive infestation of Achaea catocaloides caterpillars, shown here devouring leaves in Shankpalai in January.
Although the damage to food crops proved to be less severe than initially feared, the government declared a state of emergency to fight the devastating outbreak.
Although British officials denied this, the release and possible “deal” triggered speculations regarding the U.K.’s oil and gas interests in Libya.
In 2009 Libya produced 1. million bbl of oil daily, compared with 1. million bbl in 2003, the year before the United States lifted its sanctions on Libya.
During his speech, which greatly exceeded the 15 minutes allotted to him, Qaddafi tore a copy of the UN charter, criticized the UN Security Council's veto-power system, and called for a one-state solution for Israelis and Palestinians.
The VU’s Klaus Tschiitscher was sworn in as prime minister on March 25.
Prince Alois—who in 2004 had assumed the day-to-day governing duties of his father, Prince Hans Adam II, the head of state—set a tone of moderation in offering to cooperate with other countries to combat tax evasion and fraud.
He agreed to follow the rules of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development and suggested a partial amnesty in which people holding funds in Liechtenstein’s banks could repatriate the money to their home countries and face limited penalties.
He signed separate agreements easing bank secrecy with Germany in July and with Britain in August.
In contrast, Hans Adam set off a furor on August 15, Liechtenstein’s National Day, when he claimed that during World War II bank secrecy laws in Liechtenstein and Switzerland had saved the lives of German Jews who bought their safety with money they had deposited in the countries’ banks.
Stephan Kramer, secreIn 2009 Lithuania celebrated the 1,000th year of its first mention in historical records, the annals of a Benedictine abbey at Quedlinburg, Ger.
Festivities marking the event were held on July 6, the anniversary of the 13th-century coronation of King Mindaugas, in Vilnius’s newly rebuilt Palace of the Grand Dukes.
Among the dignitaries in attendance were the papal legate Angelo Cardinal Sodano, Denmark’s Queen Margrethe, Norway’s King Harald, Sweden’s King Carl Gustaf, the presidents of Poland, Ukraine, Georgia, Latvia, Finland, and Iceland, and the prime minister of Estonia.
On May 17 the country elected its first woman president; running as an independent, Daiia Grybauskaite (see BIOGRAPHIES), former member of the European Commission, won 69.1% of the vote in an election with a 51.8% turnout.
In the European Parliament election held on June 7, the Homeland Union (Conservatives of Lithuania) won four seats (with 26.9% of the vote), including the reelection of Vytautas Landsbergis, former president of Lithuania.
Lithuania’s economy was severely affected by the global banking crisis, particularly by the significant reduction in local businesses’ access to credit.
The output of the construction industry declined by about 48% in the second quarter compared with the corresponding period of 2008.
The economy registered overall growth in the third quarter, however, with a gain of 13% over the second quarter.
This demonstrated growing confidence that the economic crisis might soon be over in Lithuania.
The results of the elections ensured that Juncker would retain his position as head of government for another five years.
This followed news that former British prime minister Tony Blair had decided to make a bid for the job.
Juncker's announcement elicited criticism from some observers—particularly in Britain—who argued that the leader of such a tiny country as Luxembourg would not wield enough influence to serve effectively as EU president.
Belgian Prime Minister Herman Van Rompuy was ultimately selected for the post in November.
Luxembourg’s GDP per capita was the third highest in the world, trailing only that of Qatar and Liechtenstein.
In the municipal elections VMRODPMNE won 55 of the 85 mayoral positions, including that of the capital, Skopje.
The Democratic Union for Integration , an ethnic-Albanian party, won 14 mayoral races, and the SDSM won 9.
On July 10 Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski reshuffled his government following the resignations of Deputy Prime Minister for European Integration Ivica Bocevski, Education Minister Pero Stojanovski, and Agriculture Minister Aleksandar Spasenovski and the dismissal of Finance Minister Trajko Slaveski.
Bocevski was succeeded by Vasko Naumovski; Nikola Todorov became education minister; Ljupco Dimovski took over as agriculture minister; and Deputy Prime Minister Zoran Stavrevski also became finance minister.
The UN-mediated talks between Macedonia and Greece over the former country’s name continued in 2009.
Several proposals by UN mediator Matthew Nimetz failed to secure the approval of both sides.
The impact of the name dispute on Macedonia’s EuroAtlantic integration led to dissatisfaction among ethnic-Albanian politicians.
Senior DUI/BDI members threatened that the party might leave the government if the dispute was not settled.
On November 30 the EU announced that, beginning on December 19, citizens of three Balkan countries—Macedonia, Serbia, and Montenegro—would be allowed to travel without a visa within the EU’s Schengen zone.
Interethnic relations were strained following the publication in September of the Macedonian Encyclopedia by the Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts ; ethnic Albanians considered its portrayal of their community to be provocative and insulting.
Gruevski called for a dialogue about the controversial text, while the MANU withdrew the publication in order to amend it.
Owing to the global economic crisis, Macedonia’s GDP was expected to shrink by up to 1% in 2009.
Significant drops were probable in industrial output and foreign trade.
He had been convicted for having misappropriated nearly $3 million of a Taiwanese grant in 1999.
On September 5 a tour boat sank on Lake Ohrid, resulting in the deaths of 22 people, including 15 Bulgarian tourists.
Transport and Communications Minister Mile Janakievski's resignation later that day on “moral grounds"" was rejected by Gruevski on September 9.
Marc Ravalomanana, who was accused of having ruled in an authoritarian way and having misspent public money.
The protests culminated in what was widely regarded as a coup in March, when soldiers pledged their support to Andry Rajoelina, a former mayor of Antananarivo who had led the opposition to Ravalomanana.
Ravalomanana resigned and handed power to the military; he then fled to the African mainland.
The military transferred power in a matter of hours to Rajoelina, who was quickly sworn in as president.
The international community refused to accept the new government because it had come to power illegitimately, and Madagascar was suspended from both the African Union and the Southern African Development Community.
In August international mediators led by former Mozambican president Joaquim Chissano met with Rajoelina and Ravalomanana and their predecessors, Didier Ratsiraka and Albert Zafy, in Maputo, Mozam.
An agreement was reached on a power-sharing government for a transitional period of 15 months, during which legislative and presidential elections would be held.
Ravalomanana, who had been convicted of abuse of power in a judgment handed down in Madagascar in June, would be given amnesty from prosecution.
The four met again to allocate positions in the new government but were unable to agree.
Rajoelina then unilaterally appointed what he claimed was a national unity government, with himself remaining president, but his actions were widely criticized.
Additional talks were held, and on October 6 it was announced that an agreement had been reached on positions in the new government.
Although an agreement was signed on November 7—under which Rajoelina was to remain as president but rule with two co-presidents—Rajoelina did not participate in the final round of powersharing talks held in early December, and he formally abandoned the powersharing deal altogether on December 20.
Bingu wa Mutharika was reelected to a second five-year term in office, winning nearly 66% of the vote.
The political participation of women was by far the most significant ever.
Mutharika's running mate, former foreign affairs minister Joyce Banda, became the first woman in Malawi to hold the office of vice president.
The Ministry of Women and Child Development ran the 50/50 Campaign with the goal of attaining 50% female representation in the parliament.
Under Mutharika, Malawi had become one of the world’s fastest-growing economies.
Helping to boost the economy was the government’s Agricultural Police loyal to Madagascan Pres.
A month later the military ousted Ravalomanana and installed Andry Rajoelina as president.
Malaysia Amos Gumulira—AFP/Getty Images Joyce Banda, the running mate of Malawian Pres.
Mutharika was reelected, and on May 22 Banda was sworn in as vice president, the first woman to hold that office.
Input Subsidy Program, which benefited two million small-scale producers of corn , tobacco, coffee, and tea.
In June the government announced a record corn harvest that was expected to more than meet internal consumption needs.
Abdullah selected Najib, who had served as deputy prime minister from 2004, to succeed him after unprecedented electoral losses in 2008 led to severe pressure within his own party, the dominant United Malays National Organization , for Abdullah to resign.
The new prime minister quickly addressed several issues rending Malaysia’s ethnically and religiously diverse population.
One of his first actions was to free 13 prisoners held under the country’s controversial Internal Security Act, including two ethnic Indians who had led mass protests against the government in 2007.
In contrast to Abdullah, who disallowed public discussion of ""sensitive” social and religious matters, Najib emphasized the necessity of such discussion to Malaysia’s future peace and prosperity.
That need was highlighted in August when Muslims protesting the construction of a Hindu temple in Shah Alam, Selangor state, paraded a severed cow’s head through the city, offending many Hindus, to whom cows are sacred.
In another surprising move, Najib undertook to reform the New Economic Policy , the pro-Malay affirmative action program introduced by former prime minister Abdul Razak, Najib’s father, in 1971.
The NEP had long been criticized as discriminatory and obstructive to foreign investment, but UMNO-led governments had eschewed reform of the policy.
In June Najib announced that public companies were no longer required to set aside a third of their equity for indigenous partners.
In addition, foreign firms were permitted to hold major stakes in securities and fund management companies.
In parliamentary and state by-elections held during the year, the governing coalition mostly held its ground at the polls, though not without resorting to such familiar tactics as political patronage and the muzzling of opposition newspapers.
Meanwhile, opposition leader Anwar Ibrahim awaited trial on a sodomy charge that observers suggested may have been trumped up as a means of slowing the opposition’s advance.
GDP shrank at a rate of 5% between January and June— a far slide from the 6.7% growth during the same period in 2008.
In May the value of Malaysian exports posted a year-on-year decline of almost 30%; the drop was reflected in higher-than-average unemployment in manufacturing.
Of the roughly two million foreign workers in Malaysia, the government planned to return 400,000 of them to their home countries by 2010.
Malaysia's central bank predicted that the economy would strengthen in the second half of the year, buoyed by more stable global conditions and two economic stimulus packages amounting to more than $18 billion.
Muslims in Shah Alam, Malay., protest against the construction of a Hindu temple in a Muslim neighbourhood by marching through the streets on August 28 carrying the severed head of a cow, which is held sacred in Hinduism.
In the absence of a majority for his MDP, President Nasheed faced parliamentary hurdles for implementing his policies and programs.
The first three-month-long session of the Majlis ended in September without a single bill’s being passed.
Reiterating his commitment to uphold the people’s right to dissent, Nasheed said that his government would not defend human rights abuses.
Privatization and decentralization dominated the government’s agenda, and bills aimed at these objectives were introduced in the Majlis.
As part of administrative restructuring, the government proposed merging 20 atoll units into seven provinces, a measure that some parties opposed.
The privatization program sought to bring about $500 million in foreign investment and technology for developing utility services and other infrastructure.
The government, which inherited a budget deficit of about $170 million, was unable to fund such projects, and negative growth was recorded for two consecutive quarters.
The low-lying island country held the meeting underwater to draw attention to the risks of global warming.
Mohammed Seeneen/AP of political appointees and reducing their overseas and local travels.
Nasheed himself canceled many of his overseas trips, including one to a conference in Copenhagen on climate change.
President Nasheed used international forums to highlight the grave threat facing Maldives as a result of sea level rise.
He considered climate change to be a human rights issue, because peoples’ right to life was threatened.
In March Maldives declared its intention to become the first carbon-neutral country in the world, a goal it planned to achieve within a decade.
On October 17, in an effort to draw the attention of the world to the need to reduce global warming, Nasheed and his cabinet members donned wet suits and scuba gear and held a meeting underwater.
On January 21, however, the army claimed that it had destroyed the main base of a dissident Tuareg group led by Ibrahim Ag Bahanga in Tinsalak, near the Niger frontier.
Spokesmen for the rebel group challenged the report, stating that they had left the base six months earlier.
There was also reason to believe that many of Bahanga’s men had, in fact, already joined other Tuareg bands who returned to the negotiating table on February 17.
Amadou Toumani Toure called for regional cooperation in the fight against insurgents allied with al-Qaeda.
In early May Algeria sent the first of several shipments of military equipment to be used in joint operations against the insurgents.
On May 31 a Malian al-Qaeda group executed British hostage Edwin Dyer, who had been kidnapped in Niger four months earlier.
The Malian army captured an al-Qaeda base on June 16 in an attack that killed more than a dozen militants and five soldiers.
On July 20 the main Tuareg former rebel group, Alliance for Democracy and Change, announced that it would join with Mali’s army to fight al-Qaeda.
On August 27 President Toure refused to sign the country's new family law bill after strong opposition to some of its provisions dealing with women’s rights angered conservative Islamic leaders.
The City Gate project was entrusted to the world-renowned Italian architect Renzo Piano.
His designs, which included a new parliament building, were unveiled on June 27.
On April 1 the parliament unanimously elected George Abela, a lawyer, as the eighth president of Malta.
Elections were held on June 7 for representation in the European Parliament.
The Italian and Maltese governments engaged in a ""war of words” in the summer after the few surviving migrants from a dinghy that had run out of fuel were rescued in Italian waters.
The Italians insisted that Malta, which had earlier intercepted the dinghy, should give up some of its search and rescue region.
In other news, in January Charles Camilleri, the internationally renowned Maltese composer, died at age 77.
The fund, established by the United States Congress in 1983 as part of the Compact of Free Association, underestimated the magnitude of claims that would be made.
A public advocate who represented claimants noted that $23 million in personal injury awards and $2. billion in landdamage and nuclear-cleanup awards remained unpaid.
Meanwhile, the Compact trust fund, which provided 60% of the country’s budget, lost 25% in the global financial crisis.
Another area of tension between the United States and Marshall Islands governments was the amount of compensation provided to the Marshall Islands and the landowners at the missile-testing site at Kwajalein atoll.
Though the United States agreed to provide to the Marshalls, in return for the use of land, some $70 million annually until 2023 and free access to the United States for Marshallese nationals, the landowners—who had been receiving inflation-adjusted rental fees of $15 million annually—were demanding a rise to $19 million when the current agreement ended in 2016.
After having survived a no-confidence vote in October 2008 and another in April 2009, Pres.
Tomeing, who was elected president in January 2008, was criticized for his handling of the dispute with the United States Another traditional chief, Nitijela Speaker Jurelang Zedkaia, was named to succeed him on November 2.
Moulaye Ould Mohamed Laghdaf In 2009 the African Union refused to lift sanctions imposed on the leaders of the August 2008 coup that overthrew Sidi Mohamed Ould Cheikh Abdallahi, Mauritania’s first democratically elected president, until late June, when marked progress had been made toward the establishment of a civilian government.
On June 4, 2009, opposition leaders signed an agreement with the government that called for an interim unity government until the July 18 presidential elections.
Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz was declared the winner with an absolute majority of 52%, with 16% for his closest rival, Messaoud Ould Boulkheir.
Sid’Ahmed Ould Deye, chairman of the Electoral Commission, resigned on July 23 owing to serious doubts about the validity of the vote.
In February the government pledged to speed up the process of providing new identity cards for the thousands of Mauritanian refugees repatriated from Senegal.
Ould Abdel Aziz promised reparations to families of victims killed in the violence against black Mauritanians 20 years prior.
Relations had cooled since Israel’s January offensive in the Gaza Strip.
Mauritania was one of only three Arab League states to have formal diplomatic relations with Israel.
Mexico MAURITIUS Area: 2,040 sq km Population : 1,276,000 Capital: Port Louis Chief of state: President Sir Anerood Jugnauth Head of government: Prime Minister Navin Ramgoolam In 2009 Mauritius began enforcing the Equal Opportunities Act , which was passed by the legislature in late 2008 and guaranteed universal protection under the law against all forms of discrimination based on gender, ethnicity, religion, sexual orientation, age, status and physical abilities.
The EOA had been created in an effort to redress ongoing social inequalities faced by many ethnic and religious minorities, including Creoles, Tamils, and Muslims, in the employment sector and other areas of the Mauritian private sector.
A plan to preserve about 650,000 sq km of marine habitat surrounding the Chagos Archipelago was revealed in February.
The plan included the habitat of the archipelago's largest island, Diego Garcia, a British protectorate from which some 2,000 residents had been displaced 40 years earlier to clear the island for use as a military base by the United States.
In 2008 British lawmakers argued that islanders and their descendents should be allowed to return, and the reef conservation plan included the repatriation of Chagossians to serve as the nature reserve’s wardens.
Amid the ongoing economic downturn and increased job losses in the textiles and manufacturing sectors, Mauritius deepened ties with China.
In February the two countries cemented development deals amounting to more than $270 million.
Although Mexico had in recent years somewhat reduced its heavy trade dependence on the U.S., the United States market was still the destination for approximately four-fifths of all Mexican exports.
As a consequence, the country’s manufacturing sector was badly affected by the sharp decline in United States import demand during the year.
The automobile and auto parts sector, which constituted Mexico’s most important source of manufactured exports, especially suffered because of the broader crisis in the North American automotive industry.
Overall, Mexican exports declined by approximately onethird between 2008 and 2009.
The Mexican economy also suffered from a substantial falloff in foreign direct investment flows and from lower prices for petroleum and other (mainly mining) commodity exports.
Mexican officials successfully hedged the price of oil and gas exports for the 2008-09 fiscal year at a premium over prevailing international petroleum prices, but lower international prices (though partially offset by a significant devaluation of the peso) had a negative fiscal impact on all levels of government.
Mexican emigration to the United States was slowed by tougher United States immigration controls and by reduced demand for labour in sectors that typically employed large numbers of immigrant workers, such as construction.
As a result, the flow of migrant remittances to Mexico (which, after petroleum, were the country’s largest source of legal export earnings) fell by more than 10% between 2008 and 2009.
The number of households reporting the receipt of remittances declined by approximately one-fifth between 2005 (when 1.41 million households reported receiving remittances) and 2009.
Mexico’s economic woes were exacerbated during the year by the outbreak of H1N1 flu in early April.
The world’s first confirmed case of the H1N1 virus was reported in the state of Veracruz.
In June the World Health Organization declared the H1N1 flu a global pandemic, and by late December it had claimed the lives of at least 12,000 people worldwide.
The Mexican government responded aggressively to the threat by closing schools and universities, sports arenas, cinemas, museums, and churches nationwide, as well as all restaurants and other public venues in Mexico City.
Although some experts judged that public health agencies had been slow in genomically identifying the new virus, the government generally received positive evaluations for its efforts to contain the crisis.
NevertheA woman in Mexico City protests the government’s decision to disband one of Mexico’s state-run power companies, Luz y Fuerza del Centro, in October.
Micronesia, Federated States of less, disrupted production and a vertiginous drop in tourist revenues (the country's third largest source of foreign exchange) further damaged an economy already deep in recession.
For all these reasons, Mexico’s GDP shrank by 5.3% between October 2008 and October 2009, the worst performance in the Americas.
The decline in capital inflows sharply undercut the value of the peso, which fell by 25% between 2008 and April 2009.
In early 2009 the country’s central bank, Banco de Mexico, was forced to use some $15 billion in reserves to cushion the peso’s drop.
Government sources announced that the unemployment rate topped 6% and the underemployment rate jumped to 13%—the highest levels since Mexico’s severe 1994-95 financial crisis.
Felipe Calderon took several steps to address the deteriorating economic conditions.
Second, it bolstered its existing international reserves by negotiating a $30 billion currency swap with the United States Federal Reserve and a flexible credit line of $47 billion with the International Monetary Fund.
Seguro Popular, a governmentsubsidized voluntary health insurance program designed in part to provide coverage for Mexico’s large number of informal-sector workers, and Oportunidades, a conditional cash-transfer program benefiting poor families.
Finally, the Calderon administration proposed making substantial cuts in public-sector employment and emergency tax increases in order to protect social spending.
Their discontent reflected both the country’s serious economic difficulties and continued high levels of drug-related violence, which claimed 3,247 victims between January and June.
Although the Calderon administration had since 2006 committed enormous financial and human resources (including approximately 45,000 army troops) to the battle against drugsmuggling cartels, the Mexican public had grown increasingly weary of the protracted struggle and the human rights violations that sometimes accompanied army actions.
The administration retained broad support for its efforts, but only about half of respondents to public opinion surveys believed that the government would win the fight.
Of Mexico’s three largest political parties, the centre-right PAN suffered the greatest reverse in the midterm elections.
The PRI (allied with the PVEM) thus gained a majority in the Chamber of Deputies and greatly enhanced its political momentum.
Emanuel Mori and the FSM Congress over the fiscal year 2010 budget, which commenced on Oct., 2009.
Mori argued that Congress had the right to disburse only local funds, whereas Speaker Isaac V Figir argued that to deny Congress the right to distribute all state funds (including those received under the United States Compact of Free Association) was “undemocratic” and tantamount to selling sovereignty for money.
Mori’s attempt to limit congressional oversight might have arisen from ineffective oversight of past external funding.
The FSM applied to the UN for recognition of its claim to an extended continental shelf boundary.
The FSM sought rights to this additional territory in the hope that it might contain valuable submarine mineral resources.
Faced with intensified environmental degradation from climate change, the FSM took an active role in environmental politics.
As lead entity in the Alliance of Small Island States, it was pushing for a 45% reduction in greenhouse-gas emissions by 2020 and, with Mauritius, filed an application for an amendment to the Montreal Protocol to limit the use of hydrofluorocarbons.
Riots occurred in the wake of the elections as protesters upset over votefraud allegations and police harassment of the opposition stormed the parliament building and presidential palace, causing major damage.
Voronin eventually dissolved the legislature and called for repeat elections to be held on July 29.
On September 25 the AIE’s nominee for prime minister, Vlad Filat, was approved by Parliament and sworn into office.
Because the AIE had not won 61 seats, however, it was prevented from installing as president its preferred choice for the post, Lupu.
After a second parliamentary vote on December 7 was boycotted by the PCRM, parliamentary speaker Mihai Ghimpu remained as acting president until the deadlock could be resolved.
She appeared with him at charity galas, on vacation in Saint-Tropez, and at official functions.
Despite reports in 2008 in the U.K.’s Daily Mail of plans for a royal wedding, by the end of 2009 no arrangements had been announced.
The prince actively pursued his mission as an advocate for the environment.
In January he participated in a three-week expedition to visit several scientific bases in Antarctica.
In September he gave a speech at the UN calling for international action to protect the Arctic from climate change, and Chicago’s Field Museum of natural history announced that it had received a grant of nearly $600,000 from the Prince Albert II of Monaco Foundation to preserve biodiversity and avoid deforestation in Amazonian Peru.
Later that month he was honoured by the Scripps Institution of Oceanography, La Jolla, Calif., where he was awarded the Roger Revelle Prize.
Closer to home, in late 2008 he called off plans to expand the territory of Monaco by reclaiming more land from the sea.
Enkhbayar’s defeat was an upset for the MPRP and its chairman, Prime Minister Sanjaagiin Bayar, who had served as Enkhbayar’s campaign manager.
Meanwhile, in January the General Election Commission had released the results from the June 2008 election for three of the last four seats in the national assembly, the Mongolian Great Khural.
The winner of the remaining seat, a DP candidate who was imprisoned in January on fraud charges and later acquitted on appeal, took the oath in October.
In January President Enkhbayar met Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin in Davos, Switz., and in March Prime Minister Bayar met Putin in Moscow.
After five years of contention, in July the Great Khural authorized the government to conclude an agreement with the Ivanhoe Mines and Rio Tinto companies to exploit the rich gold and copper deposits at Oyuutolgoi.
Montenegro windfall taxes and what Mongolia’s stake in the mine should be, since the country was unable to invest in the project without borrowing funds.
Prime Minister Bayar discussed industrial investment schemes, including nuclear power projects, on visits in March to France, Belgium, and Germany and in April to Inner Mongolia, China.
In July UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon visited Mongolia, and Bayar went to Japan to seek aid for Mongolia during the economic downturn.
In September President Elbegdorj visited India and the United States In the first half of 2009, there was a budget deficit of about $183 million, largely due to a 28.8% fall in tax revenue.
The balance of trade in the first six months of the year was down nearly 40% compared with the same period in 2008, the value of mineral exports having suffered from the downturn in world prices.
External Relations Minister Siikhbaataryn Batbold was named the new prime minister, and Gombojavyn Zandanshatar was appointed to succeed him as external relations minister.
Savo Prelevic—AFP/Getty Images A supporter of Milo Djukanovic holds up a portrait of the Montenegrin prime minister during an election rally in Podgorica on March 27.
In December 2008 Montenegro had officially submitted its application for membership in the EU and was expecting admission in 2012.
Several polls indicated that a majority of Montenegrins backed integration.
The IMF and the World Bank predicted that the country’s GDP would contract by 2.7% in 2009 and that the economy would remain in recession through 2010.
In June more than 11,000 businesses reported debts totaling a recordbreaking $188 million.
The country's largest employer, the aluminum plant Kombinat Aluminijuma Podgorica , owed more than $280 million to foreign and local banks and about $50 million to the government and state companies.
KAP was the republic’s largest exporter, accounting for 40% of industrial production.
Service-sector employment continued to increase; in 2009 more than 70% of the labour force worked in tourism, construction, or trade.
A large portion of the nearly $560 million in foreign investment made during the first half of the year was in services.
The government passed legislation making the country more attractive to private investors and developers, and the World Travel and Tourism Council ranked Montenegro as a top tourism destination.
Nonetheless, with unemployment at 10.5% and migrants returning from Europe, popular discontent led public-sector unions to organize strikes in January and February in favour of a 20% wage increase.
In July pilots in Royal Air Maroc, the national airline, went on strike over working conditions.
The government continued to encroach upon individual freedoms, with the sentences on those arrested for the 2003 bombings in Casablanca being increased on appeal.
In August, copies of the political weeklies TelQuel and Nichane were seized and sales of the French newspaper Le Monde were banned after they reported the results of a public opinion poll on the monarchy, despite its favourable conclusions.
Hundreds of Shi'ites were arrested in April, and the Iraqi School in Rabat, which was suspected of encouraging Shi'ism, was closed after Morocco broke off diplomatic relations with Iran in February over Tehran’s threats to Bahrain.
The government also attacked those who did not comply with standards of public morality, apparently arresting as many as 20 homosexuals.
In September a 24-member network that recruited militants to fight United States forces in Iraq and Afghanistan was arrested.
In June the UN Security Council approved informal talks between Morocco and the Polisario Front, after four previous rounds of talks in 2007 and 2008 at Manhasset, N.Y., had been unsuccessful.
Two months later low levels of rainfall raised fears that there would be a drought in the provinces of Tete, Gaza, and Sofala, but El Nino rains later alleviated the situation.
Government agencies moved more quickly to implement relief measures and restore normalcy than they had during the flood and cyclone seasons in the previous two years.
Despite the natural disasters and epidemic, the 2009 quality-of-life index published by the United Nations Development Programme indicated that Mozambique had made the most progress among less-developed countries, having scored nearly 50% higher than in 1990.
Attendance in primary schools had risen more than 33% from 2000 to 2006, although gender disparities continued, especially in northern and central rural areas.
UNICEF reported a significant reduction in mortality rates among children under the age of five.
The government received three large-scale loans from the IMF, the World Bank, and the European Union, Denmark, and The Netherlands for railway, port, and communications projects.
On the negative side, Transparency International and the Ibrahim Index of African Governance agreed that government corruption was more pervasive than it had been during the previous five years.
Meanwhile, a note of serendipity was struck when a team of environmental scientists and bird experts reported the results of its expedition to a hithertounmapped forest area on the peak of Mt.
The team discovered three new species of butterfly, one new species of snake, and seven species of globally threatened birds.
Campaigning for the October 28 presidential and parliamentary election began in mid-September.
Bitter rivalry between Renamo and MDM leaders weakened their chances for electoral success.
With 75% of the votes, Guebuza won by a landslide, but the low turnout of only 44.6% of the registered voters indicated a lack of popular enthusiasm for the ruling party.
Guebuza was reelected to a second term, and it was widely believed that his decisive victory might be used as a mandate to amend the constitution to allow him to run for a third term.
Than Shwe, assisted by Prime Minister Thein Sein The year 2009 was one of stasis for military-ruled Myanmar.
Than Shwe announced no legislative preparations ahead of scheduled elections in 2010, and more than 2,100 political dissidents remained in prison.
After a threemonth trial marred by flagrant breaches of judicial process, Suu Kyi was found guilty and sentenced to three years’ hard labour in prison; Than Shwe immediately commuted the sentence to 18 months of additional home detention.
In July UN Secretary-General Ban KiMoon visited Myanmar but was refused permission to meet with Suu Kyi or other imprisoned dissidents.
Namibia Suu Kyi; he also secured the release of Yettaw, who had been sentenced to seven years’ hard labour.
During the year the United States government concluded a policy review of Myanmar, began high-level engagement talks, and discussed the loosening of sanctions against the country.
Fears of Myanmar’s close ties with North Korea—and especially concerns about possible nuclear proliferation—were partly behind the thaw in United States policy.
In August the military attacked the ethnic Kokang enclave in northern Myanmar, causing 30,000 civilians to flee into China, which lodged a formal protest.
Tensions with more than a dozen other armed groups increased as the SPDC called on the groups to disarm ahead of the elections.
Myanmar’s economy continued to suffer as urgently needed reforms were postponed.
Foreign exchange reserves grew to $3. million, largely owing to continued strong natural gas sales to Thailand.
Inflation eased from 27% to 14%, although this was dependent on continued foreign supplies of food aid.
Food security worsened, especially in the Irrawaddy Delta and western and northern Myanmar, leading to fears of major food shortages.
China announced plans to construct two energy pipelines to transport natural gas and crude oil from western Myanmar to China’s Yunnan province; the pipelines were to be completed by 2014.
SWAPO remained the dominant party, while the RDP appeared to have made little impact on voters.
Hifikepunye Pohamba was confirmed as SWAPO's candidate for the presidential election, he found himself challenged by members of his own party, some of whom were aligned with former president Sam Nujoma, who remained influential behind the scenes.
The main opposition party, Congress of Democrats, remained divided into rival factions.
The breakdown was similar in the vote for the National Assembly, with SWAPO taking 75.3% and 54 of the 72 seats, ahead of the RDP with 11.3% and 8 seats.
In June a SWAPO-backed communications bill proposed in the parliament was fought by the opposition, which claimed that the government was introducing “Zimbabwe-type"" powers of intercepting electronic communications, but since SWAPO held a two-thirds majority, the bill was later approved.
Robert Mugabe and refrained from criticizing continued human rights abuses in that country.
There were many allegations of corruption and fraud leveled at Namibian government officials throughout the year, the most notable of which involved a contract for Chinese-made scanning equipment intended for the Ministry of Finance.
Marcus Stephen declared Sept., 2009, a national holiday in Nauru to mark the commencement of a cellular phone service in the world’s smallest independent republic.
Digicel became the island’s first provider of GSM (global system for mobile) telecommunications.
The event was very significant for the remote community, and Stephen spoke for many residents when he said that it was a “truly exciting time” to have a mobile phone and Internet service in Nauru.
The 12 member countries that supported the USP sent representatives to the event, which took place during the graduation ceremony at the university’s main campus in Suva, Fiji.
On the world stage, in December Nauru established formal relations with Abkhazia and South Ossetia, reportedly in exchange for some $50 million in aid from Moscow.
Nauru joined Russia, Venezuela, and Nicaragua as the only governments to officially recognize the two breakaway Georgian republics.
Ram Baran Yadav reinstated the chief of Nepal's army; Prime Minister Pushpa Kamal Dahal— the former Maoist insurgency leader known as Prachanda—had fired the army chief for having refused, in defiance of the 2006 peace agreement, to integrate former Maoist fighters into the armed forces.
Prachanda resigned, accusing the president of having flouted the constitution.
In July the tenure of the UN Mission in Nepal was extended to Jan., 2010.
The UN achieved a major breakthrough in July when Nepal began discharging the 4,008 former Maoist child soldiers and noncombatants who had been detained in military camps.
Despite relative peace in most of the hill area, violence was increasing, along with the number of armed groups, in parts of the eastern hill area and in the southern plains.
Although the government announced a special security plan in July, the situation had not improved by year’s end.
Along with political disasters, natural disasters also caused heavy damages in Nepal.
The country experienced a rise in unemployment and a rapid increase in the number of bankruptcies.
As the government faced substantial financial shortfalls, the national debt rose significantly; while the country had enjoyed a budget surplus of 1% of GDP in 2008, a deficit of more than 4% was anticipated for 2009.
Having acted in the fall of 2008 to protect individuals’ savings accounts and to secure commercial interests, the government continued its policy of economic intervention.
Aiming to stimulate economic growth, it invested in education, the building of new homes, and the upkeep of schools and infrastructure; it also supported new energy-saving measures.
In addition, the government instituted policies intended to make part-time work more widely available and to reduce unemployment among younger workers.
Violence marred the celebration on April 30 of the national holiday known as Queen’s Day.
While the royal family was being driven along a parade route in the town of Apeldoorn, an individual in a small automobile drove toward the royal vehicle at high speed.
The automobile collided with traffic barriers and members of the public, causing the vehicle to veer off course and ultimately to crash into a monument.
Eight people, including the assailant, were killed, and nine were seriously injured.
In the area of foreign relations, the Dutch government found itself in the midst of controversy over treaties it had made with Belgium in 2005.
One of the treaties’ provisions concerned the Western Schelde estuary, which lies within The Netherlands but gives the Belgian city of Antwerp access to the North Sea.
The 2005 agreement stipulated that the Dutch would deepen the estuary in order to accommodate the largest oceangoing vessels 24 hours a day.
While the Belgian government had agreed to a two-year delay, patience ran thin when the Dutch Council of State blocked the start of the work, citing possible environmental consequences.
The initial agreement had proposed to mitigate the negative environmental effects of dredging by returning polders along the estuary to their natural flooded state; this strategy, however, was opposed by many local residents.
Unemployment reached 6% in June and was projected to peak at 7-8% in 2010.
To preserve and create jobs, the government offered subsidies to businesses that adopted an average workweek of four and a half days, funded infrastructure projects, and initiated the construction of a bikeway network intended eventually to span the country.
Planned borrowing of about U.S.$25 billion from 2009 to 2013 would effectively double government debt.
Proposed tax cuts were deferred, and government contributions to a superannuation scheme initiated by the previous.
Sir Anand Satyanand and the members of Parliament voluntarily declined pay raises.
In April former prime minister Helen Clark resigned from Parliament, after having served as a member for 27 years, to lead the United Nations Development Programme.
Nicaragu: imprisonment on bribery and corruption charges arising from his exploitation of Thai workers whom he had assisted on immigration matters.
A high-profile homicide retrial resulted in the acquittal of David Bain for the 1994 murders in Dunedin of his father, mother, sisters, and brother—murders for which he had been previously convicted.
Bain had served 12 years in prison before the London-based Privy Council overturned his conviction in 2007.
New Zealand’s military commitment in Afghanistan was increased in 2009.
In the highest categories of the New Zealand Order of Merit, titular honours, which had been abolished in 2000, were reinstated.
In response to a 2007 law on child discipline, a nonbinding citizen-initiated referendum was held on whether parents should be legally allowed to slap their children; 87.6% voted against considering a ""smack” a criminal offense.
Parliament approved a controversial measure reforming Auckland’s government by creating a “super city” with a single mayor and council, effective in 2010.
The use of handheld cell phones in motor vehicles was prohibited, and the city of Wanganui banned the wearing of gang insignia in public.
Maori singer Sir Howard Morrison (see Obituaries) died on September 24 at age 74.
Although he had been a solo performer in later years, he had initially sung with a quartet, which in 1961 toured Australia as a support act for the Everly Brothers, Shelley Berman, and the Kingston Trio.
In October the Supreme Court ruled as unconstitutional the existing constitutional ban on consecutive presidential reelection, opening the way for Pres.
In the face of the global economic crisis, the government’s decision to offset social expenditures with cuts to capital expenditures helped keep Nicaragua’s budget within IMF parameters.
Allegations of electoral fraud and corruption, however, resulted in reduced foreign assistance from the United States and Europe.
Although polling showed strong public discontent with the leaders of every major political party, support for the Sandinistas’ health, education, food, and housing initiatives had grown, particularly in the country's rural areas.
Lower inflation allowed for a loosening of monetary policy and increased access to credit.
In July the International Court of Justice at The Hague ruled in favour of Nicaraguan sovereignty over the disputed San Juan River border with Costa Rica, though the court permitted Costa Rica continued free commercial navigation on the river.
Nicaraguans living along the Caribbean coast demonstrated growing disaffection toward politics with an unusually high rate of voter abstention in the regional elections held in January.
In April the Miskito Council of Elders in the North Atlantic Autonomous Region claimed independence from Nicaragua.
The Vatican had signaled an interest in the decriminalization of therapeutic abortion, but the Roman Catholic Church in Nicaragua remained adamantly opposed to such a move.
On July 19, Sandinista supporters in Managua, Nic., celebrate the 30th anniversary of the revolution, led by the Sandinista National Liberation Front, that toppled the government of Anastasio Somoza Debayle in July 1979.
Nigeria Area: 1,189,546 sq km Population : 15,306,000 Capital: Niamey Head of state and government: President Mamadou Tandja, assisted by Prime Ministers Seyni Oumarou, Albade Abouba from September 23, and, from October 2, Ali Badjo Gamatie The prevailing issue in Niger during 2009 was Pres.
The National Assembly had rejected President Tandja’s request to hold a referendum on the issue, so he appealed to the Constitutional Court, which ruled on May 26 that the referendum would be illegal without the approval of the National Assembly.
Within hours, the president dissolved the legislative body, and on June 5 a presidential decree was issued that called for a referendum on a new constitution to be held on August 4.
The new constitution not only would provide for a three-year extension of President Tandja’s rule but would also eliminate presidential term limits.
On June 12 the Constitutional Court annulled the presidential decree; President Tandja urged the court to rescind its ruling, but it was upheld on June 26.
Later that day Tandja assumed emergency powers, and three days later he dissolved the Constitutional Court.
His actions were met with international condemnation and public demonstrations.
Opposition parties called for a boycott of the referendum, which contributed to a massive win for the president.
The legislative election to replace the National Assembly, held on October 20, was also boycotted by the opposition and resulted in victory for the ruling party.
On the day of the election, Niger was suspended from the Economic Community of West African States for having ignored the organization’s call to postpone the poll.
On April 6, Tuareg rebels of the Movement of Nigerians for Justice agreed to end their guerrilla war.
The Niger government indicated that it would begin negotiations with the MNJ over shares in the northern region’s mineral wealth.
In January the French mining company Areva was awarded the license to exploit Niger's uranium resources and began work on the Imouraren mine in early May.
On July 3, Algeria, Niger, and Nigeria signed a pact to build a pipeline to deliver Nigerian gas across the Sahara to Europe.
Yar'Adua left Nigeria on November 23 to seek medical treatment in Saudi Arabia for a heart condition.
A campaign was launched by influential politicians and lawyers calling for more tranparency about his ability to govern or his resignation, but at the end of the year, Yar’Adua remained secure in his post.
Barack Obama’s choice of Ghana for his first African state visit as a pointed rebuff to Nigeria's failings in the realms of governance, transparency, and security.
Meanwhile, UN data showed that the country's poverty rate had risen from 46% to 76% over the previous 13 years.
Turbulence in the Niger delta remained a major stumbling block to internal peace.
In May the government launched a sweeping military offensive against rebel groups in the region; though the operation killed and wounded hundreds, it failed to subdue the militants, who later in the year were able to strike beyond the delta, setting fire to an oil depot and several tankers in Lagos, the country’s financial centre.
On August 4 the government announced a 60-day amnesty for any militant who agreed to surrender his weapons in exchange for a daily stipend, education, and retraining.
Estimates of the number of militants who accepted the amnesty varied from 7,000 to 15,000.
Yar’Adua held a highly publicized meeting with Okah in October; the closed-door meeting, which Yar’Adua had requested, occurred after MEND had reportedly threatened to resume hostilities in the delta following the end of a 60-day amnesty.
In February and again in December, Christians and Muslims clashed in the city of Bauchi.
The most serious conflict involved Muslim militants belonging to the group Boko Haram, a fundamentalist sect opposed to Western education.
Authorities accused the militants of having attacked police stations and other sites in the states of Bauchi and Yobe.
The sect’s leader, Mohammad Yusuf, was taken into police custody but was later found shot to death.
Human rights activists pointed out that extrajudicial executions by the police occurred frequently in Nigeria and said that Yusuf’s killing demonstrated the urgent need for police reform.
Relying on the country’s $400 billion Government Pension Fund-Global (the former Petroleum Fund of Norway), the Norwegian government was able to guarantee commercial bank loans and implement an economic stimulus plan, which provided for increased spending on social welfare and infrastructure projects.
Citing higher inflation, the central bank raised its key interest rate to 1.5% in October.
The question of whether to allow oil drilling in the Arctic waters around Norway’s Lofoten and Vesteralen islands was hotly debated during the year.
Norwegian oil companies, facing dwindling North Sea reserves, were eager to start drilling in the area, where large deposits of oil and gas were thought to be located under the seabed.
Seismic surveys to determine potential deposits were conducted in the summer, though the results were not to be released publicly until 2010.
The surveys sparked strong protests from fishermen's organizations and environmentalists, who were adamantly opposed to opening the pristine region to exploration and drilling, citing the disruption that would be caused to the cod-fishing industry—on which generations of area residents had depended for their livelihoods—and the catastrophic environmental damage that could occur, particularly in the event of an oil spill.
The oil companies countered by arguing that fisheries had thrived for decades in close proximity to drilling installations in the southern part of the North Sea and that new technologies would help to minimize the ecological impact.
Environmentalists insisted, however, that the risk was too great to take.
In the aftermath of the elections, Stoltenberg indicated that the coalition government would wait to make a final decision on drilling near Lofoten and Vesteralen until more scientific evidence had been presented on the environmental consequences for the region.
To a greater extent than any of the five other Gulf Cooperation Council countries, Oman refrained from openly challenging or even criticizing Iran over that country’s nuclear-development program or controversial foreign policies.
Instead, Oman continued its long-standing approach of seeking to engage Tehran diplomatically, and the two countries entered into several memorandums of understanding.
The more important ones pertained to increased bilateral cooperation in energy affairs, and Oman agreed for the first time to purchase Iranian gas exports.
Oman weathered the global economic slowdown better than most of its neighbours.
A new oil field was discovered off the Musandam Peninsula in an area straddling Oman’s maritime border with Iran.
Pakistan Behrouz Mehri—AFP/Getty Images Sultan Qaboos bin Said of Oman is formally welcomed to Tehran by Iranian Pres.
The sultan’s three-day visit to Iran was his first in 30 years and the first by any head of state since Ahmadinejad s controversial reelection in June. than in earlier years to vacation farther afield.
The country’s booming tourism industry was developing a variety of new tourist destinations.
High-speed ferryboat service was inaugurated to transport vehicles and passengers to the remote but scenic Musandam Peninsula and to hitherto little-explored coastal sites and islands in the southeast.
In January, United States CIA drones struck South Waziristan, killing two top al-Qaeda leaders, Usama al-Kini and Sheikh Ahmed Salim Swedan, who were on the FBI’s most-wanted list in connection with the 1998 bombings of United States embassies in Kenya and Tanzania.
In February the Supreme Court upheld a ban prohibiting opposition leader Nawaz Sharif from holding elected office and sustained decisions removing his brother as Punjab’s chief minister.
Asif Ali Zardari, fearing intensified street violence, reinstated the judges, including Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry , who resumed duties as chief justice of the Supreme Court on March 22.
Zardari also restored the provincial government of Sharif’s brother in Punjab, and in May the Supreme Court overturned the electoral ban on Sharif.
A terrorist attack in Lahore in early March targeted Sri Lanka’s cricket team, killing six police officers and wounding several players.
Later in the month terrorists attacked a police centre in Manawan, near Lahore, killing eight.
In April the National Assembly approved the installation of Shari'ah (Islamic law) throughout the Swat valley of the North-West Frontier Province —a move that had been negotiated in February in the hopes of securing a lasting truce with militants in the area—and President Zardari signed the order.
Encouraged, Swat-based Taliban forces moved into neighbouring Buner district, but Pakistani army units stemmed the advance.
Troops also fought militants in nearby Dir district, and after peace efforts failed, a fullscale offensive was launched in Swat.
Zardari visited Washington, D.C., in May for trilateral meetings with United States Pres.
Hundreds of thousands of people fleeing the war zone required extraordinary assistance.
In late May terrorists bombed the Lahore headquarters of the Inter-Services Intelligence agency, killing 35.
Although the army declared victory in Swat, claiming to have killed 2,000 militants in the region, in June suicide bombers demolished Peshawar's posh Pearl Continental Hotel.
United States drones, active over South Waziristan, reportedly killed Taliban operatives Qari Hussain and Maulvi Sangeen Zadran.
In July Islamabad arrested pro-Taliban cleric Sufi Muhammad in continuing Swat operations.
In September, Tehrik-i-Taliban publicized its intention to wreak havoc everywhere in Pakistan, and the October bombing of the UN World Food Programme in Islamabad and a car bombing in Peshawar were traced to that threat.
More brazen was the assault on army headquarters in Rawalpindi, in which 20 died.
Still another suicide bombing in Shangla killed 41, and multiple, almost simultaneous mid-October assaults in Lahore, Peshawar, and Kohat targeted police and security installations.
The United States Congress in September approved a bill making available $7. billion over five years to rebuild Pakistan’s roads, schools, and democratic institutions.
Pakistan’s higher military officials, however, registered alarm at the bill’s linkage of the funding to the country’s war on terrorism, and Pakistan’s political opposition claimed that accepting the aid would compromise Pakistan’s sovereignty.
The United States transfer of F-16 aircraft to Pakistan proceeded without interruption, despite concerns raised in the United States Congress over Pakistan's near completion of two additional nuclear weapons reactors.
A long-awaited invasion of South Waziristan commenced on October 17 when 30,000 Pakistani soldiers invaded Taliban strongholds in the area.
Moreover, the assassination of an army brigadier and a suicide attack near the Kamra aeronautical complex in Attock, as well as repeated bombings (notably in Peshawar’s Meena Bazaar), demonstrated the vitality of the terrorist campaign.
In November increasing weakness in the Zardari presidency added to Pakistan's instability.
Ijaz Muhammad/AP the National Reconciliation Ordinance of 2007, which had provided amnesty from prosecution to high officials and politicians, the government was unable to placate its opposition.
Counterterrorist units moved aggressively in southern Punjab and Karachi, but the effort did little to shore up Zardari’s fleeting popularity.
In November gunmen assaulted two more ranking members of the army, and suicide bombers killed a mayor from the NWFP, blew up the ISI regional headquarters in Peshawar, struck outside a bank in central Rawalpindi, targeted a police station in North Waziristan, and killed more than 30 people at a Charsadda market.
A spate of seven bombings in a succeeding 10-day period killed numerous bystanders.
The country’s earlier acknowledgement of the Pakistani origin of the 2008 Mumbai terrorist attacks resulted in the late-November indictment of seven members of Lashkar-e-Taiba in connection with the attacks.
In December, Obamas decision to increase the number of United States troops in Afghanistan heightened debate in Pakistan.
Intensification of the war in Afghanistan was rumoured to imply expanded drone attacks in Pakistan’s tribal areas and possibly Balochistan.
Assaults on the naval headquarters in Islamabad and, once again, the army headquarters in Rawalpindi killed at least 38, including a major general and a brigadier.
Militants also struck in Peshawar at a district and sessions court complex and a nongovernmental organization assisting the blind, while bombs destroyed much of Lahore’s Moon Market.
The casualty toll rose still higher with the bombings of ISI headquarters in Multan, of the market in Punjab’s Dera Ghazi Khan, and of Shi'ite religious processions in Karachi and Pakistan-administered Kashmir.
Moreover, implementation of Obama's new strategy was demonstrated by the ratcheting up of drone attacks in Bajaur as well as in South and North Waziristan.
Believed to have been among the casualties was senior al-Qaeda leader Saleh al-Somali.
Given the public and official outrage in Pakistan over the intensified drone attacks, James Jones, Obama’s national security adviser; Gen.
Mike Mullen, chairman of the United States Joint Chiefs of Staff, made separate visits to Islamabad to try to ease deepening strains in U.S.-Pakistan relations.
As a mark of Palau’s recognition of the importance of its United States ties, Pres.
Johnson Toribiong agreed that several Chinese Uighurs detained at a United States military prison at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, could be temporarily resettled on the islands.
Palauans were also concerned that the Muslim Uighurs might face unacceptable culture shock and that the country’s tourism might be harmed by the presence of former detainees on the islands.
President Toribiong told the UN General Assembly in September that Palau was creating a sanctuary to protect great hammerheads, leopard sharks, and oceanic whitetip sharks.
The country acknowledged the difficulty, however, of patrolling waters the size of Texas or France with a single boat.
An animal rights group asked Palau to remove fruit bats from local restaurant menus; after having been featured on an American reality TV show, the consumption of fruit bats cooked in coconut milk became so popular with tourists that the species’ survival was said to be threatened.
The elections, held on May 3, pitted Balbina Herrera, a former legislator and minister of housing, against wealthy businessman Ricardo Martinelli (see BIOGRAPHIES) in the presidential race.
Martinelli led a coalition of opposition parties headed by the Democratic Change party.
Herrera was accused of being a radical leftist who had received support from Venezuelan Pres.
Martinelli exploited Herrera’s past links to former Panamanian strongman Manuel Noriega, and his campaign emphasized the need for change after five years of PRD-led government.
For her part, Herrera accused Martinelli of being mentally unstable (rumours had abounded for years that Martinelli was bipolar) and tried to use Martinelli's wealth and business practices against him.
In the end the desire for change—despite the country’s strong economic performance during the previous three years—led to a landslide victory for Martinelli, who captured 60% of the votes.
Martinelli’s victory ran counter to the recent leftist political trend in Latin America.
While Panama's economy was affected by the sharp decline in global trade, economists predicted that it would still post modest growth in 2009.
The $5. billion canal-expansion project was well under way, with completion slated for 2014.
The government reported that GDP grew 2.4% during the first half of the year.
Unemployment stood at 6.6% in August, up 1% from the same month a year earlier.
The U.S.Panama free-trade agreement remained unratified by the United States Congress, despite support from the administration of Pres.
Barack Obama; some United States representatives insisted that Panama first tighten its banking laws to discourage tax evasion and money laundering.
Two proposals were put forth to construct pipelines from wells to liquefaction plants.
The other, by energy giant ExxonMobil, would pipe gas from the Southern Highlands to a liquefaction plant in the capital region.
After debate between Prime Minister Michael Somare (supported by the energy minister, William Duma) and the prime minister's son, Arthur Somare (minister for public enterprises and chairman of the ministerial gas committee), the cabinet decided to adopt the scheme engineered by ExxonMobil, even though InterOil already operated an oil refinery at Port Moresby’s Fairfax Harbour and was preferred by Prime Minister Somare.
The LNG was then to be shipped to Chinese, Japanese, and Taiwanese customers already signed up under a $15 billion deal.
Investigations continued into an airline crash in August in which a chartered Airlines PNG twin-engine plane crashed in the jungle near Kokoda.
All 11 passengers and 2 crew members were killed in what was the worst civil air disaster in PNG history.
Following the crash, many Australians helped remove wreckage and assisted with the investigation of the accident.
This collaboration was seen as furthering the close relationship between PNG and Australia.
Lugo had sworn to tackle such intractable issues as land reform (1% of Paraguay’s population controlled 77% of the arable land) and poverty relief , as well as fight corruption and crime and improve access to health care.
Two women filed paternity suits against him after he admitted to having fathered a child with a third woman while he was still a bishop.
Allegations of nepotism on the part of his sister and Paraguay’s acting first lady, Mercedes Lugo, also emerged, serving to undercut the president’s reformist image.
Evo Morales signed an agreement ending a border dispute that dated from the 1932-35 Chaco War.
Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva in which Brazil, after years of resistance, agreed to triple the annual revenue it paid to Paraguay for energy from the Itaipu hydroelectric dam, which was jointly operated by the two countries; a 1973 treaty had obligated Paraguay to sell power to Brazil at fixed far-belowmarket rates.
The Lugo administration also succeeded in significantly increasing financial and medical assistance to Paraguayans in poverty, overcoming efforts in Congress to deny funding.
In September, however, Lugo suffered a setback when he was forced to rescind a decree limiting pesticide use by the soybean industry.
The expanding industry had displaced many of the country’s rural residents, which led to violent land disputes.
Clashes had also occurred over pesticide contamination and pesticide-related illnesses.
The era of former dictator Alfredo Stroessner, who ruled Paraguay from 1954 to 1989, continued to haunt the country.
In May Sabino Montanaro, who had served as Stroessner’s interior minister, was extradited from Honduras to face six trials for the disappearances and killings of government opponents in the 1970s and ’80s.
In July the bodies of two victims from the 1970s were found buried outside a police barracks in Asuncion.
Peru PERU Area: 1,285,198 sq km Population : 28,887,000 Capital: Lima Head of state and government: President Alan Garcia The year 2009 proved to be one of considerable challenges for Peru.
The global recession had a marked impact on the country’s economy, which was heavily based on the export of mineral and agricultural products.
The economy slowed significantly during the final quarter of 2008 and the first half of 2009 as foreign demand for these commodities slumped.
In an effort to counter the effects of the slowdown, the administration of Pres.
Alan Garcia worked to implement a financial stimulus package of up to $13. billion.
These measures— along with the expectation that export demand would recover—led most analysts to conclude that Peru had weathered the financial crisis better than many other countries in Latin America and had positioned itself for a relatively rapid economic rebound.
In addition to the economy, much attention in Peru was focused on the numerous protests that occurred, many of them related to the issues of land use and indigenous rights.
The most notable of these was an indigenous uprising in the Peruvian Amazon region near Bagua Grande, some 1,400 km north of Lima.
During the first week of June, members of indigenous groups opposed to two recently enacted laws allowing the country's rainforest to be opened to exploration and development blockaded highways and became involved in deadly clashes with police.
The fighting claimed the lives of at least 24 protesters and 10 policemen.
Garcia was forced to admit that his government should have carried on consultations with the indigenous groups before promulgating the laws.
Yehude Simon, who had been appointed prime minister in October 2008, resigned his post, as did several other members of Garcia's cabinet, and on June 18 Congress rescinded the laws that had sparked the uprising.
Protests were also staged by the local populations in other parts of the Peruvian Amazon and in the Andean highlands, where many complained of government indifference regarding the destructive environmental impact of mining, logging, and other activities on these areas.
In recent years local inhabitants had increasingly turned to strikes and demonstrations as a way to force their concerns to be heard.
On February 1 a freetrade agreement between Peru and the United States came into force.
The two countries had signed the agreement in 2006, and Garcia had pushed vigorously for its implementation.
In addition to its pact with the U.S., Peru was also pursuing free-trade agreements with several other countries.
In September he pleaded guilty to the remaining bribery and wiretapping charges against him and received an additional six years in prison.
Many observers noted that by pleading guilty Fujimori avoided a trial in which some 60 witnesses—including many former government officials— were expected to testify against him and that the testimony could have proved politically damaging to his daughter, Keiko Fujimori, in Peru’s upcoming 2011 presidential election.
Keiko Fujimori, a member of Congress since 2006, had already declared herself a candidate and had stated publicly that she intended to pardon her father if she won the election.
A local mayor, Andal Ampatuan, Jr., was charged with multiple counts of murder.
His father—a former governor of the province and the leader of a clan that had long ruled Maguindanao—and his brother were among 24 people charged with rebellion.
Ampatuan, Jr., Peruvian Prime Minister Yehude Simon poses with Amazonian Indians on June 1 7 after submitting a proposal to Congress to revoke two laws that had allowed the Peruvian Amazon region to be opened to development.
Poland Bullit Marquez/AP Residents of the Philippine town of San Pedro, south of Manila, wade through floodwaters following the destructive stomi that hit the area in late September. was accused of having led the ambush.
The victims were mutilated and buried in mass graves that had been dug in advance of the massacre.
Gloria Macapagal Arroyo declared a state of emergency and then martial law in the province, which was not lifted until December 12.
Her political party expelled the Ampatuan clan, who had helped her in previous elections.
Critics urged Arroyo to ban private political militias of the kind that dominated many parts of the Philippines.
In her state of the nation speech on July 27, Arroyo said that she had no desire to try to stay in power after her term ended in 2010.
She touted the resilience of the country’s economy in the midst of the global financial crisis, noting that the Philippines had enjoyed uninterrupted economic growth since she took office in 2001 and that Moody’s Investors Service had recently upgraded the country's credit rating.
An estimated 30% of the country’s nearly 92 million people still lived below the poverty line, however.
Corazon Aquino, who served as president of the Philippines and was credited with restoring democratic institutions in the country after the long dictatorship of Ferdinand Marcos, died on August 1.
More than 100,000 mourners marched in the rain during her funeral procession in Manila, the large crowds reminiscent of the ""people power” demonstrations that had helped oust Marcos from power three years after the assassination of Aquino’s husband, opposition leader Benigno Aquino, Jr., in 1983.
Fighting occurred sporadically throughout the year between government forces and two groups based in the southern Philippines.
One was the Moro Islamic Liberation Front , which had long sought independence for Muslim areas of the predominately Roman Catholic country; the other group was the al-Qaeda-affiliated Abu Sayyaf.
MILF militants were also involved in the fighting, which claimed the lives of 23 government troops and 31 guerrillas.
On September 21 government forces captured Abu Sayyaf’s main camp on the island of Jolo, killing some 19 militants.
Manila experienced its heaviest rainfall in almost half a century—424. mm within 12 hours—on September 26.
The downpour flooded 80% of the metropolitan area, displacing 380,000 people.
This storm and two typhoons that hit the Philippines in October combined to kill more than 1,000 people.
The coalition held a majority in the parliament with opposition split between the conservative Law and Justice party and the centre-left Democratic Left Alliance.
In spite of this, the government had difficulties passing its legislative agenda owing to its lack of sufficient votes to override a presidential veto.
The continuing power struggle between Prime Minister Donald Tusk, who led the PO, and Pres.
Lech Kaczynski of the PiS had become a dominant feature of the Polish political scene.
In May some tensions emerged between the coalition partners when Tusk neglected to consult Waldemar Pawlak, the deputy prime minister and PSL leader, on government policy concerning the global economic crisis even though Pawlak held the economic affairs portfolio.
The PO also unilaterally proposed legislation to eliminate government funding of political parties despite an agreement with the PSL that only legislation that the coalition partners jointly supported would be introduced in the parliament.
Despite these conflicts, the coalition survived and was expected to govern until the end of its term in 2011.
In preparation for elections to the EU Parliament in June, the PO attempted to broaden the base of its electoral support, particularly on the centre-left, by inviting politicians from other parties to run for EU seats as part of the PO’s slate.
Another notable achievement for the PO—and for Tusk personally— was the party’s successful campaign to elect former Polish prime minister Jerzy Buzek as president of the European Parliament for a two-and-a-half-year term.
In September, however, a scandal erupted that caused shock waves within the PO leadership.
After allegations of corruption surfaced in connection with legislation pertaining to the country’s casino gaming industry, three cabinet ministers, one deputy minister, and three other high-ranking government officials were dismissed from their posts.
On the foreign policy front, Poland continued to rebuild its relations with Germany during the year and finalized its ratification of the Lisbon Treaty on EU organization.
The Polish parliament had approved the treaty in 2008, but President Kaczynski had refused to sign it until an Irish referendum on the treaty had passed.
After Irish voters endorsed the treaty in October, Kaczynski finally initialed the document.
This joint PolishSwedish initiative was the first major EU proposal to be presented by Warsaw and accepted by all 27 EU member states.
The goal of the project was to promote greater stability and security among countries on the EU’s eastern border.
Barack Obama announced that plans for the deployment of a missile-defense system in Poland and the Czech Republic had been canceled.
The abrupt announcement was met with overwhelming criticism in Poland and sparked an extensive debate on the state of current and future PolishUnited States relations.
Joe Biden traveled to Warsaw, where he met with Tusk to discuss a new United States proposal that involved the possible stationing of a mobile antiballistic missile system known as the SM-3 in Poland by the year 2015.
Consumer price inflation stood at 3.7% in August and was projected to stabilize at 3.4% for the year.
The country’s unemployment rate during the second quarter was 10.8%—0.8% higher than during the same period the previous year.
The government’s 2012 target date for joining the euro zone was canceled, and at least one official suggested 2014 or 2015 as a more realistic goal for adopting the euro.
Despite the economic slowdown, Poland was still perceived as a relatively safe haven in terms of economic development; this view was supported by the decision of the IMF to grant Poland a flexible credit line of $20. billion.
The PS secured 38% of the vote, giving it 97 seats in the 230seat parliament, while the PSD took 30% of the vote, winning 81 seats, up from 75.
As a result, Socrates would have to negotiate with at least one of the opposition parties to pass legislation, which could complicate the annual budget procedure and other complex legislative initiatives.
Many observers suggested that this fragility could lead to early elections, a feeling intensified by the heightened friction during the election campaign between Prime Minister Socrates and Pres.
The president had the power to both veto legislation and call for early elections.
Meanwhile, the international economic crisis and its inevitable impact on the Portuguese economy continued to dominate the political and business scenes.
While GDP collapsed in the first two quarters of the year, dropping 3.7% compared with the same period in 2008, by late summer there were increasing signs that the worst of the storm had passed.
This prompted the EU, which limits the budget gap to 3% of GDP, to subject Portugal (and several other EU countries) to a largely symbolic excessive-deficit procedure.
On the downside, the unemployment rate rose steadily to levels that had not been seen in more than a decade, hitting 9.1% in August, and fears of continued economic turmoil led consumers to put off the purchase of durable goods and homes.
Against this backdrop, the government continued to invest in alternativeand renewable-energy projects in areas such as electric automobiles, solar energy, and wave power.
For example, Socrates announced a pilot project to equip Portugal’s existing gas stations with a pioneering recharging system for electric vehicles.
The equipment would be installed nationwide by 2011, when electric cars were expected to be broadly available.
In the solar sector a group of investors was reportedly mulling the construction of a gigantic field of photovoltaic panels in the sun-drenched Alentejo region that would be capable of generating 2,000 MW of electricity, enough to be viable for sale to export markets.
This monumental project, which would require an investment of up to about $8. billion, would be funded with subsidies from the European Union and the Portuguese government, as well as private capital, but could take up to seven years to complete.
Officials blamed the accident on recent earthquakes in the region, which may have loosened the rocks.
In the wake of the tragedy, security measures were heightened at all of the country’s beaches with cliffs.
Romania QATAR Area: 10,836 sq km Population : 1,661,000 Capital: Doha Head of state and government: Emir Sheikh Hamad ibn Khalifah Al Thani, assisted by Prime Minister Sheikh Hamad ibn Jasim ibn Jabr Al Thani In 2009 Qatar continued its trajectory of economic growth.
Despite high inflation, Qatar remained one of the world’s fastest-growing economies and continued to rank as one of its richest, as measured by income per capita.
The country’s enhanced material well-being was buttressed by the growth of the government’s sovereign wealth fund and ongoing fiscal surpluses.
In addition, Qatar remained the world leader in natural gas exports, which for the first time exceeded its foreign sales of petroleum.
In November, at the 16th annual World Travel Awards convention in London, Qatar Airways was declared the World's Leading Airline-Business Class for the second consecutive year.
The airline also received accolades for its role as a bridge between Qatar and the world’s leading hydrocarbon fuelimporting countries.
Plans for the construction of the strategic Qatar-Bahrain Friendship Bridge continued throughout 2009.
Touted as certain to become the world’s largest transportation link over water, the causeway, upon its completion, was expected to greatly reduce transit time between the two countries.
Politically, Qatar maintained its efforts to serve as a bridge between the West and the Arab and Islamic worlds by hosting international conferences on issues such as democracy, free trade, and multifaith dialogue.
It also continued to serve as a mediator in intraregional conflicts involving Chad, Lebanon, Palestine, The Sudan, and Yemen and entered into an agreement with Saudi Arabia that finally delineated the two countries’ shared boundaries.
Other than helping to end a dispute between Chad and The Sudan, however, the results of Qatar’s mediatory efforts were mixed.
In 2009 Qatar added branch campuses of Australian and Canadian institutions of higher learning in Education City, located on the outskirts of Doha.
In November Qatar hosted what was touted internationally as the world’s first-ever education summit.
Twenty years after the 1989 revolution that saw communism replaced by a fragile democratic system, politics remained badly polarized.
Personal rivalries were reinforced by disputes over what should be the pace and extent of moving toward a fully pluralist system that would be able to check the influence of powerful economic groups.
Facing an impending revenue crisis, Prime Minister Emil Boc negotiated a $27 billion loan with the IMF and other lenders.
The aid, which was approved in May, was conditional on Romania’s making deep cuts in the public sector, which employed one-third of the labour force.
The IMF also demanded that steps be taken to increase the efficiency of the bureaucracy.
These and other reforms, however, became a casualty of worsening infighting between the government partners.
In September, Boc dismissed the PSD interior minister from the government over disagreements about the conduct of the presidential elections scheduled for November 22.
After losing a vote of confidence in the parliament in October, Boc remained in the post of interim prime minister because the president failed to nominate a successor who was able to command a parliamentary majority.
The bitterly fought presidential election campaign centred on the record and character of the incumbent, Traian Basescu.
A powerful set of opponents, extending beyond politics to include big business and much of the media, saw him as an abrasive figure intent on broadening the powers of the presidency to secure a personal ascendancy over the political process.
They rallied around the PSD leader, Mircea Geoana, who believed that the president should act as an arbiter between different interests within the political elite.
Basescu and his supporters, chiefly to be found in the PDL, argued that the PSD wished to entrench the privileges of an unaccountable elite, many of whose members had been intercepting state funds over a long period.
He campaigned on an agenda of reforming state institutions; the changes included strengthening the representative role of the parliament and relaunching efforts to depoliticize the justice system.
Basescu’s campaign was damaged by the open hostility of the major televisions stations, including the main state broadcaster.
It is likely that he would have lost if Geoana had not turned out Celebrating his reelection, Romanian Pres.
Traian Basescu waves his country’s flag in front of a crowd of supporters on December 6.
Basescu trounced him in a television debate on December 3, 72 hours before the deciding second round of voting.
But for the overwhelming backing of the Romanian diaspora, especially in Western Europe, he would have lost.
Although the state electoral commission confirmed the result, the PSD claimed that there had been widespread vote fraud and appealed to the Constitutional Court, many of whose members it had appointed, to overturn the result.
The court found no grounds for taking this action, however, and Basescu began his second term on December 16.
The proBasescu PDL formed a coalition government with an ethnic Hungarian party and several independent lawmakers, and the parliament approved Basescu’s renomination of Boc as prime minister.
Although the new government quickly approved a draft budget for 2010, it still needed parliamentary approval, and the IMF had refused to release the third tranche of the rescue loan without firm evidence that the next government would agree to carry out necessary austerity measures.
The economic outlook appeared gloomy for many ordinary citizens unless politicians could put aside their deep-seated quarrels and turn their attention to the economy.
In 2008 Vladimir Putin, having served the maximum of two consecutive presidential terms permitted by the constitution, had relinquished presidential power to his handpicked successor, Dmitry Medvedev, and himself assumed the notionallv less-powerful role of prime minister.
Press reports made much of occasional signs of tension or disagreement between the president and the prime minister, but in general the tandem appeared to be working smoothly.
Assisted by First Deputy Prime Minister Igor Shuvalov, Putin oversaw the government and the economy; he was also believed to have retained the decisive voice in foreign and security affairs.
Medvedev kept a high profile, but observers pointed to the fact that he remained surrounded by Putin appointees—he had virtually no team to call his own.
In addition, Medvedev lacked the resources to sponsor any legislation that did not have Putin's blessing.
This was because the United Russia party, which dominated the State Duma , remained loyal to Putin.
All this was taken as proof that Medvedev did not yet have a deciding voice in either foreign or domestic politics.
Medvedev issued a number of signals during the year suggesting that he might harbour hopes of steering Russia in a more liberal and reform-oriented direction.
He spoke out repeatedly against corruption in public life, criticized bureaucratic mismanagement, and stated that although the state had sharply increased its role in the economy in recent years, this should be only a temporary phenomenon.
He invited responses to his ideas from the general public, and he built on these in his annual address to the Russian parliament in November.
In that speech Medvedev repeated his call for comprehensive and ambitious modernization.
Elections were held in October in 75 regions, and according to the official results, United Russia won an overwhelming victory.
There were widespread allegations of vote rigging, and three opposition parties briefly walked out of the State Duma in protest, but popular support for both Putin and Medvedev remained high; in October 78% of those polled expressed approval of Putin's performance as prime minister and 72% of Medvedev’s as president.
Opinion polls indicated that while many members of the population were anxious about the fall in their living standards caused by the global financial crisis, they did not blame the tandem for their hardships.
This, and the results of the October regional elections, suggested that the ""social contract” that some believed had been struck by the Putin leadership— whereby the authorities supposedly guaranteed a steady rise in popular living standards in exchange for the people’s political passivity—could be broken with impunity by the political leadership.
Even so, the Kremlin continued to show signs of extreme nervousness about the possibility of political instability.
As the financial crisis appeared to recede, Putin showed signs of increasing confidence.
There was already widespread speculation that he would return to the presidency in 2012, when Medvedev’s first term in office ended.
In September Putin declared that he and Medvedev would not run against one another in the 2012 election but would come to an agreement beforehand.
This was the strongest hint Putin had thus far given that he might be considering returning to the Kremlin.
Medvedev appeared to concur, echoing Putin’s comments a few days later and speaking of the ""common vision"" uniting him and the prime minister.
On the one hand, Medvedev professed his readiness to establish a dialogue with civil society.
He revived the Presidential Human Rights Council (which had been established by Putin in 2004 but later had fallen into abeyance) and appointed several outspoken critics of the regime to it.
On the other hand, threats and attacks against human rights activists and journalists increased in number in 2009.
January saw the murder in Moscow, less than a kilometre from the Kremlin, of Stanislav Markelov, a human rights lawyer who had defended people who complained of having been beaten and tortured by Russian special police forces in the North Caucasus republic of Chechnya and elsewhere.
Also shot dead was Anastasiya Baburova, a young journalist who had been accompanying Markelov and who had tried to come to his assistance.
In March the well-known human rights campaigner Lev Ponomarev was beaten outside his home in Moscow.
In July the courageous human rights defender Natalya Estemirova was abducted outside her home in Grozny, the capital of Chechnya.
Less than a month later, Zarema Sadulayeva, head of a Chechen children’s charity, and her husband were abducted and murdered near Grozny.
Russia remained a dangerous country for journalists; five were killed in 2009.
The trial of four men accused of having helped to organize the 2006 murder of Russia's best-known opposition journalist and human rights defender, Anna Politkovskaya, ended in February with their acquittal; the man whom prosecutors accused of having carried out the assassination remained at large.
Critics complained that the investigation and the trial had been botched, and in June the Supreme Court ordered a new judge and jury to hear the case.
The November death in pretrial detention of Sergey Magnitsky, a lawyer who had been working on behalf of a Western investment fund, provoked an outcry both in Russia and abroad.
In April, 10 years after then president Putin sent troops into Chechnya, Medvedev officially ended the ""counterterrorism operation"" against insurgents in the breakaway republic.
The situation in the North Caucasus, however, showed little sign of normalizing.
Ramzan Kadyrov was shot dead in Vienna; he had earlier accused Kadyrov of torture.
In March, Sulim Yamadayev, one of Kadyrov’s bitter foes, was shot dead in Dubai.
Meanwhile, in the neighbouring republics of Dagestan and Ingushetiya, the violence increased.
Suicide bombings once again became common, and shoot-outs were reported on an almost daily basis.
In June the president of Ingushetiya, Yunus-Bek Yevkurov, was nearly killed by a suicide bomber.
In November a bomb derailed an express train traveling between Moscow and St.
In 2009 Russia recorded its first annual population expansion since 1995, with an increase to 141. million.
This was the result of an increase in the birth rate, a decline in mortality rates, and an influx of immigrants.
Russia was severely hit by the global financial crisis; falling oil prices and the general economic slowdown both took their toll.
Since this downturn followed a decade of rapid economic growth fueled by high and rising energy prices, however, Russia entered the crisis with a strong budget, balance of payments, and reserves.
Policy makers were able to cover a budget deficit on the order of 8% of GDP, mainly by drawing down the reserve fund that had been built up from oil and gas revenues in preceding years.
Even so, the scale of the recession in Russia was greater than many had expected.
It appeared that many investors, both Russian and foreign, had reacted to the crisis by reducing their investment activity in Russia because they perceived underlying weaknesses in its economic institutions—in particular, the weak rule of law and the poor protection of property rights.
Corruption was endemic and, despite a number of high-profile initiatives, showed no sign of decreasing.
There was much hopeful speculation by liberal intellectuals that the economic crisis would force the leadership to liberalize both economically and politically.
The most astute Russian analysts saw little prospect, however, of radical reform that would introduce real competition into either the economy or the political system.
Yet fears that the crisis would push the leadership toward more interventionist policies proved unfounded; the authorities did not—as many had predicted they would—exploit the crisis to take control of large deeply indebted companies.
It also became clear that foreign creditors of cashstrapped Russian energy and metals companies had little appetite for taking assets offered as collateral into their own hands, and they restructured loans on a generous basis.
This proved advantageous to tycoons such as Oleg Deripaska and Roman Abramovich, who, though relatively impoverished, were not as weakened as originally anticipated.
In October Putin announced that as in previous years, there would be some privatization in 2010 and 2011, partly to pursue the reform agenda and partly to raise funds for the budget, and that foreign investors would be able to take part.
Unemployment rose from less than 6% in the summer of 2008 to 10% in March 2009.
First, some workers who had lost their jobs (including a number of previously employed pensioners) dropped out of the workforce altogether.
Second, the federal and regional governments pressured employers, including foreign firms operating in Russia, such as Renault, to halt sackings.
Regional unemployment data showed that the crisis was affecting the regions in very different ways.
Those hardest hit were the so-called metallurgical regions, where industry was dominated by steel and nonferrous-metals production.
Least hard-hit were the poorest regions that had traditionally relied on the federal centres for financial subsidies, including many parts of the North Caucasus.
Many workers suffered wage arrears or shortened workweeks or were forced to take unpaid leave.
There were fears that ""monotowns” (industrial settlements created in the Soviet period around a single industry or factory) would become a locus of social unrest.
In fact, though there were protests in such towns, they remained quite small and isolated.
By the autumn there were signs that the Russian economy was emerging from recession.
Although each month's output remained below the level of the corresponding month of 2008, the changes from one month to the next became positive in June and remained so, meaning that output in the third quarter was above that in the second quarter.
Moreover, oil prices, which had fallen as low as $35 a barrel in December 2008, had by October 2009 recovered to more than $80 a barrel.
In August an accident at Russia’s largest hydroelectric power station, Sayano-Shushenskaya, in which 75 people were killed, was seen as a worrying sign of the erosion of basic infrastructure and the state's failure to tackle it.
In June Putin surprised United States and EU negotiators by announcing that Russia was withdrawing its application and would seek to join the WTO only together with its customs union partners Kazakhstan and Belarus.
The following month, however, Medvedev appeared to reverse this position, and Russia returned to the negotiating table.
The severity of the economic crisis brought wide—if not universal—acceptance within the elite that economic modernization was an urgent necessity.
The elite was sharply divided, however, over what form the reforms should take.
According to a conservative wing, the financial crisis had been provoked by Western financial mismanagement; it would eventually blow over, and oil prices would rise again.
Russia should sit it out and then, when times were better, pursue modernization by investing in cutting-edge technology.
Representatives of this group were believed to include Deputy Prime Minister Igor Sechin (who was responsible for the energy sector) and the director general of the Russian Technologies state corporation, Sergey Chemezov.
As the crisis deepened, however, he began calling for greater social spending and intervening personally to ward off social unrest.
Meanwhile, the so-called pessimist wing believed that it would not be enough to wait for oil prices to rise again; Russia’s economic problems were structural and required systemic reform.
Medvedev himself appeared to subscribe to this view, as did Finance Minister Aleksey Kudrin, presidential economic adviser Arkady Dvorkovich, and First Deputy Prime Minister Igor Shuvalov.
The pessimists themselves were deeply divided over whether political and judicial reforms were needed as well as economic modernization.
The revelation of Russia’s economic vulnerability did little to reduce the assertiveness with which the country approached the outside world and, in particular, the other former Soviet states on its borders.
As a result, Moscow halted gas deliveries to Ukraine, and supplies to southeastern Europe were disrupted for two weeks in the middle of winter.
The main focus of attention throughout the year was on efforts to improve the strained relations between Russia and the United States Russia had been gratified by NATO’s decision, announced in December 2008, not to grant membership action plans to Ukraine and Georgia, and Moscow responded positively to the expressed desire of the administration of United States Pres.
After Presidents Obama and Medvedev met in London in April, the two countries began serious negotiations over renewing the Strategic Arms Reduction Talks I treaty.
Although the treaty expired on Dec., 2009, discussions between Russia and the United States on a new accord continued beyond year’s end.
When Obama visited Moscow in July, he and Medvedev signed an agreement by which Moscow would allow the transit of supplies across Russian territory to United States troops in Afghanistan.
Russia also responded to Obama’s September decision to halt plans to establish ballistic missile defenses in Poland and the Czech Republic by announcing that Moscow would suspend its threat to deploy short-range nuclear missiles to its Kaliningrad exclave.
In October Putin paid an official visit to China, during which Russia and China signed dozens of commercial deals and concluded a major framework agreement on the delivery of Russian gas supplies to China.
The August 2008 war with Georgia had brought home to Russia the seriousness of some of the technological problems besetting its military and prompted the Kremlin to launch an ambitious program of military reform; this provoked opposition from top military leaders.
In May Medvedev approved a new national security strategy that recognized that Russian security was threatened as much by internal problems as by external challenges.
Paul Kagame, assisted by Prime Minister Bernard Makuza By 2009—15 years after the 1994 genocide—Rwanda had become a model of postconflict recovery.
In November the restoration of diplomatic relations between Rwanda and France (severed three years earlier) settled a dispute about responsibility for the genocide.
The following month Rwanda was declared free of land mines; it was the first country to realize this status.
Despite the global financial downturn, Rwanda’s economy showed remarkable resilience, growing at an estimated rate of 8-9% during the year; growth was fueled mainly by an expanding industrial base and excellent crop harvests.
Even though the country’s major exports dropped by nearly 20%, the tourist industry yielded regular foreign exchange.
Rwandans abroad, led by the Rwanda Diaspora Global Network, congratulated the government for its successful rebuilding efforts and for reducing corruption.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines November 28 Rwanda was admitted to the Commonwealth, becoming the second member country (after Mozambique in 1995) with no formal historical ties to Britain.
In September the World Bank ranked Rwanda as the top global business reformer for 2010.
Improvements in coffee quality and production particularly reflected the country’s socioeconomic recovery, with Rwandan brands making significant inroads in overseas specialty markets.
International and local courts continued hearings on crimes connected to the 1994 genocide, with the UN extending the term of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda to December 2010.
In two cases, courts in The Netherlands and Canada each handed down long prison sentences to Rwandans charged with war crimes, but Great Britain, Switzerland, and several other European countries refused to extradite genocide suspects on grounds that they would not receive a fair trial.
Meanwhile, the government, stung by tough international criticism that it had actively encouraged rebel militias involved in hostile operations in eastern Congo, carried out a five-week joint military operation with the Democratic Republic of the Congo , beginning in January.
Joseph Kabila met in Goma to restore diplomatic relations between their countries, which had been severed in 1996.
It was the first time that a geothermal source had been used to generate electricity in the Caribbean.
The power was to be sold initially to a local utility, NEVLEC, and eventually exported to Saint Kitts and farther afield in the region.
In July, during a summit of the African Union held in Libya, Prime Minister Denzil Douglas announced that Saint Kitts and Nevis had been proposed as the headquarters of a Libyan Development Bank to be established in the eastern Caribbean.
At the end of 2009, host Saint Kitts and Nevis led the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States in signing the Treaty of Basseterre, which provided for the establishment of an OECS economic union.
A commission of inquiry established by Nevis Island Premier Joseph Parry to investigate the administration of former premier Vance Amory proceeded during the year, albeit with some hitches.
On December 15, Prime Minister Douglas dissolved the National Assembly, paving the way for elections early in 2010.
The work stoppage was organized by the umbrella Trade Union Federation.
The workers returned to work in early June following the government’s agreement to a 4.1% pay boost.
The program and its funds were designed to ease balance-of-payments pressures, shore up external reserves, and serve as a catalyst for further support from the international donor community.
In July the IMF said that it expected Saint Lucia’s GDP to contract by 2.5% in 2009 and unemployment to increase substantially.
The local authorities appointed accounting firm KPMG to assume control of the bank’s affairs.
The SEC alleged that the money placed by depositors was actually funneled into a United States bank account that was used as a personal “piggy bank” by the American principals.
In April, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines was accepted as a member of Venezuelan Pres.
Samoa group, promoted by Chavez as a more “socialist” path to development than U.S.-led free trade based on market principles.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines had been a member of the Caribbean Community for decades, and fears were expressed that the aims of the two bodies might be contradictory.
On November 25 voters strongly rejected a proposed new constitution that would have removed the British monarch as chief of state.
Compounding the problem were falling revenues from declining imports, an inflation rate of 13%, a decline in tourism and in remittances from expatriate Samoans, and the closure of American Samoan tuna canneries.
Some relief occurred when producers of the reality television show Survivor filmed two seasons of the program in Samoa.
The tsunami generated a major aid initiative from regional neighbours and diasporic Samoans.
Broad-based opposition led to the formation of a new political coalition and to ongoing legal challenges to the government.
The final challenge was dismissed by courts in August, and the change occurred on September 7, without the predicted spike in road accidents.
Shortly before the budget debate, nine independent members united to form Tautua Samoa, an opposition party; the speaker declared their seats vacant and scheduled byelections in their electorates.
The dismissed members took the matter to the Supreme Court, which ordered the members to return to the parliament and canceled the by-elections.
Tax revenues fell as economic activities shrank; in a country heavily dependent on international trade, the decline in imports significantly hurt state revenues deriving from them.
While banking and manufacturing remained important sectors of the economy, the government was eager to invest more in tourism, a critical if troubled sector.
The number of tourists had dropped sharply in recent years to little more than two million annual visits, a decline that was attributed in part to the republic’s tarnished image in some of the international press.
Tourism decreased by only 1.1% in the first half of 2009, however, after having dropped 17% in the first quarter.
In response to the drop in tourism, the government earmarked new investments for the transport infrastructure, hospitality resources, the creation of new cultural events, and the revitalization of the historic centre, which, along with Mt.
The year was also important in the normalization of the republic’s standing with the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
San Marino, long considered an international tax haven, was admitted to a ""gray list” of countries working to achieve full compliance with international financial and banking standards.
These countries were required to sign 12 bilateral agreements for economic collaboration with as many foreign partners, and San Marino reached that number by the end of the year.
Saudi Arabia success notwithstanding, the republic’s most important trading partner, Italy, still refused to sign an agreement of economic and fiscal collaboration.
The government’s decision in May to postpone regional and municipal elections (probably until 2010, when a legislative election was due), was much criticized, especially in Principe.
Though Nigeria remained Sao Tome and Principe’s leading oil-production partner in the joint Development Zone, attempts were made to involve Angola, and the United States showed increasing interest in the potential for extracting oil from the Gulf of Guinea.
Though allegations of corruption continued, some of them relating to the misappropriation of donor funding, in March 2009 the IMF approved a new poverty-reduction and growth facility program.
Portugal remained the largest donor, and donor funding was expected to meet 80% of the country’s budget.
The amount of oil and gas that could be obtained from the waters off the archipelago, however, remained unclear.
Additional payments of signature bonuses by the oil companies were expected, but there were disputes over the oil blocks that resulted in the delay of those payments.
Local elections, begun in 2004, had been considered a step toward reform.
Efforts by Saudi Arabia to make the country a hub for scientific learning and research continued in 2009.
Some conservatives criticized the coed university, which allowed men and women to take classes together.
Relations between Saudi Arabia and the neighbouring United Arab Emirates faced several challenges in 2009.
In May the U.A.E. decided to pull out of the Gulf Cooperation Council monetary union after Saudi Arabia announced that Riyadh would be the centre of the GCC central bank.
Riyadh also reportedly asked its neighbour to remove from its national identification card a map of the U.A.E. that included disputed territory linking the U.A.E. with Qatar—land that Saudi Arabia recognized as part of its territory.
In late August Saudi Arabia required U.A.E. nationals to exclusively use passports in order to enter the kingdom.
In early June, ahead of his Cairo speech addressing the Muslim world, United States Pres.
In October, King 'Abd Allah visited Syria, the first trip to that country by a Saudi ruler since the 2005 assassination of Saudi-backed Lebanese statesman Rafiq al-Hariri, whose assassination was believed by some to have been orchestrated by Damascus.
In August, Deputy Interior Minister Prince Muhammad ibn Nayef survived an attempted assassination, the first time that a royal family member had been targeted.
Al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, the Saudi arm of al-Qaeda, claimed responsibility.
Some suggested that the incident might end speculation that al-Qaeda was evading direct confrontation with the royal family.
In 2009 the Shi'ite al-Houthi rebellion in northern Yemen spilled across Saudi borders and was met with Saudi air strikes and shelling.
There were accusations that Iran was supporting the insurgents, and a Saudi naval blockage along Yemeni shores was meant to stop the supposed delivery of Iranian supplies to the rebels.
The IMF ranked Saudi Arabia first among the Arab countries in economic position.
In 2009 inflation subsided from around Yemenis displaced by the Shi'ite al-Houthi rebellion in northern Yemen make their way toward a refugee camp in the southern Saudi province ofjizan in November.
In June, Saudi Aramco and France Total agreed to invest $9. billion to build the Jubayl oil refinery, expected to produce 400,000 bbl daily.
The refinery was one of four planned refineries meant to boost domestic capacity from 2. million to 3. million bbl daily.
Saudi Arabia sacrificed billions of dollars in revenue in 2009 by cutting output to prop up the price of crude oil.
The PDS continued to dominate rural areas, but a coalition of opposition parties, Bennoo Siggil Senegaal , won control of councils in Dakar, Saint-Louis, and other large cities.
Abdoulaye Wade’s son, Karim Wade, gain his first public position as a Dakar municipal councillor.
Shortly thereafter he was appointed to a ministry post in his father’s government, and many began to see him as a possible successor to his father.
On June 2 Parliament voted to create the post of vice president, but President Wade did not sign it into law by year's end.
On April 24 Air Senegal International ceased operations after a dispute over control of the airline between the Senegalese government and the airline's majority stockholder, Royal Air Maroc, had not been resolved.
The demise of Air Senegal was a blow to tourism, which had already been hard-pressed by the global economic downturn.
The European Union announced in early August that it would give nearly $16 million to Senegal to assist the estimated 460,000 people unable to afford adequate food.
On September 7 the United States Millennium Challenge Corporation approved a five-year, $540 million grant to Senegal for improvements in agriculture and infrastructure.
In April 2008 Serbia had signed the Stabilization and Association Agreement.
Ratko Mladic and Goran Hadzic, former leader of Croatia's Krajina Serbs.
At the EU foreign ministers meeting in December, however, the Dutch government lifted its opposition after a report by the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia’s chief prosecutor, Serge Brammertz, stated that Serbia made “constant progress"" in efforts to cooperate with the court.
The move would thus enable Serbia to attract more foreign investment and expand trade with EU member states.
In July the National Assembly passed the Act on Regional Development in an effort to equalize economic development by reducing the differences between developed and undeveloped parts of the country and to deal with regional imbalances due to an aging population that had impact on revenue sharing and distribution.
Government figures showed that average incomes in Belgrade were 19 times larger than those in the eastern town of Bor and that the amount of money that was in circulation in the capital was equal to that spent in more than 80 southern and eastern municipalities combined.
According to Eurostat, some food prices in Serbia were among the highest in southeastern Europe.
The average family of three in Serbia spent more than 40% of its income on food.
The Serbian Chamber of Commerce reported that salaries were being paid 45 days late in the country's poorest areas, raising fears of potential social unrest.
The World Bank approved a $400 million loan to assist the Serbian budget for 2009 and 2010.
Russia approved a loan package amounting to about $1 billion, of which $200 million was earmarked for Serbia’s budget.
Serbia’s central bank reported a dramatic rise in the number of insolvent companies; some 13,000 company accounts were blocked in 2009, bringing the total to 63,000 businesses that owed €3 billion.
Companies were also indebted to the government for about €655 million in unpaid taxes.
Little progress was achieved in reforming the education system in light of the increasing demands for a highly trained and diversified labour force needed to compete in the global economy.
Only about 10% of the population had completed a postsecondary education.
The EU reported that civil and political rights improved and that minority rights were largely respected in Serbia.
Observers expressed concern, however, over sporadic violence and deep divisions within the Muslim communities in the southwestern region of Sandzak.
Tensions were also on the rise in the northern autonomous province of Vojvodina and in the predominantly ethnic Albanian region of the Presevo Valley, where activists were demanding autonomy and possible unification with neighbouring Kosovo.
Sierra Leone a statute giving the ethnically mixed region a new constitution.
This would allow the province more legislative, diplomatic, and economic autonomy.
The move, which was approved by Serbia’s parliament, partially restored Vojvodina’s autonomy, which it had lost in the late 1980s.
In support of the international effort to stem the increase in Indian Ocean piracy, the Coast Guard opened a monitoring and rescue centre in cooperation with the International Maritime Organization.
In November Seychelles agreed to allow EU forces to police against pirates in waters off Seychelles.
The country entered into a joint agreement with neighbouring Mauritius concerning the continental shelf both island countries share.
The agreement ensured that both countries would retain rights to deep-sea drilling, mining, and ocean-conservation efforts.
In August former Ugandan High Court judge Frederick Egonda-Ntende was sworn in as the chief justice of the Seychelles Supreme Court.
He replaced Justice Andrew Ranjan Perera, who had retired from the post earlier in 2009.
The Seychellois government also entered into an agreement with the United Nations Development Programme to improve the transparency, accountability, and efficiency of its judiciary.
The country’s economic outlook began to improve in the third quarter, however, with a gradual recovery in mining and agricultural exports.
Two IMF missions to Sierra Leone commended the government for staying on course with its monetary policies despite the challenging economic conditions worldwide.
Ernest Bai Koroma opened Parliament on October 9 with an upbeat account of his government’s progress in implementing its Agenda for Change, an ambitious strategy for achieving economic diversification, boosting agricultural productivity, developing tourism, expanding education, overhauling the health care system, and increasing women’s economic and political participation, among other goals.
The discovery of a deepwater oil field off the coast of Sierra Leone held the promise of relief from the country’s dependence on the diamond industry.
Meanwhile, former British prime minister Tony Blair visited the country in April to promote the revival of its once-vibrant tourist industry.
Acknowledging UNICEF’s findings that Sierra Leone had the world’s highest rate of maternal and child mortality, the government had increased the number of health facilities in the country by 22% as well as recruited some 60 doctors from Nigeria to help meet a shortage of medical personnel.
The government estimated that maternal mortality rates may have fallen by as much as a third in three years.
Koroma’s intent to pursue an inclusive government was tested in March by outbreaks of violence in Pujehun district and in Freetown.
Government and paramilitary forces moved quickly to quell the disturbances.
Following mediation that involved key political leaders and UN officials, the two parties reached an accord to seek nonviolent conflict resolution.
The UN-backed Special Court for Sierra Leone concluded a trial in April with the sentencing of three leaders of the rebel Revolutionary United Front— Issa Hassan Sesay, Morris Kallon, and Augustine Gbao—to long prison terms for having committed atrocities ""upon a massive scale,” including the killing An Amnesty International representative talks with women in a maternity ward in Sierra Leone’s capital, Freetown, on September 20.
Sierra Leone, which had the world’s highest rate of maternal and child mortality, was taking steps to improve health care.
Singapore of four international peacekeepers and the sanctioning of mass rape.
This was the first time that an international court had handed down sentences for attacks against international peacekeepers and held senior leaders accountable for crimes of sexual violence.
The trial of former Liberian president Charles Taylor, which was expected to be the court’s final trial, continued in The Hague.
Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong Like most other countries, Singapore was in recession in 2009, but government grants to subsidize the wage bills of employers managed to stave off some retrenchments, keeping unemployment under 5% for most of the year.
Thanks partly to these stimulus measures and to a faster-thanexpected global recovery, economic contraction in 2009 amounted to only one-third of the level that had been feared at the beginning of the year.
Still, the recession prompted a surge in the number of foreign workers applying for permanent residency in a bid to hang on to their jobs.
On the property front, however, prices defied gravity, climbing back to near 2007 peaks and even setting new per-square-foot records in some districts.
The price spiral, prompted by low interest rates, an influx of foreigners, and speculative buying, worried citizens and contributed to their unhappiness about the very visible increase in the foreign population in Singapore.
More than one in three residents in the city-state were foreign-bom in 2009.
The government pledged to slow down the intake of foreigners, while at the same time it worked to raise labour productivity so that economic growth would not be overly compromised.
On the political front, Singapore witnessed a rare upheaval within its generally placid civil-society scene when a high-profile leadership tussle occurred at the Association of Women for Action and Research.
A group of women, mostly hailing from the same church and apparently united in their opposition to homosexuality, ousted the incumbents, whom they accused of leading the organization away from its “original” purpose of advocating gender rights.
Following weeks of strident accusations and the mass mobilization of supporters on both sides of the issue for an electoral showdown, the government finally stepped in to establish limits on civil-society activism.
At the same time, the government reiterated that an existing law that criminalizes sex between men would not be repealed, although gays would be allowed to lead their private lives.
In April, in an operation that lasted 12 hours at the Singapore General Hospital, a team of doctors in Singapore became the first in Asia to perform a heartliver transplant.
A related issue involved the government’s efforts to address a rise in the number of kidney-failure patients by introducing measures to reimburse organ donors for their expenses and lost income.
These steps were carefully calibrated to ease the burden on donors while also discouraging organ trading.
Domestic industry was also hit by a halt in January in gas supplies during the Russian-Ukrainian price dispute, which highlighted Slovakia’s need for energy diversification.
Samuel Kubani—AFP/Getty Images Slovaks show off their euros after collecting the bills from an automated teller machine in Bratislava’s main square on January 1, the day that Slovakia formally joined the euro zone.
Despite the economic downturn, public support for Prime Minister Robert Fico and his Direction-Social Democracy party remained high, thanks partly to Slovakia’s accession on January 1 to the euro zone.
Slovakia was only the second Eastern European country—after Slovenia—to adopt the common currency.
Exporters welcomed the move, particularly because it helped to promote stability amid the worldwide financial crisis.
With Smer-SD support, Ivan Gasparovic was reelected as president, comfortably beating opposition candidate Iveta Radicova in the second-round runoff.
In the EP elections, Smer-SD finished first, with 32% of the vote and 5 of the 13 seats.
The three opposition parties— the Slovak Democratic and Christian Union , SMK, and the Christian Democratic Movement —each gained two seats.
Already sore from the presidential election campaign, tensions between Slovaks and Hungarians reached a new high when on August 21 Bratislava banned Hungarian Pres.
On that day Solyom was scheduled to travel to the Slovak border town of Komarno to attend the unveiling of a statue honouring a historic Hungarian king.
The Slovak authorities found Solyom's planned visit offensive for several reasons, not least because it coincided with the anniversary of the 1968 invasion by Warsaw Pact troops (including Hungarian soldiers) that crushed Czechoslovakia’s Prague Spring liberalization movement.
Still, banning the president of another EU country was considered to be a major provocation, attracting international criticism and raising fears of further antagonism between the two countries.
Once the fastest-growing member of the euro zone, Slovenia became the worst-performing.
Industrial production improved by August, which indicated that Slovenia was emerging from recession.
On October 7 the European Commission initiated an excessive-deficit procedure for budgetary shortfalls above 3% of GDP for Slovenia and eight other EU countries.
Waning demand for Slovenian exports, which made up two-thirds of total GDP, lower tax income, and a government stimulus program swelled the deficit.
The government had awarded some $700 million in guarantees for bank loans to companies to improve liquidity.
Slovenia feared that documents submitted by Croatia prejudged the boundary between the two countries, which could have, among other points, restricted Slovenia’s access to international waters and affected Koper, its busy Adriatic port.
Slovenia ended its veto on Croatia’s EU talks in September when an agreement on arbitration was announced.
On November 2 a majority within the Croatian Parliament approved sending the dispute to international arbitration—a condition set by Slovenia.
Two days later the countries’ prime ministers signed an arbitration accord.
Slovenia’s priorities for its presidency included bioethics, children’s rights, the protection and integration into society of Roma and other minorities, and the promotion of democracy, the rule of law, and human rights in southeastern Europe.
On June 7, in an election with a record-low turnout , voters selected seven representatives to the European Parliament and gave a boost to the centre-right opposition.
In Italy eight members of that country’s native Slovenian minority were elected mayors in the Friuli-Venezia Giulia region.
Slovenia confirmed its first diagnosis of HINI influenza in June and its first death from the virus on November 3.
Primoz Kozmus, gold medalist in the hammer throw at the 2008 Summer Olympics, became the world champion in August.
This growth South African Archbishop Emeritus Desmond Tutu helps to launch a Truth and Reconciliation Commission in the Solomon Islands on April 29.
The government granted a new gold mining license in central Guadalcanal, where significant reserves were identified.
It also lodged claims with the UN for recognition of the Solomon Islands’ extended continental shelf, where massive seafloor sulphide reserves were thought to exist.
The Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands continued to guarantee the country’s security and allowed the government of Prime Minister Derek Sikua to move forward with its reform program.
A forestry bill was proposed to reduce the rate of logging to more sustainable levels.
In an attempt to confront parts of its recent past, the government released a report on the anti-Chinese riots of 2006.
The Ministry for National Unity, Reconciliation, and Peace launched a Truth and Reconciliation Commission to heal some of the social divisions caused by the ethnic conflict that occurred between 1998 and 2003.
The Transitional Federal Government , which had been shored up by support from the Ethiopian military, struggled to assert control over the country following the withdrawal of Ethiopian troops in January.
They remained to help Somalia’s TFG battle a fierce insurgency, but many analysts said that their presence actually fueled support for hard-line Islamists.
The Ethiopians left a contingent of 5,250 African Union peacekeepers in Mogadishu, the capital, who looked increasingly unable to halt the fighting.
Though most analysts agreed that the peacekeepers were critical to the TFG’s survival, many Somalis turned against the AU mission following an incident in February when a roadside bomb hit an AU truck and peacekeepers fired into the street, killing 39 civilians.
Sheikh Sharif was not a new face to Somalis—he was a top leader in the ICU, which in late 2006 brought Somalia its only window of peace in nearly 20 years—and many greeted his election with optimism.
He was seen as a clear improvement over his predecessor, warlord Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed, and he had the support of some moderate militia leaders.
Yet al-Shabaab, believed to be several thousand fighters strong and in control of much of southern Somalia, opposed Sheikh Sharif.
After Sheikh Sharif appealed for help from international donors, the United States agreed to send 40 tons of weapons.
United States Secretary of State Hillary Clinton met with Sheikh Sharif in Kenya in August and promised that additional support would be forthcoming.
In September a United States air strike, the latest in a series of targeted air strikes that had begun during the administration of Pres.
He was suspected of having had a role in the 1998 bombings of United States embassies in Kenya and Tanzania.
United States officials claimed that Nabhan was training al-Shabaab fighters in suicide bombing and served as a liaison to alQaeda in Pakistan.
Days later, alShabaab suicide bombers killed 21 people at an AU base in Mogadishu, including the deputy AU commander and 16 other peacekeepers.
In December a suicide bomber killed at least 15 people at a college graduation ceremony, including three TFG ministers.
The pirates were known to operate out of Puntland, in northeastern Somalia, an area with its own government thought to be complicit in piracy.
In the election campaign the ANC promised to retain its targets of halving poverty and unemployment by 2014 and maintained that creating employment would be the core mandate for economic policy.
In February a framework agreement responding to the global economic crisis was reached between the government, labour, and business sectors, which reaffirmed a commitment to infrastructural spending as the core of a stimulus to growth and job creation.
In his state of the nation address in June, Zuma committed the government to creating 500,000 job opportunities before the end of the year.
Among changes in the postelection cabinet were the appointment of Pravin Gordhan, previously head of the South African Revenue Service, as finance minister to replace Trevor Manuel, who became head of the new National Planning Commission.
By September the Congress of South African Trade Unions had become critical of Manuel’s planning program, accusing him of wanting to become a “prime minister” and arguing that former trade unionist Ebrahim Patel, appointed minister of economic development, should have responsibility for macroeconomic policy.
In November Gill Marcus, former chairperson of Absa bank and financial group, replaced Tito Mboweni as governor of the Reserve Bank.
The judgment that the National Prosecuting Authority was politically motivated in its prosecution of Zuma (which catalyzed the recall of Pres.
Thabo Mbeki in 2008) was overturned by the Supreme Court of Appeal in January, and charges of corruption, fraud, racketeering, and money laundering against Zuma were thus reinstated.
Zuma’s supporters claimed that this vindicated their standpoint that Zuma was innocent of the charges, though the NPA made clear that the decision did not amount to an acquittal.
The Judicial Service Commission decided not to proceed with the charges raised by judges of the Constitutional Court against Western Cape Judge President John Hlophe of having improperly attempted to influence the Court.
President Zuma appointed Sandile Ngcobo as chief justice to succeed Pius Langa, whose term had expired.
The contract of suspended commissioner of police Jackie Selebi was not renewed when it expired in July, and he was replaced by Bheki Cele, former minister for community safety in KwaZulu-Natal.
In December 2008, Vusi Pikoli, suspended national director of public prosecutions, had been sacked for allegedly not paying enough attention to public security, though he claimed that his dismissal was related to his having charged Selebi with corruption.
In August 2009, however, the North Gauteng High Court ruled that his dismissal was invalid.
In November he was paid 7. million rand by the government to withdraw his court challenge contesting his dismissal.
Schabir Shaik, sentenced to 15 years in jail in 2005 after his conviction for fraud and corruption and accused by the judge of having a “generally corrupt” relationship with Zuma, was released from jail early in the year on the grounds that he was terminally ill, though the severity of his illness was widely doubted.
These included a protracted strike by doctors over wages and conditions in hospitals, a weeklong strike over wages and benefits by construction workers involved in, among other things, building stadiums for the association football World Cup games in 2010, and a weeklong strike by municipal workers over wages.
Having grown 0.2% in the third quarter of 2008, it shrank by 1.8% in the fourth quarter, 7.4% in the first quarter of 2009, and 2.8% in the second quarter, recovering to 0.9% growth in the third quarter.
Inflation, which had peaked at 13.6% in August 2008, fell during 2009 to 6.4% in August and was expected to average 5.9% through the year, inside the official target range.
This permitted the Reserve Bank to make cuts of 5% in interest rates between December 2008 and August 2009.
In 2008 the deficit on the current account of the balance of payments was 7.4% of GDP, a 36-year peak, but it eased during 2009.
Owing to the need for continued state spending in conditions of recession and lessened revenue, the 2009-10 budget deficit was projected in February to increase to 3.9% from an estimated 1% in 2008-09.
By September the National Treasury was estimating a higher budget deficit due to a decline in revenue.
The budget granted 13. billion rand in personal tax relief, and 12 billion rand was added over three years to social grants, expected to benefit some two million more people.
Some 4 billion rand was allocated to the expanded public works program, with a promise of more if necessary from a contingency fund.
Speaking to the UN General Assembly on September 23, President Zuma outlined a foreign policy in continuity with the Mbeki presidency and emphasized the importance of dealing with climate change.
The South African government continued to monitor precarious situations in nearby countries, notably Zimbabwe.
Spain Area: 505,991 sq km Population : 46,059,000 Capital: Madrid Chief of state: King Juan Carlos I Head of government: Prime Minister Jose Luis Rodriguez Zapatero After officially entering into recession in the final quarter of 2008, the Spanish economy nose-dived in 2009.
Spain not only was one of the worst-hit EU economies but also was expected to be one of the last to recover from the downturn; the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development predicted that the country would experience another year of negative growth and that unemployment would top 20% in 2010.
These policies included spending the equivalent of 2.3% of GDP in measures to stimulate the economy and create jobs, introducing subsidies for new car purchases, and extending welfare provision for the unemployed who had exhausted their entitlement to benefits.
All this forced the PSOE into making a major U-turn on taxation; the 2010 budget approved in the fall included higher capital gains taxes, a 2% hike in the general value-added tax , and the elimination of a nearly $600 across-the-board annual incometax rebate that had been promised before the 2008 elections.
In November the government unveiled a wide-ranging package of measures intended to transform the Spanish economy into one based on research and development, gender equality, and environmentally friendly and financially stable economic growth and competitiveness.
These results provided a muchneeded boost to the PP, which was reeling from the impact of the Gurtel case, a corruption scandal involving a network of companies that had obtained contracts amounting to more than $25 million from PP-controlled administrations and the party itself since the late 1990s.
Things only got worse for the party; by the end of the year, more than 60 PP members—including the party’s former national treasurer (who had been forced to resign in July) and elected officials in four regions—were under investigation for offenses that included money laundering, bribery, and tax fraud.
PP leader Mariano Rajoy’s indecisive response to the scandal and inability to stamp his authority on regional party leaders undermined his influence and electoral credibility.
Another major corruption scandal was uncovered in Catalonia in October.
Opinion polls conducted that month showed that for the first time, corruption had overtaken terrorism in the ranking of citizens’ concerns.
ETA remained active, causing small explosions in and beyond the Basque Country, injuring 65 people in a bomb attack on a Civil Guard barracks in July and killing three police officers in two separate incidents in the summer.
The French and the Spanish continued to arrest dozens of suspected activists, including in April the suspected leader of the organization, the fourth person in that position to be captured in 11 months.
Meanwhile, elections held on March 1 led to a historic change of government in the region.
Many viewed this as a healthy sign of political normalcy in the divided region.
The year saw a marked improvement in SpanishUnited States relations, which had been strained since Zapatero’s unilateral decision to withdraw Spanish troops from Iraq in 2004.
This new spirit of cooperation was reflected in Spain’s positive and symbolically important response to United States requests for help in Afghanistan and in its bid to close the Guantanamo prison in Cuba.
In October, in his first state visit to the United States since 2004, Zapatero informed United States Pres.
Sudan, The government again reacted positively to United States requests for further reinforcements from its NATO allies, despite polls showing that most Spaniards opposed increased military engagement in that country.
In May the Sri Lankan armed forces succeeded in capturing the final enclave of the rebel Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam in the north of the island.
The LTTE’s leader, Velupillai Prabhakaran, and other prominent figures died in the fighting, and surviving LTTE fighters were rounded up.
The armed victory and prospect of restored security throughout the country brought the United People’s Freedom Alliance government of Pres.
This was reflected in subsequent victories in several provincial and local elections.
Sarath Fonseka, former commander of the Sri Lankan military, in an election scheduled for Jan., 2010.
The war’s conclusion left on the table the issues of whether and how to accommodate demands from the Tamil minority—major future challenges for the Sri Lankan government.
There was, however, a clear commitment to promote economic development in the north and east in the hope of lessening resentment within the Tamil community.
Masses of civilians fled the final stages of fighting, and 280,000 were interned in government-run camps.
Their treatment in the camps invoked criticism from international groups active in relief and resettlement as well as from governments and the press in the United States and Europe.
While this criticism may have impinged on aid from the United States and the EU and affected trade preferences from the latter, ties with China and India continued to strengthen.
Ironically, economic growth, which had held up remarkably well during the long civil war, slumped in 2009 as the global recession had a serious impact on the island.
After growing at 6% in 2008, GDP was expected to rise by only 3% in 2009, although faster growth was expected in 2010.
While the end of fighting engendered a national spirit of optimism and halted an outflow of private capital, Sri Lanka’s garment and other industrial exports suffered badly as purchasing power in its principal markets dropped.
The important tourist industry began to revive, however, as soon as the fighting ended.
The government continued to run a large fiscal deficit, and foreign exchange reserves dropped to dangerously low levels.
A $2. billion loan from the International Monetary Fund that was agreed to in July helped to stabilize the country’s economic position.
Omar Hassan Ahmad al-Bashir Government troops maneuver inside the war zone near the Sri Lankan town of Mullaittivu during a final offensive against the Tamil Tiger rebels in May.
Sri Lankan Government—Reuters/Landov On March 4, 2009, the International Criminal Court issued an arrest warrant for Sudanese Pres.
Omar alBashir on seven counts of war crimes and crimes against humanity in Darfur—the first time that the tribunal had acted against a sitting head of state.
Condemning the edict, Bashir expelled 13 international philanthropic organizations active in Darfur and throughout The Sudan, including Oxfam, Save the Children, and Doctors Without Borders.
Later he announced the Sudanization of humanitarian work, which caught the government's own Humanitarian Aid Commission ill-prepared to take on relief responsibilities for Darfur and the transitional areas between north and south.
John Kerry’s intervention, the Sudanese government reversed its decision and allowed the return of philanthropic organizations on condition that they change their names and logos.
Suriname limit Darfur fatalities while simultaneously curtailing further their already limited freedom of speech and action.
The African Union and the Arab League supported Bashir, arguing that the ICC’s decision impeded peaceful settlement to the Sudanese crisis.
Both organizations requested that the UN Security Council suspend the warrant, but to no avail.
Meanwhile, Bashir continued to defy the ICC by frequent travels to friendly African and Arab countries, including Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Libya, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and Zimbabwe.
Conflict, displacement, and insecurity persisted throughout the country.
In Darfur hostilities continued between armed opposition factions, government armed forces, militias, and ethnic groups.
The UN estimated that another 250,000 southern Sudanese had been displaced by interethnic fighting, bringing the total of internally displaced persons across the country to 4. million.
UN and local officials expressed apprehension that ongoing conflict could impede preparations for national elections, originally scheduled for July 2009 but postponed until April 2010.
The elections were a crucial part of the 2005 Comprehensive Peace Agreement that ended more than two decades of civil war between the north and the south, but several hurdles would need to be overcome before polling day, the most important being the controversial results of the 2008 census.
According to the director general of the Central Bureau of Statistics, the 10 states of southern Sudan now had only about 21% of The Sudan’s total population.
These figures were rejected by leading Darfur movements and a number of political parties.
With a record 68 political parties vying for positions, political dissension would surely escalate.
Some southern officials claimed that their northern political rivals deliberately incited interethnic violence to obstruct national elections and represent the southern government as ineffectual.
In November calls for the southern states to secede from The Sudan intensified as national First Vice Pres.
Salva Kiir, the leader of southern Sudan, urged the south to split from the government.
In February, The Sudan's most acclaimed author, Tayeb Salih, died in London.
The bauxite industry, a pillar of the economy and a major source of tax revenue, was especially hard-hit.
Bauxite multinational corporation BHP Billiton's announcement in 2008 that it was proposing to pull out of Suriname further added to the gloom.
The recession, the refusal of President Venetiaan, who was nearing the end of his third term, to contest another election, and the nonappearance of an appealing successor depressed the government’s support.
At the close of 2009, some observers saw the political horizon darkening.
Bouterse’s prospects were complicated by a long-pending indictment for the murder of 15 political opponents in the 1980s.
The same observers grumbled that if Bouterse’s candidacy were to be blocked, the probable alternative, former president Jules Wijdenbosch , was almost as unattractive because of his past destabilizing management of the country.
Suriname continued to suffer the corrosive impact of organized crime and revenue losses resulting from illegal gold mining.
The recent shrinking of Southern African Customs Union benefits for the country had worsened the situation.
Two major constitutional provisions were realized; a program of free primary education, which was to be introduced gradually beginning in 2010, was effected, and the Commission on Human Rights and Public Administration was appointed in September.
The commission’s fundamental role was to protect human rights and freedoms.
It also constituted the Integrity Commission, to which politicians and top civil servants were required to declare their assets upon assumption of public office.
In October Jan Sithole, who had led the Swaziland Federation of Trade Unions since the mid-1980s, stepped down, and Mduduzi Gina was elected to succeed him as secretary-general.
Mario Masuku, president of the banned People's United Democratic Movement , who had been arrested under the Suppression of Terrorism Act soon after its promulgation in November 2008, was released from prison on September 22 on grounds of paucity of evidence.
As chairman of the Southern African Development Community’s politics, defense, and security committee, King Mswati played a prominent role in the attempt to facilitate dialogue between Madagascar’s ousted president, Marc Ravalomanana, and his successor, Andry Rajoelina.
New antigraft legislation was being prepared because corruption continued to be a problem in both government and the private sector.
Switzerland SWEDEN Area: 450,295 sq km Population : 9,290,000 Capital: Stockholm Chief of state: King Carl XVI Gustaf Head of government: Prime Minister Fredrik Reinfeldt As a small, open, and export-oriented economy, Sweden suffered greatly from the global economic downturn in 2009.
The Finance Ministry estimated that GDP contracted by 5.2%, after having been at a virtual standstill the year before.
The production of key Swedish exports, such as cars, trucks, specialty steel, household appliances, and forest products, diminished rapidly.
Many companies, such as truck-making giant Scania, reduced both work hours and salaries to offset the sharply falling demand from abroad.
The employees and unions reluctantly accepted these cuts to avoid job losses.
In spite of such measures, however, the most alarming feature of the Swedish economic crisis was rising unemployment.
In a country where full employment had been the proud goal of all governments for decades, it was a significant defeat that the unemployment rate rose from 5.8% in July 2008 to more than 8% in the autumn of 2009.
In its budget for 2010, the government projected that unemployment would reach more than 11% that year.
The government responded to the economic downturn by providing a massive fiscal stimulus package.
The budget bill for 2010, moreover, included tax cuts on ordinary incomes as well as subsidies for municipalities and for the education and training of the unemployed.
The central bank also supported Swedish banks with generous lending facilities, although by autumn none of the banks had needed any formal state aid.
Instead, the shareholders in three of the largest banks, Nordea, SEB, and Swedbank, approved capital increases.
Late in the year some indicators suggested that the worst of the Swedish economic crises was over and that the government might even have been overly pessimistic in its assumptions.
Shares on the Stockholm stock exchange rose by almost 40% from January to October.
The financial markets started to anticipate rising sales and profits in 2010 and beyond, after the ""lost year” of 2009.
Many economists believed that Sweden would be in a favourable position to resume growth once the international economy started to pick up.
The European Commission recognized Sweden as one of the EU countries with the best public finances, with a deficit below the EU average, and the IMF predicted that it would be one of the few European economies to return to a growth of more than 1% in 2010.
His ruling fourparty centre-right coalition was expected to face a united red-green opposition with Social Democratic leader Mona Sahlin as the candidate for prime minister.
In autumn opinion polls, Sahlin and her coalition of the Social Democrats, the Greens, and the Left had a small but definite lead, receiving about 5% more supporters than the government alliance.
Sweden's presidency of the EU in the second half of the year did not affect the government’s position in the polls, although Sweden put a lot of effort into finishing the long-drawn-out process for concluding the EU’s Lisbon Treaty, which was finally accepted by all EU member nations in the autumn.
In the winter it was announced that Sweden would celebrate a royal wedding in June 2010.
The engagement of Crown Princess Victoria to her longtime boyfriend, Daniel Westling, was a major news item both nationally and internationally.
Victoria was first in line to succeed her father, King Carl XVI Gustaf, to the throne.
A major disappointment for most Swedes in 2009 was the failure of the Swedish association football team to qualify for the 2010 World Cup in South Africa.
After this debacle the Swedish team received a new coach, Erik Hamren, and concentrated on qualifying for the 2012 European championships to be held in Poland and Ukraine.
The small Alpine country was shocked to find itself on a ""gray list” of uncooperative tax havens published in April by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development and protested that it had not been given prior warning and that the complaints were unjustified.
Switzerland scrambled to have its name be removed from the list by signing double-taxation agreements in less than six months with the OECD’s stipulated minimum of 12 countries, offering to share previously confidential bank documents.
The treaty with the United States stated that any request for administrative assistance had to clearly identify the person concerned, ruling out so-called fishing expeditions to net a wider range of potential tax fugitives.
The signing of the treaty followed an agreement in August for Switzerland's biggest bank, UBS AG, to turn over information on 4,450 accounts of Americans suspected of holding undeclared assets.
At the same time, it respects our legal order and our sovereignty,” Swiss Pres.
Die-hard defenders of Swiss independence accused the government of buckling under United States pressure.
Polanski was in Zurich to accept an award for his life’s work when he was detained; his arrest prompted fury in France, where he resided.
Merz came under pressure to resign over his handling of a diplomatic spat with Libya.
Relations between the two countries had soured in July 2008 when Geneva police arrested Hannibal alQaddafi, son of the Libyan leader, on allegations that he and his wife had beaten two servants.
He was released several days later, but Libya cut economic and diplomatic ties to Switzerland and detained two Swiss businessmen, allegedly for immigration violations.
The Swiss long resisted Libyan demands for an apology, but Merz ultimately traveled to Tripoli in August and apologized to Muammar al-Qaddafi, apparently without having consulted his cabinet colleagues.
He returned without the Swiss businessmen, who were subsequently sentenced to 16 months’ imprisonment.
The 57% majority in favour of the ban was seen as an embarrassment for a country that hosts the European headquarters of the United Nations and where about 4% of the population was Muslim.
On December 2 the Swiss parliament elected Economics Minister Doris Leuthard as president for 2010.
Switzerland reluctantly ended the freezing of $7 million in assets linked to Mobutu Sese Seko, the late president of Zaire (now the Democratic Republic of the Congo), when a Swiss court ruled that the money had to be returned to his family.
Switzerland stated that this was due to the inaction of Congolese authorities to recover the funds through the courts and the refusal of Mobutu’s family to relinquish their claim to the assets, which allegedly had been pilfered from the mineral-rich African country.
Switzerland was less affected by the economic recession than some other industrialized countries.
A government expert group said that it expected GDP to shrink by 1.7% in 2009 and to recover slightly to 0.4% in 2010.
State officials responded by raising duties on cloth and thread imports and setting up a commission to encourage exports.
In March a local stock market, the Damascus Securities Exchange, opened its doors.
Six companies—four banks, a publishing and marketing group, and a transportation firm—were listed on the exchange, and four brokerage houses were authorized to trade shares.
Prime Minister Muhammad Naji al-Otari announced at the end of March that no state employees or public-sector workers would be laid off as a result of the economic slump and that steps to expand agriculture along the Euphrates River were being planned.
Nevertheless, growing unemployment sparked a jump in armed robberies and other violent crimes around Aleppo.
In April the Muslim Brotherhood pulled out of the opposition National Salvation Front , headed by former vice president ‘Abd al-Halim Khaddam.
The Muslim Brotherhood’s London-based general supervisor, 'Ali Sadr al-Din al-Bayanuni, attributed the withdrawal to persistent criticism of the organization by liberals inside the NSF, as well as to disagreements over the best way to respond to Israel’s 2008 invasion of the Gaza Strip.
Sheikh Mahmud Kaftaru, an influential religious figure with close ties to the regime, was arrested in early May on charges of having held unauthorized talks with Western diplomats.
A month later the Islamic television station Mihrab al-Sham was ordered to cease broadcasting, despite its links to influential state-affiliated religious scholars.
Controversy erupted in June over a proposed personal status law that would have mandated greater uniformity across religious communities on matters of marriage, inheritance, and child custody.
Bashar al-Assad in October issued a decree that prohibited smoking in restaurants, movie houses, schools, health centres, and other public places.
Relations with Saudi Arabia turned from icy to lukewarm as the year passed.
President Assad met with the head of the Saudi intelligence service in February and then dispatched Foreign Minister Walid al-Mu'allim to Riyadh.
Saudi Foreign Minister Sa'ud al-Faisal returned the visit in early March.
Taiwan capped the rapprochement by flying to Damascus in early October.
During the visit Syria’s minister of finance told reporters that taxes on Saudi imports would be eliminated as a way to stimulate bilateral trade.
In April unprecedented joint military exercises took place, and an agreement was signed to augment cooperation between the Syrian and Turkish defense industries.
Iraqi Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki discussed collaborative measures to improve border security with President Assad during a trip to Damascus in August, and the two leaders set up a council to oversee combined economic, cultural, and security projects.
In early September, however, a cluster of bombings in Baghdad prompted Iraqi officials to accuse Syria of having provided safe haven for the Ba'thist militants responsible for the attacks.
Iraqi Foreign Minister Hoshyar Zebari infuriated Damascus by demanding that the United Nations look into the incident by forming a commission similar to the one that was investigating the assassination of former Lebanese prime minister Rafiq al-Hariri.
After breakthroughs in 2008 that involved increasing Chinese tourism in Taiwan and expanding direct flights and trade between the two countries, the administration of Pres.
The DPP insisted that the ECFA be ratified only by a national referendum, while the Ma administration promised to consult with Taiwan’s legislature.
Chinese investors were also permitted to purchase real estate in Taiwan, and institutional investors (known as Chinese qualified domestic institutional investors) were allowed to invest in Taiwan’s stock market.
Rounding out this series of economic breakthroughs, Taiwan and China's financial regulators in November signed a memorandum of understanding on financial services that would eventually allow Taiwanese securities firms, banks, and insurance companies to set up operations in China, and vice versa.
Domestically, the ruling Kuomintang suffered political attrition as three of its lawmakers were forced from office.
Longtime legislator Diane Lee resigned in early 2009 after it became clear that she had never renounced her United States citizenship.
Two other KMT legislators stepped down after they were convicted of electoral fraud.
While the KMT won the by-election to replace Lee in one of its Taipei strongholds, it did so by an unexpectedly low margin.
Further signs of electoral weakness came when the KMT lost a by-election held in rural Yunlin county, where a DPP political newcomer achieved a landslide victory over a local factional candidate.
Meanwhile, Premier Liu Chao-shiuan was forced to resign in early September to take responsibility for the administration’s much-criticized response to a devastating typhoon in August.
Liu was replaced as premier by Wu Den-yih, a former mayor of Kaohsiung and a Nantou county legislator.
In the aftermath of Typhoon Morakot, the Dalai Lama was allowed to make a rare religious and humanitarian visit to Taiwan despite objections from China.
Although Uighur human rights activist Rebiya Kadeer was not granted a visa to visit Taiwan, a documentary about her life, entitled The Ten Conditions of Love, was shown across Taiwan on October 1, China's National Day.
To show their displeasure, Chinese tourists boycotted Kaohsiung because its mayor, Chen Chu, had invited the Dalai Lama to visit the city and had screened the Kadeer documentary at a city-sponsored film festival.
The corruption trial of former president Chen Shui-bian, which began in March, was the subject of much international and domestic criticism.
Observers expressed concerns over the fairness of the trial, particularly after news emerged that prosecutors had performed a skit satirizing Chen at a Lunar New Year’s party; many also raised objections over Chen's being held in solitary confinement throughout the trial.
Chen’s wife, Wu Shu-chen, was also found guilty of corruption and given a life sentence.
The significance of this was that for the first time in decades, Taiwan was able to participate in the deliberations of a UN body, albeit not as a formal member.
Relations with the United States improved in November as Taipei agreed to permit expanded imports of United States beef, despite widespread fears in Taiwan that such beef was unsafe.
Taiwan’s export-oriented economy, which was severely affected by the ongoing global economic downturn, contracted 4.9% in 2009.
Consumers received some relief as the consumer price index declined by 1.84% and the Ma administration issued consumer vouchers amounting to more than $2 billion.
Tajikistan TAJIKISTAN Area: 143,100 sq km Population : 6,952,000 Capital: Dushanbe Chief of state: President Imomalii Rakhmon Head of government: Prime Minister Akil Akilov Though Tajikistan’s financial structure was largely protected from the direct effects of the global economic crisis because of its weak integration into the international financial system, in 2009 the country experienced very severe secondary effects.
Tajikistan’s national economy was heavily dependent on remittances from labour migrants working abroad, and these sharply declined as migrants lost their jobs owing to the spread of the economic downturn in Russia and Kazakhstan.
By the end of March, remittances were down an estimated 30%, with a 40% reduction expected by year’s end.
The Tajik government drafted a package of anticrisis measures, but most of them, while highly beneficial if implemented, were designed for future needs.
Among the long-term proposals was a revival of the vocational-technical education system, which could provide young people with much-needed technical skills.
For immediate relief, Tajikistan turned for help to the international community, using the country’s position on the front line with Afghanistan and the danger posed if the Afghan insurgency spread across the border.
A number of major international financial institutions, including the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, the Asian Development Bank, and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, provided additional assistance, including budget support.
Imomalii Rakhmon told the UN General Assembly in September that the wealthy and developed countries that had caused the financial crisis should help less-developed countries overcome its effects.
Specifically, he asked that debts be partially written off that were accumulated as a result of the crisis.
An IMF official visiting Tajikistan at the time retorted that it was the responsibility of the government of every country to manage its own economy.
Effects of the crisis became increasingly apparent as the crime rate rose.
According to official law-enforcement sources, the crime rate increased 11.6% from January to August.
September saw a wave of attacks on currency exchanges, some resulting in the killing of employees.
In July a shoot-out between security officers and what was officially described only as an “armed band” took place near Tavildara in north-central Tajikistan, but the importance of this region to the Islamist opposition during the 1992-97 civil war led to speculation that the disturbance might have been connected to the possible return to the area of Mullo Abdullo, a prominent Islamist field commander.
Members of the militant extremist Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan were believed to be crossing the border from Afghanistan into Tajikistan, raising fears that the influence of extremists in a society shaken by the effects of the economic downturn might grow.
In November the country hosted the 10th anniversary celebrations of the East African Community , which culminated in the signing of the Common Market Protocol and the laying of the foundation stone for the new EAC headquarters in Arusha.
President Kikwete dismissed suggestions from the opposition that the elections were flawed.
Like other East African states suffering from the effects of the global economic downturn, Tanzania experienced weakened demand for exports of goods (cash crops) and services and a contraction of foreign investment.
The country still ranked in the lowest 10% of the world’s economies in terms of annual per capita income.
The government’s povertyreduction strategy prioritized the agricultural sector, which accounted for more than 40% of GDP, 85% of exports, and 80% of the workforce.
In the industrial sector, gold mining was increasingly important; Tanzania became Africa’s third largest gold producer.
In June the World Bank approved a $50 million loan for a mineral-resources project to improve the socioeconomic impact of mining and to enhance local and foreign investment.
While the government paid lip service to its war on corruption, leading officials examined the difficulties in curtailing financial malfeasance.
Prime Minister Mizengo Pinda conceded that corruption was a difficult problem to overcome.
One analyst argued that the low incomes of many Tanzanians made it necessary for them to steal from the workplace to meet their basic survival needs.
In his view the most effective remedy would be to provide better economic incentives.
President Kikwete blamed foreign countries for the persistence of corruption in Tanzania and singled out the United Kingdom for failing to respond to his government’s request for assistance in corruption cases involving U.K.-based companies.
Nevertheless, the government registered some success in pursuing graft cases; two former ministers, Basil Mramba and Daniel Yona , were tried on charges of abuse of office.
Throughout the year the government sought to mitigate the harm done to the country’s image by the spate of murders of albinos, whose body parts were used in traditional medicine to make goodluck charms and potions.
In January the government banned traditional healers, but this overlooked the fact that healers purportedly treated 30% of Tanzania’s population.
More than 90 people, including four police officers, were charged with killing albinos or trading in their body parts.
Abhisit, however, was unable to restore muchneeded political stability to the country; in fact, his assumption of power as a nonelected prime minister made Thailand all the more polarized between the so-called yellow shirts—anti-Thaksin royalists who were mostly urbanbased—and the pro-Thaksin, largely rural-based red shirts.
The latter group disputed the political independence of the Constitutional Court, which had dissolved the TRT in a 2007 ruling, and contested Abhisit’s choice of Kasit Piromya, a strong supporter of the yellow shirts, as foreign minister.
The rising tensions erupted in March when the red shirts, who formed a populist movement called the United Front for Democracy Against Dictatorship , staged a massive protest in Bangkok.
In April the protesters moved to Pattaya, south of Bangkok, where they forced the cancellation of a summit meeting of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
Deeply embarrassed, Abhisit declared a state of emergency and used military force to quell the demonstrations; at least two people were killed during the crackdown.
An assassination attempt on yellow-shirt leader Sondhi Limthongkul exacerbated the crisis.
On September 19, which marked the third-year anniversary of the military coup that drove Thaksin from power, the UDD staged another large-scale demonstration in Bangkok and called on Abhisit to resign; troops were again deployed, but the protest ended peacefully.
In September Thailand’s 81 -year-old King Bhumibol was hospitalized, reportedly with pneumonia.
He was released the following month and declared to be in “satisfactory” health.
On the foreign relations front, Thailand faced international criticism in January following reports that its military had mistreated Muslim refugees from Myanmar and Bangladesh.
In April, Thai and Cambodian troops clashed near the Temple of Prear Vihear—a source of long-standing land disputes between the two countries; the skirmish left two Thai soldiers dead.
In November Thaksin was made an economic adviser to Cambodian Prime Minister Hun Sen.
At the end of the year, Thailand again raised international ire when it forcibly repatriated 4,000 Hmong refugees to Laos.
The bill was, however, passed by the National Assembly and signed into law by the president on June 30.
On August 21 deputies from all parties unanimously approved a bill defining eligibility requirements for the election, stipulating that all presidential candidates were to be in good standing with tax authorities and were to have renounced any nationality other than Togolese.
Faure Gnassingbe, was arrested on April 15 while he was attempting to seek refuge at the United States embassy.
He was accused of having plotted a coup with several senior military officers.
On April 17 police invited the public to see weapons allegedly found at Kpatcha’s house.
Police announced on May 1 that they had detained 10 civilians, as well as another Gnassingbe brother, Essolizam, for complicity in the alleged plot.
On May Demonstrators demand the resignation of Thai Prime Minister Abhisit Vejjajiva as they stage a protest outside the venue for the ASEAN summit held in Pattaya in April.
Tonga Xinhua/Landov Police in Lome, Togo, display weapons on April 1 7 that allegedly were found at the house of Kpatcha Gnassingbe, who was arrested for having plotted a coup against his brother, Pres.
Faure Gnassingbe. 28 the president announced that a truth, justice, and reconciliation commission would be created to investigate the violence that gripped the country following the death of Pres.
Aid funding was offset by falls in revenue from overseas remittances, the amount of which typically totaled $96 million annually but had dropped by 10% owing to the global recession.
In addition, government tax revenues were expected to plummet by 8% as a result of lower levels of spending and a decline in imports.
Hopes were dashed when Nautilus Minerals experienced difficulty raising funds for the seabed mining of 10 massive sulfides systems.
To the delight of pro-democratic forces, the Commission on Constitutional and Electoral Reform produced its comprehensive and radical constitutional reform recommendations in mid-November.
Under the proposals, Tonga would remain a constitutional monarchy; however, the king and Privy Council would no longer be part of the executive, the king would no longer independently appoint the prime minister or cabinet ministers, and elections would occur under a new single transferable voting system.
A Royal Commission appointed to consider the ferry’s loss revealed that the ferry was not designed to operate in open seas, had not been inspected by qualified marine engineers, and was known to be in very poor structural condition when it was sent on its interisland journey.
One victim of the economic slump was CL Financial Group, the largest conglomerate in Trinidad and Tobago; the government was forced to extend a bailout package to the group in January after the conglomerate fell into financial distress.
CL Financial was involved in insurance, banking, real estate, and other businesses throughout the Caribbean and elsewhere.
The group’s main problem concerned its insurance subsidiary, the Colonial Life Insurance Co. , which was said to be billions of dollars in arrears on its statutory fund to protect policyholders.
Trinidad and Tobago was in the international spotlight in April when it hosted United States Pres.
Barack Obama and other heads of government at the Fifth Summit of the Americas, held in Port of Spain; the visit by Obama marked his first trip to the Caribbean as the United States head of state.
In November, Trinidad and Tobago again hosted a gathering of world leaders when it presided over the biennial Commonwealth Heads of Government Conference.
Prime Minister Mohamed Ghannouchi In the Tunisian presidential and parliamentary elections held on Oct., 2009, incumbent Pres.
Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali was elected to a fifth term, as expected, and his party, the Democratic Constitutional Assembly , confirmed its hold over the Chamber of Deputies, the lower house of parliament.
There was speculation that the 73-year-old president's fifth term might be his last, given the constitution’s upper limit of 75 years of age for prospective candidates.
Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali hold placards as he arrives in the port city of Rades to give a speech at the beginning of his reelection campaign in October. eluded by amendments to the constitution passed in 2008, changes that had ostensibly been made to ease the candidate registration requirement.
David Petraeus, head of the United States military’s Central Command, told a United States congressional committee in April that four of the recent suicide bombers in Iraq had been Tunisian and that a network had been reactivated in Tunisia six months earlier to recruit militants for attacks in Iraq and Afghanistan.
Tunisia also sought the repatriation of two Tunisian prisoners held in United States military facilities, one at Bagram, Afg., and the other at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, who had been charged in absentia for terrorism offenses.
Despite objections from the European Court of Human Rights, European states persisted in returning illegal migrants to Tunisia.
Italy sent back five migrants during the year, and all of them were subsequently sentenced to prison.
Despite minor amendments, Tunisia’s 2003 antiterrorism law continued to be used to imprison the regime’s opponents, especially those who sympathized with Salafi jihadism.
By 2009 as many as 1,200 persons had been sent to prison under the law.
Sadok Chourou, the former leader of the banned Islamist political party AlNahdah, was sentenced to an additional year in prison for a new offense one month after his release in January from an 18-year sentence.
Outspoken Muslim cleric Sheikh Yusuf al-Qaradawi visited Kairouan in May, despite his past criticisms of the Tunisian government.
In June the Tunisian journalists' union submitted to the government a memorandum complaining of official harassment.
In Middle Eastern relations, Tunisia remained a member of the moderate Arab camp, standing with Saudi Arabia, Jordan, and Egypt in their confrontations with Iran.
Tunisia also retained good relations with France, obtaining support for a nuclear power station, to be completed by 2020.
Turkey was also a member state of the Group of 20 and sent representatives to the G-20 summit meetings held in London and in Pittsburgh during the year.
The local government elections were followed by a government reshuffle on May 1.
Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan’s foreign policy adviser, Ahmet Davutoglu, became foreign minister, replacing Ali Babacan, who was appointed deputy prime minister in charge of the economy.
Relations between the government and the military were strained by an expanding investigation into an alleged military plot to overthrow the government.
In October 2008, charges had been brought against 86 defendants, including a number of high-ranking officers.
While most of the officers arrested were subsequently released, 56 of the 86 defendants accused of having instigated the so-called Ergenekon plot remained in prison as new charges were added to the original indictment.
The National Security Council recommended in August that the government continue to implement its policy of strengthening the unity of the nation—i.e., of fulfilling at least some Kurdish aspirations.
Ilker Basbug, the Turkish armed forces chief, declared that the military Carrying a banner depicting the image of the founder of the Republic of Turkey, Kemal Atatiirk, protesters march in Ankara on April 18, following new arrests in an alleged plot to overthrow the government; among the protesters were many university students and teachers, who were alarmed that a number of leading academics had been charged with involvement in the plot.
On October 10, Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu joined his Armenian counterpart, Edward Nalbandian, in signing two protocols that called for the establishment of full diplomatic relations and the opening of the frontier between the two countries.
Achieving those goals remained problematic, however, even if the protocols were ratified by both countries’ parliaments, as opposition to the protocols emerged on numerous fronts.
Turkey’s relations with Syria and Iraq were upgraded to '‘strategic partnerships,"" and visa-free travel between Turkey and Syria came into force in September.
On January 29, Erdogan quit a panel at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switz., complaining that he had not been allowed to respond to a speech by Israeli Pres.
Shimon Peres rejecting Turkish criticism of the Israeli operation in Gaza.
In October, Turkey withdrew at the last moment an invitation to the Israeli air force to take part in joint maneuvers in central Turkey.
The EU annual report on Turkey’s progress praised the governments Kurdish and Armenian initiatives while drawing attention to shortcomings in human rights.
In response to the report, Egemen Bagis, Turkey’s minister for EU affairs, outlined a program of legislation aimed at meeting some of the EU’s demands.
The effects of the global recession were felt in Turkey throughout 2009.
GDP contracted by 7% year-on-year in the second quarter; the volume of foreign trade fell by 36% in the first nine months; and the unemployment rate increased from 10% to 13% by the end of July.
However, the index of the Istanbul Stock Exchange more than doubled from a low of 26,864 at the beginning of the year to 59,093 by November 5, which suggested that in Turkey the worst of the economic crisis was over.
Gurbanguly Berdymukhammedov announced that the global financial crisis was affecting Turkmenistan (despite the country’s lack of integration into the world financial system) because the volume of exports had been reduced.
The steps the government had already taken to mitigate the effects of the crisis included issuing redenominated banknotes, creating a stabilization fund, and seeking to make the Turkmen economy even less dependent on the outside world.
This last endeavour was being made easier, Berdymukhammedov noted, because Turkmenistan had no foreign debts.
In June, however, the country received a $3 billion loan from China to develop the South Yolotan natural gas deposit, from which gas would be exported to China through a new pipeline that opened in December.
Turkmenistan also expressed interest during the year in participating in the Nabucco pipeline project, an international scheme to export gas to Europe via Iran, bypassing Russia.
Foreign observers suggested that Turkmen interest was at least partly intended to irritate the Russian state-owned energy giant Gazprom.
In the first half of 2009, there were several disagreements between the two countries over gas deliveries from Turkmenistan to Russia, but by October the disputes had been resolved, and at the end of the year, deliveries were set to begin in January 2010.
In April Berdymukhammedov sought to defuse the dispute between Central Asian states over water use by offering gas and electricity to Turkmenistan's neighbours at a meeting of the International Fund to Save the Aral Sea.
He angered Tajikistan, however, by supporting Uzbekistan in insisting that construction of any large hydropower projects in upstream states be subject to regional consent and approved by independent international experts.
On April 13 Berdymukhammedov signed a decree setting up an interdepartmental working group on energy diplomacy consisting of heads of the state agencies dealing with energy affairs, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and special scientificresearch institutes to analyze the situation in the international energy sphere, including energy security issues, and promote Turkmenistan's cooperation with the international energy market.
The gradual dismantling of the legacy of Berdymukhammedov’s predecessor Saparmurat Niyazov—the self-styled Turkmenbashi the Great—continued in 2009 with the gradual disappearance of more visible trappings of Niyazov’s period in office.
This included the pervasive influence of Niyazov’s book Ruhnama, which had been given the status of holy writ and had caused incalculable damage to the education process.
The Turkmen opposition in exile argued, however, that little had actually improved since Niyazov’s death because the influence of the security services was still all-pervasive.
Investment returns from the Tuvalu Trust Fund shrank, and the fund lost an estimated 12.5% of its value as global financial markets contracted.
Following successful experiments with solar and wind energy, Tuvalu's minister for public utilities and industries announced the creation of a $20 million plan to generate all of Tuvalu’s energy from renewable sources by 2020.
Ukraine political pressure on those larger countries whose emissions were producing sea level rises that were starting to salinate hard-won cropping soil and king tides that continued to degrade coasts on Tuvalu’s atolls, which were only 4. m above sea level at the highest point.
On April 4 the risks for the many Tuvaluans who serve as crew on merchant ships were highlighted when 12 Tuvaluans on the German-registered ship Hansa Stavanger were among 24 taken hostage by Somali pirates.
In August all were freed after the ship's owner paid a $2.75 million ransom.
The regional drought that devastated large areas in neighbouring countries initially led to increased Ugandan exports of food, which offset diminished external demand for established exports such as coffee.
The drought also hit Uganda hard, however, and after food shortages became severe in parts of the country, the government temporarily halted the export of key food commodities to regional markets.
Although the government consolidated and expanded the gains of poverty-reduction efforts of recent years, the per capita GDP still ranked among the lowest in Africa.
At the beginning of the year, two British oil companies announced ""world-class"" discoveries in the Lake Albert region.
Tullow Oil signed nondisclosure production and revenuesharing agreements that were rumoured to give 8 of every 10 bbl found to the Ugandan government.
Mindful of endemic political instability in the oilbearing area, the government was eager to avoid the mistakes of other African oil-producing countries in unplanned development and lack of transparency.
Early discussions for future planning concerned the construction of a refinery and a pipeline to the coast to end the country’s dependence on Kenya.
Throughout the first quarter of 2009, Uganda participated with the Democratic Republic of the Congo and southern Sudan in a joint military operation, supported by United States advisers, in the DRC against the Lord’s Resistance Army , a Ugandan rebel group.
The operation's objectives were to capture or kill LRA leader Joseph Kony and to destroy the organizations command structure.
Kony escaped and was rumoured to be at large in the Darfur region of The Sudan under the protection of the Khartoum government, while the LRA scattered throughout the northeastern DRC and into The Sudan and the Central African Republic.
Wherever the rebels went, they continued their reign of terror, raping and killing civilians and forcibly recruiting child soldiers.
Challenged about his wife’s appointment, Museveni replied that originally he had yielded to pressure from the elders in her constituency to allow her to enter politics and that then her parliamentary performance had been impressive.
In September ongoing tension between the government and the traditional Buganda monarchy, in southcentral Uganda, erupted in violence when the police prevented the Bugandan kabaka from attending a function in a town near Kampala that the government claimed had seceded from his kingdom.
The police used tear gas and live ammunition to quash the ensuing riots, in which some 20 people died and 50 were wounded.
At the end of the month, inconclusive talks took place between the kabaka and President Museveni.
The year began with a gas dispute with Russia after the breakdown of talks on Dec., 2008, between Russia’s Gazprom and Ukraine’s national oil and gas company, Naftohaz Ukrainy.
By January 7, Russia had halted all gas transit through Ukraine on the main pipeline to Europe.
The dispute, over prices and back payments, ended after Prime Minister Yuliya Tymoshenko met with her Russian counterpart, Vladimir Putin, on January 18; gas transit through Ukraine resumed shortly thereafter.
The economic crisis in Ukraine, sparked by the worldwide financial crisis that began in 2008, deepened in 2009.
Although the contraction of the economy had slowed by November, GDP still fell 15.9% in the third quarter of the year, compared with the same period in 2008.
In the first nine months of the year the Ukrainian currency, the hryvnya, fell from 5 to 8 against the United States dollar.
The International Monetary Fund released $10. billion of its $16. billion loan to Ukraine after Tymoshenko agreed to keep the country’s budget deficit at less than 6% in 2009 and less than 4% in 2010.
On March 18, as a cost-saving measure, she ordered a 50% cut in salary for all cabinet ministers, effective from April 1 until Jan., 2010.
The Rada passed the bill in October, and, despite warnings by the prime minister and her allies in the Tymoshenko Bloc that the bill ran counter to Ukraine’s agreement with the IMF, the president signed it into law.
The IMF subsequently suspended further disbursement of the country’s loan.
The only permanent replacement was a close ally of President Yushchenko, Petro Poroshenko, who was appointed foreign minister on October 9.
The Tymoshenko Bloc responded to Svoboda’s victory by declaring the election results invalid.
The Rada initially set the next presidential election for October 25, but after the Constitutional Court overturned that decision on May 17, the election was scheduled for Jan., 2010.
Just as Yushchenko’s popularity among Ukrainians had plummeted, relations between the Ukrainian president and his Russian counterpart, Dmitry Medvedev, also deteriorated sharply.
On August 11, Medvedev wrote an open letter to Yushchenko, denouncing him as “anti-Russian” and claiming that he had deliberately disrupted the supply of Russian gas to Europe.
Joe Biden visited Ukraine, offering assurances that his country still supported Ukraine’s NATO membership bid, despite delays in the admission process.
Another visitor, from July 27 to August 10, was the new Russian Orthodox patriarch of Moscow and all Russia, Kirill I , in what was perceived to be a political mission.
United Kingdom Kamran Jebreili/AP A Metro Dubai train passes through the formerly booming emirate of Dubai in October; the ultramodern rapid-transit line—the first of its kind in any Arab Gulf country—opened on schedule on September 10, though it was still incomplete and reportedly 80% over budget. helped by the oil-rich Abu Dhabi.
Dubai’s stock exchange, real-estate values, and construction industry declined markedly, and thousands of residents and workers left the emirate.
In November world markets were shaken when Dubai asked to delay interest payments for six months, and Abu Dhabi was forced to extend bailout funds.
Nonetheless, in September Dubai inaugurated an ultramodern subway line.
Tensions between the U.A.E. and Saudi Arabia rose over border issues and the selection of Riyadh by members of the Gulf Cooperation Council as the headquarters of its proposed central bank.
The U.A.E. considered the decision to be both politically motivated and dismissive of the competitive advantages of locating the bank in the emirates.
Subsequently, in May the U.A.E. decided to join Oman in withdrawing from the planned GCC monetary union.
The U.A.E. continued its efforts to build nuclear energy plants for peaceful purposes, to generate electricity.
It entered into agreements with the United States and France to help develop its nuclear program and announced that it expected to have its first nuclear power plant operating in 2015.
In May France established a permanent military base in Abu Dhabi, a move that Iran strongly criticized as being directed against it.
The U.A.E. and Iran continued their ongoing dispute over the ownership of three strategic islands located in the Persian Gulf (Abu Musa and Greater and Lesser Tunb) that were under Iranian sovereignty.
In the United Kingdom, the government—and politicians in general—had a difficult year in 2009, partly, but not only, because of the impact on the U.K. of the global recession.
The party's poor showing resulted in part from the proportional voting system used to elect members of the European Parliament.
Labour's poor showing also reflected the unpopularity of Prime Minister Gordon Brown and his government ministers.
Criticism of his leadership came to a head on the evening of June 4, immediately after the end of voting, when James Purnell, the secretary of state for work and pensions, resigned from Brown’s cabinet.
In the hours that followed, Brown’s allies sought to ensure that no other ministers followed Purnell’s example.
None did, though Brown paid a price for securing the loyalty of two senior ministers.
He had wished to switch Chancellor of the Exchequer Alistair Darling and Foreign Secretary David Miliband to new ministerial posts, but they refused to move.
As Brown felt that he could not dismiss them, he left them where they were, and his authority was visibly weakened.
With a general election to be held no later than June 2010, one telling sign of the tide flowing away from Labour came with the decision of The Sun, the U.K.’s biggest-selling daily newspaper, to switch from Labour, which it had supported in the three previous general elections, to the Conservatives.
The Sun announced its decision on September 29, just hours after Brown delivered his main speech to Labour’s annual party conference.
Media coverage of The Sun’s decision overshadowed that of Brown’s speech, to the consternation of government ministers.
At the annual conference in October, Conservative members sought to represent a moderate and responsible party that would neither return to the free-market ideology of the 1980s nor take risks with public finances.
George Osborne (see Biographies), the party’s shadow chancellor , made it clear in a speech on October 6 that tough decisions would have to be made on both taxes and public spending.
With growing public acceptance of the need for such measures, the Conservative strategy proved more popular than it might have been in a more clement economic climate.
United Kingdom many members of both the House of Commons and the Lords had claimed expenses to which they were not entitled.
Starting on May 8, after the Daily Telegraph newspaper had bought a pirated copy of a computer disk containing previously secret information, the paper devoted much of its news coverage for some weeks to disclosing the details of MPs’ expense claims.
This showed how many MPs had exploited the expenses system to use public money to make tax-free profits on property dealings and to fund spending that had nothing to do with their parliamentary duties.
Examples included being reimbursed for building a duck house, maintaining a tennis court, and cleaning out a moat.
The disclosures led to resignations both of government ministers and of Conservative “shadow” ministers.
A number of MPs announced that they would stand down at the next general election rather than risk the wrath of their local voters.
The biggest casualty of the scandal was the speaker (or chairman) of the Commons, Michael Martin.
He was criticized by some for not fighting what appeared to be an entrenched cavalier attitude toward expenses and by others for not defending MPs vigorously enough.
On May 19 he became the first speaker in three centuries to be forced to resign his post; he was succeeded on June 22 by Conservative MP John Bercow.
Prime Minister Brown asked Sir Thomas Legg, a retired civil servant, to conduct an independent audit of all expense claims since 2004.
Most MPs agreed to abide by Legg’s request, though some challenged his findings, arguing that he was effectively changing the rules retrospectively and was challenging expense claims that were within the accepted rules at the time that they were made.
Public opinion polls, however, showed that most voters thought most MPs were dishonestly claiming money to which they were not entitled.
New rules were agreed on that both restricted what MPs could claim and required that all expense claims be published online, but these reforms did little to quell public suspicion.
Brown was also forced onto the defense by demands that Nepalese Gurkha soldiers who had fought for the British army be allowed to retire in Britain.
Government proposals to offer very limited immigration rights were rejected by the Commons on April 29.
Scotland's first minister, Alex Salmond, had to make concessions to other parties to secure the passage of the budget on February 4.
In Wales, Rhodri Morgan announced on October 1, two days after his 70th birthday, that he would step down after almost 10 years as the Welsh first minister.
Previously the highest court in the land had been the Appellate Committee of the House of Lords, where panels of Law Lords would meet to decide cases referred by the Court of Appeal.
Following growing calls to keep the legislative and judicial institutions completely separate, the Supreme Court was formally established.
Amid the global recession, the U.K.'s GDP fell by 2.5% in the first quarter of 2009.
The declines were gentler after that, although the announcement of a third-quarter slide of 0.2%, the sixth quarterly decline in GDP in succession, meant that the recession was the longest since quarterly GDP data were first collected in 1955.
By the final months of the year, there were signs that the trough of the recession had been reached, with output 6% below its earlv-2008 peak, and a tentative recovery had begun.
Despite signs of economic recovery, however— including a steady rise in property values from the spring—unemployment continued to rise, reaching 2. million, or 8% of the labour force, by the end of the year, compared with 1. million at the end of 2008.
The Bank of England , under the guidance of its governor, Mervyn King , acted aggressively in the early months of the year to revive demand.
In addition, the BOE embarked on a program of “quantitative easing,"" to inject more money into the economy by buying bonds from companies and banks.
By the end of the year, the BOE had injected £200 billion into the money supply.
One reason why monetary policy was loosened so dramatically was that there was little room for further fiscal expansion.
Government measures that had been announced in 2008 to support the economy, combined with rapidly falling tax revenues, led the chancellor of the Exchequer to forecast in his budget speech on April 22 that government borrowing in fiscal 2009-10 was likely to reach £175 billion (about $260 billion), or 12.4% of GDP, the highest peacetime figure for the U.K. in recent decades.
This meant that Darling could not stimulate the economy further through tax cuts or higher spending.
Indeed, he gave advance warning of future tax increases, intended to take effect as the economy recovered.
He announced that the top rate of income tax would rise in 2010 to 50% for those earning more than £150,000 (about $220,000) a year and that personal tax allowances for those earning more than £100,000 a year would be withdrawn.
United Kingdom Matt Dunham/AP Protesters take part in an antiwar demonstration in London on October 24. discuss the global recession.
Barack Obama for his role since September 2008 in leading the international response to the financial crisis.
At the summit the G-20 members agreed to inject $1. trillion into the global economy, including an additional $500 billion for less-developed countries.
The new bank remained vulnerable, however, like other major U.K. banks, which continued to require government support in the form of equity stakes and the insurance of ""toxic” loans.
The banks’ plight was underlined by the Royal Bank of Scotland’s announcement on February 26 of an annual loss of £24. billion , the biggest loss in U.K. company history.
In response to a European Commission ruling on the conditions under which state aid was permitted, the government announced on November 3 that both RBS and LBG would be required to sell off some of their mortgage, insurance, and retail banking subsidiaries to smaller banks or to companies new to banking.
Brown on June 15 announced that a full, independent inquiry would be held into Britain’s involvement in Iraq to find out what lessons could be learned.
Brown said that the inquiry, to be chaired by Sir John Chilcot, a retired civil servant, would be conducted in private, but the prime minister subsequently yielded to pressure, not least from Chilcot, to allow that, where possible, hearings could be conducted in public.
As U.K. forces were leaving Iraq, they were arriving in Afghanistan, and by October they numbered 9,500 there, mainly in Helmand province.
Amid accusations that British troops lacked some of the equipment that they needed to operate effectively, U.K. casualties increased sharply during the year.
On October 14 Brown said that British troops needed to stay in Afghanistan ""to protect British streets” from al-Qaeda.
Public support for the war fell as the death toll among U.K. troops increased, and a survey in November by market-research company YouGov found that more than 70% of the British public wanted the troops brought home within 12 months.
On August 20 Kenny MacAskill, Scotland’s justice minister, ordered the release of ‘Abd al-Basit al-Megrahi from jail on compassionate grounds.
At the time of his release, Megrahi, who had been diagnosed with terminal cancer, was appealing his conviction.
Megrahi returned to a hero’s welcome in Libya, which had reportedly negotiated his release with the Scottish authorities.
The event led to some friction between the U.K. and the U.S., which publicly condemned Megrahi’s release.
In October, Brown and Foreign Secretary Miliband proposed that former prime minister Tony Blair be selected as the president of the European Council, a new post established by the Lisbon Treaty, which came into effect on December 1.
The post eventually went to Belgian Prime Minister Herman Van Rompuy, while the U.K.’s Baroness Ashton was named high representative for foreign affairs and security policy.
The 11-year-old Good Friday Agreement remained in force in Northern Ireland, despite occasional armed attacks by fringe military groups.
On March 7 two British troops were shot dead by members of the Real Irish Republican Army outside a British army base in the province.
One of the hard-line republican groups, the Irish National Liberation Army , announced on October 11 that it regarded the war as over and would henceforth use only peaceful means to pursue its goals.
The INLA had declared a ceasefire in 1998 but was subsequently accused of having involvement in a number of serious crimes.
The main source of tension between the two men in 2009 concerned policing.
Under the Good Friday Agreement, ultimate control over policing in the province would be handed over to the Northern Ireland Executive.
Throughout 2009 McGuinness urged that the transfer take place as swiftly as possible.
Robinson was more cautious, ostensibly because he feared that the U.K. would not provide enough funding for the police service but also because he feared that his party would lose ground to rival Protestant parties if Sinn Fein was seen to have too much influence over the new police service.
Full agreement on a transfer of powers, however, had not been achieved by the end of 2009.
Presidents George W Bush and, from January 20, Barack Obama In 2009, after decades of international economic, military, and political leadership, the United States faced serious limits on its ability to control world affairs.
Years of fiscal excess exacerbated the effects of a severe global recession, reducing United States influence abroad and allowing less-developed countries, including China, to assume—at least temporarily—the U.S.'s historical role as the world's engine of economic growth.
A new president, Barack Obama, started the year with high expectations and ended it with what appeared to be a significant legislative victory, but he also learned the limits of power in a politically divided country.
The United States struggled through the year under the burden of its most severe economic downturn since the Great Depression.
Joined by other major governments, the United States adopted unprecedented stimulus measures aimed at saving jobs and restoring growth, fully utilizing the borrowing and spending powers of the United States Department of the Treasury and the monetary and credit-creation devices of the central banking system.
By year’s end the intervention appeared to have stopped the economic decline, but economists worried that recovery would be slow by historical standards and hindered by excessive government intervention and borrowing.
The United States recession officially started in December 2007, but the slump accelerated as businesses reacted to major financial market turmoil the following year and a resulting reduction in credit.
GDP contracted 6.3% in late 2008 and 5.7% in early 2009—the most dismal two quarters for the United States economy in more than 60 years.
In mid-February, Obama signed a $787 billion stimulus spending measure.
Initially, financial markets reacted negatively, with stock prices sinking to 1997 levels by early March.
As more cracks in the economy appeared, the federal government responded with increasing activism.
The Treasury Department was forced to extend a total of $80 billion to two ailing automobile manufacturers, taking 8% ownership of Chrysler and a 61% stake in General Motors and forcing both companies into temporary bankruptcy.
Insurance giant AIG, which reinsured numerous mortgage securities that went sour, needed even more help, taking $170 billion in government funds to remain solvent after staggering losses.
By late spring, aided by loans authorized under the 2008 Troubled Assets Relief Program emergency legislation, financial institutions had begun to stabilize.
Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner established “stress tests” to make certain remaining banks were adequately capitalized and accurately projecting their losses.
The United States central bank kept interest rates at historic lows to encourage borrowing and economic activity.
The target rate for federal funds was pegged at zero to 0.25% for the entire year, which helped to keep rates for business loans and mortgages down.
The Federal Reserve pumped well over $1 trillion into the economy by purchasing Treasury bonds and mortgage instruments, effectively printing new money to keep interest rates at minimal levels.
Even with massive federal intervention, however, job losses continued, with unemployment hitting 10.2% in October— the highest jobless rate in more than a quarter of a century—before easing slightly to 10% in December.
The upswing erased most of the stock market losses of 2008, which averaged some 40%, but also produced major inequities.
By year’s end, the seven largest banks that had received TARP funding had repaid the government with dividends and interest, in part to escape government supervision, including caps on executive pay.
This meant that some financial industry executives were receiving outsized bonuses even as jobs continued to disappear across the country.
GDP finally turned positive in the third quarter, gaining 2.2% and raising hopes that the country was emerging from recession.
Some economists, however, noted that the economic growth was made possible only by temporary federal stimulus programs, including an $8,000 tax credit for first-time home buyers and a $3 billion “cash for clunkers” program designed to remove gasBarack Obama—with his wife, Michelle, watching—is sworn in as the 44th president of the United States on January 20.
For the first time in 35 years, Social Security and other pensioners received no inflation adjustment because the consumer price index for the fiscal year ended September 30 actually dropped.
Even so, energy and food prices began climbing again late in the year, signaling an imminent return to the modest inflation of recent years.
The recession erased most remaining traces of fiscal responsibility in Washington.
Stimulative policies helped balloon the United States federal deficit to $1.42 trillion for the fiscal year, three times the previous record set a year earlier.
A similar deficit was forecast for fiscal year 2010, part of a deficit projection of $9 trillion for the next decade.
Fiscal imbalance, in addition to low interest rates, helped depress the value of the United States dollar against foreign currencies for much of the year and prompted frequent grumbling from countries that held United States Treasury debt.
Like his predecessor, Obama entered office vowing to reduce partisanship in Washington, but he made little progress in his first year.
With Democrats holding substantial majorities in both houses of Congress, Obama allowed congressional leaders to shape important legislation.
Republicans, largely excluded from substantive negotiations on key bills, were able to slow progress on several of Obama’s legislative priorities.
In the president’s first month in office, Democrats pushed three major bills through Congress with minimal or no Republican support.
The second bill was a reauthorization and expansion of the State Children's Health Insurance Program, a measure that had been vetoed twice by former president George W Bush as fiscally irresponsible.
The House of Representatives passed a third bill—the $787 billion stimulus spending measure—without any Republican votes.
The partisan actions helped solidify the Republican caucus, particularly in the Senate, where 60 votes were effectively required for most legislative action.
The president was able to accomplish numerous changes through executive order in early 2009.
In January Obama rescinded the “Mexico City policy”— which had been reinstated by Bush in 2001—to allow the resumption of United States foreign aid funding for international family planning groups that facilitated abortion services or abortion counseling.
In March he removed restrictions on federal funding for stem cell research that had been established by the Bush administration eight years earlier.
Obama’s overall job-approval rating, as measured by public opinion polls, topped 65% in early 2009 but dropped steadily to around 50% in late December.
His rating was weighed down by rising unemployment, perceived federal overreaching, and hard decisions that he had to make on his legislative and policy agendas.
Later that month, however, when Obama renominated Ben Bemanke for a second term as chairman of the Federal Reserve Board , the nomination was quickly bogged down amid congressional demands for more transparency and added control over the Fed.
In June, declaring that the subprime mortgage crisis had been caused by ""insufficient regulation,” Obama proposed a sweeping increase in federal authority over the country’s financial institutions.
By December the House had approved—again without any Republican votes—legislation that cracked down on hedge funds and credit-rating agencies, established a new financial consumer watchdog agency, and increased congressional scrutiny of Fed monetary policy.
Later in June the House approved a controversial Obama administration energy and environmental protection bill on a largely party-line vote.
The “capand-trade” legislation, which would establish a system of buying and selling pollution permits to meet emissions limits, aimed to slash greenhouse-gas emissions to 17% below 2005 levels by 2020.
Opponents complained that the legislation would hamstring American industry and cause major increases in taxes and the cost of American goods.
The Senate failed to take up the legislation during 2009 as opposition mounted, and several analysts declared the cap-and-trade concept dead.
At year's end Obama obtained a major victory on his top domestic policy priority when both chambers of Congress approved national health care reform bills after contentious legislative bargaining.
Both bills would extend access to health insurance to an additional 30 million Americans, prohibit denial of coverage by insurers, and require most Americans to obtain insurance or face financial penalties.
The bills would pay for expanded care in part through tax increases on higher-income earners and reductions in payments to providers of Medicare and Medicaid services.
Although Democrats were optimistic that Obama would eventually get a final bill to sign, serious problems remained.
Critics complained that the legislation would raise revenues quickly but delay benefits and called into question its estimated $900 billion price tag over 10 years.
IT’S HOT GOOD ENOUGH FOR United States ^ . a ■ ■ A 1 Opponents of proposed health care reform legislation rally on Capitol Hill in Washington, D.C., on November 5. a government takeover of health care, and no GOP member voted for either bill.
The Senate dropped a provision setting up a government-run insurance option to compete with private firms, angering liberal Democrats, and also watered down a strict House measure prohibiting public funds from being spent on abortion services.
At year's end, support for the legislation dropped markedly amid allegations that some Senate votes had been effectively bought via special-interest provisions.
Even so, the apparent breakthrough on health care provided an upbeat ending to a difficult first year for the new administration.
President Obama moved quickly in departing from Bush administration efforts to combat Islamist terrorism and extremism.
Only days after his inauguration, Obama signed executive orders that banned the use of harsh interrogation techniques on captured terrorist suspects, abolished secret CIA overseas prisons, and called for closing the United States military detention facility at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, within a year.
The Guantanamo deadline was especially controversial and proved overly ambitious.
Few countries were interested in taking high-risk prisoners, however; in addition, federal trials of detainees posed some enormous procedural and security problems, and terrorism recidivism was high among released prisoners.
In May the administration altered its course and announced that it would retain the use of military tribunals, albeit with new procedures that would provide additional defendant rights.
This decision meant that the defendants, all of whom had been captured abroad, would receive most of the constitutional protections and process rights afforded United States citizens.
Holder defended the venue as appropriate because most September 11 victims were civilians and the attacks occurred on United States soil.
The one-year deadline for closing the Guantanamo facility was abandoned.
Administration officials explored the possibility of confining most of the inmates at an unused state prison in rural northwestern Illinois, and federal acquisition of the prison was under way at year’s end.
Another idea—transferring numerous prisoners to Yemen—was widely discredited after concerns were raised over al-Qaeda activity in that country.
Yemeni extremists were linked to the perpetrator of an attempted bombing of an airliner bound for Detroit on Christmas Day.
Hood, Texas, in November was also linked to a radical Islamist cleric in Yemen.
In his presidential campaign, Obama had criticized United States involvement in Iraq and suggested that Afghanistan pacification efforts were wrongly shortchanged as a result.
As security conditions in Iraq continued to improve, the new administration began slowly removing United States military personnel, with an announced goal of ending United States combat operations by mid-2010 and exiting the country entirely by late 2011.
The military outlook in Afghanistan deteriorated rapidly, however, as Taliban insurgents regrouped and stepped up attacks on United States and NATO forces.
In February Obama announced plans to send 17,000 additional United States troops to Afghanistan, bringing the total troop commitment to 68,000.
He also ordered a comprehensive review of the United States mission in Afghanistan.
His military appointees concluded their review in August and asked for the deployment of up to 40,000 more troops.
The request came as evidence of fraud nearly overturned the Afghan national election.
At the same time, United States troop fatalities in the country were mounting (they doubled in 2009 compared with the previous year), and antiwar activists were raising the spectre of another Vietnamlike disaster for the United States military.
Following three months of internal deliberations, in what was likely the most important decision of his first year in office, Obama announced that he would send 30,000 fresh United States troops to Afghanistan in an attempt to blunt the insurgency and that he would use his best efforts to recruit another 10,000 troops from reluctant NATO allies.
With the decision to send more troops, however, Obama also called for a drawdown of combat forces to begin after 18 months, leading many conservatives to fault the commitment as unserious.
Left-wing critics complained that despite superficial changes, Obama had adopted and even escalated most war and national security policies of his predecessor.
Obama defended his path as he accepted the Nobel Peace Prize in Oslo in December.
The new administration worked to project a more cooperative and tolerant image of the United States abroad during 2009, acknowledging past errors and seeking to repair strained United States diplomatic relationships in many parts of the world.
In April Obama sought a ""fresh start” with Russia, telling Russian Pres.
This diplomatic outreach was well received internationally, but tangible results on specific major international controversies were almost nonexistent during the year.
Some world leaders applauded the approach as helpful toward restoring the vitality of United States diplomacy, while critics suggested that the United States was instead pandering, projecting weakness, and abandoning a leadership role that had provided stability in an uncertain world.
Joe Biden declared that Russia was a nation in decline, Russia allowed the United States to use its airspace to resupply allied military forces in Afghanistan and promised a new nuclear arms reduction agreement by year’s end.
In September, in a major concession, the United States dramatically abandoned elements of its long-standing European missile shield project—including planned missile interceptors in Poland and a radar site in the Czech Republic.
The Strategic Arms Reduction Talks I treaty was allowed to expire in December without a replacement, and Russia pressed for additional concessions by threatening to restart development of new offensive weaponry.
Efforts to thwart the nuclear ambitions of North Korea and Iran again went nowhere in 2009.
The United States offered several initiatives to entice North Korea into abandoning its nuclear weapons research, including bilateral negotiations, but the North Korean regime continued to test missiles and nuclear weapons and staved off ongoing international pressure to shutter its nuclear facilities.
Despite active United States diplomacy, both public and private, Iran also evaded proposals to reign in its nuclear development.
Obama drew widespread criticism from opponents who thought he issued only a mild condemnation of an Iranian government crackdown on prodemocracy dissidents following a disputed election in June.
Obama also downplayed the belated discovery of a new Iranian fuel-reprocessing facility in Qom.
In October Iranian negotiators in Geneva appeared to agree to a U.S.backed proposal to send most of Iran’s stockpile of low-enriched uranium to Russia for reprocessing—a plan that would have delayed any Iranian nuclear weapon by at least a year.
Obama's open hand to Latin America did not immediately produce results.
At the meeting in Trinidad and Tobago, Obama was photographed warmly greeting Venezuelan Pres.
Hugo Chavez, but the effort stilled Chavez’s anti-American rhetoric only briefly.
Venezuela later announced that it was cooperating on nuclear development with Iran.
The United States State Department sided with a Chavez ally, Honduran Pres.
Manuel Zelaya, after he was overthrown in June and deported to Costa Rica.
The United States pressured Honduras to restore Zelaya to power, suspending military and development aid to the country and canceling United States visas for Honduran officials.
The interim Honduran government refused to accede, however, and instead proceeded to new elections in November.
Although the United States ultimately urged recognition of the balloting results, which removed Zelaya’s party from control, the development was widely viewed as a sign of declining United States influence in Latin America.
As the Chinese economy grew rapidly out of its 2008 downturn and the United States economy struggled, U.S.-China relations sustained awkward moments.
China was a significant holder of United States Treasury bonds, and Beijing officials repeatedly warned against excessive United States borrowing.
An influential Chinese central banker published a paper in March that predicted that the United States dollar would eventually be replaced as the world’s reserve currency.
Obama visited China in November and was given a decidedly mixed reception, which included a joint ""press conference” (at which no questions were allowed) and a meeting with Chinese students that authorities prevented from being televised.
In December China and the U.S.—the world’s largest emitters of carbon dioxide—were central players at the UN Climate Change Conference in Copenhagen.
Both countries made demands of each other while declining to make serious concessions.
As a result, aspirational goals but no enforceable actions defined the outcome.
Throughout the event, Chinese officials appeared to avoid serious negotiations with their United States counterparts, and Obama expressed chagrin when he appeared at a Chinese meeting with Indian, Brazilian, and South African officials to which he had not been invited.
DEVELOPMENTS IN THE STATES 2009 Fiscal troubles created by a long-running national economic recession dominated the priorities of United States state governments in 2009.
Almost all states were constitutionally required to balance their budgets, and, facing major deficit projections, officials took drastic measures to reduce costs and increase revenue.
The fiscal crisis, termed the most severe for states since the Great Depression, discouraged creation of new legislative programs, prompted major tax increases during economic hard times, and caused unusual tensions in the symbiotic relationship between states and the federal government.
Several lower-tax states with energybased economies were able to weather the downturn relatively easily and used federal stimulus funds to avoid significant trims to state services.
While the economy showed signs of recovery by midyear, state finances were slow to stabilize.
In the face of declining tax revenues and rising expenses from unemployment, Medicaid, and other soA protester chants during a demonstration staged in July by health care workers and others outside the gated entrance to the private residential community in Los Angeles where California Gov.
United States cial payments, numerous states ended the year facing the possibility of additional severe budget deficits in 2010 without the help of further federal assistance.
All 50 states held regular legislative sessions during the year, and 15 staged one or more special sessions, often to deal with budget matters.
Under fiscal pressure, some state governments reformed services and operations, often by consolidating functions, reducing hours, and increasing efficiency.
Utah’s 2008 enactment of a four-day workweek for some agencies was closely watched.
Maine’s governor issued a controversial economy measure to consolidate school districts, and the state’s voters later refused to overturn it.
California faced the country’s most severe financial problems, and the state chief justice criticized the California initiative and referendum process as having produced haphazard and counterproductive policies over the years.
Voters in Maine and Washington rejected ""taxpayer bill of rights” measures designed to limit government growth.
In November, benefiting from deteriorating public confidence in government officials, Republicans made gains in limited state elections.
In New Jersey and Virginia the GOP wrested away governorships previously held by Democrats; a Republican also took over as governor in Arizona after Pres.
Republicans picked up seats in legislative elections in Virginia and New Jersey and in a handful of special elections in four other states.
For 2010, 26 governorships would be held by Democrats and 24 by Republicans.
Democrats owned a more comfortable advantage in state legislatures, enjoying two-house control of 27 states, while Republicans held a majority in both chambers of 14 states.
In 8 states the legislatures were split or tied, and Nebraska had a nonpartisan unicameral legislature.
As state budgets deteriorated rapidly in the face of national economic conditions, the United States Congress rushed billions of dollars in aid to state treasuries to maintain services and control deficits.
In many cases, however, this aid came with strings attached, imposing federal policies on unenthusiastic state governments and, in some instances, countering state efforts to reduce social services spending.
For example, one federal stimulus program to assist state unemployment insurance efforts required that part-time workers be covered; Republican governors in Texas, South Carolina, Alabama, Louisiana, Alaska, and Mississippi initially rejected those funds.
Legislatures in South Carolina and Alaska overturned gubernatorial decisions and accepted almost all federal assistance offered.
Federal efforts to improve homeland security prompted another face-off over the 2005 Real ID Act, which required states to tighten standards on the issuance of state driver's licenses as well as identification cards.
Washington warned that residents of states unable to comply by the December 31 deadline could not use existing licenses as identification to board airplanes or enter federal buildings.
With only a small minority of states on track to meet the deadline, the government granted an extension until May 2011.
The fiscal crisis preoccupied state governments throughout the year and led to a second consecutive year of reduced general fund spending.
Revenue from all major state tax sources diminished by more than 10% as the national economy languished, while required expenditures for unemployment, health care, and other programs rose dramatically.
Stimulus funds were used to shore up state expenditures for social services, infrastructure programs, public schools, and general economic stabilization.
The aid also allowed a few, mostly smaller, states to balance their budgets without dramatic legislative adjustments, although 13 states drained their rainy-day funds in order to resolve budget problems.
To reduce costs, 22 states laid off government workers and 23 made acrossthe-board reductions in agency budgets.
In some cases interest groups were able to stop planned cuts via lawsuits.
Colorado, Kansas, Michigan, North Carolina, and Washington were among states closing prisons.
Arizona and California resorted to selling public buildings to raise funds and then leasing them back.
Even though the federal stimulus program promised $100 billion to shore up state education—usually among the last items cut in any downturn—Idaho, Kansas, Utah, Nevada, and Washington trimmed spending on public schools, and Florida, Kansas, and Washington reduced higher-education support.
The crisis overcame traditional legislative reluctance to raise taxes during economic downturns.
In revenue actions 29 states raised taxes or fees to generate $23. billion in new revenue, the largest increase on record.
Twelve states raised sales taxes, producing $6. billion in additional net revenue.
Three states boosted motor-fuel levies, while 17 states increased taxes on tobacco and alcohol.
At year’s end the economic downturn showed signs of easing, but social service expenditures in most states continued to climb as state revenue lagged.
Some state officials began lobbying Washington for another round of aid even while they prepared for a decline in overall state spending for an unprecedented third consecutive year.
Despite setbacks, legal recognition of same-sex marriage expanded significantly during the year.
Vermont, New Hampshire, and the District of Columbia became the first jurisdictions to sanction gay marriage through legislative process.
In November, Maine voters rescinded a gay-marriage law passed by the legislature earlier in the year.
The Iowa Supreme Court declared that state's ban on samesex marriages to be unconstitutional.
Nevada authorized domestic partnerships, and the state of Washington strengthened its domestic partnership laws.
The California Supreme Court affirmed the validity of Proposition 8, a 2008 initiative that overturned the high court’s extension of full same-sex marriage rights, but the ruling also validated 18,000 gay marriages performed before the vote was taken.
By year’s end 5 states and the District of Columbia fully sanctioned same-sex marriage, and 7 more provided for domestic partnerships or civil unions; 30 states, including California, had constitutional provisions banning same-sex marriage.
Arkansas became the 15th state to ban late-term ""partial-birth” abortions.
Kansas, Ohio, and North Dakota required medical clinics to post notices advising women that they could not be coerced into having an abortion.
Georgia became the first state to provide for adoption of human embryos; critics said that the law was a back-door attempt to extend legal rights to embryos.
United States tors to offer anesthesia for a fetus before abortions performed 20 or more weeks after conception.
Under recession-induced pressure to raise additional revenue, states continued to expand legalized gaming.
In November, Ohio voters approved casinos in four cities after having rejected four similar ballot proposals.
Kansas became the first jurisdiction to provide for state-owned casinos, although actual gambling operations at its initial Dodge City site were to be run by a private firm under a lease arrangement.
Reversing a recent trend, the imposition of capital punishment ticked up during 2009.
Eleven states executed a total of 52 men; 24 of those were in a single state, Texas.
New Mexico became the second state in three years to repeal the death penalty, and Maryland narrowed the criteria for its imposition.
The governor of Texas became embroiled in a controversy over whether he had allowed an innocent man to be executed for arson in 2004.
Objections to the death penalty as cruel and unusual punishment continued.
Nebraska became the last among 35 death-penalty states to authorize execution by lethal injection, and Ohio became the first to authorize a slow-acting single-dose intravenous anesthetic to replace the three-injection method used elsewhere across the country.
The year produced unprecedented ethics drama involving ranking state officials.
Following his indictment on federal corruption charges, including an alleged attempt to sell Pres.
Rod Blagojevich was impeached and removed from office by the Illinois legislature.
He was only the eighth governor in United States history to have been ousted after impeachment.
Sarah Palin, the 2008 Republican vice presidential candidate, abruptly resigned her office at midyear, complaining of ""frivolous” ethics investigations by the state legislature.
Mark Sanford, who had been under investigation after having confessed to using state funds to pursue an extramarital affair.
Bill Richardson withdrew as the Obama administration's candidate to head the United States Commerce Department owing to an ongoing investigation into New Mexico state contracting practices.
Three powerful speakers of state house chambers left office early under fire.
In Florida, Ray Sansom quit after accusations that he had funneled funds to a college that later hired him; he was later indicted by a state grand jury.
In Massachusetts, Salvatore DiMasi resigned amid allegations that he had helped solicit kickbacks from a state contractor.
In Georgia, Glenn Richardson attempted suicide and later resigned amid rumours of his having had an extramarital affair with a lobbyist.
The United States Congress debated a sweeping reform of national health care in late 2009.
Most congressional bills envisioned a major expansion of Medicaid, a health insurance program for low-income persons that is jointly funded by federal and state governments and run by states.
State officials, however, feared they would be burdened with stepped-up obligations and no method of paying for them.
Some Democratic proposals also included a ""public option”—that is, a government health plan that would compete with private insurers.
To meet objections that the provision of a public option would lead to government takeover of health care, bill writers explored turning over numerous details to individual states or allowing individual states to opt out.
The House and the Senate passed their bills in early November and late December, respectively.
Medicaid expenditures soared; to help states defray added costs, the federal stimulus bill contained $87 billion in funds for a two-year period ending in 2011.
The transfers, however, came with stipulations that states had to retain the eligibility and application processes they had in place as of mid-2008.
That meant that Arizona, California, Florida, Rhode Island, and South Carolina had to rescind stricter eligibility requirements they had enacted since mid-2008.
In yet another federalism controversy, as H1N1 flu threatened the U.S., states were given responsibility for distributing flu vaccine even as health department employees were being furloughed during budget cutting.
One result was an ominous shortfall in vaccine distribution, but the most severe predictions of a swine flu epidemic failed to materialize by year's end.
Reversing a controversial policy of the George W Bush administration, the Obama administration announced it would no longer pursue criminal cases against users of medical marijuana who followed state laws.
Fourteen states allowed the use of marijuana prescribed by medical personnel.
In November balloting, Maine voters approved an expansion of the state’s medical marijuana program.
Madeline Martinez, executive director of the Oregon chapter of the National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws , talks with a patron at the Cannabis Cafe in Portland; the cafe served those who held Oregon medical marijuana cards.
Uruguay URUGUAY Area: 177,879 sq km Population : 3,361,000 Capital: Montevideo Head of state and government: President Tabare Ramon Vazquez Rosas In 2009, for the fifth time since the restoration of democratic rule in 1985, Uruguayans went to the polls to elect a president and the entire parliament.
As expected, Mujica won by a comfortable margin, earning 53% of the vote to 43% for Lacalle.
Mujica promised to run an administration similar to that of Brazilian Pres.
Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva—i.e., a leftist government that would respect the rules of international finance and investment while striving to improve the plight of the less fortunate.
Former finance minister Danilo Astori, who was to serve as Mujica’s vice president, was expected to have a large say in running the economy.
Mujica’s rumpled persona and shoot-from-the-hip speaking style perhaps contributed to this concern.
Nevertheless, Uruguay’s democracy was clearly successfully consolidated.
Tabare Vazquez culminated with the successful implementation of a program to provide laptop computers to all primary schoolchildren in Uruguay.
The ability of same-sex couples to adopt children was legalized during the year.
Health care was made more fully accessible to the poor through a someMatilde Campodonico/AP Jose Mujica campaigns for president of Uruguay in October.
He won in a runoff election on November 29. what controversial increase in the personal income tax.
Even with a slowdown in economic growth brought on by the worldwide financial crisis, Uruguay was expected to see a modest positive gain in GDP for the year.
Unemployment remained historically low, and foreign investment was especially strong.
A new container terminal at the port of Montevideo was opened late in the year.
In his independence day speech at the beginning of September, Karimov declared that the anticrisis measures adopted by the government had produced ""convincing” results, and he attributed Uzbekistan’s economic success to the country’s having followed its own development path.
As part of the program designating 2009 as the Year of Development and Improvement of the Countryside, the little-developed Navoi region was declared a free economic zone; the Uzbek leadership aspired to attract investment amounting to $900 million by year's end.
Lee Myung-bak raised expectations for increased investment by Seoul in Uzbek industry.
Uzbekistan’s relations with its neighbours Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan worsened during the year.
Uzbekistan remained adamant in its opposition to the construction of large-scale hydroelectric projects in those two countries, and in February Karimov persuaded his Turkmen counterpart to join him in opposing construction of the two power dams, thereby infuriating the Tajiks, whose rhetoric toward Uzbekistan became sharper as the year progressed.
Uzbek-Tajik relations began to deteriorate at the very beginning of the year when Uzbekistan stopped transmission of power purchased by Tajikistan from Turkmenistan.
In September an Uzbek expert questioned the safety of the large power plants built in Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan during the Soviet era; his concerns were raised later in the month by Uzbek Foreign Minister Vladimir Norov in the UN General Assembly.
This event marked an escalation of the verbal feud between Uzbekistan and its upstream neighbours.
Relations between Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan were strained by the occasionally high-handed behaviour of Uzbek border guards and the Uzbek reinforcement of the common border after an armed attack in May on a police post in the town of Khonobod near the Kyrgyz frontier.
The attack was initially attributed to the militant Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan; the Kyrgyz Border Service denied Uzbek assertions that the group had come from Kyrgyzstan.
Venezuela rights abuses dating back to 2005, when Uzbek government troops fired on unarmed protesters, the EU lifted the last of several sanctions that had been imposed against it.
Pressure by the Group of 20 and the United States on Vanuatu to end its tax havens led to declines in activity in Vanuatuan offshore financial centres.
From December 2006 to June 2008, external assets fell from $292 million to $116 million.
Though regional source economies contracted, tourism grew significantly, and the numbers of visiting cruise ships increased.
In July, France financed the construction of a new airport on Pentecost, which would exploit the island’s tourist potential and reduce its isolation.
Increases in quotas for Vanuatuan horticultural workers in New Zealand and Australia were also producing useful revenues.
On the external political front, Vanuatu established diplomatic relations with the United Arab Emirates and renewed a dispute with France over the ownership of two uninhabited islands that France maintained were part of its overseas territory of New Caledonia.
New Caledonian leader Victor Tutugoro, however, had signed a document declaring that Matthew and Hunter islands belonged to Vanuatu.
In September, after two earlier tries by Vanuatu’s electoral college to elect a new chief of state, lolu Abil was installed as the country’s new president.
Kalkot Mataskelekele’s term in office had ended in August, and his bid for reelection was unsuccessful.
The government faced criticism and political challenges for the mishandling of funds by the Commodities Marketing Board and Air Vanuatu.
The Vatican sponsored a number of anniversary celebrations, and a commemorative exposition was held for the public between February and May.
Dramatic tensions between the Vatican and the Italian government emerged during the year after the Roman Catholic newspaper Avvenire published articles highly critical of Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi.
The articles concerned not only the Italian government’s draconian response to illegal immigration but also what was claimed to be scandalous conduct by the prime minister in his private life.
Following a series of journalistic exchanges that included an attack on Avvenire s top editor by II Giomale, a Berlusconi family newspaper, Vatican Secretary of State Tarcisio Cardinal Bertone canceled a planned dinner with Berlusconi and took a public stance in favour of Avvenire and its editor.
The prime minister subsequently dissociated himself from II Giomale’s attack.
In an effort to reestablish a collaborative relationship with the Italian government, Pope Benedict XVI met with Berlusconi's chief adviser in early September.
Another controversy erupted over Pope Benedict’s public claim—made during his official visit to Africa in March—that the distribution of condoms could not arrest the spread of AIDS; he instead advocated sexual abstinence and marital fidelity.
The intransigence of his position on family planning and abortion was well known and allegedly led to the Vatican's rejection of several nominees to the post of United States ambassador to the Holy See; among those rejected was Caroline Kennedy, the daughter of former United States president John F Kennedy.
Theologian Miguel H Diaz was eventually confirmed as ambassador in August.
In May the pope toured the Holy Land, where he met with representatives of the major faiths.
On this and other occasions, he called for a strengthening of the role of the UN in promoting world peace.
Dmitry Medvedev’s visit to Italy in early December, he also met with the pope and with Bertone.
On December 3 Medvedev and the pope announced an agreement to upgrade the level of representation between Russia and the Vatican to full diplomatic relations.
Hugo Chavez scored a decisive victory on Feb., 2009, when voters approved a referendum to remove term limits for all elected officials, which thus enabled Chavez to run for reelection in 2012.
This measure won the support of 54.4% of the voters and restored to Chavez the political momentum that he had lost after voters defeated his first attempt to scrap term limits in December 2007.
On July 25 he opined that he would not object to being given powers to eliminate all “counterrevolutionary” laws by the end of the year.
More than 80% of the deputies in the National Assembly were loyal to Chavez, but they declined to give him those powers.
Still, the deputies passed important legislation that moved Venezuela closer to the Cuban model.
Noteworthy in this regard were laws that increased government control over police forces, education, and the expropriation of land.
In addition, community councils received new powers to determine the manner in which expropriated property could be used.
Vietnam provision of false information that harmed the state; conviction for this offense could bring a prison sentence of up to four years.
The National Electoral Council oversaw the PSUV’s internal elections for delegates to the First Extraordinary Congress, which took place over three weeks beginning on November 21.
There was concern in the PSUV that the opposition could win the one-third of National Assembly seats necessary to block fundamental changes to the states administrative structure.
Thus, the government introduced legislation that downsized the representation of party coalitions and gave the Chavez-controlled CNE the power to arbitrarily redraw electoral districts until just prior to the 2010 elections.
Venezuela’s economy remained dependent on revenue from petroleum sales.
In November the Ministry of Finance projected that oil revenues for 2009 would amount to $18.33 billion.
Non-oil revenues were expected to total $39.07 billion, and debt was likely to reach $16.42 billion.
Inflation approached 30%, real wages fell, and distribution programs sustained large cuts in their budgets.
One study found that food consumption among poorer Venezuelans was declining despite discounts of up to 40% at Mercal, the state-owned grocery chain.
Many units of the government’s primary-care health network, Barrio Adentro, closed despite being staffed by thousands of Cuban doctors.
The Foreign Exchange Administration Commission reported that the government authorized $29. billion for imports through September—a 47% decrease compared with 2008.
In the international arena, Chavez sought to strengthen the Bolivarian Alternative for the Americas—which he described as an “anti-imperialist military alliance”—and to develop the Union of South American Nations into an institution capable of managing political and military tensions.
Venezuela’s admission was cast into doubt on November 8 when Chavez told his people to “prepare for war” with Colombia, one of Mercosur’s five associate members.
Alvaro Uribe’s decision to allow the United States to use military installations in Colombia as bases from which to hunt down drug traffickers.
It adopted a resolution calling for measures to prevent recession, reduce inflation, and stabilize the macroeconomy.
Long-simmering discontent over the government’s decision to approve bauxite mining in the Central Highlands and to award the construction contract to a Chinese company erupted in public.
A loose coalition of environmental scientists, academics, and retired officials opposed the government.
General Vo Nguyen Giap, a national military hero, wrote three letters to party and state leaders urging reconsideration on environmental and national security grounds.
These concerns were echoed at a government seminar in April to review bauxite mining and were raised on the floor of the National Assembly in May.
The government was eventually forced to revise its plans and address the impact on the environment and ethnic minority community.
At midyear the Central Committee held its 10th plenum, which initiated preparations for the 11th national congress, scheduled for January 2011.
The meeting reviewed draft socioeconomic plans for 2011-20, proposed alterations to the party’s 1991 platform, and appointed three subcommittees to deal with administrative matters, leadership selection, and amendments to the party statutes.
Relations with China became a domestic issue when Beijing unilaterally declared a moratorium on fishing in the South China Sea from May 16 to August 1, the height of Vietnam’s fishing season.
Chinese fishery vessels aggressively chased Vietnamese fishermen out of the area by seizing catches and detaining and fining boat crews.
In July the Roman Catholic Church became involved in a major dispute over ownership of land that once belonged to the Tam Toa church in the Vinh diocese in the city of Dong Hoi.
During July and August tens of thousands of parishioners held public prayer vigils and mass rallies to protest police brutality, demand the release of those arrested, and call for land confiscated by the state to be returned to the church.
Riot police and bulldozers leveled the site in August, and in November authorities returned to remove a statue of the Virgin Mary from the Catholic cemetery there.
Security authorities continued to arrest and detain prominent pro-democracy activists.
In October, Vietnam tried and convicted six persons for their role in 2008 in hanging banners in Haiphong calling for political freedom.
In December former army officer Tran Anh Kim, one of five dissidents arrested in June, was convicted and sentenced to more than five years in prison for subversion.
The other four, notably U.S.-educated human rights lawyer Le Cong Dinh, were expected to be tried in 2010.
In October the Central Committee held its 11th plenum to discuss future economic plans and the draft political report to be presented to the 11th congress.
The plenum concluded that Vietnam had begun its recovery from the global financial crisis with a GDP growth rate projected at 5.2% for the year.
Later the government announced that it would extend until March 2010 portions of the economic stimulus package that it had enacted.
Vietnamese leaders crisscrossed the globe in 2009 to promote Vietnam’s interests.
President Nguyen Minh Triet addressed the UN General Assembly and Security Council Summit on Nuclear Nonproliferation and Nuclear Disarmament in September before flying to Cuba.
In November he visited Venezuela and Singapore, and in December he journeyed to Italy, the Vatican, Spain, and Slovakia.
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs Pham Gia Khiem, who accompanied the president, made a separate trip to Washington to promote trade and educational cooperation.
Prime Minister Nguyen Tan Dung visited numerous countries around the globe, including China twice, first in April to participate in the Boao Forum for Asia (a symposium on Asia’s economic future) and then in October to attend a trade and investment conference in Chengdu.
He also attended the 15th Association of Southeast Asian Nations summit in Thailand in October.
During 2009 Vietnam hosted visits by the presidents of Laos, South Korea, and Sri Lanka; the prime ministers of Thailand, France, and Finland; and the foreign minister of Cuba.
Prime Minister AN Muhammad Mujawar Ruling a poor country with limited resources, the Yemeni government faced two important challenges in 2009.
The second was an armed uprising of the alHouthis along the mountainous northern border with Saudi Arabia.
Antigovemment demonstrators attend a rally in the southern Yemeni city of Habileen on October 14.
Reuters/Landov tended that they were seeking to revive the old Zaydi monarchy that had been toppled by a coup d’etat in 1962.
In early November al-Houthi elements made an incursion into Saudi Arabia.
Both Yemen and the Saudis accused Iran of supporting the Shi'ite al-Houthis, thereby feeding Shi'ite-Sunni tensions in the region.
By December armed conflicts with the al-Houthis had left thousands dead or wounded, and some 150,000 civilians had fled the area.
Both the United States and Saudi Arabia feared that alQaeda, which had a presence in Yemen, would take advantage of the weak government and instability to expand its influence in Yemen and Saudi Arabia.
At year's end there were indications that the al-Houthis were willing to pursue peace talks with Saudi Arabia.
Yemen remained a country with high unemployment and shortages of water, electricity, and municipal services.
The Yemeni government was trying to attract foreign investment to stimulate the economy.
It also continued seeking entrance into a partnership with the Gulf Cooperation Council to help its economy and provide employment for its workers.
He complained about uncooperative members within his own ruling Movement for Multiparty Democracy and malicious media attacks.
Shortly afterward, a dispute arose within the MMD leadership about the timing of a national convention to elect party officers.
President Banda and his supporters contained the dissent by dissolving the provincial branch executive that had been opposing them, but this action only buttressed allegations of autocratic behaviour and lack of transparency.
In August former president Frederick Chiluba was acquitted of corruption charges after a long trial; this was the first time that an African former head of state had undergone a credible trial in his own country.
Earlier in the year his wife, Regina, had been imprisoned for having received stolen funds during his term of office, and in 2007 the U.K.’s High Court had determined that the former president had bilked the Zambian government of some $46 million.
In the trial that ended in 2009, he was accused of having embezzled half a million dollars during his 10-year presidency, but the judge ruled that the prosecution had not established that the funds in question could be traced to government money.
Zimbabwe Tsvangirayi Mukwazhi/AP On March 11, hundreds of mourners in Buhera, Zimb., attend the burial of Susan Tsvangirai, wife of Zimbabwean Prime Minister Morgan Tsvangirai; her death in a head-on automobile collision in which her husband was also injured prompted speculation of an assassination attempt. tions involved in fighting corruption in Africa.
The effects of the global recession on Zambia’s economy were mitigated by high copper prices, which were driven by strong demand from China, the world’s largest consumer.
Global electronics manufacturers also sustained demand and investment in mining.
To reduce overdependence on the mining sector, which supplied most of the country’s foreign earnings, the World Bank and other international agencies urged Zambia to develop alternative sources of revenue, including tourism and agriculture.
Although poverty continued to be a serious problem, the economy had strengthened, characterized by a stable currency and increasing trade.
Although inflation topped 12%, growth was anticipated to exceed 5% in 2009-10.
Zambia had become a model country in malaria-reduction policy; a 2008 survey showed that the prevalence of the malaria parasite in children under age five had decreased by more than 50% since 2006.
Mortality rates in this age group had also been reduced by 29% from 2002 to 2007, which health professionals largely attributed to the success of the country’s new malaria policy.
From the beginning, political analysts expected that the new government was a fragile, uneasy power-sharing arrangement, which the SADC had strongarmed the parties into accepting.
Essentially, Tsvangirai was cast as the junior partner to his archrival, Pres.
On March 6 suspicion about ZANU-PF objectives deepened when the prime minister was injured in a head-on automobile collision in which his wife, Susan, was killed.
Many MDC-T officials and supporters believed that this accident was an assassination attempt, for Tsvangirai had survived a previous attempt on his life and several brutal beatings at the hands of his political opponents.
In his inaugural speech Tsvangirai advocated a policy for democratic reconstruction; however, Pres.
Mugabe’s intransigence and unyielding control over home affairs, the military, and the security forces blocked any reform.
Throughout the year Tsvangirai complained about continued harassment and manhandling of MDC-T members, including legislators and ministers, some of whom faced criminal charges.
Of these, the most conspicuous case was that of Roy Bennett, whose nomination as deputy minister of agriculture Mugabe refused to accept.
Two days after the unity government came into effect, Bennett, a white farmer and the MDC-T treasurer, was detained on charges of alleged antigovernment activities.
Bennett’s case highlighted the issue of Mugabe’s blocking the appointment of top government officials, which in mid-October culminated in the MDC-T’s boycott of cabinet meetings with the president.
After intervention by SADC leaders, Tsvangirai agreed to lift the three-week boycott on the understanding that the power-sharing agreement would be implemented fully within 30 days.
Despite the tense political scene, the new government managed to turn around the economy.
On February 2, the government devalued the Zimbabwe dollar—as it had six months earlier—dropping 12 zeros to make Z$1 trillion of the old currency redenominated to Z$1.00.
Then in April the new unity government suspended the Zimbabwean dollar for at least a year, opting to allow the use of selected foreign currencies, notably the South African rand and the United States dollar, in financial transactions.
By August the month-on-month inflation rate had fallen to 0.4%, and by year’s end GDP was projected to grow by about 6-7% in 2010.
The agricultural and mining sectors began to improve as restructuring programs were established and investment began to return.
The major problem that remained was Zimbabwe's $1. billion debt to the IMF, the World Bank, and the African Development Bank, which the government was unable to repay; however, the policies of the new prime minister and his financial officials won a considerable amount of international support, which resulted in rescheduled loan repayments and offers of development assistance by foreign donors.
Author of Encyclopedia of Weather and Climate and Basics of Environmental Science.
President and CEO, National Council on U.S.-Arab Relations; International Economic Policy Advisor, United States Department of State.
Translator of Sahar Khali feh’s The Inheritance and The Image, the Icon, and the Covenant.
The Autism Spectrum Barrett, David B Research Professor of Missiometrics, World Evangelization Research Center.
Author of World Christian Encyclopedia and Schism and Renewal in Africa.
Consulting Editor, The Business Standard ; Consulting Senior Fellow, International Institute of Strategic Studies, London; Former Media Advisor to Prime Minister of India.
Korea, Democratic People's Republic of; Korea, Republic of Beckwith, David C Freelance Writer.
United States; United States: Developments in the States Bell, Susanna.
German Brokopp, John G Media Relations Consultant, Freelance Journalist, and Syndicated Columnist on casino gambling.
Kazakhstan; Kyrgyzstan; Tajikistan; Turkmenistan; Uzbekistan Brown, Geoff.
Senior Research Fellow, Latvian Institute of International Affairs, Riga.
Equestrian Sports: Steeplechasing; Thoroughbred Racing: International Casey, Nora Sprena.
Professor of International Studies, Center for Research and Teaching in Economics , Mexico City.
Author of “How It’s Being Done:"" Urgent Lessons from Unexpected Schools.
A Novel of American Dreaming, The Fires, The Light Possessed, A Trance After Breakfast: And Other Passages, and Listening to the Page: Adventures in Reading and Writing.
Director of International Strategies and Development, United States Olympic Committee; Vice President, International Weightlifting Federation.
English: Other Literature in English Clark, Janet H Editor, Independent Analyst, and Writer on international economic and financial topics.
International Organization in a Divided World and The United Nations and Changing World Politics.
Fashion and the Academy Awards and Costume and Fashion: A Complete History.
Author of The World According to Mike Leigh, The Andrew Lloyd Webber Story, and others.
Colombia Crossing, Peter F Data Analyst, World Christian Database; Center for the Study of Global Christianity.
World Music Correspondent, The Guardian ; Producer/Correspondent, BBC TV and Radio.
Education and Public Outreach Officer, National Solar Observatory, Sacramento Peak, New Mexico.
Burundi; Comoros; Djibouti; Mauritius; Seychelles El-Amir, Ayman M Columnist, Al-Ahram Weekly; Al-Shorouk Daily; Media Consultant.
Journalist; Media Consultant; Former Assistant Editor, The Irish Times.
Indonesia Fendell, Robert J Freelance Writer on automobiles and racing.
Automobile Racing: United States Auto Racing; Rallies and Other Races Fisher, Martin.
Lawyer; Former Chairman, Malta National Archives Advisory Committee; Past President, Malta Historical Society.
The Deeper Meaning of the DarwinLincoln Double Bicentennial Gragnani, Cristina.
Italian Graham, John W Chair Emeritus, Canadian Foundation for the Americas; Former Canadian Ambassador.
Australia; Dependent States: Indian Ocean; East Timor ; Nauru; Palau; Papua New Guinea Haag, Martin.
Lebanon; Saudi Arabia Hammer, William R Fritiof Fryxell Professor of Geology, Augustana College, Rock Island, Ill.
Retired Editor and National and European Economics Correspondent, Washington and Brussels Bureaus, Los Angeles Times.
Senior Contributing Writer; Football Historian; longtime writer with newspapers and the Australian Football League.
Football: Australian Hoffman, Dean A Member, Communicators Hall of Fame, Harness Racing Museum.
The Farm the Kellers Built, Castleton Farm: A Tradition of Standardbred Excellence, Quest for Excellence: Hanover Shoe Farms: The First 75 Years, and The Hambletonian: America’s Trotting Classic.
Inside Cuban Baseball and Venezuelan Bust, Baseball Boom: Andres Reiner and Scouting on the New Frontier.
Algeria; Morocco; Tunisia Johnson, Todd M Director, Center for the Study of Global Christianity.
Literary Critic; Assistant Professor, Morioka College, Takizawa, Japan.
Manager and Senior Editor, Arts and Culture Group, Encyclopaedia Britannica.
Benin; Burkina Faso; Cameroon; Central African Republic; Congo, Republic of the; Cote d’Ivoire; Gabon; Guinea; Mali; Mauritania; Niger; Senegal; Togo Lawson, Fred H Professor of Government, Mills College, Oakland, Calif.
Meteorologist, Climate Prediction Center, United States National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
Senior Sports Writer, The Sunday Times ; Former Assistant Editor, The Cricketer.
Haiti Mancoff, Debra N Adjunct Professor of Art History, School of the Art Institute of Chicago.
The Detroit Institute of Arts and Treasures from the Art Institute of Chicago.
Creating National History in Contemporary Ukraine, Belarus: A Denationalized Nation, and Motherland: Russia in the Twentieth Century.
Belarus; Ukraine Marston, John A Professor, Centro de Estudios de Asia y Africa, El Colegio de Mexico.
Coeditor of History, Buddhism, and New Religious Movements in Cambodia.
Coauthor of Militia Redux; or, Sor and the Revival of Paramilitarism in Thailand.
Coeditor of and contributor to The Unraveling of Representative Democracy in Venezuela.
Primate Research: A Key to Understanding What It Means to Be Human Nishizaki, Yoshinori.
Baseball: Japan Nolen, Jeannette L Social Science Editor, Encyclopaedia Britannica.
Managing Editor, The M&A Lawyer; Contributing Editor and Writer, Investment Dealers Digest; Contributing Writer, Registered Rep.
Antigua and Barbuda; Bahamas, The; Barbados; Dependent States: Caribbean and Bermuda; Dominica; Grenada; Guyana; Jamaica; Saint Kitts and Nevis; Saint Lucia; Saint Vincent and the Grenadines; Trinidad and Tobago Reuning, Winifred.
Editor and Web Manager, Office of Polar Programs, National Science Foundation.
Football: Association Football : Africa and Asia; Europe Salewicz, Chris.
Cape Verde; Chad; Equatorial Guinea; Gambia, The; Guinea-Bissau; Lesotho; Madagascar; Namibia; Sao Tome and Principe Schiavo, Leda.
Japan Schreiber, Barbara A Editorial Assistant, Encyclopaedia Britannica.
Coeditor of The Continuum Encyclopedia of American Literature and The Continuum Encyclopedia of British Literature.
Chief Executive, Womens International Squash Players Association; Technical Director, World Squash Federation.
Automobile Racing: Rallies and Other Races ; Football: Canadian; WORLD AFFAIRS: Dependent States: Europe and the Atlantic Shubinsky, Valery.
Dance: European Smith, Gregory O Director, European Management Institute, Rome.
Sri Lanka Sparks, Karen J Director and Editor, Encyclopaedia Britannica.
Lecturer, Yukon College; Researcher, Northern Climate Exchange, Northern Research Institute.
Music: Classical Susser, Leslie D Diplomatic Correspondent, The Jerusalem Report.
Children of the War and the Memory of World War II in Dutch Literature of the 1980s.
The New Millennium, The Pritzker Prize: The First Twenty Years, and others.
Senior Writer, Golf Digest and Golf World; Contributing Columnist, Chicago Tribune.
Columnist and Contributor, Buenos Aires Herald; Reporter, Associated Press; South America Correspondent, World Soccer; Contributor, FIFA Magazine.
Democracy at the Crossroads and numerous articles and book chapters on Umguay.
Executive Director, College Swimming Coaches Association of America; Former Editor in Chief, Swimming World.
Swimming; Swimming: Sidebar Wilkinson, John R Freelance Sportswriter, United Kingdom.
A Novel Poem, Beyond the Pale, The Absinthe of Desire, Family Fictions, and others.
Poland Wyllie, Peter J Professor Emeritus of Geology, California Institute of Technology.
In this photo Denmark’s Queen Margrethe II presents the official law of self-governance to Josef Motzfeldt, the chairman of the Greenland Parliament.
No part of this work may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher.
Updated annually, Britannica World Data is particularly intended as direct, structured support for many of Britannica’s other reference works—encyclopaedias, yearbooks, atlases—at a level of detail that their editorial style or design do not permit.
Like the textual, graphic, or cartographic modes of expression of these other products, statistics possess their own inherent editorial virtues and weaknesses.
Two principal goals in the creation of Britannica World Data were up-to-dateness and comparability, each possible to maximize separately, but not always possible to combine.
Comparability, however, also resides in the meaning of the numbers compiled, which may differ greatly from country to country.
The headnotes to the thematic tables explain many of these methodological problems; the Glossary serves the same purpose for the country statistical pages.
Published data do not always provide the researcher or editor with a neat, unambiguous choice between a datum compiled on two different bases (say, railroad track length, or route length), one of which is wanted and the other not.
Finally, published data on a particular subject may be complete and final but impossible to summarize in a simple manner.
The education system of a single country may include, for example, public and private sectors; local, state, or national systems; varying grades, tracks, or forms within a single system; or opportunities for double-counting or fractional counting of a student, teacher, or institution.
When no recent official data exist, or they exist, but may be suspect, the tables may show unofficial estimates, a range , analogous data, or no data at all.
The published basis of the information compiled is the statistical collections of Encyclopaedia Britannica, Inc., some of the principal elements of which are enumerated in the Bibliography.
Further information is received in a variety of formats—telephone, letter, fax, microfilm and microfiche, and most recently, in electronic formats such as computer disks, CD-ROMs, and the Internet.
So substantial has the resources of the Internet become that it was decided to add uniform resource locators to the great majority of country pages and a number of the CNS tables (summary world sites with data on all countries still being somewhat of a rarity) so as to apprise the reader of the possibility and means to access current information on these subjects year-round.
Though often dissimilar in content, they will usually be updated year-round, expanded as opportunity permits, and lead on to related sites, such as parliamentary offices, information offices, diplomatic and consular sites, news agencies and newspapers, and, beyond, to the myriad academic, commercial, and private sites now accessible from the personal computer.
While these URLs were correct and current at the time of writing, they may be subject to change.
The great majority of the social, economic, and financial data contained in this work should not be interpreted in isolation.
By the same token, study of those sources will be made more concrete by use of Britannica World Data to supply up-to-date geographic, demographic, and economic detail.
Those italicized terms that are used regularly in the country compilations to introduce specific categories of information (e.g., birth rate, budget ) appear in this glossary in italic boldface type, followed by a description of the precise kind of information being offered and how it has been edited and presented.
Many terms have quite specific meanings in statistical reporting, and they are so defined here.
Other terms have less specific application as they are used by different countries or organizations.
Data in the country compilations based on definitions markedly different from those below will usually be footnoted.
Terms that appear in small capitals in certain definitions are themselves defined at their respective alphabetical locations.
When substantial numbers of persons do not know, or state, their exact age, distributions may not total 100.0%. aquatic plants production, the weight of aquatic plants harvested in freshwater or marine areas; the share harvested by farming is aquaculture production, area, the total surface area of a country or its administrative subdivisions, including both land and inland water area.
Land area is usually calculated from “mean low water” on a “plane table,” or flat, basis. area and population, a tabulation usually including the first-order administrative subdivisions of the country (such as the states of the United States), with capital (headquarters, or administrative seat), area, and population.
Detail of national law as to what constitutes a transaction, the basis of its valuation, and the size of a transaction visible to fiscal authorities all result in differences in the meaning of a particular national statement.* balance of trade, the net value of all international goods trade of a country, usually excluding reexports (goods received only for transshipment), and the percentage that this net represents of total trade.
Balance of trade refers only to the “visible” international trade of goods as recorded by customs authorities and is thus a segment of a country’s BALANCE OF PAYMENTS, which takes all visible and invisible trade with other countries into account.
A country has a favourable, or positive , balance of trade when the value of exports exceeds that of imports and negative when imports exceed exports, barrel , a unit of liquid measure.
The number of barrels of crude petroleum per metric ton, ranging typically from 6.20 to 8.13, depends upon the specific gravity of the petroleum.
The world average is roughly 7.33 barrels per ton. birth rate, the number of live births annually per 1,000 of midyear population.
Netherlands OECD Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development OECS Organization of Eastern Caribbean States Serb.-Mont.
United Arab Emirates UNDP United Nations Development Programme Months Jan.
September Miscellaneous AIDS Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome avg. average i.f. cost, insurance, and freight commun. communications CPI consumer price index est. estimate excl. excluding o.b. free on board GDP gross domestic product GNP gross national product govt. government inch including LNG liquefied natural gas a. not available e.s. not elsewhere specified no. number pi. plural pub. admin. public administration SDR Special Drawing Right SITC Standard International Trade Classification svcs. services teacher tr. teacher training transp. transportation VAT value-added taxes Voc.
When both a recurrent and a capital budget exist for a single country, the former is the budget funded entirely from national resources that would recur (be generated by economic activity) every year.
It funds the most basic governmental services, those least able to suffer interruption.
The capital budget is usually funded by external aid and may change its size considerably from year to year. capital, usually, the actual seat of government and administration of a state.
When more than one capital exists, each is identified by kind; when interim arrangements exist during the creation or movement of a national capital, the de facto situation is described.
This principle, the “underlying cause of death,” is the basis of the medical judgment as to cause; the statistical classification system according to which these causes are grouped and named is the International List of Causes of Death , the latest revision of which is the Tenth.
When data on actual causes of death are unavailable, information on morbidity, or illness rate, usually given as reported cases per 100,000 of infectious diseases (notifiable to WHO as a matter of international agreement), may be substituted. chief of state/head of government, paramount national governmental officer exercising the highest executive and/or ceremonial roles of a country’s government.
In general usage, the chief of state is the formal head of a national state.
The primary responsibilities of the chief of state may range from the purely ceremonial—convening legislatures and greeting foreign officials—to the exercise of complete national executive authority.
The head of government, when this function exists separately, is the officer nominally charged (by the constitution) with the majority of actual executive powers, though they may not in practice be exercised, especially in military or single-party regimes in which effective power may reside entirely outside the executive governmental machinery provided by the constitution.
A prime minister, for example, usually the actual head of government, may in practice exercise only Cabinet-level authority.
Examples include the Commonwealth (composed of independent states [from 1931 onward]), Puerto Rico since 1952, and the Northern Marianas since 1979. communications, collectively, the means available for the public transmission of information within a country.
For each, a rate per 1,000 persons is given, constant prices, an adjustment to the members of a financial time series to eliminate the effect of inflation year by year.
It consists of referring all data in the series to a single year so that “real” change may be seen, constitutional monarchy, see monarchy, consumer price index , also known as the retail price index, or the cost-of-living index, a series of index numbers assigned to the price of a selected “basket,” or assortment, of basic consumer goods and services in a country, region, city, or type of household in order to measure changes over time in prices paid by a typical household for those goods and services.
Items included in the CPI are ordinarily determined by governmental surveys of typical household expenditures and are assigned weights relative to their proportion of those expenditures.
Death rates for individual countries may be compared with the estimated world annual average of 8. deaths per 1,000 population in 2005. density , usually, the DE FACTO POPULATION of a country divided by its total area.
Special adjustment is made for large areas of inland water, desert, or other uninhabitable areas—g., excluding the ice cap of Greenland, dependency, an area annexed to, or controlled by, an independent state but not an integral part of it; a non-self-governing territory.
A crown dependency is a dependency originally chartered by the British government , direct taxes, taxes levied directly on firms and individuals, such as taxes on income, profits, and capital gains.
It is most commonly reported for wages paid on a daily, weekly, or monthly basis; annual figures may represent total income or averages of these shorter periods.
The index for each country applies to all wage earners in a designated group and ordinarily takes into account basic wages (overtime is normally distinguished), bonuses, cost-of-living allowances, and contributions toward social security.
Contributions toward social security by employers are usually excluded, as are social security benefits received by wage earners, economically active population, see population economically active.
Rates given usually refer to free market values when the currency has no, or very limited, restrictions on its convertibility into other currencies. exports, material goods legally leaving a country and subject to customs regulations.
Valuation of goods exported is free on board unless otherwise specified.
The value of goods exported and importedo.b. is calculated from the cost of production and excludes the cost of transport, external debt, public and publicly guaranteed debt with a maturity of more than one year owed to nonnationals of a country and repayable in foreign currency, goods, or services.
The debt may be an obligation of a national or subnational governmental body (or an agency of either), of an autonomous public body, or of a private debtor that is guaranteed by a public entity.
For BALANCE OF PAYMENTS, the origin in terms of component balance of trade items and balance of invisibles is given.* fisheries production, the live-weight equivalent of the aquatic animals (including fish, crustaceans, mollusks, and other aquatic mammals) caught in freshwater or marine areas by national fleets and landed in domestic or foreign harbours for commercial, industrial, or subsistence purposes.
The share of fisheries production that is harvested by farming is aquaculture production. o.b. , see exports. food, see daily per capita caloric intake. foreign direct investment , a long-term investment with a significant degree of control by a business entity or individual of one country into another country’s economy.
FDI comprises three components—equity capital, reinvested earnings, and intra-company loans.
The net balance of the three FDI components is often volatile from one year to the next.
If negative for a particular time period, the balance of the three components is called a reverse investment, or disinvestment. form of government/political status, the type of administration provided for by a country’s constitution—whether or not suspended by extralegal military or civil action, although such de facto administrations are identified— together with the number of members for each legislative house, named according to its English rendering.
Unless otherwise noted, the value is given in current prices of the year indicated.
The System of National Accounts (SNA, published under the joint auspices of the UN, IMF, OECD, EC, and World Bank) provides a framework for international comparability in classifying domestic accounting aggregates and international transactions comprising “net factor income from abroad,” the measure that distinguishes GDP and GNP. gross national income , also called gross national product , the total value of final goods and services produced both from within a given country and from external (foreign) transactions in a given accounting period, usually a year.
A family household is one composed principally of individuals related by blood or marriage. household income and expenditure, data for average size of a HOUSEHOLD (by number of individuals) and median household income.
Sources of income and expenditures for major items of consumption are given as percentages.
In general, household income is the amount of funds, usually measured in monetary units, received by the members (generally those 14 years old and over) of a household in a given time period.
The income can be derived from wages or salaries, nonfarm or farm SELF-EMPLOYMENT, transfer payments, such as pensions, public assistance, unemployment benefits, etc., and other income, including interest and dividends, rent, royalties, etc.
The income of a household is expressed as a gross amount before deductions for taxes.
Data on expenditure refer to consumption of personal or household goods and services; they normally exclude savings, taxes, and insurance; practice with regard to inclusion of credit purchases differs markedly. imports, material goods legally entering a country and subject to customs regulations; excludes financial movements.
The principal alternate basis for valuation of goods in international trade is that of cost, insurance, and freight ; its use is restricted to imports, as it comprises the principal charges needed to bring the goods to the customs house in the country of destination.
Because it inflates the value of imports relative to exports, more countries have, latterly, been estimating imports on ano.b. basis as well. incorporated territory , see territory. independent, of a state, autonomous and controlling both its internal and external affairs.
Its date usually refers to the date from which the country was in effective control of these affairs within its present boundaries, rather than the date independence was proclaimed or the date recognized as a de jure act by the former administering power. indirect taxes, taxes levied on sales or transfers of selected intermediate goods and services, including excises, value-added taxes, and tariffs, that are ordinarily passed on to the ultimate consumers of the goods and services.
Total infant mortality includes neonatal mortality, which is deaths of children within one month of birth. invisibles , see balance of trade. kingdom, see monarchy. labour force, portion of the POPULATION ECONOMICALLY ACTIVE comprising those most fully employed or attached to the labour market (the unemployed are considered to be “attached” in that they usually represent persons previously employed seeking to be reemployed), particularly as viewed from a shortterm perspective.
In the “gross domestic product and labour force” table, the majority of the labour data provided refer to population economically active, since PEA represents the longer-term view of working population and, thus, subsumes more of the marginal workers who are often missed by shorterterm surveys.
Elsewhere, particularly where much adult literacy may be the result of literacy campaigns rather than passage through a formal educational system, definition and testing of literacy may be better standardized. major cities, usually the five largest cities/towns proper (national capitals are almost always given, regardless of size); fewer cities/towns may be listed if there are fewer urban localities in the country.
The state may be a coprincipality, emirate, kingdom, principality, sheikhdom, or sultanate.
The powers of the monarch may range from absolute through various degrees of limitation of authority to nominal, as in a constitutional monarchy, in which the titular monarch reigns but others, as elected officials, effectively rule. monetary unit, currency of issue, or that in official use in a given country; name and abbreviation or symbol according to local practice or name and 3-digit code according to the ISO (International Organization for Standardization); and valuation in United States dollars and U.K. pounds sterling, usually according to free-market rates.
See also exchange rate. natural increase, also called natural growth, or the balance of births and deaths, the excess of births over deaths in a population; the rate of natural increase is the difference between the BIRTH RATE and the DEATH RATE of a given population.
The estimated world average during 2005 was 11. per 1,000 population, or 1.35% annually.
Other languages may have local protection, may be permitted in parliamentary debate or legal action , or may be “national languages,” for the protection of which special provisions have been made, but these are not deemed official.
The United States, for example, does not yet formally identify English as “official,” though it uses it for virtually all official purposes. official name, the local official form, short or long, of a country’s legal name taken from the country’s constitution or from other official documents.
The English-language form is usually the protocol form in use by the country, the United States Department of State, and the United Nations. official religion, generally, any religion prescribed or given special status or protection by the constitution or legal system of a country.
Identification as such is not confined to constitutional documents utilizing the term explicitly, organized territory , see territory, overseas department , see department, overseas territory , see territory, parliamentary state, see state, part of a realm, a dependent Dutch political entity with some degree of self-government and having a special status above that of a colony (e.g., the prerogative of rejecting for local application any law enacted by The Netherlands). participation/activity rates, measures defining differential rates of economic activity within a population.
Unless otherwise specified, populations given are DE FACTO, referring to those actually present, rather than DE JURE, those legally resident but not necessarily present on the referent date.
National practices vary as regards the treatment of such groups as armed forces, inmates of institutions, persons seeking their first job, unpaid family workers, seasonal workers and persons engaged in part-time economic activities.
In some countries, all or part of these groups may be included among the economically active, while in other countries the same groups may be treated as inactive.
In general, however, the data on economically active population do not include students, persons occupied solely in family or household work, retired persons, persons living entirely on their own means, and persons wholly dependent upon others.
See also labour force. population projection, the expected population in the years 2010 and 2020, embodying the country’s own projections wherever possible.
Estimates of the future size of a population are usually based on assumed levels of fertility, mortality, and migration.
When a single consistent measure of value, such as VALUE ADDED, can be obtained, this is given, ranked by value; otherwise, and more usually, quantity of production is given. public debt, the current outstanding debt of all periods of maturity for which the central government and its organs are obligated.
For countries that report debt under the World Bank Debtor Reporting System , figures for outstanding, long-term EXTERNAL DEBT are given.
Britannica World Data publishes only purchasing power parity rates as calculated by the World Bank method. quality of working life, a group of measures including weekly hours of work (including overtime); rates per 100,000 for job-connected injury, illness, and mortality; coverage of labour force by insurance for injury, permanent disability, and death; workdays lost to labour strikes and stoppages; and commuting patterns (length of journey to work in minutes and usual method of transportation).* railroads, mode of transportation by self-driven or locomotive-drawn cars over fixed rails.
Length-of-track figures include all mainline and spurline running track but exclude switching sidings and yard track.
Route length, when given, does not compound multiple running tracks laid on the same trackbed. recurrent budget, see budget. religious affiliation, distribution of nominal religionists, whether practicing or not, as a percentage of total population.
This usually assigns to children the religion of their parents. remittances, amount of a migrant’s earnings sent from the migration destination to the place of origin.
Remittance data are compiled somewhat differently from one country source to another but usually include cash transfers of long-term legal migrants.
Cash transfers of short-term (“for less than one year of residence”) legal migrants or the cash transfers of illegal migrants and refugees are also often included with remittances.
The standard sources used in BWD for national remittances are the latest editions of World Bank publications and UNCTAD Handbook of Statistics.
These two sources may also include net wages and salaries of all nonresident migrants and approximate the value of migrants’ transfers of household and personal effects to their place of origin as part of a broader remittances definition. republic, a state with elected leaders and a centralized presidential form of government, local subdivisions being subordinate to the national government.
A federal republic (as distinguished from a unitary republic) is a republic in which power is divided between the central government and the constituent subnational administrative divisions (g., states, provinces, or cantons) in whom the central government itself is held to originate, the division of power being defined in a written constitution and jurisdictional disputes usually being settled in a court; sovereignty usually rests with the authority that has the power to amend the constitution.
A unitary republic (as distinguished from a federal republic) is a republic in which power originates in a central authority and is not derived from constituent subdivisions.
A people’s republic, in the dialectics of Communism, is the first stage of development toward a communist state, the second stage being a socialist republic.
An Islamic republic is structured around social, ethical, legal, and religious precepts central to the Islamic faith. retail price index, see consumer price index. retail sales and service enterprises, see manufacturing, mining, and construction enterprises/retail sales and service enterprises. roundwood, wood obtained from removals from forests, felled or harvested (with or without bark), in all forms.
Though the term is sometimes limited in meaning to fully independent and internationally recognized states, the more general sense of an entity possessing a preponderance of these characteristics is intended here.
It is, thus, also a first-order civil administrative subdivision, especially of a federated union.
An associated state is an autonomous state in free association with another that conducts its external affairs and defense; the association may be terminated in full independence at the instance of the autonomous state in consultation with the administering power.
An external territory is a territory situated outside the area of the country.
An organized territory is a territory for which a system of laws and a settled government have been provided by an act of the United States Congress.
An overseas territory is an overseas subdivision of the French Republic with elected representation in the French Parliament, having individual statutes, laws, and internal organization adapted to local conditions. ton-miles, or ton-kilometres, aggregate measure of freight hauled by a specified means of transportation, equal to tons of freight multiplied by the miles each ton is transported.
The distinction is usually based on the country’s own definition of urban, which may depend only upon the size (population) of a place or upon factors like employment, administrative status, density of housing, etc. value added, also called value added by manufacture, the gross output value of a firm or industry minus the cost of inputs—raw materials, supplies, and payments to other firms— required to produce it.
Value added is the portion of the sales value or gross output value that is actually created by the firm or industry.
Value added generally includes labour costs, administrative costs, and operating profits.
Population 4 population population population Province Province Province Badakhshan 823.
Kabul 2,536,300; Herat 349,000; Kandahar 324,800; Mazar-e Sharif 300,600; Jalalabad 168,600.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force Agriculture Mining Manufacturing Public utilities Transp. and commun.
Construction Trade, hotels, restaurants Finance, real estates Pub. administration Services 8 Other TOTAL 2006-07 in value Af ’000,000 % of total value 117,277 31.
Broadband 2007 0.50 17 0.02 17 Education and health Educational attainment:a.
Education student/ enrollment teachers students teacher ratio rate Primary 51,802 4,318,819 83.
Refers to settled population only and excludes refugees in Pakistan and Iran.
Includes Afghan refugees in Pakistan and Iran and nomadic population; the first complete national census since 1976 may be conducted in September 2010.
Detail does not add to total given because of rounding. n Represents 93% of world production.
Tirana 343,078 406,000); Durres 99,546; Elbasan 87,797; Shkoder 82,455; Vlore 77,691.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2006 in value % of total labour % of labour ’000,000 leks value force force Agriculture 156,592 17.
Price and earnings indexes 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Consumer price index Monthly earnings index 80.
Algiers 1,532,000 ; Oran 724,000; Constantine 475,000; Annaba 410,700; Batna 285,800.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2004 Agriculture 716,000 7.
Petroleum and natural gas Other mining 1 Manufacturing 1 4,157,0006 443,0006 44.36 j 4.76 > 135,1006 846,7006 1.46 8.96 Public utilities 1 815,000 8.
Education teachers students student/ teacher ratio enrollment rate Primary 170,207 4,078,954 24.
The Berber language, Tamazight, became a national language in April 2002.
Importsi.f. in balance of trade andi.f. in commodities and trading partners.
Area and population area population 2000 Districts and islands sq mi sq km census Eastern District 25.
The seat of the legislature, as defined by the Constitution of American Samoa, is at Fagatogo, one of a number of villages within an urban agglomeration collectively known as Pago Pago.
Swains Island is administered by a village government and a representative of the governor.
Area of American Samoa including deeply indented harbour is 84. sq mi , includes 3,530 inadequately defined and 2,360 unemployed.
Andorra la Vella 21,556; Escaldes-Engordany 16,475; Encamp 8,704; Sant Julia de Loria 8,077; La Massana 4,662.
France and Spain are responsible for Andorra’s external security; the police force is assisted in alternate years by either French gendarmerie or Barcelona police.
In 2006, Andorra had 10,736,722 visitors, of which daily excursionists from Spain 4,612,061, daily excursionists from France 3,705,536.
Luanda 2,766,000; Huambo 173,600; Lobito 137,400; Benguela 134,500; Namibe 132,900.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2006 2003 in value % of total labour % of labour AOA ’000,000 value force force Agriculture 322,900 8.
Education teachers students student/ teacher ratio enrollment rate Primary 3,707,087 Secondary/Voc.
In 2008 about half of crude petroleum production came from offshore Cabinda, an exclave separated from Angola proper by a sliver of the Dem.
Onshore production in Cabinda has been stymied by the possibility of secessionist unrest.
General condition of even paved roads is poor. n Circulation of daily newspapers.
Area and population area population Parishes 2 Saint George sq mi sq km 2001 census 9.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2001 in value % of total labour % of labour EC$’000,000 value force force Agriculture, fishing 79.
Community councils on Antigua and the local government council on Barbuda are the organs of local government.
Based on table of detailed de facto census results released in July 2004.
Fuel storage facilities on Antigua supply petroleum to eastern Caribbean countries.
Buenos Aires 12,795,000; Cordoba 1,452,000; Rosario 1,203,000; Mendoza 918,000; San Miguel de Tucuman 832,000.
Structure of gross domestic product and 2006 labour force 2001 in value % of total labour % of labour ARS '000,000 value force force Agriculture 50,760 7.
Area of Tierra del Fuego excludes claims to Britishheld islands in the South Atlantic Ocean.
Import duties and VAT less imputed bank service charges, includes 427,307 not defined and 4,351,596 unemployed.
Yerevan 1,107,800; Gyumri 147,000; Vanadzor 105,000; Vagharshapat 57,300; Hrazdan 52,900.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2006 in value % of total labour % of labour AMD ’000,000 value force force Agriculture, forestry 497,121 18.
Price and earnings indexes 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 200810 Consumer price index 104.
The Armenian Apostolic Church has special status per 1991 religious law.
In addition, about 13% of neighbouring Azerbaijan (including the 4,400 sq km geographic region of Nagorno-Karabakh ) has been occupied by Armenian forces since 1993.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2002 2000 in value % of total labour % of labour Af. ’000,000 value force force Agriculture 1 11.
Most Arubans are racially and ethnically mixed; the 4 major ethnic groups are Amerindian, Dutch, Spanish, and black.
Service facilities include a free zone, offshore corporate banking facilities, casino/resort complexes, a petroleum transshipment terminal, a cruise ship terminal, and ship repair and bunkering facilities.
Taxes less subsidies and imputed bank service charges, includes 3,118 unemployed.
Detail does not add to total given because of rounding. n Minimum wage for the manufacturing and service industries.
Includes crude petroleum imports and refined petroleum exports; excludes imports and exports of Aruban free zone totaling Af.9,000,000 (95% food products, 69% from the U.K.) and Af.0,000,000 (96% food products, 43% to Panama), respectively.
Sydney 3,641,422/4,119,191; Melbourne 3,371,888/3,592,590; Brisbane 1,676,389/1,763,132; Perth 1,256,035/1,445,077; Adelaide 1,040,719/1,105,840; Gold Coast -Tweed Heads 454,436/541,675; Newcastle 288,732/493,467; Canberra -Queanbeyan 356,120/368,128; Gosford 282,726/n.a.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007-08 2007 in value % of total labour % of labour $A ’000,0006 value force force Agriculture, forestry, fishing 25,085 2.
Price and earnings indexes 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 20089 Consumer price index Weekly earnings index 92.
Interest and prices Govt, bond yield 5.30 4.90 5.30 5.27 5.71 6.33 Industrial share prices 100.
Balance of payments 10 Balance of visible trade -5,514 -15,339 -18,064 -13,372 -9,596 -17,770 Imports,o.b. -70,527 -85,861 -105,230 -120,383 -134,509 -160,205 Exports,o.b.
Vienna 1,677,867 ; Graz 250,653; Linz 189,069; Salzburg 149,201; Innsbruck 118,362.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 in value % of total labour % of labour €’000,000 value forces force Agriculture, forestry 4,350 1.
Baku 1,145,000 ; Ganca 307,500; Sumqayit 268,800; Minga^evir 95,500; Qaraquxur 74,700.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2005 in value % of total labour % of labour AZN ’000,000 value force force Agriculture Petroleum and natural gas, 1,565 5.
Nassau 231,500; Freeport 47,100; West End 12,900; Cooper’s Town (on Great Abaco) 8,600; Marsh Harbour 5,400.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force _ 2006 _ in value % of total B$’000 value Agriculture Fishing Mining Public utilities Manufacturing Construction Transp. and commun.
Trade, hotels, restaurants Finance, real estate Pub. admin., defense Services Other TOTAL 24,400 0.
Statistically derived midpoint within range, includes public corporations.
Much of which is transshipped from the petroleum storage terminal near Freeport.
Manama 157,000; Muharraq 91,307; Ar-Rifa 79,550; Madlnat Hamad 52,718; AlC All 47,529; Madlnat Tsa 36,833.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2001 value in % of total labour % of labour BD '000,000 value forces forces Agriculture, fishing 25.
Official name is Al-Muharraq. includes the area of Hawar island and other nearby islets awarded to Bahrain by the International Court of Justice in 2001.
Includes 5,424 inadequately defined and 16,136 unemployed Bahrainis. n Of which 59% non-Bahrainis; non-Bahrainis constituted 70% of labour force in 2006.
Dhaka 7,000,940/12,797,394; Chittagong 2,579,107/3,858,093; Khulna 855,650/1,388,425; Rajshahi 472,775/775,495; Sylhet 463,198; Comilla 404,200; Tungi 352,900.
Reinstated Jan., 2009; replaced interim caretaker government from October 2006. includes 45 indirectly elected seats reserved for women.
The Chittagong Hill Tracts, a semi-autonomous region for non-Bengali tribal people within Chittagong division was created by an accord signed in December 1997.
Export processing zone manufactures (particularly ready-made garments) are of the greatest value.
Area and population area population 2000 Parishes 1 sq mi sq km census Christ Church 22 57 49,497 St.
Bridgetown 98,700; Speightstown 3,600; Oistins 2,300; Bathsheba 1,800; Holetown 1,400.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2006 2005 in value % of total labour % of labour Bds$’000,000 value force force Agriculture, fishing 175.
Parishes and city of Bridgetown have no local administrative function, includes most of the city of Bridgetown.
The adjusted de jure census total including non-enumerated persons and institutionalized persons is 268,792.
Offshore banking and information services are important sources of revenue.
Minsk 1,741,000; Homyel 481,500; Mahilyow 367,700; Vitsyebsk 343,600; Hrodna 318,600; Brest 301,400.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2003 in value Br ’000,000,000 % of total value labour forces % of labour forces Agriculture, forestry 7,110 7.
However, a 2003 concordat grants the Belarusian Orthodox Church privileged status.
Includes 136,000 registered unemployed and 799,000 undistributed selfemployed and unregistered unemployed. n Detail does not add to total given because of rounding.
Brussels 148,873/1,831,496; Antwerp 472,071/955,338; Liege 190,102/641,591; Gent 237,250/423,320; Charleroi 201,593/405,236.
Price and earnings indexes 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Consumer price index Annual earnings index 93.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2006 in value % of total labour % of labour €’000,000 value force force Agriculture 2,352 0.
Belize City 65,200; San Ignacio/Santa Elena 19,100; Belmopan 18,100; Orange Walk 16,300; Dangriga 12,000.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 in value % of total labour % of labour BZ$’000 value force force Agriculture, fishing, forestry 271,000 10.
Excludes crude petroleum extraction, includes crude petroleum extraction.
Cotonou 719,912; Porto-Novo 255,878; Godomey 187,836; Parakou 178,304; Abomey-Calavi 75,226; Bohicon 74,070.
Porto-Novo, the official capital established under the constitution, is the seat of the legislature, but the president and most government ministers reside in Cotonou.
Excludes reexports (notably petroleum and food products particularly from Nigeria and Niger) valued at U.S.$253,000,000 in 2005. 1417,000,000 in 2005.
Area and population area population Municipalities sq mi sq km 2000 census Hamilton 0.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 in value % of total labour % of labour Bd$’000,000 value force 0 force 0 Agriculture, fishing 45 0. l Quarrying 1 55 ' Construction I 3,544 8.
The economy of Bermuda is overwhelmingly based on service industries such as tourism, insurance companies, offshore financial centres, e-commerce companies, and ship repair facilities.
Subscribers. 16 2004-05; many students attend universities abroad because Bermuda does not have a degree-conferring university, business school, or law school.
Thimphu 79,185; Phuntsholing 20,537; Gelaphu 9,199; Wangdue 6,714; Samdrup Jongkhar 5,952; Samtse 4,981.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2005 in value % of total labour % of labour Nu ’000,000 value force force Agriculture, forestry 9,578 18.
Buddhism is the spiritual heritage of Bhutan per article 3. of the 2008 constitution.
Indian currency is also accepted legal tender; the ngultrum is at par with the Indian rupee.
Estimated district areas are derived from district area percentages of total national area as published in the Statistical Yearbook of Bhutan . includes 634,972 residents and 37,453 temporary residents.
Includes 48,734 in ill-defined activities and 7,865 unemployed. n Detail does not add to total given because of rounding.
Santa Cruz 1,116,059 (urban agglomeration 1,422,000); La Paz 789,585 ; El Alto 647,3506; Cochabamba 516,683; Oruro 201,230; Sucre 193,873.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2002 in value % of total labour % of labour Bs '000,0009 value forcei i forceii Agriculture 3,920 13.
Executive and legislative branches meet in La Paz, judiciary in Sucre, includes the 1,425 sq mi area of the Bolivian part of Lake Titicaca.
Sarajevo 376,000; Banja Luka 165,100; Zenica 84,300; Tuzla 84,100; Mostar 63,500.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 1999 in value % of total labour % of labour KM ’000,000 value force force Agriculture, forestry 1,716 7.
High Representative of the international community per the 1995 Dayton Peace Agreement/EU Special Representative.
Combined total for the separately constructed budgets of the FBH, RS, and Brcko District along with the small central government budget.
Taxes on products and imports less subsidies and imputed bank service charges.
Retail price index through 2006, consumer price index beginning in 2007.
Gaborone 214,400; Francistown 91,800; Molepolole 65,600; Selebi-Pikwe 54,700; Maun 51,600.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007-08 2003 in value % of total labour % of labour P ’000,000 value forceio forceio Agriculture 1,489 1.
Hn addition, the Ntlo ya Dikgosi , a 35member body consisting of chiefs, subchiefs, and associated members, serves in an advisory capacity to the government, includes 4 specially elected members and 2 ex officio members ; the statutory number includes the speaker who may be appointed from outside the National Assembly.
The high court meets in Lobatse, but its move to Gaborone was pending in mid-2009.
Other principal cities 5 /metropolitan areas population population Santos 416,100/1,606,143 Nova Iguagu 830,7006 Sao Luis 922,200/1,210,027 Teresina 737,100/778,341 Guarulhos 1,209,600 7 Sao Bernardo Natal 774,200/1,174,886 do Campo 767,8007 Maceio 871,900/1,089,295 Campo Grande 716,200/724,638 Joinville 470,400/1,041,494 Londrina 482,600/711,611 Joao Pessoa 675,000/1,004,580 Osasco 701,0007 Sao Gongalo 960,800 7 Santo Andre 667,9007 Florianopolis 385,000/940,518 Jaboatao 650,4008 Duque de Caxias 839,3006 Blumenau 270,700/617,462 Families.
Distribution of income percentage of national income by quintile 1 2 3 4 5 3.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2006 10 in value % of total labour % of labour U.S.$’000,000 value force force Agriculture, forestry 72,300 5.
United States dollar 2.89 2.65 2.34 2.14 1.77 2.34 £ 5.15 5.13 4.03 4.19 3.55 3.41 SDR 4.29 4.12 3.34 3.21 2.80 3.60 International reserves Total 48,847 52,462 53,245 85,156 179,433 192,844 SDRs 2 4 29 8 2 1 Reserve pos. in IMF — — — — — — Foreign exchange 48,844 52,458 53,216 85,148 179,431 192,843 Gold 1.08 1.08 1.08 1.08 1.08 1.08 % world reserves 0.
Interest and prices Central bank discount 23.92 24.55 25.34 19.98 17.85 20.48 Govt, bond yield Industrial share prices Balance of payments Balance of visible trade +24,794 +33,666 +44,703 +46,458 +40,031 +24,746 Imports,o.b. -48,290 -62,809 -73,606 -91,350 -120,618 -173,197 Exports,o.b.
As of September. n Includes 218,000 not adequately defined and 8,210,000 unemployed.
Bandar Seri Begawan 67,100; Kuala Belait 32,000; Seria 30,700; Tutong 19,600.
A11 official documents that must be published by law in Malay are also required to be issued in an official English version.
Foreign workers accounted for 70% of the 160,500 economically active in 2004.
Sofia 1,156,796; Plovdiv 345,249; Varna 313,983; Burgas 187,514; Ruse 156,761; Stara Zagora 140,303.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2006 in value % of total labour % of labour ’000,000 leva value force force Agriculture, forestry 2,028 5.
Bulgaria has no official religion; the constitution, however, refers to Eastern Orthodoxy as the “traditional” religion.
Sofiya-Grad includes Sofia city and immediately adjacent urban and rural areas.
Unofficially up to 40% of the population is estimated to be atheist or agnostic, includes short-term public guaranteed external debt.
Hemus Air and Bulgaria Air only including significant charter services; these two airlines operated under the name Bulgaria Air from February 2009.
Ouagadougou 1,475,223; Bobo-Dioulasso 489,967; Koudougou 88,184; Banfora 75,917; Ouahigouya 73,153.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2006 1996 in value % of total labour % of labour CFAF ’000,000 value force force Agriculture 1 ,012,100 32.
Foreign trade 7 Balance of trade 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 CFAF ’000,000,000 % of total -210.
Importso.b. in balance of trade and commodities andi.f. in trading partners.
Subscribers. n Based on the 2003 Burkina Faso Demographic and Health Survey, comprising 57,737 people in 9,097 households, about 80% of which are located in rural areas.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 1990 in value % of total labour % of labour U.S.$’000 value force force Agriculture 342,000 34.
Price index 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 11 Consumer price index 73.
HIV/AIDS-related 370; lower respiratory infections 185; diarrheal diseases 128; war-related 114; perinatal conditions 100; malaria 57.
Telephones Dailies 2007 2015 2.415 Cellular 2008 48116 6016 Internet users 2008 65 8.
South African troops in Burundi representing AU peacekeeping mission 973.
Phnom Penh 1,364,000; Battambang 124,290; Sisophon 85,382; Siemreap 83,715; Sihanoukville 66,723.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 in value % of total labour % of labour KHR ’000,000,000 value force force Agriculture 10,406 29.
Importso.b. in balance of trade andi.f. in commodities and trading partners, includes estimates for illegal exports.
Area and population area population Regions Capitals sq mi sq km 2004 estimate Adamoua Ngaoundere 24,595 63,701 782,000 Centre Yaounde 26,623 68,953 2,703,000 Est Bertoua 42,086 109,002 816,000 Extreme-Nord Maroua 13,229 34,263 2,941,000 Littoral Douala 7,818 20,248 2,380,000 Nord Garoua 25,517 66,090 1,326,000 Nord-Ouest Bamenda 6,680 17,300 1,989,000 Ouest Bafoussam 5,364 13,892 2,142,000 Sud Ebolowa 18,221 47,191 578,000 Sud-Ouest Buea 10,0811 26,1101 1,343,000 LAND AREA INLAND WATER TOTAL 180,2132 3,707 183,9201.
Douala 1,371,400; Yaounde 1,344,600; Kousseri 476,600; Garoua 461,300; Bamenda 419,400; Maroua 335,800.
HIV/AIDS-related 308; lower respiratory infections 201; malaria 119; diarrheal diseases 88; perinatal conditions 69.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2005 in value CFAF ’000,000,000 % of total value labour forces % of labour force Agriculture, fishing, forestry 1,668 19.
Area and population area population Provinces Capitals sq mi sq km 2009 3 estimate Alberta Edmonton 255,541 661,848 3,632,483 British Columbia Victoria 364,764 944,735 4,419,974 Manitoba Winnipeg 250,116 647,797 1,213,815 New Brunswick Fredericton 28,150 72,908 748,319 Newfoundland and Labrador St.
John’s 156,453 405,212 508,990 Nova Scotia Halifax 21,345 55,284 939,531 Ontario Toronto 415,599 1,076,395 12,986,857 Prince Edward Island Charlottetown 2,185 5,660 140,402 Quebec Quebec 595,391 1,542,056 7,782,561 Saskatchewan Regina 251,367 651,036 1,023,810 Territories Northwest Territories Yellowknife 519,735 1,346,106 42,940 Nunavut Iqaluit 808,185 2,093,190 31,556 Yukon Whitehorse 186,272 482,443 33,442 TOTAL 3,855,1034 9,984,6704 33,504,680 piratory system 61.0; diseases of the nervous system 31.9; accidents 27.6; diseases of the digestive system 26.9; diabetes mellitus 24.3.
Distribution of income percentage of family after-tax income by quintile 1 2 3 4 5 2.3% 7.6% 14.8% 24.3% 51.0% Quality of working life.
Toronto 5,113,149; Montreal 3,635,571; Vancouver 2,116,581; Ottawa-Gatineau 1,130,761; Calgary 1,079,310; Edmonton 1,034,945; Quebec 715,515; Winnipeg 694,668; Hamilton 692,911; London 457,720; Kitchener 451,235; St.
Other metropolitan areas population population population Abbotsford 159,020 Oshawa 330,594 Sherbrooke 186,952 Barrie 177,061 Regina 194,971 Sudbury 158,258 Halifax 372,858 Saguenay 151,643 Trois-Rivieres 141,529 Kelowna 162,276 St.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 20063 in value % of total labour % of labour Can$’000,0006 value force force Agriculture, fishing, forestry 25,965 2.
Price and earnings indexes 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Consumer price index Hourly earnings indexi® 93.
Foreign trade Balance of trade 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Can$’000,000,000 +47.
Includes professional, scientific, and technical services . n Summed total; reported total equals Can$l,225,687,000,000.
Praia 125,148; Mindelo (on Sao Vicente) 76,650; Santa Maria 18,780; Assomada 13,562; Pedra Badejo 11,348.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2005 1990 in value % of total labour % of labour C.V.Esc. '000,000 value force force Agriculture, fishing 8,904 9.
George Town 28,836; West Bay 10,855; Bodden Town 8,300; Cayman Brae has 4 small settlements.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 in value % of total labour % of labour U.S.$’000,000 value force force Agriculture, forestry, fishing 10.
Also of great importance to the economy are the captive insurance, mutual fund, and ship registration sectors.
Bangui 622,771; Bimbo 124,176; Berberati 76,918; Carnot 45,421; Bambari 41,356.
HIV/AIDS-related 604; lower respiratory infections 184; malaria 158; diarrheal diseases 105.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2006 1988 in value % of total labour % of labour CFAF '000,000 value force force Agriculture, fishing, forestry 421,900 54.
Communications units units number per 1,000 number per 1,000 Medium date in '000s persons Medium date in '000s persons Televisions 2004 24 6.
Telephones Dailies 2007 5ii 1.211 Cellular 2008 15412 3512 Internet users 2008 19 4.
Official figure; a roughly equal amount was smuggled out of the country.
Importso.b. in balance of trade andi.f. in commodities and trading partners.
National roads only; much of the 9,700 mi local road network is unusable.
N’Djamena 989,000 3 ; Moundou 108,728; Sarh 95,050; Abeche 63,165; Kelo 36,643; Pala 31,281.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2006 1993 in value % of total labour % of labour CFAF '000,000 value force force Agriculture Mining 723,700 1,560,700 20.
Based on the 2003 Chad Demographic and Health Survey, comprising 27,879 people in 5,369 households, about 80% of which were in rural areas.
Santiago 200,792 8 /5,428,590 9 ; Valparafso-Vina del Mar /803,683; Concepcion 212,003/ 666,381; La Serena-Coquimbo /296,253; Antofagasta 285,255/285,255.
Price and earnings indexes 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Consumer price index Hourly earnings index 93.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 in value % of total labour % of labour Ch$’000,000,00011 valueii force force Agriculture, fishing 3,080 4.
Includes military pensions and funding for the paramilitary and the Copper Stabilisation Fund.
Shanghai 14,987,000; Beijing 11,106,000; Guangzhou 8,829,000; Shenzhen 7,581,000; Wuhan 7,243,000; Tianjin 7,180,000; Chongqing 6,461,000; Shenyang 4,787,000; Dongguan 4,528,000; Chengdu 4,123,000; Xi’an 4,009,000; Nanjing 3,679,000; Guiyang 3,662,000; Harbin 3,621,000; Changchun 3,183,000; Dalian 3,167,000; Zibo 3,061,000; Hangzhou 3,007,000; Kunming 2,931,000; Taiyuan 2,913,000; Qingdao 2,866,000; Jinan 2,798,000; Zhengzhou 2,636,000; Fuzhou 2,606,000; Changsha 2,604,000; Lanzhou 2,561,000; Xiamen 2,519,000; Jinxi 2,426,000.
Distribution of income percentage of urban household income by quintile 1 2 3 4 5 9.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2006 2002 in value % of total labour % of labour Y ’000,000,000 value force force Agriculture, forestry, fishing 2,404 11.
Statutory number; includes 36 seats allotted to Hong Kong and 12 to Macau.
Data for Taiwan, Quemoy, and Matsu included; Hong Kong and Macau are excluded.
Includes 7,700,000 registered unemployed; remainder mostly activities not defined.
Bogota 7,033,914; Medellin 2,248,912; Cali 2,139,535; Barranquilla 1,144,470; Cartagena 871,342; Cucuta 582,332.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 in value % of total labour % of labour Col$’000,000 value forced forced Agriculture, forestry 33,349 8.
Import figures areo.b. in balance of trade andi.f. in commodities and trading partners.
Moroni 46,000; Mutsamudu 21,558; Domoni 13,254; Fomboni 13,053; Tsembehou 10,552.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2004 in value % of total labour % of labour CF ’000,000 value force i° force i° Agriculture, fishing 84,119 50.
Trade, restaurants, hotels Finance, insurance, 26,38711 15.8H real estate 7,948 4.
Communications units units number per 1,000 number per 1,000 Medium date in ’000s persons Medium date in ’000s persons Televisions 2002 13 23 PCs 2004 5.
Excludes Mayotte, an overseas possession of France, unless otherwise indicated. 3 languages are official per 2001 constitution.
A constitutional referendum effective from May 23, 2009, returned greater powers to the central government, includes 15 indirectly elected seats.
Kinshasa 7,273,947; Lubumbashi 1,283,380; MbujiMayi 1,213,726; Kananga 720,362; Kisangani 682,599; Bukavu 471,789.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2004 2003 in value % of total labour % of labour FC ’000,000 value force force Agriculture 1,796,000 43.
Most transactions are conducted outside of the banking system and often with United States dollars.
To be formally reorganized into 25 provinces and 1 city in mid-2009 or later.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2004 2003 in value % of total labour % of labour CFAF ’000,000 value force force Agriculture, forestry, fishing 132,800 5.
The post of prime minister, an extraconstitutional creation from January 2005, was abolished on September 15, 2009.
Area and population area population Provinces Capitals sq mi sq km 20071 estimate Alajuela Alajuela 3,766 9,753 810,165 Cartago Cartago 1,207 3,125 484,186 Guanacaste Liberia 3,915 10,141 298,897 Heredia Heredia 1,026 2,657 398,865 Limon Limon 3,547 9,188 392,616 Puntarenas Puntarenas 4,354 11,277 408,654 San Jose San Jose 1,915 4,959 1,505,851 TOTAL 19,730 51,100 4,299,234 ing and publishing 95; fabricated metal products 74.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2005 2008 2 in value % of total labour % of labour C’000,000 value force force Agriculture, forestry, fishing 753,382 8.
Abidjan 3,576,000; Bouake 573,700; Daloa 215,100; Yamoussoukro 185,600; Korhogo 115,000.
HIV/AIDS-related 299; malaria 153; lower respiratory infections 132; diarrheal diseases 102; perinatal conditions 92.
The peace accord signed between the warring factions in March 2007 enabled the creation of a power-sharing transitional government in April 2007.
At least 1 million foreigners have been forced to leave southern Cote d’Ivoire from September 2002.
A UN embargo on rough diamond exports was in effect from November 2004 to November 2007.
Detail does not add to total given because of rounding. n Abidjan airport only.
UN 7,800, French 1,800; however, dismantling of the buffer zone occupied by the peacekeeping troops began in April 2007.
Zagreb 691,724; Split 175,140; Rijeka 143,800; Osijek 90,411; Zadar 69,556.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force _ 2007 _ _ 2008 _ in value % of total labour % of labour kn ’000,000 value force force Agriculture, forestry, hunting, fishing Mining l Manufacturing [ Public utilities > Construction Transp. and commun.
Trade, restaurants Finance, real estate Pub. admin., defense Services Other TOTAL 16,477 6.
Havana 2,174,790; Santiago de Cuba 425,990; Camaguey 306,702; Holguin 274,805; Santa Clara 208,739; Guantanamo 208,579.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 2004 in value % of total labour % of labour CUP ’0007 value7 forces forces Agriculture 1,913,600 4.
Provision of separate data below does not imply recognition of either state’s claims but is necessitated by the lack of unified data.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2005 in value % of total labour % of labour €’000,000 value force force Agriculture, fishing 306.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2003 in value % of total labour % of labour YTL ’000 value force force Agriculture and fishing 288,152 6.
Prague 1,233,211; Brno 370,592; Ostrava 307,767; Plzen 169,273; Liberec 100,914; Olomouc 100,373.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 2005 in value % of total labour % of labour Kc ’000,000 value force force Agriculture, forestry 77,416 2.
Foreign trade 5 Balance of trade 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 Kc ’000,000,000 % of total -71.
Greater Copenhagen 1,153,615; Arhus 237,551; Odense 158,163; Alborg 121,818; Esbjerb 70,880.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force Agriculture, fishing Mining Manufacturing Construction Public utilities Transp. and commun.
Trade, restaurants Finance, real estate Pub. admin., defense Services Other TOTAL 2008 in value DKK ’000,000 % of total value 18,489 1.
Percentage of de jure population economically active based on total population.
Taxes less subsidies on products, includes 15,100 not adequately defined and 143,300 unemployed.
Djibouti 583,000; Ali Sabieh 23,000; Dikhil 16,700; Arta 11,600; Tadjourah 8,700.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2005 2003 in value % of total labour % of labour FDJ '000,000 value force force Agriculture 1 Mining ] 4,051 3.
Weights of consumer price index components for Djibouti city only, indirect taxes.
Area and population area population 2001 Parishes sq mi sq km census St.
Roseau 16,600; Portsmouth 3,600; Marigot 2,900; Berekua 2,600; Atkinson 2,500.
Taxes less imputed banking service charges and subsidies, includes 3,054 unemployed and 43 unclassified by economic activity.
Santo Domingo 1,887,586 5 ; Santiago 507,418; San Pedro de Macoris 193,713; La Romana 191,303; San Cristobal 137,422.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2005 in value % of total labour % of labour RD$’000,0006 value force force Agriculture 24,250 7.
About 10% of the population of the Dominican Republic is a mix of legally and illegally resident Haitians. 5 2002 census population for national district region (combined population of Santo Domingo province and the national district) is 2,731,294.
Dili 151,026; Los Palos 12,612; Same 9,966; Pante Macassar 9,754; Maliana 9,721.
Communications number units per 1,000 number units per 1,000 Medium date in ’000s persons Medium date in ’000s persons Televisions Telephones 200214 PCs Dailies 2005 2007 3.015 4.315 Cellular 2007 6916 6016 Internet users 2004 1.
Military expenditure as percentage of GDP:a. iTimor-Leste is the preferred short-form name per the United Nations.
Some vestiges of traditional beliefs are also practiced in conjunction with Roman Catholicism.
Excludes reexports. 57% of paved roads were in poor or damaged condition in late 1999; gravel roads were not usable for most vehicles.
Guayaquil 2,387,000 5 ; Quito 1,514,000 5 ; Cuenca 303,994; Machala 217,266; Santo Domingo de los Colorados 211,689; Portoviejo 194,916.
Quechua and Shuar are also official languages for the indigenous peoples, includes Santa Elena province created in October 2007. includes Santo Domingo de los Tsachilas province created in October 2007. 5 2005 population of urban agglomeration.
Import figures areo.b. in balance of trade andi.f. for commodities and trading partners.
Cairo 6,759 ; Alexandria 4,085; Al-Jlzah 2,891; Shubra al-Khaymah 1,026; Port Said 571; Suez 512.
Average household size 4.2; average annual income per household:a.; sources of income:a.; expenditure:a.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2005-06 2006 in value % of total labour % of labour LE ’000,00011 valueii forced forced Agriculture 81,766.
San Salvador 316,090 ; Santa Ana 245,421; Soyapango 241,403 3 ; San Miguel 218,410; Mejicanos 140,7513.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2003 in value % of total labour % of labour CFAF ’000,000 value force force Agriculture, fishing 109,000 1.
Official government census figures; credible estimates are significantly lower.
Asmara 435,000; Keren 57,000; Assab 28,000; Afabet 25,000; Massawa 25,000; Mendefera 25,000; Teseney 25,000.
Structure of gross domestic product 2007 in value % of total U.S.$’000,000 value Agriculture, fishing 235.
Mandate for the UN peacekeeping force along the EritreanEthiopian border was terminated in July 2008.
The name in Tigrinya, the most widely spoken local language, is Hagere Iertra.
New constitution ratified in May 1997 was not implemented in August 2009.
Data taken from a 1996-97 survey of the 12 largest urban centres in the country.
Tallinn 396,852; Tartu 101,965; Narva 66,712; Kohtla-Jarve 45,399; Parnu 44,074.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2006 2005 in value % of total labour % of labour EEK ’000,000 value force force Agriculture, fishing, forestry 5,683 2.
Addis Ababa 2,738,248; Adama 222,035; Dire Dawa 222,000; Mekele 215,546; Gonder 206,987; Bahir Dar 180,094.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2004-05 1995“ in value % of total labour % of labour Br ’000,0005 value force force Agriculture 35,948 47.
Education student/ enrollment teachers students teacher ratio rate Primary 124,20216 12,174,719 66.616 71 Secondary/Voc.
Includes 3 special enumeration areas with a total population of 96,570.
Based on the national Household Income and Expenditure Survey, comprising 17,332 households.
Importso.b. in balance of trade andi.f. in commodities and trading partners. n Length of Ethiopian segment of Addis Ababa-Djibouti railroad, which in 2007 was in poor condition.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2006 2005 in value DKK ’000,000 % of total value labour force % of labour force Agriculture 2,410 7 20.
Formally independent of the national Danish Lutheran church from July 2007.
The maritime boundary demarcation agreement between the Shetland Islands and the Faroes in 1999 has allowed for the still unsuccessful exploration for deep-sea petroleum as of mid-2008.
Nasinu 87,446 6 ; Suva 85,691 (urban agglomeration, 241,432); Lautoka 52,220; Nausori 47,6046; Nadi 42,284.
Other 545.88 9.98 — — TOTAL 5,483.35 100.05 316,041 100.05 Selected balance of payments data.
Matanitu Tu-Vaka-i-koya ko Viti/Viti; Hindustani longform name: Fiji Ripablik.
English, Fijian, and Hindustani had equal status per 1997 constitution.
Backed by the military from December 2006; the 1997 constitution was not formally abrogated until April 2009.
Data for paid employees only who are 15 and over, indirect taxes less imputed bank service charges and subsidies.
Helsinki 576,632 ; Espoo 241,5656; Tampere 209,552; Vantaa 195,3976; Turku 175,582; Oulu 137,061.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2006 in value U.S.$’000,000 % of total value labour force % of labour force Agriculture, fishing, forestry 6,021 2.
From farms of 1 hectare and larger only, includes 204,000 unemployed persons not previously employed and 4,000 not adequately defined, importsi.f., exportso.b.
Paris 2,181,371/10,142,977; Marseille 839,043/1,418,481; Lyon 472,305/1,417,463; Lille 226,014/1,016,205; Nice 347,060/940,017; Toulouse 437,715/850,873; Bordeaux 232,260/803,117; Nantes 282,853/568,743; Toulon 167,816/543,065; Douai-Lens: Douai 40,094, Lens 34,872/512,462; Strasbourg 272,975/440,265; Grenoble 156,107/427,658; Rouen 107,904/388,798; Valenciennes 41,506/355,660; Nancy 105,468/331,279; Metz 124,435/322,946; Montpellier 251,634/318,225; Tours 136,942/306,974; Saint-Etienne 177,480/286,400; Rennes 209,613/ 282,550.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force _ 2006 _ _ 2005 in value % of total labour % of labour €’000,000 value force force Agriculture, forestry, fishing 32,700 1.
Interest and prices Central bank discount Govt, bond yield 4.13 4.10 3.41 3.80 4.30 4.23 Industrial share prices 9 72.
Britannica World Data continues to compile separate pages for the four FODs and acknowledges that some data are without a doubt double-counted.
Data for France are footnoted if taken from an international source that clearly cites the inclusion of the FODs.
Includes Monaco. n Last state-owned coalproducing mine closed in April 2004.
In 2004 the European Space Agency accounted for 26% of GDP and employed 8,300.
Faaa 29,781 4 ; Papeete 26,050 (urban agglomeration 131,6955); Punaauia 25,399 4 ; Pirae 14,551 4 ; Nunue 4,9276.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2006 in value % of total labour % of labour U.S.$’000,000 value force 7 force 7 Agriculture, fishing 164.
Located on Bora-Bora, Nunue is the largest town not on the island of Tahiti.
The manufacture of energy-generating products is included in Public utilities.
Imports i.f.; exportso.b. n Fruit known locally as nono; also known as Indian mulberry.
Libreville 661,600; Port-Gentil 116,200; Franceville 41,300; Lambarene 9,000.
Area and population area population area population 2006 2006 sq km estimate sq km estimate Basse 2,048 217,014 Kanifing2.
Serekunda 335,700 2 ; Brikama 80,700; Bakau 45,5002; Banjul 33,131 ; Farafenni 30,400.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 1993 in value % of total labour % of labour D ’000,000 value forces forces Agriculture 5,321 26.
Air transport 15; passenger arrivals 300,000, passenger departures 300,000; cargo loaded and unloaded 2,700 metric tons.
Kanifing and Banjul make up most of Greater Banjul, includes national area near the mouth of the Gambia River not allocated by division.
Low-income population in Banjul and Kanifing only; weights of consumer price index components.
Tbilisi 1,106,500; Kutaisi 188,600; Batumi 122,200; Rustavi 117,300; Zugdidi 72,100.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 2007 in value % of total labour % of labour GEL ’000,000 value force force Agriculture 1,703.
On Aug., 2008, Russia became the first country to recognize Abkhazia’s and South Ossetia’s independence from Georgia. 6 2008 rough estimate.
Georgia claims as part of Shida Kartli region, includes Abkhazia and South Ossetia.
Excludes all but 1,900 people from the populations of Abkhazia and South Ossetia.
Excludes Abkhazia and South Ossetia. n Taxes on products less subsidies and less imputed bank service charges.
Favourite leisure activities include playing football (soccer; registered participants, 2004) 6,272,804, as well as watching television, using the computer, going to the cinema, attending theatrical and musical performances, visiting museums, and taking part in package tours.
Manufacturing enterprises no. of employees wages as a % of avg. of all manufacturing wages value added at factor values Motor vehicles 516,461 144.
In 2009 Germany was a world leader in the production of wind and solar power.
United States dollar 0.95 0.79 0.73 0.85 0.76 0.70 0.72 £ 1.53 1.41 1.41 1.46 1.49 1.36 1.03 SDR 1.30 1.18 1.14 1.21 1.14 1.07 1.11 International reserves Total 51,171 50,694 48,823 45,140 41,687 44,327 43,137 SDRs 1,980 1,942 2,061 1,892 2,010 2,162 2,198 Reserve pos. in IMF 6,695 7,656 6,863 3,483 1,958 1,396 2,382 Foreign exchange 42,495 41,095 39,899 39,765 37,719 40,768 38,557 Gold 110.79 110.58 110.38 110.21 110.04 109.87 109.72 % world reserves 11.15 11.27 11.44 11.49 Interest and prices Central bank discount Govt, bond yield 4.
Excludes eastern Germany except for the former East Berlin, includes attempted murder.
Accra 1,847,432; Kumasi 627,600; Tamale 269,200; Tema 237,700; Obuasi 122,600.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 1999 in value £’000,0005 % of total value labour force6,7 % of labour forces Agriculture, forestry, fishing 258,500 34.
Athens 745,514 ; Thessaloniki 363,987 ; Piraeus 175,697 6 ; Patrai 161,114; Peristerion 137,918 6 ; Irakleio 133,012.
Hhe autocephalous Greek Orthodox Church has special recognition per the constitution.
Unofficial source; government states there are no ethnic divisions in Greece.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2006 in value % of total labour % of labour U.S.$’000,000 value forces forces Agriculture, fishing, hunting, trapping 92 4.
But government-owned corporations have debt obligations in ships and buildings.
Area and population Parishes 1 Principal towns sq mi area sq km population 2001 census St.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 1998 in value % of total labour % of labour EC$’000,000 value force force Agriculture 83.
Military expenditure as percentage of GDP:a.; per capita expenditure,a.
Hurricanes Ivan and Emily, which struck Grenada in September 2004 and June 2005, respectively, destroyed much of the nutmeg and cacao fields as well as the banana crop; it is estimated that it will take a decade to regrow the nutmeg groves.
Imports areo.b. in balance of trade andi.f. for commodities and trading partners.
Education teachers students student/ teacher ratio enrollment rate Primary 3,246i 9 60,769 19.019 Secondary/Voc.
Within Pointe-aPitre urban agglomeration. n Excludes 19,870 non-salaried workers.
Finance, real estate; Public administration, defense; Services includes Transportation and communications.
Tamuning 10,833; Mangilao 7,794; Yigo 6,391; Astumbo 5,207; Hagatna 1,122.
Education student/ enrollment teachers students teacher ratio rate Primary i5 1,917 28,106i 6 14.
Tncludes active-duty United States military personnel, United States Department of Defense employees, and dependents of both.
Payroll employment only; excludes proprietors, the self-employed, unpaid family workers, and military personnel.
Other includes Agriculture, Manufacturing, Transportation and communications, and Finance.
Civilian labour force only, including unemployed, includes (significantly petroleum) imports for transshipment to Micronesia.
Includes military physicians licensed by the Guam public health office.
A 2006 agreement to move 8,000 United States Marines from Okinawa to Guam by 2014 was ratified by the Japanese Diet in May 2009.
Guatemala City 942,348; Mixco 277,400 3 ; Villa Nueva 187,700 3 ; Quetzaltenango 106,700; Escuintla 65,400.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2002 in value % of total labour % of labour Q '000,000 value force force Agriculture 29,365 11.
Last operating rail service was shut down September 2007; no passenger service is available.
Area and population area population 2001 Parishes of Guernsey sq mi sq km census Castel 3.
Retail price index 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Retail price indexis 114.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2006 2008 12 in value % of total labour % of labour £’000 value force force Horticulture, fishing 24,198 1.
Communications number units per 1,000 number units per 1,000 Medium date in ’000s persons Medium date in ’000s persons Televisions Telephones 2007 PCs Dailies 2007 2006 i’6i 7 25E 7 Cellular 2005 43.
Military Total active duty personnel:a.. iData exclude Alderney and Sark unless otherwise noted.
The States of Deliberation was reorganized in 2004. includes 3 ex officio members (2 of whom have no voting rights) and 2 representatives from Alderney.
The States of Alderney has a president and 10 elected members; Sark’s feudal system of government ended with elections to a 28-member assembly in December 2008.
Equivalent in value to pound sterling ; the Guernsey government issues both paper money and coins.
Islets that are directly administered by Guernsey, includes Alderney, Sark, and other dependencies, includes Jersey.
Excluding administrative and financial services; financial services accounted for 66% of the export economy in 2002.
Conakry 1,851,800; Kankan 113,900; Labe 64,500; Kindia 56,000; Nzerekore 55,000.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 1996 in value FG ’000,000,000 % of total value labour force % of labour force Agriculture, forestry, fishing 4,738.
Circulation of daily newspapers, which are subject to rigorous government censorship.
A constitution adopted by the National Assembly in 2001 had been neither promulgated nor vetoed by the President, includes 2 unfilled seats reserved for citizens of Guinea-Bissau residing abroad.
Formal economy only; in spring 2009 most of Guinea-Bissau’s income was derived from trafficking South American cocaine into Europe.
Georgetown 236,900; Linden 44,900; New Amsterdam 35,700; Corriverton 12,700; Bartica 11,300.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2006 2002 in value % of total labour % of labour G$’000,000 value force force Sugar 20,457 11.
Statistically derived midpoint within range, indirect taxes less subsidies. includes 32,100 unemployed.
Port-au-Prince 703,023 ; Carrefour 336,2225; Delmas 284,0795; Cap-Haitien 111,094; Gonaives 104,825.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007-08 1990 in value % of total labour % of labour G ’000,0007 value forces forces Agriculture, forestry 3,204 23.
Includes 63,975 not adequately defined and 339,679 officially unemployed.
Tegucigalpa 967,200; San Pedro Sula 623,100; Choloma 212,400; La Ceiba 167,300; El Progreso 118,200.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 in value % of total labour % of labour L '000,000 value force force Agriculture 32,823 12.
Tn actuality an interim regime supported by the military from June 28, 2009; presidential elections were planned for November 2009.
Taxes and import duties less imputed bank service charges, includes official unemployment figures; unofficial estimates of unemployment are significantly higher.
Subscribers. n Based on the Encuesta Nacional de Demografia y Salud 2005-06.
Central & Western District (overlaps with the historic capital area of Victoria), Hong Kong Island.
Kowloon 2,019,533; Victoria 981,714; Tuen Mun 488,249; Sha Tin 425,140; Tseung Kwan O 344,872.
Foreign trade 10 Balance of trade 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 HK$’000,000,000 % of total -63.
Imports arei.f., exportso.b. n Includes reexports and domestic exports.
Combined length of East Rail and West Rail; West Rail was inaugurated in December 2003.
There were an additional 4,848 practitioners of traditional Chinese medicine in Hong Kong at the beginning of 2006.
Budapest 1,702,297; Debrecen 205,084; Miskolc 171,096; Szeged 167,039; Pecs 156,664; Gyor 128,808.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2008 in value % of total labour % of labour Ft ’000,000,000 value force force Agriculture, forestry 878.
Reykjavik 119,547 ; Kopavogur 29,976 6 ; Hafnarfjordhur 25,850 6 ; Akureyri 17,541; Gardhabzer 10,3586.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 2007 in value % of total labour % of labour ISK ’000,000,000 value force force Agriculture 18.
NATO agreed to begin regular supervision of Icelandic airspace from July 2007.
Distribution of expenditure percentage of household expenditure by decile/quintile 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 3.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008-09 1999-2000 in value Rs ’000,000,000 % of total value labour force % of labour force Agriculture, forestry, fishing 8,618 17.
Interest and prices Central bank discount 6.25 6.00 6.00 6.00 6.00 6.00 6.00 Advance rate 11.
Populations are March 1, 2008, official projections based on the 2001 Indian census results.
Data are for the 22 scheduled languages of India (including associated languages/dialects of each of the 22) unless otherwise footnoted.
Jakarta 8,603,349; Surabaya 2,611,506; Bandung 2,288,570; Medan 2,029,797; Bekasi 1,940,308; Tangerang 1,451,595; Semarang 1,352,869; Depok 1,339,263; Palembang 1,323,169; Makasar 1,168,258.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 2006 in value Rp ’000,000,000 % of total value labour force % of labour force Agriculture, fishing, forestry 713,291 14.
Tehran 7,797,520; Mashhad 2,427,316; Esfahan 1,602,110; Tabriz 1,398,060; Karaj 1,386,030; Shiraz 1,227,331; Ahvaz 985,614; Qom 959,116.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007-08 2007 Agriculture, forestry 268,002 10.
Baghdad 5,054,000; Mosul 1,316,000; Irbll 926,000; Al-Basrah 870,000; Karkuk 750,000.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2006 in value % of total labour % of labour ID ’000,000,000 value force force Agriculture 4,133 6.
Represents the Baghdad-Mosul line, the only operational route in July 2006.
Dublin 506,211 ; Cork 119,418; Galway 72,414; Limerick 52,539; Waterford 45,748.
In 2005 there were 243,000 foreigners in the labour force, of which 120,000 were from Poland.
Area and population area population area population 2006 2006 sq km census sq km census Towns Parishes Castletown 2.
Douglas 26,218; Onchan 9,172; Ramsey 7,309; Peel 4,280; Port Erin 3,575.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2006-07 2006 in value % of total labour % of labour £’0008 values force force Agriculture, fishing 18,514 1.
International business 294,1611° 16.210 I Pub. admin., defense 89,823 5.
Equivalent in value to pound sterling ; the Isle of Man government issues both paper money and coins.
Combined total for Noble’s Hospital and Ramsey and District Cottage Hospital.
Jerusalem; international recognition of its capital status has largely been withheld.
Jerusalem 763,600; Tel Aviv-Yafo 392,500 (metro area 3,040,400); Haifa 264,800 ; Rishon LeZiyyon 226,100.
Structure of net domestic product and labour force 2007 2008 in value % of total labour % of labour NIS ’000,000 value force force Agriculture 11,575 1.
Taxes on products less imputed bank service charges and statistical discrepancy, includes 23,000 not adequately classified and 180,400 unemployed.
Importsi.f.; exportso.b.; the import of military goods are excluded from foreign trade data.
Rome 2,718,768 ; Milan 1,299,633 ; Naples 973,132 ; Turin 908,263 ; Palermo 663,173 ; Genoa 610,887; Bologna 372,256; Florence 364,710; Bari 322,511; Catania 298,957; Venice 268,993; Verona 264,191; Messina 243,997; Padua 210,173; Trieste 205,356; Taranto 195,130; Brescia 189,742; Prato 185,603; Reggio di Calabria 185,577; Modena 179,937; Parma 178,718.
Nearly 100% of dwellings have access to electricity, a safe water supply, and toilet facilities.
Interest and prices Central bank discount Govt, bond yield 4.25 4.26 3.56 4.05 4.49 4.68 Share prices 11 73.
Average household size 2.5; average annual disposable income per household €28,100 (c.
Monza and Brianza province was created from part of Milano province, Lombardy region; Fermo from part of Ascoli Piceno province, Marche region; and Barletta-Andria-Trani from parts of Bari and Foggia provinces, Puglia region.
According to the general government budget; for Italy this is the central government budget and some of the local government budget.
Kingston 585,300 5 ; Spanish Town 148,800; Portmore 103,900; Montego Bay 82,700; Mandeville 47,700; May Pen 44,800.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 in value % of total labour % of labour J$’000,000 value force force Agriculture 50,078.
Taxes on products less subsidies and less imputed bank service charges, includes 1,400 not adequately defined and 134,600 unemployed.
Tokyo 8,731,000; Yokohama 3,648,000; Osaka 2,651,000; Nagoya 2,246,000; Sapporo 1,898,000; Kobe 1,533,000; Kyoto 1,467,000; Fukuoka 1,437,000; Kawasaki 1,388,000; Saitama 1,210,000; Hiroshima 1,166,000; Sendai 1,031,000; Kita-Kyushu 985,000.
Tokyo 35,676,000; Osaka-Kobe 11,294,000; Nagoya 3,230,000; Fukuoka-Kita-Kyushu 2,792,000; Sapporo 2,544,000; Sendai 2,250,000; Hiroshima 2,045,000; Kyoto 1,805,000.
Distribution of income percentage of average household income by quintile 1 2 3 4 5 11.
Leisure/use of personal time Discretionary daily activities weekly average hrs./min.
Manufacturing enterprises avg. no. of persons engaged annual wages as a % of avg. of all mfg. wages value added Food products Paints, soaps, and 1,067,940 60. 80,059 pharmaceuticals 203,164 148.
Distribution of traffic cargo carried % of national total passengers carried % of national total Road 4,961 91.
Statistical discrepancy and import duties less imputed bank service charges and less consumption taxes for gross capital formation.
Includes 710,000 not adequately defined and 2,560,000 unemployed. n Budgeted funds for General Account.
All major coal mines were closed by 2002 but 8 smaller mines were still operational in 2007.
Area and population area population 2001 Parishes sq mi sq km census Grouville 3.
Structure of gross value added 7 and labour force 2008 2007 in value % of total labour % of labour £J '000,000 value force force Agriculture, fishing 56 1.
Education student/ teachers students teacher ratio enrollment rate Primary 6,980 Secondary/Voc.
Based on the Jersey Annual Social Survey 2008, comprising 1,859 people.
GNI for 2008 equals £J 4,000,000,000; gross value added total includes net interest income from bank profits, which are excluded from GNI calculations.
Amman 1,036,330; Az-Zarqa 395,227; Irbid 250,645; ArRusayfah 227,735; Al-Quwaysimah 135,500; Wadi as-Slr 122,032.
Net taxes on products less imputed bank service charges, including 4,000 not adequately defined and 187,000 unemployed.
Almaty 1,247,896; Astana 550,438; Shymkent 526,140; Qaraghandy 446,139; Taraz 336,057.
L No election since independence in 1991 has been deemed free and fair by international standards, includes 15 nonelective seats.
January 1. includes an area of 6,700 sq km (2,600 sq mi) enclosing the Bayqongyr space launch facilities and the city of Bayqongyr leased to Russia in 1995 until 2050.
The estimated 70,000 residents of Bayqongyr are excluded from the Qyzylorda population total.
Nairobi 2,864,700; Mombasa 823,500; Nakuru 266,500; Eldoret 227,800; Kisumu 220,000; Ruiru 120,900; Thika 102,300.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 2006 in value % of total labour % of labour K Sh ’000,000 value force force Agriculture 499,421 23.
The post of Prime Minister was created per two bills approved by the National Assembly in March 2008.
Based on 2006 survey that excludes the mostly Muslim North Eastern province.
Includes informally employed, small-scale farmers and pastoralists, unemployed, self-employed, and unpaid family workers. n Importsi.f.; exportso.b.
Area and population areas population Island/Atoll Groups 2005 Islands/Atolls 4 sq km census Gilbert Group 285.55 83,683 Abaiang 17.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 2005 in value % of total labour % of labour $A '000,000 value force force Agriculture, fishing 41.
Communications units units number per 1,000 number per 1,000 Medium date in '000s persons Medium date in '000s persons Televisions 2003 4 44 PCs 2005 1 11 Telephones Dailies 2007 16 0 0 Cellular 2008 1.
Administratively Kiribati has seven district councils for outlying islands (including four for the Gilberts and one each for Banaba, the Line Islands, and Phoenix Group), a district council for North Tarawa, and an urban council and town council for South Tarawa.
Banaba is actually an isolated island to the west of the Gilbert Group, includes Caroline , Malden, Starbuck, Vostok, and Flint islands.
Total area is 64 sq km. includes Birnie, Enderbury, McKean, Manra, Nikumaroro, Orona, Rawaki , and Kanton islands.
Based on the 2006 Household Income and Expenditure Survey, comprising 1,161 households.
Registered vehicles in South Tarawa only. 3 weeklies only published in 2007.
P’yongyang 3,300,000; Namp’o 1,127,000; Hamhung 773,000; Ch’ongjin 582,480; Kaesong 334,433; Sinuiju 326,011.
Data for commodities (imports U.S.$1,525,400,000; exports U.S.$735,000,000) exclude trade with South Korea, includes mail and weight of passengers.
The ban on cellular phones, which began in 2004, was lifted in 2008, and service began in January 2009.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 20093 in value % of total labour % of labour W ’000,000,000 value force force Agriculture, forestry, and fishing 23,982 2.
Seoul 10,456,034; Pusan 3,596,076; Inch’on 2,741,217; Taegu 2,512,601; Taejon 1,494,951.
Pristina 165,844; Prizren 107,614; Ferizaj 71,758; Mitrovice 68,929; Gjakove 68,645; Peje 68,551.
Alternate short-form names in Albanian include Kosova and Kosove. independence was declared Feb., 2008, and the new constitution became effective on June 15, 2008. 3 20 seats are reserved for minority communities.
A 2,000-member EU mission to Kosovo is expected to eventually replace the UN as international administrative authority.
Statistical/planning regions; actual local government is based on 30 municipalities.
Formerly important minerals include lead, zinc, ferronickel, and magnesite; ferronickel mining resumed in late 2007; halloysite is also extracted.
Troops providing security and stability from 32 nations including 8 non-NATO nations.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 in value % of total labour % of labour KD ’000,000 value force force Agriculture 70 0.
Of which 973,286 Kuwaitis and 1,893,602 non-Kuwaitis; more narrowly defined April 2005 census total excluding Kuwaitis residing abroad equals 2,213,403 (Kuwaitis equal 880,774, non-Kuwaitis 1,332,629). includes noncitizens.
Unclassified. n 2005 census data are based on only about one-half of the non-Kuwaiti population economically active.
Bishkek 794,300; Osh 224,300; Jalal-Abad 85,100; Karakol 61,900; Tokmok 54,900.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 2005 in value % of total labour % of labour KGS '000,000 value force force Agriculture 47,801 25.
Vientiane 194,200 ; Savannakhet 58,200; Pakxe 50,100; Xam Nua 40,700; Muang Khammouan 27,300; Louangphrabang 26,400.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2003 in value % of total labour % of labour KN ’000,000,000 value force* force* Agriculture 12,168 30.
Per an expenditure and consumption survey of 8,100 households, includes trucks and buses.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 in value % of total labour % of labour Ls ’000 value force force Agriculture, forestry, and fishing 453,709 2.
Riga 713,016; Daugavpils 104,857; Liepaja 84,747; Jelgava 65,419; Jurmala 55,870.
Banuary 1; administrative reorganization begun in 2009 to be completed in 2010.
Beirut 395,000 ; Tripoli 212,900; Sidon 149,000; Tyre 117,100; An-Nabatiyah 89,400.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2005 2001 in value % of total labour % of labour LBP ’000,000,000 value force force Agriculture 1,690 5.
J By law one-half of the membership is Christian and one-half Muslim/Druze.
Created in 2003; actual effective implementation of local government unclear in mid-2009.
A1-Biqa includes Baalbek-Hermel. includes about 425,000 registered Palestinian refugees, of whom about 225,000 live in refugee camps.
Maseru 116,300; Mafeteng 61,600; Hlotse 50,900; Mohale’s Hoek 44,500; Maputsoe 32,800.
HIV/AIDS-related 1,624; cardiovascular diseases 205; lower respiratory infections 89; diarrheal diseases 84.
Data for 2002-03 based on the Household Budget Survey comprising 5,992 households, includes 94,190 mine workers in South Africa; the number of mine workers in South Africa in late 2005 equaled 51,900.
Monrovia 1,010,970; Ganta 41,106; Buchanan 34,270; Gbarnga 34,046; Kakata 33,945.
Communications number units per 1,000 number units per 1,000 Medium date in ’000s persons Medium date in ’000s persons Televisions Telephones 2001 69 25 PCs Dailies 2007 2007 55ii 1511 Cellular 2008 73212 19312 Internet users 2008 20 5.
Excludes informal sector employment equaling 487,000 and an unknown number of unofficially unemployed.
No railway lines were operational in early 2009. n Circulation of daily newspapers.
Tripoli 1,065,405/ 2,189,000; BanghazI 670,797/ 1,113,000; Misratah 121,669.
Average household size 5.9; income per household:a.; sources of income:a.; expenditure:a.
Education teachers students student/ teacher ratio enrollment rate Primary 755,338H Secondary/Voc. 732,614ii Tertiary 15,711 375,028 23.
By 2005 most ministries had relocated to Surt and other cities as part of a radical decentralization plan.
The policy-making body (General People’s Congress) meets annually in Surt.
Area and population area population Regions 20093 Communes sq mi sq km estimate Oberland 23,102 Balzers 7.
The designation of “state church” for Roman Catholicism per article 37 of the constitution was under review in 2008.
Vilnius 558,165; Kaunas 352,279; Klaipeda 183,433; Siauliai 126,215; Panevezys 112,619; Alytus 67,505.
Structure of gross national product and labour force 2008 in value % of total labour % of labour LTL '000,000 value force force Agriculture, forestry 4,500 4.
Detail does not add to total given because of rounding, includes metal furniture.
Luxembourg 85,467/125,594; Esch-sur-Alzette 29,515/72,437; Petange 15,151/22,379; Differdange 20,4434; Dudelange 18,052.
In addition, the 22-member Council of State (a 21-member body of unelected citizens appointed by the Grand Duke plus the hereditary Grand Duke) serves in an advisory capacity to the government.
In 2007 included 195,800 Luxembourgers, 10,700 resident foreigners, and 136,300 workers from neighbouring countries. n Luxembourgers and resident foreigners only.
Area and population area population 2006 Geographic areas sq mi sq km census Macau peninsula 3.
Military expenditure as percentage of GDP:a. includes 12 directly elected seats, 7 seats appointed by the chief executive, and 10 seats appointed by business and special-interest groups.
Skopje 486,600; Bitola 73,300; Kumanovo 71,700; Prilep 66,000; Tetovo 54,500.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2006 20076 in value % of total labour % of labour MKD ’000,000 value force force Agriculture 33,320 11.
Detail does not add to total given because of rounding, includes nominal practitioners.
Rent and taxes on production less imputed bank service charges, includes 323,287 unemployed.
Antananarivo 1,403,449; Toamasina 179,045; Antsirabe 160,356; Fianarantsoa 144,225; Mahajanga 135,660.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2004 2005 in value % of total labour % of labour FMG ’000,000,000 value force force Agriculture 9,857 26.
Per confirmation of referendum results in April 2007 by the High Constitutional Court.
The discovery of offshore and on-land petroleum was announced in September 2005.
Indirect taxes less subsidies and less imputed bank charges. u Unemployed.
Railroad infrastructure was either inoperable or in poor condition in June 2003.
Lilongwe 669,021; Blantyre 661,444; Mzuzu 128,432; Zomba 87,366; Kasungu 42,351.
HIV/AIDS-related 729; lower respiratory infections 244; cardiovascular diseases 175; malaria 169; diarrheal diseases 164.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 1998 in value % of total labour % of labour MK '000,000 10 value 10 force force Agriculture 136,432 32.
June 2009 update of the United States Bureau of the Census International Database.
Based on the Malawi Integrated Household Survey 2004-05, comprising 10,777 households.
At constant prices of 2005. n Importso.b. in balance of trade andi.f. in commodities and trading partners.
Based on the Malawi Demographic and Household Survey 2004, comprising 13,664 households.
Kuala Lumpur 1,482,400; Subang Jaya 954,300 7 ; Klang 936,700; Johor Bahru 838,900; Ipoh 692,200; Putrajaya 55,000.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 in value % of total labour % of labour RM ’000,000 value force force Agriculture, forestry, and fishing 76,219 10.
Tncludes 44 appointees of the Paramount Ruler; the remaining 26 are indirectly elected.
Location of the second royal palace, the prime minister’s office, and the supreme court, includes the population of Putrajaya.
Male 2 103,693; Hithadhoo 9,465; Fuvammulah 7,636; Kulhudhuffushi 6,998; Thinadhoo 4,442.
The only non-Sunni are Shfl members of the Indian trading community and non-Muslim workers who serve alcohol on the resort islands.
Bamako 1,494,000 2 ; Sikasso 113,803; Segou 90,898; Mopti 79,840; Koutiala 74,153; Kayes 67,262.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 2004 in value % of total labour % of labour CFAF ’000,000 value forces force Agriculture, fishing 1,302,120 33.
Per 2004 Malian labour force survey; the 2004 population economically active estimate of the ILO Employment Trends Unit is 5,322,000.
Based on the Mali Demographic and Health Survey 2001, comprising 64,116 people in 12,331 households.
Area and population area population Islands Statistical districts 4 Largest localities sq mi sq km 2009 3 estimate Comino Gozo Malta Northern District Northern Harbour South Eastern District Southern Harbour Western District TOTAL Rabat Mosta Birkirkara Zejtun Zabbar Zebbug 1.
Majuro 2 20,800; Ebeye 9,345; Laura 2,256; Ajeltake 1,170; Enewetak 823.
Military The United States provides for the defense of the Republic of the Marshall Islands under the 1984 and 2003 compacts of free association 18 . x In addition, the Council of Iroij , a 12-member body of tribal chiefs, serves in an advisory capacity.
Four districts centred at Majuro, Ebeye, Wotje, and Jaluit make up the local government structure.
Based on the Marshall Islands 2006 Community Survey, comprising 9,491 respondents.
Based on the 2006 RMI Community Survey, comprising 9,491 respondents in 1,205 households.
Fort-de-France 90,347 (urban agglomeration, 133,281); Le Lamentin 39,847; Le Robert 23,856; Schcelcher 21,419.
Education teachers student/ students teacher ratio enrollment rate Primary 3,031 12 30,156 Secondary/Voc.
Import duties less subsidies and less imputed financial service charges.
Nouakchott 743,500; Nouadhibou 94,700; Rosso 48,922; Boghe 37,531; Adel Bagrou 36,007.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2006 2000 in value % of total labour % of labour UM ’000,000 value force force Agriculture, livestock, fishing 112,075 15.
Education teachers students student/ teacher ratio enrollment rate Primary i4 11,379 483,776 42.
Not adequately defined. n Includes Vu of the traffic of the defunct Air Afrique.
Port Louis 148,939; Beau Bassin-Rose Hill 109,701; Vacoas-Phoenix 106,865; Curepipe 83,754; Quatre Bornes 80,780.
French is not official but may be used to address the speaker of the National Assembly.
As of 2000 census, includes Rodrigues; Rodrigues is 91% Roman Catholic.
Area and population area population Islands 2007 Communes Capitals sq mi sq km census Grande Terre Acoua Acoua 4.
Structure of value added 11 and labour force 2005 2002 in value % of total labour % of labour €’000 value force force Agriculture, forestry, and fishing 1,000 0.
Mamoudzou 6,186/53,022; Koungou 6,710/19,831; village of Labattoir 15,067/commune of Dzaoudzi 15,339; Pamandzi 9,077/9,077.
A local referendum in March 2009 approved the change of status to an overseas department of France in 2011.
Excludes vocational. 2,345 students study in metropolitan France or Reunion.
Distribution of income percentage of household income by decile 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 1.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2008 in value % of total labour % of labour Mex$’000,000 value force force Agriculture, forestry, and fishing 350,955 3.
Selected economic activities no. of establishments no. of employees yearly wage as a % of avg. of all wages value added (Mex$’000,000 Manufacturing Services 328,178 4,198,579 130.
Statistically derived midpoint within range, indirect taxes less subsidies and less imputed bank service charges, includes 1,593,300 unemployed.
Detail does not add to total given because of rounding. n Metal content.
Area and population area population States Major Islands Capitals sq mi sq km 2000 census Chuuk Weno 49.
Weno, in Chuuk state 13,802; Palikir, on Pohnpei 6,444; Nett, on Pohnpei 6,158; Kolonia, on Pohnpei 5,681; Colonia, on Yap 3,216.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2006 2000 in value % of total labour % of labour U.S.$’000,000 value force force Agriculture and fishing^ 44.
English is the language of the Congress per article 9, section 19, of the constitution.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 20068 20058 in value ’000,000 % of total labour % of labour Moldovan lei value force force Agriculture 6,489 14.
Opposition forces in Transdniestria 7,500; Russian troops in Transdniestria (November 2008) 1,500.
Major causes of death per 100,000 population:a.; however, principal causes are those of a developed country with an older population.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2006 2007 in value % of total labour % of labour €’000,0007 value force force Agriculture, forestry, fishing 29 — Mining and quarrying 2 — Manufacturing 216.
Military Defense responsibility lies with France according to the terms of the Versailles Treaty of 1919. x Under the authority of the prince.
The principality is a single administrative unit, and no separate area within it is distinguished as capital.
Excludes trade with France; Monaco has participated in a customs union with France since 1963. n Fixedwing service is provided at Nice, France; helicopter service is available at Fontvieille.
Ulaanbaatar 1,031,200; Erdenet 74,300; Darhan 72,400; Choybalsan 40,123; Moron 28,903.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 2005 2 in value % of total labour % of labour Tug ’000,000,000 value force force Agriculture 1,151.
Podgorica 136,473; Niksic 58,212; Pljevlja 21,377; Bijelo Polje 15,883; Cetinje 15,137; Bar 13,719.
Foreign trade 10 Balance of trade 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 -359. -416. -505. -855. -1,535. -1,502.
Taxes on products less imputed bank service charges and less subsidies.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 2006 in value % of total labour % of labour DH '000,000 value force force Agriculture, forestry, fishing 90,690 13.
About 83% of the land area of Laayoune-Bojador-Sakia El-Hamra is located within Western Sahara.
The entire area of Oued Eddahab-Lagouira is located within Western Sahara.
Detail does not add to total given because of gross rounding of the Western Sahara areas of Morocco.
Excludes Western Sahara. n 2004; sum of combined arrondissement populations.
Roughly 60% of Morocco’s fisheries production comes from Atlantic waters off of Western Sahara.
Cannabis is an important illegal export; Morocco was the world’s number 2 producer in 2008.
Maputo 1,094,315 (urban agglomeration 1,766,823); Matola 672,508; Nampula 477,9003; Beira 431,583; Chimoio 237,278.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2006 2002 in value % of total labour % of labour MTn '000,000 value force force Agriculture 44,551 25.
Yangon 4,088,000; Mandalay 961,000; Naypyidaw 930,000; Mawlamyine 405,8007; p a thein 215,6007; Bago 200,9007.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2004-05 1997-98 in value % of total labour % of labour K ’000,000,000 value forces forces Agriculture 4,390 48.
Military expenditure as percentage of GDP :a. l A new draft constitution was approved in a May 2008 referendum; parliamentary elections are scheduled for 2010.
Site near Pyinmana was officially proclaimed the new capital on March 27, 2006.
Windhoek 277,300; Rundu 62,300; Walvis Bay 54,900; Oshakati 34,900; Swakopmund 26,700; Katima Mulilo 25,600.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2000 in value % of total labour % of labour N$’000,000 value force force Agriculture, fishing 5,844 9.
Taxes less imputed bank service charges and less subsidies, includes 220,634 unemployed.
Based on the Namibia Demographic and Health Survey 2000, comprising 6,392 households.
Communications units number per 1,000 Medium date in ’000s persons Televisions 2002 0.
Distribution of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 1997 in value % of total labour % of labour $A ’000,000 value force 7 8 9 force 7 8 9 Agriculture, fishing 3.
The majority of foreign mine workers were repatriated to Kiribati and Tuvalu in 2006.
Detail does not add to total given because of rounding. n Phosphate extraction, the backbone of the Nauruan economy, halted in 2003 but resumed in 2006.
Expect phosphate extraction for the next 5 years to 20 years using processing refurbishments.
Coral gravel, a by-product of phosphate extraction, was exported in 2008.
Kathmandu 671,846; Biratnagar 166,674; Lalitpur 162,991; Pokhara 156,312; Birganj 112,484.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007-08 1998-99 in value % of total labour % of labour NRs ’000,000 value forces forces Agriculture 258,282 31.
In late December 2007 the interim legislature voted to abolish the monarchy (which had been suspended from January 2007); the formal endorsement of the abolishment occurred in May 2008.
Amsterdam 1,482,287: Rotterdam 1,169,800; The Hague 997,323; Utrecht 592,463; Haarlem 407,521.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 2005 Agriculture, forestry, fishing Mining Manufacturing Construction Public utilities Transp. and com mu Trade, hotels Finance, real estate Pub. admin., defense Services Other TOTAL in value €’000,000 % of total value 9,414 1.
Frisian is officially recognized in Friesland but not legally codified by the national government.
Detail does not add to total given because of rounding. n Importsi.f.; exportso.b.
Willemstad 93,599; Kralendijk 3,179; Philipsburg 1,227; Oranjestad 1,003; The Bottom 462.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 in value % of total labour % of labour NAf. ’000,000 value forces forces Agriculture, forestry, fishing 1 Mining and quarrying 1 41.
Uhe dissolution of the Netherlands Antilles is scheduled to take place in October 2010.
Curatjao and Sint Maarten are to become separate overseas territories within the Netherlands with a status similar to Aruba.
Bonaire, Saba, and Sint Eustatius will be directly integrated into the Netherlands.
Curasao’s island council has jurisdiction over the other island councils until the dissolution is finalized.
Includes 6,919 unemployed. n Detail does not add to total given because of rounding.
Noumea 91,386 ; Mont-Dore 24,1956; Dumbea 18,602 6 ; Pai'ta 12,062 6 ; Poindimie 4,824.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2004 2006 in value % of total labour % of labour CFPF ’000,000 value forces forces Agriculture, fishing 10,105 1.
The Noumea Accord granting New Caledonia limited autonomy was signed in May 1998; future referenda concerning possible independence are to be held between 2014 and 2018.
Taxes and subsidies less imputed bank service charges. n Importsi.f.; exportso.b.
Area and population area population Islands 2008 Regional Councils sq km estimate North Islands 116,219 3,250,700 Auckland 6,059 1,414,800 Bay of Plenty 12,277 269,900 Gisborne ^ 8,355 46,000 Hawke’s Bay Manawatu14,111 152,700 Wanganui 22,206 229,200 Northland 13,789 154,700 Taranaki 7,257 107,500 Waikato 24,025 402,200 Wellington 8,140 473,700 area population Islands 2008 Regional Councils sq km estimate South Islands.
Auckland 1,313,200; Christchurch 382,200; Wellington 381,900; Hamilton 197,300; Napier 122,600.
A unitary authority that is administered by a city council or district council with regional powers.
Managua 908,892’ Leon 139,433; Chinandega 95,614; Masaya 92,598; Estelf 90,294.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 2006 in value % of total labour % of labour C$’000,000 value force force Agriculture, forestry 21,048.
Lakes and lagoons are excluded from the areas of departments and autonomous regions.
Niamey 707,951 ; Zinder 170,575; Maradi 148,017; Agadez 78,289; Tahoua 73,002.
Based on a 2006 demographic and health survey of 14,945 persons age 25 and over.
Lagos 9,466,000; Kano 3,140,000; Ibadan 2,628,000; Abuja 1,576,000; Kaduna 1,442,000; Benin City 1,190,000.
HIV/AIDS 258; respiratory infections 182; malaria 181; cardiovascular diseases 167.
Based on the 2003 Nigeria Demographic and Health Survey of 35,173 people, about two-thirds of whom live in rural areas.
Area and population area population 2005 Municipal councils Major villages sq mi sq km estimate Northern Islands 3 55.
Military The United States is responsible for military defense; in 2009 the Northern Island of Farallon de Medinilla continued to be used as a target range by the United States military.
Tn November 2008 residents elected their first nonvoting delegate to the United States Congress.
A11 villages are unincorporated census-designated places, includes 1,744 not adequately defined and 1,869 unemployed.
Oslo 560,484 ; Bergen 247,746; Trondheim 165,191; Stavanger 119,586; Baerum 108,144.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 2006 in value % of total labour % of labour NOK '000,000 value force force Agriculture, fishing 27,678 1.
Persons on Jan Mayen and Svalbard are normally registered as residents on the mainland.
The population of Jan Mayen on July 1, 2008, was 20; the population of Svalbard on Jan. 1, 2008, was 2,449, including Norwegian settlements 1,821, the Russian settlement 620, the Polish settlement 8.
Structure of gross national product and labour force 2008 2003 in value % of total labour % of labour RO ’000,000 value force 9 force 9 Agriculture, forestry, fishing 234.
Education teachers students student/ teacher ratio enrollment rate Primary 20,105i 9 278,461 14.319 73 SecondaryA/oc. 19,277i 9 306,377 15.519 79 Tertiary 2,959 69,018 23.
Employed only; includes 424,178 expatriate workers and 312,446 Omani workers.
Oil and natural gas excludes petroleum products; Manufacturing includes petroleum products. n Taxes less subsidies and less imputed bank service charges.
Karachi 12,130,000; Lahore 6,577,000; Faisalabad 2,617,000; Rawalpindi 1,858,000; Multan 1,522,000; Gujranwala 1,513,000; Hyderabad 1,459,000; Peshawar 1,303,000.
Excludes armed forces, indirect taxes less subsidies, includes 25,000 inadequately defined and 2,680,000 unemployed.
Military The United States is responsible for the external security of Palau, as specified in the Compact of Free Association of Oct., 1994. iFormal transfer of capital to Melekeok on Babelthuap from Koror took place Oct., 2006; many ministries and offices remained in Koror in late 2009.
Forest area overlaps with other categories, transportation and communications includes Public utilities.
Panama City 415,964/845,684 (urban agglomeration 1,281,000); San Miguelito 352,9362; Colon 52,286/205,557; Arraijan 63,753/203,207; La Chorrera 54,823/153,778; David 76,481/141,710.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 2006 in value % of total labour % of labour B ’000,0003 values force force Agriculture, fishing 1,120 6.
District adjacent to Panama City within Panama City urban agglomeration.
Protestant/independent Christian 44%; Roman Catholic 22%; traditional beliefs 34% 5.
Port Moresby 289,900; Lae 75,600; Arawa (on Bougainville) 40,300; Mount Hagen 34,900; Popondetta 30,400; Mendi 28,600.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2000 in value % of total labour % of labour K ’000,000 value force force Agriculture, forestry, fishing 6,342.
A referendum on possible future independence is to be held between 2014 and 2019.
New Guinea Papuans are predominantly descendants of original arrivals; New Guinea Melanesians are more racially mixed with other Pacific peoples.
In actuality, many citizens combine Christian faith with some traditional indigenous practices.
Importso.b. in balance of trade and trading partners andi.f. in commodities.
Asuncion 519,361 (urban agglomeration 1,870,000); Ciudad del Este 222,274; San Lorenzo 204,3565; Luque 170,9865; Capiata 154,2745.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2005 in value % of total labour % of labour 0 ’OOO,OOO,OOO value force force Agriculture, forestry, fishing 13,533.
In September 2009 Brazil agreed to pay Paraguay U.S.$360,000,000 annually for electricity from the shared Itaipu hydroelectric dam. n Transportes Aereos del Mercosur only.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2008 in value % of total labour % of labour S/. '000,000 value forces forces Agriculture, forestry, fishing 20,403 6.
Unemployed. n Importso.b. in balance of trade and i.f. in commodities and trading partners.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 2006 in value % of total labour % of labour f* ’000,000 value force force Agriculture, fishing 1,102,756 14.
Sum of regional areas, including coastal water; actual reported total area is 300,000 sq km.
Reported total; summed total of 88,542,991 excludes 29,344 persons residing in a disputed area between the National Capital Region and Calabarzon and 2,279 Filipinos residing in embassies abroad.
Based on actual reported total area, includes indigenous Catholics and Protestants.
Warsaw 1,709,781; Krakow 754,624; Lodz 747,152; Wroclaw 632,162; Poznan 557,264; Gdansk 455,581; Szczecin 406,941.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2008 in value % of total labour % of labour zt '000,000 value force force Agriculture, forestry, fishing 44,553 3.
Ionian Catholicism has special recognition per 1997 concordat with Vatican City.
Lisbon 564,657 ; Porto 263,131 ; Braga 164,192; Coimbra 148,443; Funchal 103,961.
San Juan 2,608,375; Aguadilla 339,523; Ponce 262,943; San German 147,242; Yauco 124,566; Mayagiiez 110,644.
Minimum number of seats per constitution; minority parties may have additional representation.
Ad-Dawhah 339,847; Ar-Rayyan 258,193; AlWakrah 26,993; Umm Salal Muhammad 25,413; Al-Khawr 18,036.
Import duties less imputed bank service charges, including 6,572 unemployed.
Saint-Denis 168,910; Saint-Pierre 144,329; Saint-Paul 99,291; Le Port 64,390.
Trade excludes restaurants and hotels, and Services includes restaurants and hotels.
Taxes less subsidies and less imputed bank service charges. n Non-salaried employees.
Bucharest 1,944,367; Timisoara 311,586; Iasi 308,843; ClujNapoca 306,474; Constarqa 302,171.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 in value % of total labour % of labour RON ’000,000 value force force Agriculture, forestry, fishing 32,566.
Petersburg 648,000 1,677,900 13,501,0384 Arkhangelsk 5 Arkhangelsk 158,600 410,700 1,229,858 Kaliningrad Kaliningrad 5,800 15,100 937,404 Kareliya Petrozavodsk 66,600 172,400 690,653 Komi Syktyukar 160,600 415,900 968,164 Leningrad St.
Petersburg 32,600 84,500 1,633,350 Murmansk Murmansk 55,900 144,900 850,929 Nenets 5 Naryan-Mar 68,200 176,700 42,079 Novgorod Novgorod 21,400 55,300 652,437 Pskov Pskov 21,400 55,300 705,289 St.
Petersburg 4,568,047; Novosibirsk 1,390,513; Yekaterinburg 1,322,954; Nizhny Novgorod 1,274,708; Samara 1,135,422; Omsk 1,131,100; Kazan 1,120,238; Chelyabinsk 1,092,495; Rostovna-Donu 1,048,714; Ufa 1,021,458; Perm 987,234.
United States dollar 29.45 27.75 28.78 26.33 24.55 29.38 £ 52.56 53.60 49.56 51.69 49.18 42.83 SDR 43.77 43.09 41.14 39.61 38.79 42.25 International reserves Total 73,175 120,809 175,891 295,568 464,379 412,548 SDRs 0.
Foreign exchange 73,172 120,805 175,690 295,277 464,004 411,494 Gold 12.55 12.44 12.44 12.91 14.48 16.71 % world reserves 1.
On Dec., 2005, Komi-Permyak merged with Perm to form Perm . n Reported total; summed total equals 6,577,600 sq mi —reason for discrepancy is unknown.
An additional 449,000 personnel in paramilitary forces include railway troops, special construction troops, federal border guards, interior troops, and other federal guard units.
Kigali 860,000 6 ; Gitarama 84,669; Butare 77,449; Ruhengeri 71,511; Gisenyi 67,766.
Many small usually Christian-linked schismatic religious groups have proliferated since the 1994 genocide.
Taxes on products less imputed bank service charges. n Importso.b. in balance of trade andi.f. in commodities and trading partners.
Area and population area population 2001 Islands Capitals sq mi sq km census 3 Nevis* St.
Military expenditure as percentage of GDP:a. x The Federation of Saint Christopher and Nevis is the alternate official long-form name, includes 3 appointed seats and 1 ex officio seat for the attorney general (if not elected); in addition, a speaker may be appointed from outside of the National Assembly.
The Nevis legislature is subordinate to the National Assembly only with regard to external affairs and defense.
The light railway formerly serving the sugar industry on Saint Kitts began serving as a scenic tour route in 2003.
Castries 65,000; Vieux Fort 4,600; Micoud 3,400; Dennery 2,900; Soufriere 2,900.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 2007 in value % of total labour % of labour EC$’000,000 value force force Agriculture, forestry, fishing 103.
Represents elected seats only; the speaker may be elected from outside the House of Assembly.
Total includes the uninhabited 30 sq mi (78 sq km) Central Forest Reserve.
Taxes on products less subsidies and less imputed bank service charges, includes 12,480 unemployed and 4,770 inadequately defined.
Area and population area population Census Divisions3 sq mi sq km 20042 estimate Island of Saint Vincent Barrouallie 14.
Varieties of taro roots, indirect taxes less subsidies and less imputed bank service charges, includes 9,258 unemployed.
Apia 37,237 ; Vaitele 6,294 3 ; Faleasi’u 3,548; Vailele 3,174 3 ; Le’auva’a 3,015.
Military No military forces are maintained; informal defense ties exist with New Zealand, and Australia assists with maritime surveillance training.
Sao Tome 49,957; Neves 6,635; Santana 6,228; Trindade 6,049; Santo Antonio 1,010.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2006 2001 in value % of total labour % of labour Db '000,000 value forced forced Agriculture, fishing 239,300 16.
Education student/ enrollment teachers students teacher ratio rate Primary 1,009 32,6161° 30. 97i° Secondary/Voc.
Licenses for petroleum exploration in an offshore area shared by Sao Tome and Principe and Nigeria were awarded in March 2006; no crude petroleum was extracted from this area as of October 2009.
Major cities 3; Riyadh 4,465,000; Jiddah 3,012,000; Mecca 1,385,000; Medina 1,010,000; Ad-Dammam 822,000.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 in value % of total labour % of labour SR '000,000 value force force Agriculture, forestry, fishing 41,050 2.
Foreign trade 10 Balance of trade 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 SR '000,000,000 % of total +193.
Dakar 2,243,4007; Touba 529,200; Thies 263,500; Kaolack 186,000; Mbour 181,800; Saint-Louis 171,300; Rufisque 162,100.
Originally created in 1999, abolished in 2001, and reinstated in August 2007. includes 65 appointees of president.
Most citizens practice a syncretic form of Islam, includes communes of Pikine and Guediawaye , adjacent to Dakar commune . approximate figures for span of years.
Includes 484,000 not adequately defined and 351,400 unemployed. n Imports i.f.; exportso.b.
Based on the 2005 Senegal Demographic and Health Survey, of which 22,795 people were age 25 and over.
Belgrade 1,120,092; Novi Sad 191,405; Nis 173,724; Kragujevac 146,373; Subotica 99,981; Zrenjanin 79,773.
Mining and quarrying 1; copper 32,000 5 ; silver 4,150 5 ; selenium 7,500 kg.
Manufacturing 1; food products and beverages 52,302; chemicals and chemical products 23,813; cement, bricks, and ceramics 11,532; fabricated metal products 11,056; base metals 9,407.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 1 2007 in value CSD ’000,000,000 % of total value labour force % of labour force Agriculture, forestry, fishing 206.
Excludes Kosovo , a disputed transitional republic that declared its independence from Serbia on Feb., 2008.
Area and population area population area population Island Groups/ 2002 Island Groups/ 2002 Islands 2 sq km census Islands 2 sq km census Inner Inner Islands 243.
Creole, English, and French are all national languages per constitution.
The Seychelles are administratively divided into 26 districts and geographically split among 47 Inner Islands, 2 Inner Islands, and 70 Outer Islands.
Freetown 818,700; Bo 181,800; Kenema 148,800; Makeni 90,400; Koidu 87,300.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 2004 in value % of total labour % of labour Le ’000,000 value force force Agriculture, forestry, fishing 3,734,856 53.
Telephones Dailies 2007 22io 6.510 Cellular 2008 L009 11 181H Internet users 2008 14 2.
Represents trade and repairs, indirect taxes less imputed bank service charges.
Detail does not add to total given because of rounding, includes estimated value for income in kind.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 in value % of total labour % of labour S$’000,000 value forces forces Agriculture, quarrying 177.
Five community development councils established in 2001 manage a variety of social services.
Aquarium fish farming is also an important economic pursuit; Singapore produces roughly 30% of the world’s ornamental fish.
Length of Singapore portion of Singapore-to-Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, railway.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2006 in value % of total labour % of labour Sk '000,000 value force 4 force 4 Agriculture 62,859 3.
Education teachers students student/ teacher ratio enrollment rate Primary 13,684 235,378 17. 92io Secondary/Voc.
Ljubljana 268,423; Maribor 96,408; Celje 38,047; Kranj 36,357; Velenje 25,935.
Net taxes on products, includes 48,000 unemployed and 10,000 not distributed.
Honiara 57,400; Gizo (in the New Georgia Islands) 6,300; Auki 4,400; Buala 2,700.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2006 2004 in value % of total labour % of labour Sl$’000,000 value force 3 force 3 Agriculture, forestry, fishing 1,217.
Although small-scale artisanal production continued, production at the country’s only gold mine was suspended from 2000 because of lawlessness, but it resumed in 2007.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 2001-02 in value % of total labour % of labour U.S.$’000,000 value force force Agriculture, livestock Mining 1 Public utilities J 1,657 18 62.
Military expenditure as percentage of GDP:a. iProclamation of the “Republic of Somaliland” in May 1991 on territory corresponding to the former British Somaliland (which unified with the former Italian Trust Territory of Somalia to form Somalia in 1960) had not received international recognition as of November 2009.
Administration disputed (at least in part) between Puntland and Somaliland.
In 2008 18 doctors graduated from a Somali medical institution for the first time since 1990.
Johannesburg 3,435,000; Cape Town 3,215,000; Ekurhuleni 2,986,000; eThekwini 2,729,000; Tshwane 1,338,000.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force Agriculture, forestry, fishing Mining Manufacturing Construction Public utilities Transp. and commun.
Trade, hotels Finance, real estate Pub. admin., defense Services Other TOTAL 2007 in value R ’000,000 % of total value 56,685 2.
Afrikaans; English; Ndebele; Pedi ; Sotho ; Swazi; Tsonga; Tswana ; Venda; Xhosa; Zulu.
Taxes on products less subsidies on products, includes 4,487,000 unemployed.
Excluding gold export earnings estimated at U.S.$5,400,000,000 in 2006. n Circulation of daily newspapers.
Madrid 3,213,271 ; Barcelona 1,615,908 ; Valencia 807,200; Sevilla 699,759; Zaragoza 666,129; Malaga 566,447.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 in value % of total labour % of labour LKR '000,000 value force force Agriculture, forestry, fishing 589,998 13.
Colombo 672,743 ; Dehiwala-Mount Lavinia 219,827 3 ; Moratuwa 185,668 3 ; Jaffna 151,612; Negombo 150,364; Sri Jayewardenepura Kotte 121,3703; Kandy 121,286.
Excludes 7 districts in northern and eastern Sri Lanka, includes 166,700 unclassified and 394,000 unemployed.
Omdurman 1,271,403; Khartoum 947,483 15 ; Khartoum North 700,887; Port Sudan 308,195; Kassala 234,622; Juba (in Southern Sudan) 114,980.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2004 in value % of total labour % of labour SDD '000,000,000 value force 1 ® force 1 ® Agriculture 3,299 28.
Comprehensive peace agreement ending 21-year-long war in southern Sudan signed Jan., 2005; interim constitution from July 9, 2005, to be effective for 6 years.
Areas of Northern and Southern Kordofan are estimated. n Includes disputed Abyei area.
Population of 2008 urban agglomeration is 8. million including 1. to 1. million internally displaced persons.
Southern Sudan—UN peacekeeping force 8,800, 700; Darfur—African Union/UN hybrid peacekeeping force 14,600, 3,900.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2006 2004 in value % of total labour % of labour SRD '000,000 value force force Agriculture, forestry, fishing 272,799 4.
Smuggling or unregulated activities in such areas as gold mining and tree removal, indirect taxes less subsidies and less imputed bank service charges, includes 16,425 unemployed.
There are no public railways operating in Suriname; 52 mi of the private railroad were operational in 2003.
Manzini 115,200; Mbabane 78,700; Lobamba 11,000; Big Bend 10,400; Malkerns 10,000.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2005 in value % of total labour % of labour E ’000,000 value forces forces Agriculture 1,277.
Based on 4,457 individuals age 25 or over in the Swaziland Demographic and Health Survey 2006-07.
Stockholm 810,120; Goteborg 500,197; Malmo 286,535; Uppsala 190,668; Linkoping 141,863.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 in value % of total labour % of labour SEK ’000,000 value force force Agriculture, forestry, fishing 42,993 1.
Zurich 1,132,200; Geneva 503,600; Basel 489,900; Bern 346,300; Lausanne 317,000; Luzern 200,282.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 in value % of total labour % of labour CHF '000,000 value force force Agriculture, forestry, fishing 5,801 1.
Detail does not add to total given because of rounding, includes nonresident population of 1,601,900.
Excludes 218,200 reservists; the 85,000-member civil defense forces are not part of the armed forces.
Aleppo 2,181,061; Damascus 1,552,161; Hims 750,501; Hamah 467,807; Latakia 424,392.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 in value % of total labour % of labour S.P ’000,000 value forces forces Agriculture 413,877 20.
Tslam is required to be the religion of the head of state and is the basis of the legal system.
January 1. includes 1,176 sq km of territory in the Golan Heights recognized internationally as part of Syria but occupied by Israel or UN peacekeepers.
Includes 1,200,000 Iraqi refugees and 450,000 long-term Palestinian refugees in mid-2009.
Based on the Household Income and Expenditure Survey with a survey population of 124,525. n Importsi.f.; exportso.b.
Taipei 2,629,269/6,698,319; Kao-hsiung 1,520,555/2,767,655; T’ai-chung 1,055,898/2,218,527; T’ao-yuan 391,822/ 1,905,973; T’ai-nan 764,658/1,255,450.
Dushanbe 679,400; Khujand 155,900; Kulyab 93,900; Kurgan-Tyube 71,000; Istaravshan 60,200.
Major causes of death per 100,000 population 7; diseases of the circulatory system 363.7, of which ischemic heart disease 146.5, hypertensive diseases 89.7; diseases of the respiratory system 78.7; malignant neoplasms (cancers) 58.2; accidents 37; diseases of the digestive system 35.9.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 in value % of total labour % of labour TJS ’000,000 value force force Agriculture Mining j 2,525.
Tncludes 8 members appointed by the President and 1 seat reserved for the outgoing president.
Russian is the language of communication between nationalities per the constitution.
Muslim 35%, of which Sunni 30%, ShlT 5%; Christian 35%; other 30%; Zanzibar only is 99% Muslim.
Dar es Salaam 2,805,500; Mwanza 458,100; Zanzibar 422,300; Arusha 362,900; Mbeya 304,200; Dodoma 188,200.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2002 in value % of total labour % of labour TZS ’000,0007 value7 forces forces Agriculture, fishing 5,690,446 27.
Tncludes 80 indirectly elected seats , 10 seats appointed by the President, and a seat for the Attorney General serving ex officio.
Has local internal government structure; Unguja island has 3 administrative regions, Pemba island has 2.
Imports o.b. in balance of trade andi.f. in commodities and trading partners. n Circulation of daily newspapers.
Bangkok 6,704,000; Samut Prakan 378,741; Nonthaburi 291,555; Udon Thani 222,425; Nakhon Ratchasima 204,641.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 in value % of total labour % of labour THB '000,000 value force 5 force 5 Agriculture, forestry, fishing 1,056,838 11.
Foreign trade 7 Balance of trade 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 THB '000,000,000 % of total +186.
Lome 921,000 ; Sokode 106,300; Kara 100,400; Atakpame 72,700; Kpalime 71,400.
Nukualofa 23,658 (Greater Nukualofa 34,311); Neiafu 4,123; Haveloloto 3,405 9 ; Tofoa-Koloua 3,213 9 ; Pangai-Hihifo 2,523.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007-08 2003 in value % of total labour % of labour T$’000 value force force Agriculture 112,294 20.
Tonga has defense cooperation agreements with both Australia and New Zealand.
Tncludes 14 nonelective seats and 9 nobles elected by the 29 hereditary nobles of Tonga.
Chaguanas 73,100; San Juan 57,100 3 ; San Fernando 56,600; Port of Spain 49,800 ; Arima 35,600 3 ; Scarborough 4,600.
Within greater Port of Spain, approximately 2002; exact date of information is unknown.
Net of VAT less imputed bank service charges, includes 39,000 unemployed.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 2007 in value % of total labour % of labour TND ’000 value force force Agriculture, forestry, fishing 4,884,300 9.
Mining and quarrying 554,900 i Public utilities 4,743,8008 9.38 97 Q Manufacturing 9,425,600 18.
Istanbul 10,757,327; Ankara 3,763,591; izmir 2,606,294; Bursa 1,431,172; Adana 1,366,027; Gaziantep 1,175,042.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2006 in value % of total labour % of labour YTL ’000 value force force Agriculture, forestry, fishing 64,278,298 7.
Other 99,659,0467 11.77 2,446,0008 9.98 TOTAL 853,636,2369 100.09 24,775,0009 100.
Ashgabat 744,000; Turkmenabat 256,000; Da§oguz 210,000; Mary 159,000; Balkanabat 139,000.
Estimate of United States Bureau of the Census International Database ; official Turkmen estimates are significantly higher.
Budget statistics are unreliable because the government spends large amounts of extra-budgetary funds.
Estimate of the ILO Employment Trends Unit. 2nd quarter only; from/to Russia only.
Based on 2000 Turkmenistan Demographic and Health Survey of 13,566 people age 25 and over.
Alapi 1,024; Fakaifou (on Fongafale islet) 1,007; Vaiaku 516; Motufoua 506.
Education student/ enrollment teachers students teacher ratio rate Primary 73 1,460i 6 19.
Local government councils have been established on all true atolls and isolated reef islands.
Kampala 1,533,600; Kira 164,700; Gulu 146,600; Lira 102,200; Mbale 86,200.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008-09 2003 in value % of total labour % of labour UGX '000,000 value force force Agriculture, forestry, fishing 7,055,000 23.
Statistically derived midpoint of range, indirect taxes less imputed bank service charges.
Based on the Uganda National Household Survey 2005-06, comprising approximately 7,400 households.
A11 Uganda passenger rail service was suspended in 1997; limited service resumed in mid-2007.
Kiev 2,765,531; Kharkiv 1,455,964; Dnipropetrovsk 1,017,514; Odesa 1,008,627; Donetsk 974,598.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 2005 in value % of total labour % of labour UAH ’000,000 value force force Agriculture 64,297 6.
Net indirect taxes and taxes on production less subsidies and less imputed bank service charges.
Dubai 1,354,980; Sharjah 685,000; Abu Dhabi 630,000; Alc Ayn 350,000; ‘Ajman 202,244; Ra 5 s al-Khaymah 113,347.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 in value % of total labour % of labour AED ’000,000 value force force Agriculture 12,797 1.
Hwenty seats are appointed by the rulers of the 7 emirates and 20 seats are indirectly elected, approximate figures; border/territorial disputes exist with Saudi Arabia/Iran, respectively.
No population change predicted between 2008 and 2009 by some unofficial sources because of world economic downturn.
U.A.E. citizens constituted only 18.7% of the total population in 2008.
English; both English and Scots Gaelic in Scotland; both English and Welsh in Wales.
London 7,619,800/8,567,000; Birmingham 1,010,400/2,285,000; Manchester 465,900/2,230,000; Leeds 477,600/1,529,000 7 ; Glasgow 637,000/1,160,000; Newcastle upon Tyne 200,200/882,000; Liverpool 464,200/811,000; Bristol 465,500; Sheffield 458,100; Edinburgh 452,200; Leicester 348,000; Kingston upon Hull 320,100; Bradford 315,100; Coventry 312,500; Cardiff 310,800; Nottingham 273,300; Belfast 268,400; Stoke-on-Trent 258,600; Plymouth 256,000; Southampton 252,700.
Distribution of disposable income percentage of household income by quintile 1 2 3 4 5 ~1A 11.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2006 2008 in value % of total labour % of labour £’000,000 value forceio forceio Agriculture, forestry, fishing 10,577 0.
Financial aggregates 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Exchange rate United States dollar per £ 1.78 1.93 1.72 1.96 2.00 1.46 SDRs per £ 1.20 1.24 1.20 1.30 1.27 0.95 International reserves Total 35.35 39.94 38.47 40.70 48.96 44.35 SDRs 0.38 0.33 0.29 0.40 0.36 0.45 Reserve pos. in IMF 6.32 5.53 2.33 1.41 1.10 2.35 Foreign exchange 28.65 34.08 35.85 38.89 47.50 41.55 Gold 10.07 10.04 9.99 9.97 9.98 9.98 % world reserves 1.
Interest and prices Central bank discount Govt, bond yield long term 4.58 4.93 4.46 4.37 5.04 4.58 Balance of payments Balance of visible trade -79.45 -111.49 -124.72 -140.66 -179.74 -172.98 Imports,o.b. -387.25 -461.14 -509.04 -588.25 -622.02 -639.32 Exports,o.b.
Church of England “established” (protected by the state but not “official”); Church of Scotland “national” (exclusive jurisdiction in spiritual matters per Church of Scotland Act 1921); no established church in Northern Ireland or Wales.
One of nine new unitary authorities formally established in April 2009.
Second quarter. n VAT and other taxes less subsidies and less imputed bank service charges.
Components of population change net domestic/ net change in percentage international States population 8 change births deaths migration Alabama 180,500 4.
Paul-Bloomington 3,230,000 Minneapolis 383,000 San Diego-Carlsbad-San Marcos 3,001,000 San Diego 1,279,000 St.
Petersburg-Clearwater 2,734,000 Tampa 341,000 Baltimore-Towson 2,667,000 Baltimore 637,000 Denver-Aurora 2,507,000 Denver 599,000 Pittsburgh 2,351,000 Pittsburgh 310,000 Portland-Vancouver-Beaverton 2,207,000 Portland 558,000 Cincinnati-Middletown 2,155,000 Cincinnati 333,000 Sacramento-Arden-Arcade-Roseville 2,110,000 Sacramento 464,000 Cleveland-Elyria-Mentor 2,088,000 Cleveland 434,000 Orlando-Kissimmee 2,055,000 Orlando 231,000 San Antonio 2,031,000 San Antonio 1,351,000 Kansas City 2,002,000 Kansas City, Mo.
Vital statistics infant States live births birth rate per 1,000 population death rate per 1,000 population mortality rate per 1,000 live births 9 abortion rate per 1,000 life live births 10 expectancy 1 Alabama 63,235 13.
Leading cause of death by age group total number of deaths death rate total 4 male female per 100,000 population percentage of all deaths All agesis 2,448,017 1,207,675 1,240,342 825.
Distribution of income percentage of disposable family income by quintile 1 2 3 4 5 3.
Population age 16 and over volunteering for an organization 26.2%; median annual hours 52.
Crime rates per 100,000 population in metropolitan areas violent crime total murder and nonnegligent manslaughter forcible rape robbery aggravated assault Chicago 15.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force Agriculture, forestry, fishing Mining and quarrying Manufacturing Construction Public utilities Transp. and commun.
Trade, hotels, restaurants Finance, real estate Public administration, defense Services Other TOTAL _2008_ in value % of total U.S.$’000,000,000 value 157.
Gross domestic product 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 Gross domestic product 10,971.
Net exports of goods and services -500. -624. -726. -763. -708 Exports 1,045.
Balance of payments Balance of visible trade -545.76 -668.38 -787.06 -843.54 -826.91 -836.27 Imports,o.b.
Home ownership rates percent percent States 2000 2007 States 2000 2007 Alabama 73.
Navigable channels 26,000 mi, 41,843 km; oil pipeline length 131,000 mi, 210,824 km; gas pipeline 28 1,462,300 mi, 2,353,300 km.
Certified route passenger/cargo air carriers 80; operating revenue (U.S.$’000,000; 2007) 173,104; operating expenses 163,894.
Intercity passenger and freight traffic by mode of transportation cargo traffic (’000,000,000 ton-mi) % of nafl total passenger traffic (’000,000,000 passenger-mi) % of nat’l total Rail 1,558 41.
An additional 6,500,000 people were not interviewed for this 2003 survey because they did not speak English or had cognitive or mental disabilities.
Excludes 5 nonvoting delegates from the District of Columbia, the United States Virgin Islands, American Samoa, the Northern Mariana Islands, and Guam and a nonvoting resident commissioner from Puerto Rico.
Net change in population does not include a usual small residual population that is not accounted for under births less deaths in conjunction with net domestic/international migration.
Gross income from all sources, including transfer payments to individuals.
Detail may not add to total given because of incomplete survey results.
Excludes doctors of osteopathy, physicians with unknown addresses, and inactive physicians.
Montevideo 1,269,552; Salto 99,072; Paysandu 73,272; Las Piedras 69,222; Rivera 64,426.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2006 in value % of total labour % of labour UYU ’000,000 value force 3 forces Agriculture 54,947 10. i 157,200 10.
Tashkent 1,959,190; Namangan 446,237; Andijon 321,622; Samarkand 312,863; Bukhara 249,037; Nukus 240,734.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2000 in value % of total labour % of labour UZS ’000,000 value force force Agriculture, fishing Manufacturing, mining, 6,116,400 21.
Subscribers. n Based on the 2002 Uzbekistan Health Examination Survey, of which 9,624 respondents were age 25 and over.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 1999 in value % of total labour % of labour Vt ’000,000 value force force Agriculture 7,480 14.
Production of goods and services that are retained by their producers for their own final consumption.
Caracas 1,836,286 ; Maracaibo 1,571,885 ; Valencia 1,199,510 ; Barquisimeto 862,519 ; Ciudad Guayana 635,978.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2006 in value VEB ’000,000,0008 % of total value® labour force % of labour force Agriculture 1,016,000 8.
Ho Chi Minh City 3,452,100 ; Hanoi 1,420,400 ; Haiphong 591,100 ; Da Nang 459,400.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2008 in value % of total labour % of labour VND ’000,000,000 value force 5 force 5 Agriculture, fishing 232,188 20.
Estimate of United States Bureau of the Census International Data Base (June 2009 Update). 4 2007 urban agglomeration.
Area and population area population Islands 1 Principal towns sq mi sq km 2008 estimate St.
United States Virgin Islands 45.4%; other Caribbean 34.9%, of which St.
Percentage of births within marriage may be an underestimation due to the common practice of consensual marriage.
Sanaa 2,006,619; Aden 588,938; Ta'izz 466,968; AlHudaydah 409,994; Ibb 212,992.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 2005-06 in value % of total labour % of labour YR ’000,000 value force force Agriculture, forestry, fishings 593,667 10.
Education teachers students student/ teacher ratio enrollment rate Primary 110,12714 3,219,564 22.414 75 Secondary/Voc. 55,862i 5 1,455,206 24.61 5 37 Tertiary 6,062 209,386 33.
Khat’s agricultural contribution to GDP is about 2.5% of total GDP; khat cultivation employs nearly 15% of the labour force.
Virtually all natural gas was flared or reinjected for field pressure maintenance, includes petroleum refining.
Customs duties less imputed bank service charges, includes 795,316 unemployed.
Lusaka 1,306,600; Kitwe 408,300; Ndola 398,100; Kabwe 191,100; Chingola 148,600.
Detail does not add to total given because of rounding. 3 to 4% in 2005.
Harare 1,572,000; Bulawayo 676,787; Chitungwiza 321,782; Mutare 170,106; Gweru 141,260.
HIV/AIDS-related 1,406; cardiovascular diseases 142; lower respiratory infections 84; tuberculosis 55; malignant neoplasms 54.
Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2006 2002 in value % of total labour % of labour Z$’000,000 value force force Agriculture, forestry, fishing 155,807 15.
Historic pact for the sharing of executive authority (Constitutional Amendment 19) entered into force Feb., 2009.
Multiple foreign currencies (including the United States dollar and South African rand) became legal tender in January 2009. includes 3 million Zimbabweans living outside of the country, many of whom are in South Africa.
Official year-on-year inflation rate in July 2008 was 231,000,000%; private sector estimates placed it at 80,000,000,000% or higher.
Lack of commodities in shops and multiple price changes per day make precise calculation of CPI virtually impossible.
Weights of consumer price index components, indirect taxes less imputed bank service charges, includes 298,000 unemployed.
Based on the 2005-06 Zimbabwe Demographic and Household Survey, comprising 16,082 people.
Other South America 7,318 1,565 1,799,979 2,028,586 +228,607 517,206 11.
Other Southwest Asia 2,534 6,440 2,932,353 3,068,534 +136,181 191,444 13.
Pacific Ocean Islands Liechtenstein, Monaco, Norway, San Marino, and Switzerland.
In this table “date of independence” may refer to a variety of circumstances.
In the case of the newest countries, those that attained full independence after World War II, the date given is usually just what is implied by the heading—the date when the country, within its present borders, attained full sovereignty over both its internal and external affairs.
In the case of longer established countries, the choice of a single date may be somewhat more complicated, and grounds for the use of several different dates often exist.
The reader should refer to appropriate Britannica articles on national histories and relevant historical acts.
The date of the current, or last, constitution is in some ways a less complicated question, but governments sometimes do not, upon taking power, either adhere to existing constitutional forms or trouble to terminate the previous document and legitimize themselves by the installation of new constitutional forms.
Often, however, the desire to legitimize extraconstitutional political activity by associating it with existing forms of long precedent leads to partial or incomplete modification, suspension, or abrogation of a constitution, so that the actual day-to-day conduct of government may be largely unrelated to the provisions of a constitution still theoretically in force.
When a date in this column is given in italics, it refers to a document that has been suspended, abolished by extraconstitutional action, or modified extensively.
The characterizations adopted under “type of government” represent a compromise between the forms provided for by the national constitution and the more pragmatic language that a political scientist might adopt to describe these same systems.
For an explanation of the application of these terms in the Britannica World Data, see the Glossary at page 501.
The positions denoted by the terms “chief of state” and “head of government” are usually those identified with those functions by the constitution.
The duties of the chief of state may range from largely ceremonial responsibilities, with little or no authority over the day-to-day conduct of government, to complete executive authority as the effective head of government.
In certain countries, an individual outside the constitutional structure may exercise the powers of both positions.
Membership in the legislative house of each country as given here includes all elected or appointed members, as well as ex officio members (those who by virtue of some other office or title are members of the body), whether voting or nonvoting.
The legislature of a country with a unicameral system is shown as the upper house in this table.
The number of administrative subdivisions for each country is listed down to the second level.
Finally, in the second half of the table are listed the memberships each country maintains in the principal international intergovernmental organizations of the world.
This part of the table may also be utilized to provide a complete membership list for each of these organizations as of Dec., 2009.
Constitutions whose dates are in italic type had been wholly or substantially suspended or abolished as of late 2009.
International organizations, conventions AC Arctic Council ACP African, Caribbean, and Pacific states ADB Asian Development Bank APEC Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation ASEAN Association of Southeast Asian Nations ATs Antarctic Treaty signatories AU African Union CARICOM Caribbean Community and Common Market ECOWAS EU FAO FZ G-20 GECF I-ADB IAEA IBRD ICC ICJ IDA IDB ILO IMF IMO ITU LAS OAS Economic Community of West African States The European Union Food and Agriculture Org.
The Franc Zone Group of Twenty Gas Exporting Countries Forum Inter-American Development Bank International Atomic Energy Agency International Bank for Reconstruction and Development International Criminal Court International Court of Justice International Development Association Islamic Development Bank International Labour Org.
International Telecommunication Union League of Arab States Organization of American States OPEC PC SCO UNCTAD UNESCO UNIDO WHO WTO Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries Pacific Community Shanghai Cooperation Org.
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Org.
Per nondemocratic national referendum of Nov., 1996, amending the constitution.
Excludes 2 former presidents serving as senators-for-life. i02Rectangle defined by coordinates; claim extends beyond 12 mi. i03Mix of parliamentary democracy and Samoan customs. i° 4 Royal decrees from March 1,1992, created first written rules of governance, ^Singapore is open to negotiation to the maritime claims of nearby states.
The data represent the latest published and unpublished data for both the surveyed area of the countries and their populations, the latter as of a single recent year , as of a recent census to provide the fullest comparison of certain demographic measures that are not always available between successive national censuses, and as of decade population estimates over a seventy year span.
The 2008 Revision, the United States Bureau of the Census International Data Base, databases of other international organizations, and Encyclopcedia Britannica’s own estimates.
One principal point to bear in mind when studying these statistics is that all of them, whatever degree of precision may be implied by the exactness of the numbers, are estimates—all of varying, and some of suspect, accuracy—even when they contain a very full enumeration.
The United States—which has a long tradition both of census taking and of the use of the most sophisticated analytical tools in processing the data—is unable to determine within 1.2% its total population nationally.
In states and larger cities, where enumeration of particular populations, including illegal, is more difficult, the accuracy of the enumerated count may be off as much as 3.1% at a state level and by a greater percent for a single city.
The high accuracy attained by census operations in China may approach 0.25% of rigorously maintained civil population registers.
Other national census operations not so based, however, are inherently less accurate.
For example, Ethiopia’s first-ever census in 1984 resulted in figures that were 30% or more above prevailing estimates.
An undercount of 2-8% is more typical, but even census operations offering results of 30% or more above or below prevailing estimates can still represent well-founded benchmarks from which future planning may proceed.
The editors have tried to take account of the range of variation and accuracy in published data, but it is difficult to establish a value for many sources of inaccuracy unless some country or agency has made a conscientious effort to establish both the relative accuracy of its estimate and the absolute magnitude of the quantity it is trying to measure—for example, the number of people in Cambodia who died at the hands of the Khmer Rouge.
Area and population country area population population square miles square kilometres rank total midyear 2009 rank density % annual growth rate 2004-09 census year total male (%> female (%> urban (%> per sq mi per sq km Afghanistan 249,347 645,807 41 28,150,000 43 112.
The sources of these data are censuses; national population registers (cumulated periodically); registration of migration, births, deaths, and so on; sample surveys to establish demographic conditions; and the like.
The statistics provided for area and population by country are ranked, and the population densities based on those values are also provided.
The population densities, for purposes of comparison within this table, are calculated on the bases of the 2009 midyear population estimate as shown and of total area of the country.
The data in this section conclude with the estimated average annual growth rate for the country during the five-year period 2004-2009.
In the section containing census data, information supplied includes the census total (more often de facto, the population actually present, rather than de jure, the population legally resident, who might be anywhere); the malefemale breakdown; the proportion that is urban (usually according to the country’s own definition); and finally an analysis of the age structure of the population by 15-year age groups.
This last analysis may be particularly useful in distinguishing the type of population being recorded—young, fast-growing nations show a high proportion of people under 30 (many countries in sub-Saharan Africa have about 40% of their population under 15 years), while other nations (for example, Sweden, which suffered no age-group losses in World War II) exhibit quite uniform proportions.
The projections for 2010, 2020, and 2030 represent the best fit of available data through late summer 2009.
The evidence of the last 30 years with respect to similar estimates published about 1970, however, shows how cloudy is the glass through which these numbers are read.
In 1970 no respectable Western analyst would have imagined proposing that mainland China could achieve the degree of birth control that it apparently has since then; on the other hand, even the Chinese admit that their methods have been somewhat Draconian and that they have already seen some backlash in terms of higher birth rates among those who have so far postponed larger families.
Civil register not a census. sBeginning of year.006 estimate. i°2001 census household population. i12001 estimate. i2Based on preliminary census figures.
S3|ricludes Svalbard and Jan Mayen.Mean figures for 2002. secludes Azad Kashmir, Northern Areas, and Afghan refugees unless otherwise indicated.
Excludes Azad Kashmir, Northern Areas, and Afghan refugees. szExcludes the disputed transitional republic of Kosovo. ssDe facto population including temporary nonresident workers.
Excludes East Jerusalem.|ncludes 305,000 Israeli Jews in the West Bank.2005 estimate for both the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. iExcludes Israeli Jews in the West Bank.|ncludes Israeli Jews in the West Bank.
Most of the populations given refer to a so-called city proper, that is, a legally defined, incorporated, or chartered area defined by administrative boundaries and by national or state law.
In some instances, where cities proper do not exist or are not strictly demarcated, populations of locally defined urban areas may be used.
In a few cases, data refer to the municipality, or commune, similar to the medieval city-state in that the city is governed together with its immediately adjoining, economically dependent areas, whether urban or rural in nature.
Some countries define no other demographic or legal entities within such communes or municipalities, but many identify a centre, seat, head , or locality that corresponds to the most densely populated, compact, contiguous core of the municipality.
Populations for urban agglomerations as defined by the United Nations are occasionally inset beneath the populations of cities proper.
Specifically that is when the urban agglomeration populations are at least three times the size of cities proper.
For certain countries, more than one form of the name of the city is given, usually to permit recognition of recent place-name changes or of forms of the place-name likely to be encountered in press stories if the title of the city’s entry in the Encyclopedia Britannica is spelled according to a different romanization or spelling policy.
Chinese names for China are usually given in their Pinyin spelling, the official Chinese system encountered in official documents and maps.
Sources for this data were often national censuses and statistical abstracts of the countries concerned, supplemented by Internet sources.
Albans 131,300 Chula Vista 217,478 McKinney 115,260 South Bend 104,069 Maturin 325,000 St.
Louis 350,759 Acarigua 137,000 ★ Lusaka Mufulira Baton Rouge 227,071 Jackson 175,710 St.
Paul 277,251 Barcelona 328,000 Beaumont 109,579 Jacksonville 805,605 St.
The countries, and the principal languages represented in each, are listed alphabetically.
The sum of the estimates equals the 2003 population of the country given in the “Area and population” table.
Many countries do not collect any official data whatever on language use, and published estimates not based on census or survey data usually span a substantial range of uncertainty.
The editors have adopted the best-founded distribution in the published literature (indicating uncertainty by the degree of rounding shown) but have also adjusted or interpolated using data not part of the base estimate.
Such adjustments have not been made to account for largescale refugee movements, as these are of a temporary nature.
A variety of approaches have been used to approximate mother-tongue distribution when census data were unavailable.
Some countries collect data on ethnic or “national” groups only; for such countries ethnic distribution often had to be assumed to conform roughly to the distribution of language communities.
This approach, however, should be viewed with caution, because a minority population is not always free to educate its children in its own language and because better economic opportunities often draw minority group members into the majority-language community.
For some countries, a given individual may be visible in national statistics only as a passport-holder of a foreign country, however long he may remain resident.
Such persons, often guest workers, have sometimes had to be assumed to be speakers of the principal language of their home country.
For some countries in the Americas, so few speakers of any single indigenous language remain that it was necessary to combine these groups as Amerindian so as to give a fair impression of their aggregate size within their respective countries.
No systematic attempt has been made to account for populations that may legitimately be described as bilingual, unless the country itself collects data on that basis, as does Bolivia or the Comoros, for example.
Where a nonindigenous official or excolonial language constitutes a lingua franca of the country, however, speakers of the language as a second tongue are shown in italics, even though very few may speak it as a mother tongue.
Lingua franca figures that are both italicized and indented are not included in population totals.
No comprehensive effort has been made to distinguish between dialect communities usually classified as belonging to the same language, though such distinctions were possible for some countries— g., between French and Occitan or among the various dialects of Chinese.
Parenthetical alternatives are given for a number of languages that differ markedly from the name of the people speaking them or that may be combined with other groups sometimes distinguishable in national data but appearing here under the name of the largest member—g., “Tamil (and other Indian languages)” combining data on South Asian Indian populations in Singapore.
Based on “nationality” at 1982 census, includes naturalized citizens.French is the universal language throughout France; traditional dialects and minority languages are retained regionally in the approximate numbers shown, however. lOData reflect multilingualism; 2000 population estimate is 233,000.
An assessment was made for each country of the available data on distribution of religious communities within the total population; the best available figures, whether originating as census data, membership figures of the churches concerned, or estimates by external analysts in the absence of reliable local data, were applied as percentages to the estimated 2001 midyear population of the country to obtain the data shown below.
Several concepts govern the nature of the available data, each useful separately but none the basis of any standard of international practice in the collection of such data.
The word “affiliation” was used above to describe the nature of the relationship joining the religious bodies named and the populations shown.
This term implies some sort of formal, usually documentary, connection between the religion and the individual (a baptismal certificate, a child being assigned the religion of its parents on a census form, maintenance of one’s name on the tax rolls of a state religion, etc.) but says nothing about the nature of the individual’s personal religious practice, in that the individual may have lapsed, never been confirmed as an adult, joined another religion, or may have joined an organization that is formally atheist.
The user of these statistics should be careful to note that not only does the nature of the affiliation differ greatly from country to country, but the social context of religious practice does also.
A country in which a single religion has long been predominant will often show more than 90% of its population to be affiliated , while in actual fact, no more than 10% may actually practice that religion on a regular basis.
Such a situation often leads to undercounting of minority religions (where someone is counted at all), blurring of distinctions seen to be significant elsewhere (a Hindu country may not distinguish Protestant denominations; a Christian country may not distinguish among its Muslim or Buddhist citizens), or double-counting in countries where an individual may conscientiously practice more than one “religion” at a time.
Until 1989 communist countries had for long consciously attempted to ignore, suppress, or render invisible religious practice within their borders.
Countries with large numbers of adherents of traditional, often animist, religions and belief systems usually have little or no formal methodology for defining the nature of local religious practice.
On the other hand, countries with strong missionary traditions, or good census organizations, or few religious sensitivities may have very good, detailed, and meaningful data.
Kitts and Nevis Roman Catholic 3,090,000 Anglican 10,000 traditional beliefs 3,660,000 Tonga Free Wesleyan Roman Catholic other Uruguay Oman Methodist 10,000 Hindu 1,050,000 44,000 16,000 41,000 Roman Catholic 2,590,000 Ibadlyah Muslim 1,840,000 other 15,000 Muslim 1,050,000 Protestant 150,000 Sunni Muslim 350,000 Pentecostal 7,000 Baha’i 260,000 Mormon 50,000 Hindu 190,000 other 12,000 Jewish 170,000 Jewish 30,000 Christian 100,000 nonreligious 1,050,000 other 480,000 other 20,000 St.
Lucia Roman Catholic 125,000 other 130,000 Trinidad and Tobago Roman Catholic Hindu 380,000 308,000 244,000 142,000 76,000 149,000 Uzbekistan Pakistan Protestant 20,000 Spain Muslim 19,156,000 Sunni Muslim 113,950,000 other 13,000 Roman Catholic 36,920,000 Anglican Muslim other Tunisia Sunni Muslim other Russian Orthodox 195,000 Shl'I Muslim 25,010,000 Muslim 200,000 other (mostly Christian Hindu other 3,560,000 1,730,000 370,000 St.
The accuracy of these data depends on the effectiveness of each respective national system for registering vital and civil events (birth, death, marriage, etc.) and on the sophistication of the analysis that can be brought to bear upon the data so compiled.
Even in a developed country such identifications are often left to nonmedical personnel, and in a developing country with, say, only one physician for every 10,000 population, there will be too few physicians to perform autopsies to assess accurately the cause of death after the fact and also too few to provide ongoing care at a level where records would permit inference about cause of death based on prior condition or diagnosis.
Calculating natural increase, which at its most basic is simply the difference between the birth and death rates, may be affected by the differing degrees of completeness of birth and death registration for a given country.
The total fertility rate may be understood as the average number of children that would be borne per woman if all childbearing women lived to the end of their childbearing years and bore children at each age at the average rate for that age.
As indicated above, data for causes of death are not only particularly difficult to obtain, since many countries are not well equipped to collect the data, but also difficult to assess, as their accuracy may be suspect and their meaning may be subject to varying interpretation.
Statistics on causes of death seek to identify the “underlying” cause (that which sets the final train of events leading to death in motion) but often must settle for the most proximate cause or symptom.
Even this kind of analysis may be misleading for those charged with interpreting the data with a view to ordering health-care priorities for a particular country.
The eight groups of causes of death utilized here include most, but not all, of the detailed causes classified by the World Health Organization and would not, thus, aggregate to the country’s crude death rate for the same year.
Expectation of life is probably the most accurate single measure of the quality of life in a given society.
It summarizes in a single number all of the natural and social stresses that operate upon individuals in that society.
The number may range from as few as 40 years of life in the least developed countries to as much as 80 years for women in the most developed nations.
The lost potential in the years separating those two numbers is prodigious, regardless of how the loss arises—wars and civil violence, poor public health services, or poor individual health practice in matters of nutrition, exercise, stress management, and so on.
The available data usually include both first marriages and remarriages after annulment, divorce, widowhood, or the like.
When well-defined family data are not collected as part of a country’s national census or vital statistics surveys, data for households have been substituted on the assumption that most households worldwide represent families in some conventional sense.
Increasing numbers of census programs, however, even in developing countries, are making more adequate provision for distinguishing these nontraditional, often nonfamily households.
Each of these measures represents an aggregate value of goods and services produced by a specific country.
The GDP, the more basic of these, is a measure of the total value of goods and services produced entirely within a given country.
The GNI, the more comprehensive value, is composed of both domestic production and the net income from current transactions with other countries.
In the first section of the table, data are presented for the nominal GNI, the nominal GNI per capita, and the GNI purchasing power parity per capita.
Purchasing power parity is an economic theory used to determine the number of units in a country’s currency that are required to buy the same amount of goods and services in another country.
PPP is expressed in a common currency, usually United States dollars, and as such it is often used to compare the standards of living between countries.
PPPs per capita in this table are nearly always values calculated by the World Bank.
Beside the GNI are given figures for annual growth of total and per capita “real” GDP (“real” figures being adjusted to eliminate the effect of recent inflation or, occasionally, of deflation between two given dates) along with average annual population growth rates for the same span of years.
GDP/GNI values allow comparison of the relative size of national economies, but further information is provided when these aggregates are analyzed according to their industrial sectors of origin and component kinds of expenditure.
The secondary sector, composed of manufacturing, construction, and public utilities.
National product and accounts country gross national income , 2006 gross domestic product , 2000-05 origin of gross domestic product by economic sector, 2005 nominal average annual (’000,000 per capita growth rates, 2000-05 primary secondary tertiary other U.S.$) nominal purchasing real popureal GDP agrimining manuconpublic transp., trade finanother governpower parity GDP lation per capita culture facturstrucutilcommucial svcs. ment <%) <%> ing tion ities nications svcs.
The tertiary sector, which includes transportation and communications, trade , financial services (including banking, real estate, insurance, and business services), other services , and government services.
The category “other” contains adjustments such as import duties and bank service charges that are not distributed by sector.
Because the majority of the world’s countries are in the less developed bloc, and because their principal financial concern is often external debt and its service, data are given for outstanding external public and publicly guaranteed long-term debt rather than for total public debt, which is the major concern in the developed countries.
The external account records the sum of all economic transactions of a current nature between one country and the rest of the world.
The account shows a country’s net of overseas receipts and obligations, including not only the trade of goods and merchandise but also such invisible items as services, interest and dividends, shortand long-term investments, tourism, transfers to or from overseas residents, etc.
Each transaction gives rise either to a foreign claim for payment, recorded as a deficit (g ., from imports, capital outflows), or a foreign obligation to pay, recorded as a surplus (e.g., from exports, capital inflows) or a domestic claim on another country.
Any international transaction automatically creates a deficit in the balance of payments of one country and a surplus in that of another.
The data in this section are taken from International Financial Statistics published by the International Monetary Fund.
Net income or expenditure from tourism (in United States dollars for comparability) is often a significant element in a country’s balance of payments.
Receipts from foreign nationals reflect payments for goods and services from foreign currency resources by tourists in the given country.
Expenditures by nationals abroad are also payments for goods and services, but in this case made by the residents of the given country as tourists abroad.
The table focuses on the concept of “economically active population,” which the International Labour Organisation defines as persons of all ages who are either employed or looking for work.
In general, the economically active population does not include students, persons occupied solely in domestic duties, retired persons, persons living entirely on their own means, and persons wholly dependent on others.
Persons engaged in illegal economic activities—smugglers, prostitutes, drug dealers, bootleggers, black marketeers, and others—also fall outside the purview of the ILO definition.
Countries differ markedly in their treatment, as part of the labour force, of such groups as members of the armed forces, inmates of institutions, the unemployed (both persons seeking their first job and those previously employed), seasonal and international migrant workers, and persons engaged in informal, subsistence, or part-time economic activities.
Some countries include all or most of these groups among the economically active, while others may treat the same groups as inactive.
Each of these measures indicates certain characteristics in a given national labour market; none should be interpreted in isolation, however, as the meaning of each is influenced by a variety of factors—demographic structure and change, social or religious customs, educational opportunity, sexual differentiation in employment patterns, degree of technological development, and the like.
At the same time, low activity and participation rates might be characteristic of a country having a young population with poor employment possibilities or of a country with a good job market distorted by the presence of large numbers of “guest” or contract workers who are not part of the domestic labour force.
Loss of working-age men to war, civil violence, or emigration for job opportunities may also affect the structure of a particular labour market.
This occurs because the countries involved have poor, largely agrarian economies in which the average worker is a farmer who tills his own small plot of land.
In countries with well-developed economies, “employees” will usually constitute the largest portion of the economically active.
Caution should be exercised when using the economically active data to make intercountry comparisons, as countries often differ in their choices of classification schemes, definitions, and coverage of groups and in their methods of collection and tabulation of data.
The population base containing the economically active population, for example, may range, in developing countries, from age 9 or 10 with no upper limit to, in developed countries, age 18 or 19 upward to a usual retirement age of from 55 to 65, with sometimes a different range for each sex.
Data on female labour-force participation, in particular, often lack comparability.
In many less developed countries, particularly those dominated by the Islamic faith, a cultural bias favouring traditional roles for women results in the undercounting of economically active women.
In other less developed countries, particularly those in which subsistence workers are deemed economically active, the role of women may be overstated.
The second major section of the table provides data on the distribution by economic sector of the economically active population.
The data usually include such groups as unpaid family workers, members of the armed forces, and the unemployed, the last distributed by industry as far as possible.
The categorization of industrial sectors is based on the divisions listed in the International Standard Industrial Classification of All Economic Activities.
The “other” category includes persons whose activities were not adequately defined and the unemployed who were not distributable by industrial sector.
A substantial part of the data presented in this table is summarized from the online database of the ILO, which compiles its statistics both from official publications and from information submitted directly by national census and labour authorities.
Bolivia 3625 3.525 4525 4.325 9125 8.825 4225 4.125 7325 7.025 9625 9.325 40921,25 39.421,25 Bosnia and Herzegovina 59 10.
China 99839 4.939 1,27139 6.239 4,97139 24.439 1,08739 5.339 15 15 4,57815,39 2.515, 39 57519, 39 2.819.
Iraq 1997 4,75765 10.565 42.97, 65 24.865 44.765 5.265 47766 11.666 43966 10.666 Ireland 2004 1,876 41.
Liechtenstein 2004 15.673 41.473 55.623, 73 45.673 54.373 37.273 0.474 1.374 10.674 36.474 Lithuania 200324 1,642 49.
Montenegross Morocco 2002 10,48253 24.853 54.57, 53 35.453 53.553 17.553 3,951 38.
French Guiana 4.847 5.547 3.847 4.447 9.447 10.747 1.947 2.147 13.547 15.547 23.547 27.047 12.619,47 14.419,47 French Polynesia 10 2.
Greece 1.94, 5 7.04, 5 2.24, 5 8.14,5 2.54, 5 9.04, 5 1.34, 5 4.74, 5 12.94,5 47.04, 5 1.14,5 3.94, 5 —4, 5 0.14,5 Greenland 5.
Japan 4.735 8.835 1.435 2.735 14.735 27.535 3 3 3 3 27.83, 35 52.03, 35 — — Jersey 71 5.
Malawi 90734 9.234 49634 5.034 2,11834 21.434 63934 6.534 15 15 1,82215.34 18.415,34 33421,34 3.421,34 Malaysia 3.
Nepal 48534, 88 5.934, 88 45834, 88 5.634, 88 1,58034, 88 19.234, 88 1,26834, 88 15.434, 88 55934, 8 6.834, 88 2,04234, 88 24.934, 88 45319, 34, 88 5.519, 34, 88 Netherlands, The 5.
Peru 2002 12,89253 42.053 72.653 48.253 56.253 40.253 38.835, 94, 95 81.135, 94, 9E 8.835, 94, 95 6.835, 94, 95 2,69377 32.577 1,09177 13.277 Philippines 2004 35,830 37.453 67.123 41.553 52.053 31.053 36.
Kitts and Nevis 1991 16.94 44.44 70.54 41.64 47.14 36.34 14.84 81.94 1.04 2.34 2.44, 45 14.74,45 1.74, 45 10.54, 45 St.
Paraguay 30877 3.777 36477 4.477 1,35277 16.377 19777 2.477 15 15 2,28715.77 27.615,77 — — Peru 1,654 4.
Turkmenistan Tuvalu 13 13 14 14 14 14 14 14 14 14 1,55914 16.214 — — Uganda 1,047 4.
The FAO depends largely on questionnaires supplied to each country for its statistics, but, where no official or semiofficial responses are returned, the FAO makes estimates, using incomplete, unofficial, or other similarly limited data.
And, although the FAO provides standardized guidelines upon which many nations have organized their data collection systems and methods, persistent, often traditional, variations in standards of coverage, methodology, and reporting periods reduce the comparability of statistics that can be supplied on such forms.
FAO data are based on calendar-year periods; that is, data for any particular crop refer to the calendar year in which the harvest occurred.
In spite of the often tragic food shortages in a number of countries in recent years, worldwide agricultural production is probably more often underreported than overreported.
Some countries, for example, report only crops that are sold commercially and ignore subsistence crops produced for family or communal consumption, or barter; others may limit reporting to production for export only, to holdings above a certain size, or represent a sampling only.
Methodological problems attach to much smaller elements of the agricultural whole, however.
Some countries, however, collect the basic data they report to the FAO on sown or cultivated areas instead and calculate production statistics from estimates of yield.
Millet and sorghum, which in many European and North American countries are used primarily as livestock or poultry feed, may be reportable by such countries as animal fodder only, while elsewhere many nations use the same grains for human consumption and report them as cereals.
FAO vegetable statistics include vegetables and melons grown for human consumption only.
Some countries do not make this distinction in their reports, and some exclude the production of kitchen gardens and small family plots, although in certain countries, such smallscale production may account for 20 to 40 percent of total output.
Livestock statistics may be distorted by the timing of country reports.
Ireland, for example, takes a livestock enumeration in December that is reported the following year and that appears low against data for otherwise comparable countries because of the slaughter and export of animals at the close of the grazing season.
It balances this, however, with a June enumeration, when numbers tend to be high.
Milk production as defined by the FAO includes whole fresh milk, excluding milk sucked by young animals but including amounts fed by farmers or ranchers to livestock, but national practices vary.
Certain countries do not distinguish between milk cows and other cattle, so that yield per dairy cow must be estimated.
Some countries do not report egg production statistics (here given of metric tons), and external estimates must be based on the numbers of chickens and reported or assumed egg-laying rates.
Other countries report egg production by number, and this must be converted to weight, using conversion factors specific to the makeup by species of national poultry flocks.
The notes that follow, keyed by references in the table headings, provide further definitional information.
Most of the data and concepts used in this table are adapted from the United Nations’ Energy Statistics Yearbook.
Total installed electrical power capacity comprises the sum of the rated power capacities of all main and auxiliary generators in a country.
Production of electricity comprises the total gross production of electricity by publicly or privately owned enterprises and also that generated by industrial establishments for their own use, but it usually excludes consumption by the utility itself.
Measured in millions of kilowatt-hours (kWhr), annual production of electricity ranges generally between 50% and 60% of total production capacity.
The great majority of the world’s electrical and other energy needs are met by the burning of fossil hydrocarbon solids, liquids, and gases, either for thermal generation of electricity or in internal combustion engines.
Many renewable and nontraditional sources of energy are being developed worldwide (wood, biogenic gases and liquids, tidal, wave, and wind power, geothermal and photothermal energy, and so on), but collectively these sources are still negligible in the world’s total energy consumption.
For this reason only hydroelectric and nuclear generation are considered here separately with fossil fuels.
Trade in electrical energy refers to the transfer of generated electrical output via an international grid.
Total electricity consumption (residential and nonresidential) is equal to total electricity requirements less transformation and distribution losses.
In this table, coal comprises all grades of anthracite, bituminous, subbituminous, and lignite that have acquired or may in the future, by reason of new technology or changed market prices, acquire an economic value.
These types of coal may be differentiated according to heat content and content of impurities.
Most coal reserve data are based on proven recoverable reserves only, of all grades of coal.
Exceptions are footnoted, with proven in-place reserves reported only when recoverable reserves are unknown.
Production figures include deposits removed from both surface and underground workings as well as quantities used by the producers themselves or issued to the miners.
Wastes recovered from mines or nearby preparation plants are excluded from production figures.
This term refers to any combustible gas (usually chiefly methane) of natural origin from underground sources.
The data for production cover, to the extent possible, gas obtained from gas fields, petroleum fields, or coal mines that is actually collected and marketed.
Manufactured gas is generally a by-product of industrial operations such as refineries, gasworks, coke ovens, and blast furnaces.
It is usually burned at the point of production and rarely enters the marketplace.
Crude petroleum is the liquid product obtained from oil wells; the term also includes shale oil, tar sand extract, and field or lease condensate.
Production and consumption and consumption per capita data in the table refer, so far as possible, to the same year so that the relationship between national production and consumption patterns can be clearly seen; data are given in barrels.
The published proven reserve figures do not necessarily reflect the true reserves of a country, because government authorities or corporations often have political or economic motives for withholding or altering such data.
The estimated exhaustion rate of petroleum reserves is an extrapolated ratio of published proven reserves to the current rate of withdrawal/ production.
Present world published proven reserves will last about 40 to 45 years at the present rate of withdrawal, but there are large countryto-country variations above or below the average.
Data on petroleum and gas pipelines are provided because of the great importance to both domestic and international energy markets of this means of bringing these energy sources from their production or transportation points to refineries, intermediate consumption and distribution points, and final consumers.
The pipeline length for petroleum includes the combined total length for both crude and refined petroleum pipelines, whereas the pipeline length for gas includes the combined total length for natural gas, condensate, and liquefied petroleum gas pipelines.
The source for these data was the latest edition of the CIA World Factbook.
H 791H 46,426H 348,982H 6,029H 3411 98H 24,289n Jamaica 1,469 11,808 7,217 98.
Unfortunately, the availability of information about these services often runs behind the capabilities of the services themselves.
Certain countries publish no official information; others publish data analyzed according to a variety of fiscal, calendar, religious, or other years; still others, while they possess such data almost simultaneously with the end of the business or calendar year, may not see them published except in company or parastatal reports of limited distribution.
Even when such data are published in national statistical summaries, it may be only after a delay of up to several years.
The figures include government publications, school texts, theses, offprints, series works, and illustrated works, even those consisting principally of illustrations.
A book is defined as a work of 49 or more pages; a work published simultaneously in more than one country is counted as having been published in each.
A periodical is a publication issued at regular or stated intervals and, in Unesco’s usage, directed to the general public.
Newspapers continually are founded, cease publication, merge, or change frequency of publication.
Data on circulation are often incomplete, slow to be aggregated at the national level, or regarded as proprietary.
Post office statistics are compiled mainly from the Universal Postal Union’s annual summary Statistique des services postaux.
Some countries do not enumerate domestic traffic or may record only international traffic requiring handling charges.
Data on mail traffic includes the number of copies of newspapers and excludes advertising material and ordinary money orders.
Data for some kinds of telecommunications apparatus are relatively easy to collect; telephones, for example, must be installed, and service recorded so that it may be charged.
But in most countries the other types of apparatus mentioned above may be purchased by anyone and used whenever desired.
As a result, data on distribution and use of these types of apparatus may be collected in a variety of ways—on the basis of numbers of subscribers, licenses issued, periodic sample surveys, trade data, census or housing surveys, or private consumer surveys.
Data on telephones refer to “main lines,” or the lines connecting a subscriber’s apparatus (fixed or mobile) to the public, switched net.
The Statistical Yearbook of Unesco contains extensive data on book, periodical, and newspaper publishing, and on television broadcasting that have been collected from standardized questionnaires.
The quality and recency of its data, however, depend on the completion and timely return of each questionnaire by national authorities.
The commercially published annual World Radio TV Handbook is a valuable source of information on broadcast media and has complete and timely coverage.
It depends on data received from broadcasters, but, because some do not respond, local correspondents and monitors are used in many countries, and some unconfirmed or unofficial data are included as estimates.
This table summarizes the basic indicators of health personnel; hospitals, by kind and utilization; mortality rates that are most indicative of general health services; external controls on health (adequacy of food supply and availability of safe drinking water); and sources and amounts of expenditure on health care.
Each datum refers more or less directly to the availability or use of a particular health service in a country, and, while each may be a representative measure at a national level, each may also conceal considerable differences in availability of the particular service to different segments of a population or regions of a country.
In addition, even when trained personnel exist and facilities have been created, limited financial resources at the national or local level may leave facilities underserved; or lack of good transportation may prevent those most in need from reaching a clinic or hospital that could help them.
Definitions and limits of data have been made as consistent as possible in the compilation of this table.
For example, despite wide variation worldwide in the nature of the qualifying or certifying process that permits an individual to represent himself as a physician, organizations such as the World Health Organization try to maintain more specific international standards for training and qualification.
Statistics for health personnel in this table uniformly include all those actually working in the health service field, whether in the actual provision of services or in teaching, administration, research, or other tasks.
One group of practitioners for whom this type of guideline works less well is that of midwives, whose training and qualifications vary enormously from country to country but who must be included, as they represent, after nurses, perhaps the largest and most important category of health auxiliary worldwide.
Hospitals also differ considerably worldwide in terms of staffing and services.
In this tabulation, the term hospital refers generally to a permanent facility offering inpatient services and/or nursing care and staffed by at least one physician.
Establishments offering only outpatient or custodial care are excluded.
These statistics are broken down into data for general hospitals , specialized facilities (with care in only one specialty), local medical centres, and rural health-care centres; the last two generally refer to institutions that provide a more limited range of medical or nursing care, often less than full-time.
Statistics on number of beds refer to beds that are maintained and staffed on a full-time basis for a succession of inpatients to whom care is provided.
Admission and discharge, the two principal points at which statistics are normally collected, are the basis for the data on the amount and distribution of care by kind of facility.
The data on numbers of patients exclude babies born during a maternal confinement but include persons who die before being discharged.
The bed-occupancy and average length-of-stay statistics depend on the concept of a “patient-day,” which is the annual total of daily censuses of inpatients.
The bed-occupancy rate is the ratio of total patientdays to potential days based on the number of beds; the average lengthof-stay rate is the ratio of total patient-days to total admissions.
Bed-occupancy rates may exceed 100% because stays of partial days are counted as full days.
Two measures that give health planners and policy makers an excellent indication of the level of ordinary health care are those for mortality of children under age five and for maternal mortality.
The latter refers to deaths attributable to delivery or complications of pregnancy, childbirth, the puerperium , or abortion.
Levels of nutrition and access to safe drinking water are two of the most basic limitations imposed by the physical environment in which health-care activities take place.
The nutritional data are based on reported levels of food supply , referred to the recommendations of the United Nations’ Food and Agriculture Organization for the necessary daily intake for a moderately active person of average size in a climate of a particular kind (fewer calories are needed in a hot climate) to remain in average good health.
The range of deficiency is less dramatic numerically but far more critical to the countries in which deficiencies are chronic, because the deficiencies lead to overall poor health (raising health service needs and costs), to decreased productivity in nearly every area of national economic life, and to the loss of social and economic potential through early mortality.
By “safe” water is meant only water that has no substantial quantities of chemical or biological pollutants—e., quantities sufficient to cause “immediate” health problems.
Data refer to the proportion of persons having “reasonable access” to an “adequate” supply of water within a “convenient” distance of the person’s dwelling, as these concepts are interpreted locally.
The data on health care expenditure were excerpted from a joint effort by the WHO and the World Bank to create better analytical tools by which the interrelations among health policy, health care delivery systems, and human health might be examined against the more general frameworks of government operations, resource allocation, and development process.
Expenditures were tabulated for direct preventative and curative activities and for public health and public education programs having direct impact on health status—family planning, nutrition, and health education— but not more indirect programs like environmental, waste removal, or relief activities.
Public, parastatal , international aid, and household expenditure reports and surveys were utilized to build up a comprehensive picture of national, regional, and world patterns of health care expenditures and investment that could not have been assembled from any single type of source.
For reasons of space, public and parastatal are combined as the former.
A principal source for expenditures was the World Bank Group Statistical Database, which includes national statistics, UN databases, and World Bank surveys.
Pakistan 2002 101,635 4,560 44,520 45,390 23,084 1,516 2003 5,496 -16.583.
Zimbabwe includes Gaza Strip.Registered personnel; all may not be present and working in the country.Number of pharmacies.Central Hospital only.|\jurses include midwives.Hamad General Hospital only.°lncludes Montenegro.i Victoria Hospital only.Paramaribo Hospital only.4_927 community hospitals only.1987.
Because the administrative structure, financing, manning, and scope of institutions and programmed tasks in these fields vary so greatly from country to country, no well-accepted or well-documented body of statistical comparisons exists in international convention to permit objective assessment of any of these subjects, either from the perspective of a single country or internationally.
The data provided within any single subject area do, however, represent the most consistent approach to problems of international comparison found in the published literature for that field.
The provision of social security programs to answer specific social needs, for example, is summarized simply in terms of the existence or nonexistence of a specific type of benefit program because of the great complexity of national programs in terms of eligibility, coverage, term, age limits, financing, payments, and so on.
Activities connected with a particular type of benefit often take place at more than one governmental level, through more than one agency at the same level, or through a mixture of public and private institutions.
A bullet symbol indicates that a country has at least one program within the defined area (a circle indicates data is for 2007); in some cases it may have several.
A blank space indicates that no program existed providing the benefit shown; ellipses indicate that no information was available as to whether a program existed.
Data given for social security expenditure as a percentage of total central governmental expenditure are taken from the International Monetary Fund’s Government Finance Statistics Yearbook, which provides the most comparable analytic series on the consolidated accounts of central governments, governmentally administered social security funds, and independent national agencies, all usually separate accounting entities, through which these services may be provided in a given country.
Data on the finances of social security programs are taken in large part from the International Labour Office’s The Cost of Social Security (triennial), supplemented by national data sources.
Statistics are usually based on the number of offenses reported to police, not the number of offenders apprehended or tried in courts.
A person identified as having committed multiple offenses is counted only under the most serious offense.
Murder refers to all acts involving the voluntary taking of life, including infanticide, but excluding abortion, or involuntary acts such as those normally classified as manslaughter.
Assault includes “serious,” or aggravated, assault—that involving injury, endangering life, or perpetrated with the use of a dangerous instrument.
Burglary involves theft from the premises of another; although Interpol statistics are reported as “breaking and entering,” national data may not always distinguish cases of forcible entry.
Automobile theft excludes brief use of a car without the owner’s Social protection country social security programs available, 2007 or 2008 expendifinances, latest tures, latest (% Of total central govt.)* receipts expenditures old-age, invalidity, deatha sickness and maternityt* work injury® unemploymentd family allowances® total (’000,000 natl. cur.) insured persons <%> employers <%) government <%) other (%> total (’000,000 natl. cur.) benefits (%> administration (%> other <%> Afghanistan • • • 4.
Criminal offense data for certain countries refer to cases disposed of in court, rather than to complaints.
Police manpower figures refer, for the most part, to full-time, paid professional staff, excluding clerical support and volunteer staff.
Personnel in military service who perform police functions are presumed to be employed in their principal activity, military service.
The figures for military manpower refer to full-time, active-duty military service and exclude reserve, militia, paramilitary, and similar organizations.
The data on military expenditures are from the SIPRI Military Expenditure Database, as well as from the IMF’s Government Finance Statistics Yearbook and country statistical publications.
Programs providing cash payments for each of the three types of longterm benefit indicated to persons exceeding a specified working age who are qualified by a term of covered employment, partially or fully incapacitated for their usual employment by injury or illness, and qualified by their status as spouse, cohabitant, or dependent minor of a qualified person who dies.
Programs providing cash or medical services to employment-qualified persons who become temporarily or permanently incapacitated (fully or partially) by work-related injury or illness.
Programs providing cash payments to families or mothers to mitigate the cost of raising children and to encourage the formation of larger families.
A police officer is a full-time, paid professional, performing domestic security functions.
Data include administrative staff but exclude clerical employees, volunteers, and members of paramilitary groups.
Includes all active-duty personnel, regular and conscript, performing national security functions.
Excludes reserves, paramilitary forces, border patrols, and gendarmeries. crime and law enforcement military protection country offenses reported to the police per population manpower, 2008 h expenditure, 2007 arms trade 100,000 population per police total personal property officers total (’000 per 1,000 population total ’000,000 per capita % of central government % of GDP or imports 1999 exports 2005 murder assault burglary automobile U.S.$) expenditure GNP theft 53.41 1.
Virgin Islands O O O West Bank Western Sahara Yemen • • 10. — — Zambia O 9 O 1.
As of November 2008 United States and allied coalition forces numbered 143,000 and 6,500, respectively.|ncludes United States military aid of U.S.$2 billion annually.
Whenever possible, data referring to preprimary education programs have been excluded from this compilation.
These data are supplemented at each level by a figure for enrollment ratio, an indicator of each country’s achieved capability to educate the total number of children potentially educable in the age group usually represented by that level.
At the first and second levels this is given as a net enrollment ratio and at the third level as a gross enrollment ratio.
Data in this last group are confined as far as possible to those who have completed their educations and are no longer in school.
At each level of education, differences in national statistical practice, in national educational structure, public-private institutional mix, training and deployment of teachers, and timing of cycles of enrollment or completion of particular grades or standards all contribute to the problems of comparability among national educational systems.
Reporting the number of schools in a country is not simply a matter of counting permanent red-brick buildings with classrooms in them.
Often the resources of a less developed country are such that temporary or outdoor facilities are all that can be afforded, while in a developed but sparsely settled country students might have to travel 80 km a day to find a classroom with 20 students of the same age, leading to the institution of measures such as traveling teachers, radio or televisual instruction at home under the supervision of parents, or similar systems.
Such difficulties also limit the comparability of statistics on numbers of teachers, with the further complications that many at any level must work part-time, or that the institutions in which they work may perform a mixture of functions that do not break down into the tidy categories required by a table of this sort.
In certain countries teacher training is confined to higher education, in others as a vocational form of secondary training, and so on.
For purposes of this table, teacher training at the secondary level has been treated as vocational education.
At the higher level, teacher training is classified as one more specialization in higher education itself.
Many countries do, indeed, have a primary system composed of grades 1 through 6 that passes students on to some kind of postprimary education.
All of these difficulties are compounded when a country has instruction in more than one language or when its educational establishment is so small that higher, sometimes even secondary, education cannot take place within the country.
Enrollment figures in this table may, therefore, include students enrolled outside the country.
Student-teacher ratio, however, usually provides a good measure of the ratio of trained educators to the enrolled educable.
In general, primary and secondary students have been counted on the basis of full-time enrollment; tertiary students and teachers have been counted on the basis of both fulltime and part-time enrollment or employment.
It is not always, however, the best indication of utilization of teaching staff and facilities.
Utilization, provided here for higher education only, is best seen in a gross enrollment ratio, which compares total enrollment to the population within the normal age limits for that level.
Literacy data provided here have been compiled as far as possible from data for the population age 15 and over for the best comparability internationally.
Standards as to what constitutes literacy may also differ markedly; sometimes completion of a certain number of years of school is taken to constitute literacy; elsewhere it may mean only the ability to read or write at a minimal level testable by a census taker; in other countries studies have been undertaken to distinguish among degrees of functional literacy.
When a country reports an official 100% literacy rate, it should usually be viewed with caution, as separate studies of “functional” literacy for such a country may indicate 10%, 20%, or even higher rates of inability to read, or write, effectively.
Substantial use has been made of UNESCO literacy estimates, both for some of the least developed countries and for some of the most fully developed, where literacy is no longer perceived as a problem, thus no longer in need of monitoring.
Finally, the data provided for public expenditure on education are complete in that they include all levels of public expenditure (national, state, local) but are incomplete for certain countries in that they do not include data for private expenditure; in some countries this fraction of the educational establishment may be of significant size.
Occasionally data for external aid to education may be included in addition to domestic expenditure.
Cote d’Ivoire 150,79221 11.621 8916 7,62216 100,29716 13.216 39 2,257 11.
Yemen27 2002-03 11,01313 113,81218 2,950,403 72 1,2244 14,08318 1,364,129 34 1254 1,406 Zambia 2002-03 4,22121 36,151 1,731,579 47.
Paraguay 270,5764 22.04 2,16111 57,87411 1,495,957H 25.8H 32 5,764 20.46 87.
Somalia 140,53113 13.013 2123 27,09913 617,89713 22.813 15 1,664 8.56 82.
Zimbabwe 26Data include Gaza Strip and West Bank.Public schools only.1999-2000.
BIBLIOGRAPHY AND SOURCES The following list indicates the principal documentary sources used in the compilation of Britannica World Data.
It is by no means a complete list, either for international or for national sources, but is indicative more of the range of materials to which reference has been made in preparing this compilation.
Because of the relative ease of access to these sites for PC users, uniform resource locators for mainly official sites have been added to both country statements and individual Comparative National Statistics tables (at the end of the headnote) when a source providing comparable international data existed.
Many sites exist that are narrower in coverage or less official and that may also serve the reader (on-line newspapers; full texts of national constitutions; business and bank sites) but space permitted the listing of only the top national and intergovernmental sites.
Sites that are wholly or predominantly in a language other than English are so identified.
Trade Yearbook; Yearbook of Forest Products; State of the World’s Forests 2003.
Constitutions of the Countries of the World; Constitutions of Dependencies and Territories.
Industrial Commodities Statistics Yearbook; Energy Statistics Yearbook; International Trade Statistics Yearbook ; Monthly Bulletin of Statistics; Statistical Yearbook.
American Samoa at a Glance’, Report on the State of the Island ( United States Department of the Interior ); 2000 Census of Population and Housing ; American Samoa Statistical Yearbook.
Statistical Appendix ; Statistical Yearbook; 2001 Population and Housing Census.
Statistical Yearbook of the Argentine Republic; Censo nacional de poblacion, hogares, y vivienda 2001.
Census of Population and Housing 2000; Statistical Abstract ; Quarterly Statistical Digest; Central Bank of the Bahamas Annual Report.
Bangladesh Population Census, 2001; Statistical Yearbook of Bangladesh; Central Bank Annual Report.
Barbados Economic Report ; Monthly Digest of Statistics; Annual Statistical Digest; Central Bank Annual Report; Barbados Population and Housing Census 2000.
Statistical Yearbook of Bhutan; Population and Housing Census of Bhutan 2005; Royal Monetary Authority of Bhutan Monthly Bulletin.
Annual Economic Report 2006; Overseas Trade Report 2006; Labour Force Survey 2006.
China Statistical Yearbook; 2000 Population Census of the People's Republic of China.
Anuario estadistico ; Costa Rica at a Glance ; IX censo nacional de poblacion y V de viviendas, 2000.
Monthly Statistical Review; Census of Population, Households and Dwellings 31st March 2001; Statistical Yearbook.
Central Bank Informe de la Economia Dominicana ; Cifras Dominic anas ; VIII censo nacional de poblacion y vivienda, 2002.
Monthly Bulletin of Statistics; Statistical Indicators about Egypt; Census Population, Housing, and Establishment, 2006; Statistical Yearbook.
Monthly Bulletin of Estonian Statistics; 2000 Population and Housing Census; Statistical Yearbook of Estonia; The 2006 National Statistics.
Bulletin d’information statistique ; Annee 2006 des Resultats Mediocres.
Judaea, Samaria, and Gaza Area Statistics Quarterly; Palestinian Statistical Abstract.
Statistisches Jahrbuch fur die Bundesrepublik Deutschland ; Germany Facts and Trends.
Statistical Appendix (IMF Staff Country Report ); 2001 Population and Housing Census.
Boletin estadistico ; Anuario estadistica ; Instituto nacional de estadistica censos nationales XI de poblacion y VI de habitacion 2002; Banco de Guatemala Annual Report.
Census of Population of Ireland, 2006; National Income and Expenditure ; Statistical Yearbook of Ireland.
Korea Statistical Yearbook; Social Indicators in Korea ; 2005 Population and Housing Census.
Statistical Appendix ; Statistichesky Yezhegodnik Kyrgyzstana (Statistical Yearbook of Kyrgyzstan); Population Census 1999; National Bank of the Kyrgyz Republic Monthly Bulletin.
Statistical Appendix ; Statistical Yearbook; 2006 Population Census; Central Bank Annual Report.
Chiffres-cles de Luxembourg (annual); Annuaire statistique ; Bulletin du STATEC ; Recensement general de la population du 15 fevrier 2001.
Statistical Appendix (IMF Staff Country Report ); Republica Moldova in Cifre ; Population Census 2004.
Report to the Pyithu Hluttaw on the Financial, Social, and Economic Conditions for 20 ** ; Statistical Abstract ; 1983 Population Census.
Statistical Yearbook of the Netherlands; Monthly Bulletin of Statistics.
Central Bank Quarterly Bulletin; Fourth Population and Housing Census Netherlands Antilles 2001; Statistical Yearbook of the Netherlands Antilles.
New Zealand.06 New Zealand Census of Population and Dwellings; New Zealand Official Yearbook.
Folke-og boligtelling 2001 (Population and Housing Census); lndustristatistikk ; Statistical Yearbook of Norway; Monthly Bulletin of Statistics.
General Census of Population, Housing, and Establishments ; Statistical Yearbook; Bank of Oman Annual Report.
Economic Survey ; Pakistan Statistical Yearbook; Population Census of Pakistan, 1998.
Narodowy spis powszechny 2002 (National Population and Housing Census); Statistical Bulletin ; Statistical Yearbook of the Republic of Poland; Demographic Yearbook of Poland; Concise Statistical Yearbook.
Statistical Appendix (IMF Staff Country Report ); 2001 Population Census.
General Census of Housing and Inhabitants, 1994; Statistical Abstract ; Central Bank Quarterly Bulletin.
Turkey.00 Genel Niifus Sayimi (2000 Census of Population); Central Bank Quarterly Bulletin; Statistical Yearbook of Turkey.
Tuvalu Country Profile 2003; Annual Statistical Report; 2002 Population and Housing Census; Statistical Report 2005.
An Official Handbook ; Census 2001; General Household Survey series ; Monthly Bulletin of Statistics.
SIC-Based Products ; United States Imports: SICBased Products ; Vital and Health Statistics ; 2000 Census of Population and Housing.
Statistical Digest ; 2000 Census of Population and Housing ; United States Virgin Islands Economic Indicators ; United States Virgin Islands Economic Review and Industry Outlook.
Population, Housing and Establishment Census — 1997; Palestinian Statistical Abstract.
For exam'pie, ""military affairs 10:270; 09:270; 08:270; 07:258; 06:247; 05:248; 04:248; 03:277; 02:278; 01:276"" indicates that military affairs appeared every year from 2001 through 2010.
Other references that appear with a page number but without a year are references for the current yearbook.
Indented entries under a topic refer by page number to some other places in the yearbook text where the topic is discussed.
Names of people covered in biographies and obituaries are usually followed by the abbreviation “” or """" with the year in dark type and a page number in light type,g., Jackman, Hugh 10:91, or Cronkite, Walter 10:122.
Samak Sundaravej biography 09:104 obituary 10:157 References to illustrations are by page number and are preceded by the abbreviation il.
DeLorean, John Zachary 06:108 Deloria, Vine, Jr.:108 Delp, Brad 08:124 Delta Air Lines, Inc.
References giving only a page number in light type are for the current edition.
Inarritu, Alejandro Gonzalez 08:84 incandescent lightbulb environment 235, il.
Kiribati 10:425; 09:424; 08:424; 07:420; 06:421; 05:423; 04:425; 03:456; 02:453; 01:455 see also world data Kiribati Shipping Services Ltd.
United States election of 2008 (special report) 09:176 United States 482, il.
The Radical Stronghold of European Muslims"" (Tom Gallagher) 07:476 References giving only a page number in light type are for the current edition.
