No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, scanning, or otherwise, without permission in writing from the publisher, except by a reviewer, who may quote brief passages in a review.
You have put your finger on it. —Warren Commission Executive session, Jan., 19641 THE ASSASSINATION OF PRESIDENT JOHN FITZGERALD KENNEDY in Dallas on November 22, 1963, is easily the greatest whodunit murder mystery of the twentieth century.
JFK, a young and beloved president, was cruelly and brutally gunned down at half-past noon at his wife’s side.
The images of his murder, captured that day in Dealey Plaza by dozens of amateur photographers, were so horrific that many, including the Zapruder film—the most important of all the movies taken that day —were suppressed from full public viewing for more than a decade.
Camelot, the magic of the JFK administration, was destroyed in the span of less than ten seconds.
The presumed assassin, Lee Harvey Oswald, was identified in the first hour after the shooting.
At approximately 1:51m., less than an hour and a half later, he was found by Dallas Police hiding in a dark movie theater, sitting alone, with his .38 snub-nose revolver in his belt.
Then, when McDonald reached for Oswald’s right wrist, Oswald punched McDonald between the eyes with his left fist.
McDonald hit him back, and in the ensuing scuffle, Oswald drew the .38 out of his belt.
The gun misfired, and in the course of grappling with Oswald, McDonald suffered a pronounced four-inch scratch, from the corner of his eye down to the comer of his mouth.
No giant, Oswald turned out to be a loner who moved to Russia intending to give up his United States citizenship.
In Russia, he acquired a Russian bride and became a self-professed Marxist.
When he returned from Russia, Oswald brought back his Russian wife, Marina, and their first child, a daughter named June Lee.
Even with his family in the United States, Oswald had a history of living alone.
At the time of the assassination, Oswald was living in a rooming house, while his wife and daughter were rooming with a Russian speaking acquaintance, Ruth Paine.
Four days later, on October 20, 1963, Marina gave birth to their second daughter, Audrey Marina Rachel Oswald, approximately one month before the JFK assassination.
Truly, the JFK assassination was a watershed event in United States history.
The instant rifle fire broke out on that sunny November day in Dallas, the innocence of the postwar prosperity and optimism of the Eisenhower years died for good.
President Lyndon Baines Johnson was sworn into office before Air Force One departed Dallas that day for Washington.
After JFK’s death Johnson led the nation into the dark days of Vietnam, proclaiming the necessity of a war JFK had already decided to abandon.
The 1960s, after JEK’s death, was marked by antiwar protests, urban racial riots, the feminist revolution and the rise of a new sexuality, and an upheaval in economics and politics that questioned whether the United States could and would provide social and economic justice for all United States citizens, let alone for peoples of other nations striving to achieve their own freedom in their homelands.
Almost from the first hour after the Warren Commission delivered its final report to President Johnson on September 24, 1964, critics began to raise serious considerations that the Commission was a whitewash.
Contrary to the impression given the public, the Warren Commission was not unanimous in its conclusion Lee Harvey Oswald was the lone assassin.
United States Senator Richard Russell Jr., a Democrat and member of the Warren Commission, in the final session of the Commission on September 18, 1964, led a group of three dissenting members that included himself, Sen.
John Sherman Cooper, a Republican from Kentucky with a reputation for his independent views, and Rep.
Hale Boggs, a Democrat from Louisiana who was then serving as majority whip of the United States House of Representatives.
Ultimately, the dissenters accepted the final report with minor changes, but only after Supreme Court Justice Earl Warren insisted the final report needed to be unanimous.
Later, Russell was shocked to find out that of the thirteen executive sessions held by the Warren Commission, the one where the objections were made was the only session that had not been transcribed.
Instead, all that was published were brief minutes of the meeting that left out any mention of the disagreement.
In a television interview given on January 19, 1970, less than a year before his death, Russell again proclaimed his doubts about the Warren Commission’s conclusion.
In a 2003 Gallup poll three-quarters of Americans, fully 75 percent, responded that they believed Lee Harvey Oswald did not act alone.
Now, fifty years after the assassination, despite repeated efforts by the United States Congress to force full disclosure, the CIA and other United States agencies continue to lock away hundreds of thousands of documents in secret files.
To maintain the shroud of secrecy over the JFK assassination a half-century after the event is a disgrace for a nation that proclaims values of truth and justice.
In 2013 the government continues to suppress key documents regarding the JFK assassination, which reinforces the suspicion that there remains some deep, dark, disturbing truth that would be more than the American people could handle.
Truthfully, the innocence of accepting government at face value died along with JFK in the streets of Dallas on November 22, 1963.
A nation committed to a robust First Amendment would welcome the challenge of contesting competing versions of history, especially when evidence abounds that Lee Harvey Oswald was not a lone-nut assassin, but a highly complicated young man with tentacles that reached into the KGB, as well as the CIA, the FBI, and Navy Intelligence.
The JFK assassination, as is the case with the Lincoln assassination, may endure as a perpetual mystery of American politics.
Each generation sees the trauma through the lens of their particular experience with politics and each remains ever fascinated with the enigma.
This book begins where all good murder investigations should begin, namely, with an investigation of the ballistics evidence.
The point of the first chapter is that a careful examination of the ballistics evidence makes clear a lone-assassin cannot account for all the bullet damage that occurred that day.
After fifty years of continuing controversy, no book could possibly cover every aspect of an event as complicated as the JFK assassination.
Instead it seeks to communicate that the investigation of the JFK assassination is more than an attempt to find the shooters.
It is an attempt to plumb the motivation of the guilty parties, regardless of how high up the suspicion goes.
While finding out who pulled the trigger or triggers involved in shooting JFK is important, the key to the puzzle requires deciphering the motivations of those who wanted JFK dead so LBJ could be placed in the White House.
To be successful the inquiry must probe who were the forces higher up that organized the conspiracy and why did they want JFK murdered.
ONE THE SINGLE-BULLET THEORY But on the Life blowups, I saw for the first time enough evidence to prove that Connally had not been hit until at least thirteen frames later—too late for it to have been the same bullet, too soon for it to have been a second bullet from the same rifle. —Josiah Thompson, Six Seconds in Dallas, 19677 A WEEK AFTER THE ASSASSINATION, FBI chief J Edgar Hoover told President Lyndon Johnson in a phone call that three shots were fired, with two hitting JFK and a separate shot hitting Governor John Connally.
In accounting for three shots, Hoover did not imagine one shot had missed.
More important, Hoover rushed to identify incorrectly the bullet the Warren Commission later was to designate as the single bullet that hit both JFK and Connally.
Hoover told LBJ, “one complete bullet rolled out of the President’s head,” after it destroyed much of JFK’s head on impact.
But somehow, from the very beginning of the investigation into the assassination, finding a nearly pristine bullet was important in the process of framing Lee Harvey Oswald as the assassin.
Only days after the assassination, Life Magazine writer Paul Mandel published an article in the December 6, 1963 issue, in which he asked questions that ultimately led to the conclusion of a conspiracy.
Perhaps most important, Mandel makes people aware that JFK’s neck wound was an entry wound.
Hence the recurring guess that there was a second sniper somewhere else.
But the 8 mm shows the President turning his body far around to the right as he waves to someone in the crowd.
Life had purchased the exclusive rights to the Zapruder film and did not make it available to the public, so Mandel’s claim had to be taken at face value.
In a special memorial issue that Life published in the days after the assassination, the editors chose to show some stills from the film.
Mandel also assumed that only three bullets were fired and that a separate bullet hit JFK and Connally.
All three bullets have been recovered — one deformed, from the floor of the limousine; one from the stretcher that carried the President; one that entered the President’s body.
The truth is that no bullet was found in the limousine and no bullet was recovered from the president’s body.
The bullet that was found at Parkland Hospital, marked Warren Commission Exhibit 399, was found on a stretcher at Parkland Hospital, but there is no evidence President Kennedy’s body was ever placed on that stretcher.
Mandel assumed the first bullet struck JFK, the second bullet struck Connally, and the third bullet was the fatal headshot that mortally wounded JFK at Zapruder frame 313.
What was clear from the Mandel article was that in the first days after the JFK assassination, information was being fed to credible journalists like Mandel at Life to refute the physical evidence observed by the physicians who treated JFK immediately after the shooting at Parkland Hospital.
ASTRAY BULLET The FBI’s official theory remained that three bullets had been fired, with two hitting Kennedy and one hitting Connally, at least until government investigators realized a witness to the assassination, James Tague, had been hit in the cheek by a ricochet from a missed shot.
On July 23, 1964, Warren Commission counsel Wesley J Liebeler took Tague’s testimony in Dallas.
As the motorcade passed through Dealey Plaza, Tague was standing on the far side of the triple underpass by the bridge abatement.
When he realized what he first heard as firecrackers were actually gunshots, he ducked behind the bridge abatement.
We walked back down there, and another man joined us who identified himself as the deputy sheriff, who was in civilian clothes, and I guess this was three or four minutes after.
The same day, Liebeler took the testimony of Dallas County Deputy Sheriff Eddy Raymond Walthers who confirmed Tague’s story.
Although Walthers could not remember Tague’s name, he remembered a man who claimed he had been struck by something on the face during the shooting in Dealey Plaza.
Tague was not sure which shot resulted in the ricochet that hit him, but he believed it was the second or third shot, not the first.
The Warren Commission’s final report conceded that one shot missed, although the report equivocated over whether the missed shot was the first or the second.
In acknowledging a stray shot had hit Tague, the Commission implied that a single bullet had to have been responsible for hitting both JFK and Connally.
The alternative was to argue a bullet fragment had hit Tague, most likely from the third shot that hit JFK’s head.
But the markings the bullet left on the pavement prior to ricocheting to hit Tague made it unlikely that Tague was hit by a bullet fragment.
The only room for doubt the Warren Commission’s conclusion left was whether the first shot had missed, or the second.
But either way, the Warren Commission was stuck attributing all the damage done to JFK and to Connally to two bullets.
The pristine bullet J Edgar Hoover had discussed with LBJ in the immediate aftermath of the assassination came in handy.
Warren Commission junior counsel Arlen Specter cleverly decided he would craft the pristine bullet into the single bullet that hit both JFK and Connally.
So if a first shot missed, Specter reasoned that was the shot that ricocheted to hit Tague, with the second shot hitting both JFK and Connally, and the third shot being the head shot that killed JFK at Zapruder frame 313.
Or, alternatively, the first shot may have hit both JFK and Connally, with the second shot ricocheting to hit Tague, and the third shot being the head shot that killed JFK at Zapruder frame 313.
Either way, the pristine bullet Hoover discussed became the “single bullet” of the Specter theory.
Doubters quickly characterized Specter’s single bullet as the “magic bullet” that injured two adult men only to emerge from Connally’s body in pristine condition —a theory that quickly raised eyebrows from those experienced with firearms.
FINDING THE MAGIC BULLET Key to the Warren Commission’s conclusion that a lone shooter was responsible for killing JFK is what has become known as the “magic bullet,” a pristine bullet identified as Commission Exhibit 399, or CE399 for short.
The bullet found on a stretcher at Parkland Hospital in the first hour after JFK was admitted for treatment is important because ballistics linked it to having been fired from Oswald’s Mannlicher-Carcano rifle.
The bullet is controversial in that the precise stretcher on which the bullet was found is not certain, and because the Parkland Hospital employees who found the bullet were unable to identify with certainty that it was the CE399 bullet.
As a footnote, without explanation the Warren Commission dropped Hoover’s suggestion the pristine bullet had fallen on a stretcher as a result of massaging JFK’s heart on the way to the hospital.
For one, Jackie Kennedy and a brain-dead JFK remained in the back seat of the limo on the way to the hospital; no one massaged JFK’s heart.
And second, Specter had to dismiss the idea the pristine bullet dropped from JFK’s body because if the pristine bullet remained in JFK’s body, then it couldn’t have been the single bullet that hit both JFK and Connally.
The Commission never seems to have considered the possibility the bullet was planted.
If this possibility had been considered, then the Commission might have realized that some of the evidence might be “fake” and could have been deliberately faked.
At the time when the planting could have been done, it was not known if any other ballistics evidence survived the shooting.
In the process of arranging the stretchers to allow someone to use a restroom along the wall, Tomlinson bumped the wall with the stretcher he took off the elevator.
Tomlinson assumed the bullet had been lodged under the edge of a mat on top of the stretcher.
Despite repeated attempts, Specter was unable to establish that the bullet was found on the stretcher Tomlinson rode with in the elevator, or that Tomlinson had any idea where the bullet may have come from.
To Specter’s obvious frustration, Tomlinson testified the bullet came from the stretcher already in the hall on the ground floor, a stretcher Tomlinson knew even less about than the stretcher he found in the elevator when he entered.
Making Tomlinson’s testimony even weaker, at no point while Tomlinson was under oath did Specter show Tomlinson CE399, or a photograph of CE399, to ask him if it was the bullet he found on the stretcher at Parkland Hospital.
Just to be clear, the interview under oath ended without Tomlinson making a positive ID of CE399 as the bullet he found.
Wright, the personnel director of security for the Dallas County Hospital District and a former police detective with the Dallas Police Department.
Commission Exhibit 1024, CE1024 for short, is a note from FBI Special Agent E Johnson, dated 7:30 m. on November 22, 1963.
The attached expended bullet was received by me about 5 min. prior to Mrs.
It was found on one of the stretchers located in the emergency ward of the hospital.
Also on this same stretcher was rubber gloves, a stethoscope and other doctor’s paraphernalia.
It could not be determined who had used this stretcher or if President Kennedy had occupied it.
An exhaustive search of the documentary record failed to produce any photograph of the bullet found on the stretcher before the FBI removed the bullet from Parkland Hospital.
FBI Special Agent Johnson made no note of the two bloody sheets Tomlinson noticed on the stretcher he found in the hall on the ground floor.
According to Commission Exhibit 2011 , on June 12, 1964, FBI Special Agent Bardwell Odum showed Tomlinson and Wright CE399 and both stated that while the bullet looked like the bullet Tomlinson found on the stretcher, neither of them positively identify CE399 as the bullet.
Wright told Josiah Thompson, author of the 1967 book Six Seconds in Dallas, that the bullet Tomlinson found on the stretcher on November 22, 1963, had a pointed tip, which obviously did not meet the description of the rounded tip of CE399.
Wright reached into his desk and produced for Thompson a pointed .30 caliber round he claimed looked like the bullet Tomlinson found.
Thompson was so impressed by the discrepancy that he photographed Wright’s pointed-tip round next to a key to give an indication of size.
Clearly, the pointed .30 caliber round Wright produced is shorter than CE399 and bears a pointed tip distinct from CE399’s rounded tip.
Thompson also researched and ruled out that the stretcher on which Tomlinson found the bullet was the stretcher used for either President Kennedy or Governor Connally.
When the presidential limo arrived at Parkland, JFK was taken to Trauma Room 1, where he was pronounced dead at 1:00m., approximately the same time Tomlinson testified he found the bullet.
JFK’s body remained on his stretcher until 1:45m., when the casket arrived.
Connally was taken to Trauma Room 2 on a stretcher and then wheeled into Operating Room 5.
The stretcher was wheeled out of Operating Room 5, placed on an elevator, and returned to the ER at approximately 1:00m., as Connally was being placed under anesthesia in Operating Room 5.
Again, Tomlinson testified he found the bullet at approximately 1:00m. on a stretcher located on the ground floor that was already in the hall when his elevator door opened.
In the final report, the Warren Commission wrote, “Although Tomlinson was not certain whether the bullet came from the Connally stretcher or the adjacent one, the Commission concluded that the bullet came from the Governor’s stretcher.
Clearly, the Warren Commission wanted CE399 to have been found on Connally’s stretcher because that would support the single-bullet theory that assumes CE399 wounded Connally after wounding JFK in the back and neck.
Finding CE399 on Connally’s stretcher would eliminate the problem that no bullet had been found in either body.
The Warren Commission’s logic that because CE399 was not found on JFK’s stretcher it had to be found on Connally’s stretcher is shaky when we realize that four other emergency cases were admitted to Parkland Memorial Hospital in a space of twenty minutes, with two of these patients bleeding profusely.
At 12:38m., a woman identified as Helen Guycion was admitted to Parkland Hospital, bleeding from the mouth.
Sixteen minutes later, Arnold Fuller, a two-and-a-half-year-old child, was admitted with a deep cut on his chin.
Secret Service Agent Andrew Berger, in a memorandum placed into evidence with the Warren Commission’s Report as Commission Exhibit 1024, described a bizarre incident where a man claiming to be an FBI agent tried to force his way into the ER trauma room where JFK was being treated.
Just as we began to ask for his credentials, he abruptly attempted to enter the emergency room and had to be forcibly restrained by us.
Josiah Thompson pointed out that two witnesses to the Warren Commission testified to having seen Jack Ruby at Parkland Hospital at about the time JFK’s death was announced.
A nightclub owner with connections to the mob, he had a habit of schmoozing with police to make sure his business was not harassed, especially as Ruby’s Carousel Club featured burlesque-like strip-tease dancers.
It was not unusual to see Ruby milling around the heart of the action anytime the police radio announced something of special interest was happening in the city.
Seth Kantor, a Scripps Howard newspaper writer, testified to the Warren Commission on June 2, 1964, that he saw Ruby near the entrance to Parkland Hospital immediately after the JFK shooting.
The lone assassin theory came to hinge on the Warren Commission proving the near-pristine bullet CE399 struck both JFK and Governor John Connally.
However, the Warren Commission’s failure to consider the possibility CE399 was planted on the stretcher at Parkland Hospital, possibly by Jack Ruby, suggests the Warren Commission was primarily interested in CE399 because it could be made to fit the predetermined theory that Lee Harvey Oswald was the lone assassin.
Robert Roeder Shaw, the chief of thoracic surgery at Parkland Hospital in Dallas, operated on Connally’s obvious and serious chest wound.
Testifying to the Warren Commission on April 21, 1964, Shaw established that he had personal experience with approximately one thousand cases involving bullet wounds, both at Parkland Hospital and during World War II, when he served as chief of thoracic surgery in Paris, France.
Shaw testified that a bullet entered Connally’s back just below his right shoulder blade, proceeded to shatter Connally’s fifth rib, and exited just below Connally’s right nipple.
When asked if one or two bullets had caused the injuries to Connally, Shaw testified that he assumed at the time the wounds to Connelly’s chest, wrist, and thigh had been caused by the same bullet, although he also considered it possible that a second or even a third bullet might have caused the wrist and thigh wounds.
With his focus on making sure Connelly could breathe, Shaw gave Connelly’s wrist and thigh wounds only cursory thought or examination.
Warren Commission counsel Arlen Specter then asked Shaw whether he believed CE399, the pristine bullet found on the stretcher at Parkland Hospital, could have caused all three of Connally’s wounds.
For CE399 to have emerged in near-pristine shape after having inflicted the wounds Shaw observed and treated on Connally was simply not credible.
The original, pristine weight of this bullet before it was fired was approximately 160—161 grains.
The Commission reported the weight of the bullet recovered on the stretcher at 158. grains in Parkland Hospital.
This single-bullet theory asks us to believe that this bullet went through seven layers of skin, tough, elastic, resistant skin.
I just can’t believe that this bullet had the force to do what have demanded of it; and I don’t think they have really stopped to think out carefully what they have asked of this bullet, for the simple reason that they still do not understand the resistant nature of human skin to bullets.
X-rays showed that there were more than three grains of metal from the bullet lodged in the wrist, ruling out the possibility that CE399 was the bullet that hit Connelly’s wrist.
James Humes, the presiding pathologist at JFK’s autopsy at Bethesda Naval Hospital, also hesitated to agree that CE399 was responsible for Connally’s injuries.
William Osborne hand at least five bullet fragments to Bell that he had removed from Connally’s arm.
Audrey Bell, operating room nurse, gave the bullet fragments to Bob Dolan of the Dallas Police Department, who gave them to Captain Fritz of the Dallas Police Department, who transferred the fragments to the Dallas Police Department crime lab.
Who received the bullet fragments at the FBI and when are not indicated, leaving open the question whether the bullet fragments nurse Bell placed in a vial in the Parkland Hospital operating room are the same fragments that ended up in the FBI crime laboratory in Washington.
The chain of custody of the Connally bullet fragments was so poorly established there was no chance any of these bullet fragments would ever be introduced in court.
Assassination researcher Russell Kent has catalogued fifteen different references in the Warren Commission Reports and the House Select Committee on Assassinations that itemize various bullet fragments supposedly taken from Connally’s wrist.
The historical record of the bullet fragments taken from Connally’s wrist is woefully inadequate as the type of forensic documentation needed for these various bullet fragments to serve any purpose, including being introduced as evidence into a court proceeding to establish fact.
Again, the possibility remains open that only some of the bullet fragments removed from Connally’s wrist made their way into one or more of the various fifteen different exhibit references Kent catalogued.
The answer is inevitably a resounding “no,” judging from the JFK assassination medical record, as documented by the Warren Committee or the House Select Committee on Assassinations.
The doctors at Parkland Hospital were interested first in making sure Connally’s life was secure and second in operating on him as quickly and efficiently as possible so as to stabilize his medical condition and increase his chances of healing.
But when the victim was the governor of Texas, shot in what turned out to be the assassination of the president of the United States, it is remarkable that medical considerations completely outweighed legal considerations in Connally’s emergency medical treatment.
Granted, the primary concern of the doctors at Parkland Hospital was the care of Connelly as a patient.
Yet, in the most important criminal case in twentieth-century United States history, the forensic importance of the metal fragments in Connally’s body could not have been higher.
The record shows that while the Parkland Hospital physicians did their job attending to Connally’s wounds, no similar attention was given to the legal implications of the medical evidence they were encountering while operating on their patient.
Even more remarkable was the number of law enforcement personnel Parkland Hospital allowed to be in the operating room as surgeons were treating Connally’s wounds.
They appear to have been lax regarding the importance of preserving for trial the ballistic evidence extracted from Connally’s body during the operation.
Once the doctors removed the bullet fragments from Connally’s wrist, the chain-of-custody description shows law enforcement procedures— tracking the bullet fragments from the hospital to the Dallas Police Department to the FBI—were sloppy at best.
Debate continues today regarding how much lead was removed from Connally’s body, where those bullet fragments ended up, and how much lead was left in Connally’s body.
So the debate over bullet fragments and the so-called “magic bullet” continues.
Logically, those arguing CE399 is the same bullet that hit JFK in the back and neck and hit Connally in the chest, the wrist, and the thigh are bound to assume that all bullet fragments have been identified and measured precisely, so as to conclude the mass missing from CE399 is not exceeded by the bullet fragments that occurred in the shooting.
Connally died in 1993, and a frantic effort to get family permission to extract bullet fragments that remained in his body thirty years after the JFK assassination was unsuccessful.
The Justice Department refused to intervene, and Connally was buried with bullet fragments from the JFK assassination still in his body.
Since JFK was pronounced dead in the operating room, the doctors at Parkland Hospital never performed surgery in the attempt to save his life.
Therefore, they never removed or measured bullet fragments remaining in JFK’s brain and skull.
Since the head wound was obviously a fatal wound, they had no reason to find or treat any other wounds.
While it is understandable that no precise determination appears to have been made at Parkland Hospital regarding what bullet fragments remained in JFK’s body at the time of his death, no precise determination appears to have been made during the subsequent autopsy at Bethesda.
Moreover, given the massive nature of JFK’s head wounds, bullet fragments were widely scattered throughout the limousine, possibly even causing the fractures observed on the limousine windshield after the shooting had occurred.
JFK skull and brain matter splattered out of the limousine, hitting the motorcycle officers trailing the limousine and Secret Service Agent Clint Hill as he jumped onto the limousine from behind.
Yet, immediately following the assassination law enforcement officers appear to have made no attempt to precisely gather bullet fragments from the street, from bystanders, from the motorcycle officers, or from Agent Clint Hill.
Remarkably, film footage taken at Parkland Hospital after the assassination shows government officials actually cleaning the limousine with a bucket of water and cloth rags to remove the blood, skull parts, and brain debris from the limo’s interior, with no apparent regard for the evidence.
Yet, not only was the limousine cleaned at Parkland, the limousine was sent for repairs before forensic experts had a chance to collect evidence.
Another problem with the investigation and ballistic analysis is the lack of deformity observed in CE399.
Assassination researcher Josiah Thompson found the lack of deformity in the bullet CE399 to be a major problem.
Thompson argued in his 1967 book, Six Seconds in Dallas, that he was not convinced the weight loss evidenced in the bullet fragments precluded CE399 from being the bullet that wounded Connally.
On April 14, 1964, various members of the Warren Commission staff arranged a viewing of the Zapruder film with two autopsy surgeons and two experts from the Army’s Wound Ballistics Branch at Edgewood Arsenal.
Such a conclusion, if embraced by the Warren Commission, would have been lethal to the single-bullet theory.
Light and Dolce expressed themselves very strongly that the bullet recovered from Connally’s stretcher could not have broken his radius without having suffered more distortion.
The impact badly smashed the front end of the resulting bullet, shown in the Warren Commission’s report as CE856.
Oliver had another bullet fired through an anesthetized goat to simulate 66 percent of the resistance encountered by a bullet through Connally’s chest.
As a result, the projectile was badly squeezed along a longitudinal axis, as seen in CE853.
A third bullet was fired into a skull, with the resulting two pieces of the bullet being scarcely recognizable, as seen in CE857.
Cyril Wecht the X-rays of Connally’s chest and wrist together with multiple close-up photographs of CE399.
Wecht left no doubt that his conclusion was that the single-bullet theory was nonsense.
I do not think that it could have been possible for the bullet shown as CE399 to have been a bullet that traversed the bodies of both President Kennedy and Governor Connally.
I think it’s something which I could not accept, that this bullet which is not fragmented, not deformed or mutilated, with just a slight defect at the tail could have inflicted this amount of damage.
It just does not seem to fit with any of the cases I’ve seen of what happens to pellets after they have struck bone.
Still, despite admitting the ammunition manufactured by Western Cartridge for the Mannlicher-Carcano rifle had no consistency of composition, Guinn insisted fragments allegedly from Connally’s wrist came from CE399.
Furthermore the FBI fragments are now ‘missing’ and their weights unknown.
Professor Ronald White points out that while Guinn concluded the CE842 fragments came from CE399 because they were similar in chemical composition, CE842 contained 2,400 percent more sodium and 1,100 percent more chlorine.
White also noted that to confirm the single-bullet theory, it is necessary to link CE399 with Kennedy’s neck and back wounds.
But since no bullet fragments were removed from Kennedy’s neck and back wounds even at the autopsy, it is impossible to link CE399 to JFK with certainty, even if CE399 matched precisely the CE842 fragments in chemical composition.
A spokesman for Western Cartridge declared the reliability of such ammunition would be questionable today.
JFK’S NECK AND BACK WOUNDS The ER team at Parkland Hospital in Dallas and the autopsy team at Bethesda Naval Hospital produced medical records that describe two completely different views of JFK’s wounds.
Because the ER team focused exclusively on stabilizing vital signs, they did not turn over the President’s body, and therefore did not notice another bullet wound located in the President’s upper back.
Hence, we have the makings of one of the most incredible foul-ups in medical history.
The Parkland physicians didn’t know of the back wound and the Bethesda autopsy team did not know that the tracheostomy incision concealed a bullet wound.
After realizing JFK had been shot, the motorcade rushed from Dealey Plaza directly to Parkland Hospital.
Once the presidential limousine arrived, the ER team at Parkland went into immediate action implementing trauma efforts to resuscitate JFK, despite realizing almost immediately that the president’s massive head wounds made their efforts to save his life futile.
Once JFK was pronounced dead, a scuffle arose between the Secret Service and local Dallas authorities who insisted the crime committed in Dallas had to be investigated and prosecuted in Dallas.
At issue was whether or not the autopsy should be done in Dallas, supervised by Texas law enforcement personnel under the jurisdiction of Texas criminal law.
Thus, the jurisdiction for the investigation and prosecution of the crime fell under the jurisdiction of Texas law.
In 1963 there was no law making it a federal crime to assassinate the president.
Truthfully, Jackie Kennedy and the White House had no authority to remove JFK’s body from Dallas.
An autopsy should have been performed in Dallas under Texas law and a criminal investigation should have been undertaken in Dallas under Texas law.
Under Texas and federal statutes at the time, JFK’s body should have remained in Dallas for autopsy, and the criminal investigation and trial should have been handled locally.
Yet, the White House and the Secret Service won the argument in a confrontation that almost ended up in a fistfight.
A casket was ordered to fly JFK’s body back to Washington, and the Secret Service quietly took LBJ back to Love Field.
Once the casket arrived, the Secret Service made sure JFK’s body was whisked from Parkland Hospital and driven directly to Love Field where it was loaded aboard Air Force One.
Chaos would perhaps best describe the way JFK’s body left Dallas, and controversy would perhaps best describe the way the JFK autopsy was conducted.
The hurriedly assembled autopsy team in Washington was not given the luxury of even a single night to prepare.
Typically an autopsy team takes time to research the case and plan the autopsy based on reports of the crime scene so they can produce reliable and comprehensive medical evidence that would be admissible in court.
Jackie Kennedy insisted that since JFK was a navy officer, the autopsy should take place at Bethesda Naval Hospital, thus overruling administration officials who scheduled the autopsy to be conducted at the army’s Walter Reed Hospital.
In the confusion at both Dallas Parkland Hospital and at Bethesda Naval Hospital, no one imagined junior counsel Arlen Specter would virtually singlehandedly take over configuring the medical evidence into a legal argument to frame Lee Harvey Oswald as the victim before the official Warren Commission government inquiry into the assassination.
In doing so, Specter concocted his single-bullet theory in order to deflect consideration of a conspiracy, and in the process pinned the blame on the conveniently deceased Lee Harvey Oswald as the sole gunman responsible for shooting the president.
Lee Harvey Oswald’s murder brought the criminal investigation to a screeching halt and obviated the need for a criminal prosecution.
Yet the problem remained that Specter’s singlebullet theory depended upon establishing medical proof that CE399 passed from the entrance wound in JFK’s back, through JFK’s body, to exit in JFK’s throat and this theory was never considered or pursued by the medical team at either Dallas Parkland Hospital or Bethesda Naval Hospital.
The doctors at Parkland assumed JFK had been shot from the front, while the doctors at Bethesda concluded JFK had been shot from the rear.
Only after Arlen Specter proposed the single-bullet theory did it become important to prove the bullet that wounded JFK’s back and neck was the same bullet that wounded Connally.
Both men had to have been wounded by the same bullet, or, given the Warren Commission’s conclusion only three shots could had been fired by the Mannlicher-Carcano bolt-action rifle in the time available for shooting, there had to have been a second shooter.
If the throat wound was determined to be an entrance wound, there had to be a second shooter positioned to the front of the motorcade.
Specter’s entire argument came to rest on the hypothesis the bullet that entered JFK’s back exited through his throat and went on to cause all Connally’s wounds, despite the fact neither the medical evidence ascertained in the ER at Parkland nor the medical evidence ascertained in the autopsy at Bethesda supported that theory.
Arlen Specter was out of luck once he realized neither the doctors at Parkland nor Bethesda had established a bullet path through JFK’s body.
That was a lynchpin for the Warren Commission’s central conclusion that Oswald was the lone gunman responsible for gunning down JFK, but it did not deter Specter.
Lacking the medical evidence to prove the point, Specter resorted to elaborate diagrams of various assassination reconstructions to argue the hypothetical case that a trajectory could be established making it possible for a single bullet to injure both men.
Despite medical and ballistics evidence, in the end the Warren Commission resorted to arguing it was possible the bullet entered JFK’s back, exited his throat, and then continued on its trajectory to hit Connally in the back, lungs, wrist, and thigh.
The Commission had to succeed in their argument otherwise the effort to establish that Lee Harvey Oswald was the lone assassin would fail.
If there were more than one shooter, that would mean there was a conspiracy to assassinate JFK, which would instigate a public outcry for an investigation.
The Warren Commission sought to avoid that because no one knew how high up and widespread a conspiracy might go.
As long as Lee Harvey Oswald remained the only viable suspect, the case could be closed as a horrible accident of history.
No doctor at Parkland or Bethesda ever thought to postulate a single-bullet theory.
And JFK was long buried at Arlington Cemetery before anyone realized the single-bullet theory would depend on medical questions the doctors at Parkland and Bethesda had never thought to ask and on ballistic evidence establishing a bullet path from the back wound to the neck wound that the doctors at Parkland and Bethesda had never thought to look for.
The simple truth was the doctors examining JFK at Parkland and at Bethesda never thought to connect the bullet paths through Kennedy’s body.
President Lyndon B Johnson and the Justice Department used the Warren Commission to create an official government narrative explaining why and how JFK was killed.
The transcripts to the testimony provide insight into the leading nature of the investigation and the desire to force a particular outcome.
But if we take a look at the facts, the Warren Commission largely ignored how the doctors at Parkland Hospital, the first to see JFK’s wounds, nearly unanimously describe their findings in contradiction to the Warren Commission’s conclusions.
According to the doctors at Parkland hospital, JFK suffered an entrance wound in his neck.
At a press conference held at Parkland Hospital on November 22, 1963, a newsman asked Dr.
Malcolm Perry, the physician who had performed the tracheotomy on JFK, whether or not the wound to JFK’s throat was an entrance wound.
The wound appeared to be an entrance wound in the front of the throat; yes, that is correct.
It could have been the head or there could have been a second wound of the head.
Wicker also reported JFK had “a massive, gaping wound” in the back and on the right side of his head and that Parkland physicians said immediately after the shooting that it was impossible to tell if JFK’s wounds were caused by one or two bullets.
The Warren Commission, the Authorities, and the Report, is considered the definitive guide to the Warren Commission testimony.
Charles James Carrico explained why the back wound went unnoticed at Parkland Hospital.
No, sir; at least initially there was no time to examine the president completely for all small wounds.
As we said before, this was an acutely ill patient and all we had time to do was to determine what things were life-threatening right then and attempt to resuscitate him and after which a more complete examination would be carried out, and we didn’t have time to examine for other wounds.
As we said initially, this was an acute emergency situation and there was not time initially and when the cardiac massage was done this prevented any further examination during this time this was being done.
After the President was pronounced dead, his wife was there, he was the President, and we felt certainly that complete examination would be carried out and no one had the heart, I believe, to examine him there.
In his testimony to the Warren Commission on March 9, 1964, Secret Service Agent Roy Kellerman described how he discovered JFK’s back wound in the morgue at Bethesda Naval Hospital the evening of the assassination just prior to the start of the autopsy.
And with the part of the skull removed, and the hole in the throat, nobody was aware until they lifted him up that there was a hole in his shoulder.
Unfortunately, Kellerman did not get questioned on this point and he did not return to explain the comment.
But the comment suggests a sequence of shots that would separate JFK’s back wound from his throat wound, providing additional support to the hypothesis the back and throat wounds were separate wounds.
Humes examined the back wound and found it to be a shallow entry wound that had penetrated less than an inch into JFEK’s back.
Navy Commander J Thornton Boswell, attending the autopsy, found the depth of JFK’s back wound could be probed up to only the first or second knuckle of the little finger, a depth of about two inches.
No path through JFK’s body could be established for the missile, and X-rays failed to detect any bullets yet remaining in JFK’s body.
Inasmuch as no complete bullet of any size could be located in the brain area and likewise no bullet could be located in the back or any other area of the body as determined by total body X-rays and physical inspection revealing there was no point of exit, the individuals performing the autopsy were at a loss to explain why they could find no bullets.
Claw Shaw was a New Orleans businessman who was the only person brought to trial in connection with the JFK assassination.
He was acquitted, but during the trial United States Army physician, Lt.
Pierre A Finck, a participant in the JFK autopsy at Bethesda, admitted that military brass present in the Bethesda autopsy room interfered with the doctors conducting the autopsy.
He claimed military brass actually stopped the doctors from performing procedures they felt were necessary to determine the exact type and nature of wounds JFK suffered.
Alvin Oser, one of the chief prosecutors working on the trial under the direction of District Attorney Jim Garrison, cross-examined Finck.
Finck had testified to the Warren Commission that he was confident that the bullet which hit JFK’s back had passed through his neck and continued on to injure Connally, even though he believed a bullet doing this much damage would have fragmented or deformed.
Finck told the Warren Commission he was completely confident that JFK’s wounds were exit wounds, consistent with JFK being shot from behind.
Oh, yes, there were Admirals, and when you are a Lieutenant Colonel in the Army you just follow orders, and at the end of the autopsy we were specifically told — as I recall it, it was by Admiral Kenney, the Surgeon General of the Navy — this is subject to verification — we were specifically told not to discuss the case.
There are many factors influencing the ability to talk or not after a shot.
Your Honor, I would like an answer from the Colonel and I would ask the Court so to direct.
I was told that the family wanted an examination of the head, as I recall, the head and the chest, but the prosecutors in this autopsy didn’t remove the organs of the neck, to my recollection.
From what I recall I looked at the trachea, there was a tracheotomy wound the best I can remember, but I didn’t dissect or remove these organs.
Your Honor, I would ask Your Honor to direct the witness to answer my question.
Because we were told to examine the head and the chest cavity, and that doesn’t include removal of the organs of the neck.
I was interested in the track and I had observed the conditions of bruising between the point of entry in the back of the neck and the point of exit at the front of the neck, which is entirely compatible with the bullet path.
Finck was perhaps the most highly qualified forensic pathologist to attend the JFK autopsy in Bethesda.
If he had been allowed to dissect the back and neck wounds to his satisfaction, it is highly likely Finck would have concluded the neck wound was an entry wound and the back wound was an unconnected entry wound, and he likely would have rejected the lone-gun hypothesis.
Had Finck been allowed to complete his work, his conclusions would have been devastating to any attempt to frame Lee Harvey Oswald as the sole assassin.
Military brass at the autopsy intervened to stop his work most likely because politics dictated they do so.
Finck acquiesced to Arlen Specter’s hypothetical questions that all the wounds seen in JFK’s body could have been caused by shots from the rear because politics dictated him to do so.
As a junior military officer Finck did not feel he had the authority to countermand orders.
J Thornton Boswell, another of the pathologists attending the JFK autopsy, who was in charge of the autopsy.
Boswell explained to the review board [Mr Eardley from the Justice Department] was really upset.
The DOJ officials in New Orleans showed Boswell a transcript of Finck’s testimony and Boswell spent all night reviewing the testimony.
This was an answer the Justice Department obviously felt could not be allowed to stand on the record without a rebuttal.
If Oswald was to be framed as the lone-gun assassin, the hypothetical possibility counsel Arlen Specter continually posed to medical witnesses that a path from the back wound to the neck wound could have been established if only it had been examined, had to remain open.
THE MAGIC BULLET TO THE RESCUE Now, to return to the autopsy, a message from Dallas also changed the course of the examination being undertaken by the physicians in the autopsy room at Bethesda Naval Hospital.
While the autopsy was yet in progress on the night of the assassination, Dr.
Humes at Bethesda received information that a bullet had been found on a stretcher at Parkland Hospital.
That information arrived with the delivery of a portion of JFK’s skull that apparently had also been delivered from Dallas.
Humes stated that the pattern was clear that the one bullet had entered the President’s back and had worked its way out of the body during external cardiac massage and that a second high-velocity bullet had entered the rear of the skull and had fragmented prior to exit through the top of the skull.
Humes had no idea Arlen Specter would later expect him to declare the back wound as an entrance wound and the throat wound as an exit wound.
At the autopsy on the night of November 22, 1963, news that a bullet had been found at Parkland Hospital was “a godsend” that “reduced the high stress level taking its toll” on the doctors “who were frantically searching for a missile in Kennedy’s body,” noted assassination researcher Jerry McKnight.
The problem is there was no chain of evidence to link CE399 to JFK’s back wound.
There is no proof the stretcher on which CE399 was found was a stretcher ever used to hold JFK’s body.
Specter would also later argue that the pristine “magic bullet,” identified by the Warren Commission as CE399, did fall out nearly unscathed, but only after it exited JFK’s throat and passed through Connally’s chest, fractured his right wrist, and punctured his thigh, leaving a small fragment in Connally’s thigh bone.
Sylvia Meagher pointed out that Humes at the autopsy did not even realize the throat wound involved a bullet wound, thinking the throat wound was a tracheotomy and nothing more.
Clearly, the observers at the autopsy took away the impression that the bullet in the back had penetrated only a short distance, without exiting from the body, and that the surgeons believed that the missile had worked its way out of the body during external cardiac massage.
Humes did not come to believe the bullet had passed through and exited from the body until at least the next day, when he learned from Dr.
Perry at Parkland Hospital that the President had arrived there with a bullet wound at the Adam’s apple which had been obliterated during the tracheotomy.
That was a problem for Arlen Specter and the Warren Commission, because as we have noted, an entrance wound in the throat and an entrance wound in the back meant there had to be two shooters, one in front of the limousine and the other in back of the limousine.
GOVERNOR CONNALLY SPEAKS Journalist Martin Agronsky interviewed Governor John Connally from his Parkland Memorial Hospital room on November 27, 1963, five days after the JFK assassination.
And then we had just turned the corner , we heard a shot; I turned to my left—I was sitting in the jump seat.
I turned to my left to look in the back seat—the President had slumped.
Almost simultaneously, as I turned, I was hit and I knew I had been hit badly.
Then there was a third shot and the President was hit again and we thought then very seriously.
I had still retained consciousness but the President had slumped in Mrs.
After the third shot, the next thing that occurred—I was conscious, the Secret Service man, of course, the chauffeur had pulled out of the line, they said, “Get out of here”; on the radios they said, “Get us to a hospital immediately” and we pulled out, of course, immediately, as fast as we could go and got to the hospital.
In the space of a few seconds, it is unbelievable what can happen, Martin.
On April 21, 1964, Connally testified to the Warren Commission, telling essentially the same story—that he was hit by the second shot.
Governor Connally: We had just made the turn ... when I heard what I thought was a shot.
I instinctively turned to my right because the sound appeared to come from over my right shoulder, so I turned to look back over my right shoulder, and I saw nothing unusual except just people in the crowd, but I did catch the President in the corner of my eye, and I was interested, because once I heard the shot in my own mind I identified it as a rifle shot, and I immediately—the only thought that crossed my mind was that this is an assassination attempt.
So I looked, failing to see him, I was turning to look back over my left shoulder into the back seat, but I never got that far in my turn.
I got about in the position I am now in facing you, looking a little bit to the left of center, and then I felt like somebody had hit me in the back.
Again my trend of thought just happened to be, I suppose along this line.
I knew it when I just looked down and I was covered with blood, and the thought immediately passed through my mind that there were either two or three people involved or more in this or someone was shooting with an automatic rifle.
These were just thoughts that went through my mind because of the rapidity of these two, of the first shot plus the blow that I took, and I knew I had been hit, and I immediately assumed, because of the amount of blood, and, in fact, that it had obviously passed through my chest that I had probably been fatally shot.
So, I merely doubled up, and then turned to my right again and began to—I just sat there, and Mrs.
She was sitting, of course, on the jump seat, so I reclined with my head in her lap, conscious all the time, and with my eyes open; and then, of course, the third shot sounded, and I heard the shot very clearly.
I heard the shot hit something, and I assumed again—it never entered my mind that it ever hit anybody but the President.
He was emphatic about the time frame, even when under crossexamination Specter repeatedly asked the same question slightly rephrased each time he asked it.
Governor Connally: | tured to the right both to see, because it was an instinctive movement, because that is where the sound came from, but even more important, I thought it was a rifle shot.
I immediately thought of an assassination attempt, and I turned to see if I could see the President, if he was all right.
Failing to see him over my right shoulder, I turned to look over my left shoulder.
Connally testified he did not hear any shots from the direction of the overpass ahead of the limousine.
Nellie Connally, the governor’s wife, testified to the Warren Commission immediately following her husband.
In fact, the receptions had been so good every place that I had showed much restraint by not mentioning something about it before.
It seems to me it was very soon, that I heard a noise, and not being an expert rifleman, I was not aware that it was a rifle.
I turned over my right shoulder and looked back, and saw the President as he had both hands at his neck.
And you are indicating with your own hands, two hands crossing over gripping your own neck.
The controversy over which bullet hit Connally intensified in November 1966, when Life Magazine arranged to have Connally inspect enlarged frames from the Zapruder film.
Amid Heightening Controversy about the Warren Report, Governor Connally Examines for ‘Life’ the Assassination Film,” published by Life on November 25, 1966, hit the newsstands on the third anniversary of the assassination.
The multiple-page article featured on the magazine’s cover, contained a full-page photograph of Connally, shown with a magnifying glass held in both hands, bent over a light table to examine enlarged positives of six frames from the Zapruder film displayed for his examination.
At frame 222, as the limousine pulls clear of the highway sign, Governor Connally emerges, still turned to his right.
When President Kennedy can be seen, a sixth of a second later, at frame 225, President Kennedy emerges from the highway sign and it is clear he has been hit.
Beginning at frame 225, Governor Connally turns his head leftward until, in 228, he faces straight ahead through frame 231, the last frame Life showed on a page-and-a-half spread featuring frames from the Zapruder film.
Connally told Life he believed, as best he could judge it, that the bullet hit him in frame 234, nine frames and one-half second later than the Warren Commission said he had been hit.
In the interview with Life, Nellie Connally was equally firm on her testimony.
To the end of their lives, both John Connally and his wife Nellie held to their original recollections of the tragic sequence of shots on November 22, 1963.
SPECTER’S SINGLE-BULLET THEORY The Warren Commission chose to disregard the testimony of John and Nellie Connally because the single-bullet theory proposed by counsel Arlen Specter required that JFK and Connally had to have been hit by the same shot.
This directly contradicts the statement by both John and Nellie Connally that they saw JFK react to the neck wound before the shot that hit Connally in the back.
In taking testimony from witnesses, Specter had pressed the medical doctors not trained in the fine points of legal testimony to answer hypothetical questions.
But competent lawyers would be expected to coach their clients never to answer such questions in court.
Hypothetical questions always propose a fictional possibility, or counterfactual conclusion, in which even the most outrageous outcomes typically cannot be ruled out.
Regarding Nellie Connally’s testimony, the Warren Commission grasped the Specter-postulated counterfactual as if it were proven fact.
Specter hung his single-bullet interpretation on the assumption that Connally had a “delayed reaction” to having been shot, allowing for the possibility Connally misinterpreted that the first shot missed and the second shot might have been the one that hit both JFK and Connally.
I have heard reports, and have been told by my professional associates of any number of instances where people received penetrating wounds in various portions of the body and have only the sensation of a slight discomfort or slight slap or some other minor difficulty from such a missile wound.
I am sure he would be aware that something happened to him, but that he was shot.
It could very easily be one of some type of an injury—I mean the awareness that he had been struck by a missile.
I don’t know, but people have been drilled through with a missile and didn’t know it,86 Dr.
Humes in his next answer blew Specter’s single-bullet theory out of the water.
Humes testified it was “extremely unlikely” the nearly pristine CE399 struck Connally’s thigh because X-rays show metallic fragments in the thigh bone.
The Commission conveniently overlooked that comment and focused on the possibility of a delayed reaction to a gunshot wound.
The Governor did not even know that he had been struck in the wrist or in the thigh until he regained consciousness in the hospital the next day.
Moreover, he testified that he did not hear what he thought was the second shot, although he did hear a subsequent shot, which coincided with the shattering of the President’s head.
One possibility, therefore, would be a sequence in which the Governor heard the first shot, did not immediately feel the penetration of the bullet, then felt the delayed reaction of the impact on his back, later heard the shot which shattered the President’s head, and then lost consciousness without hearing a third shot which might have occurred later,27 “Tt is frustrating and ironic that the Zapruder film does not enable the viewer to pinpoint the exact moment of impact of the bullet in the President’s back, or of the bullet that struck the Governor,” Sylvia Meagher wrote.
However, to establish that the same bullet hit Connally, who was sitting in the limousine’s jump Seat several inches below JFK, he would have to allow a downward trajectory.
CE385 is inconsistent with the testimony of the doctors at both Parkland and Bethesda and with autopsy photographs that place JFK’s back wound considerably lower on the back, down at least an inch or two from the neck.
The drawing was controversial because it showed the bullet trajectory on a downward angle when the natural assumption and the available medical evidence of JFK wounds suggest that a line drawn from a back entrance wound to a neck exit would be on an upward bullet trajectory.
To achieve this affect, Specter had the drawing made to show the point where the bullet entered JFK’s back higher than where it actually did enter.
Specter also drew the attention of the commissioners to photographs showing JFK’s suit jacket was bunched up in the back so as to explain why the bullet holes observed in JFK’s shirt and suit coat were lower down on the back where he argued the bullet entered.
Three important photographs taken instants before JFK was wounded the first time, supported Specter’s argument that JFK’s suit jacket was bunched up in back at the time of the shooting.
Yet all three photographs show JFK sitting upright, such that a bullet hitting him in the back an inch or more below the neck would have had an upward trajectory to exit JFK’s neck.
JFK is clearly seen sitting in a normal posture with his head upright as he observed bystanders along Elm Street on the right side of the limo.
Betzner’s photo shows JFK sitting upright, with his head held upright and JFK looking right.
Willis, a World War II Army Air Corp veteran, was at Pearl Harbor the day the Japanese attacked.
From his military and hunting experience, Willis immediately recognized the first shot as a gunshot.
His photograph, corresponding to Zapruder frame 202, shows Kennedy’s limo from the rear, approaching the Stemmons Freeway sign.
Kennedy can be seen sitting upright, his head held upright, with his gaze turned slightly to the right as the limo approached the Stemmons Freeway “Keep Right” road sign and JFK looks to his right at the bystanders on Elm Street.
In the photo, JFK’s head is clearly upright as he looks slightly to the right.
There is no doubt Kennedy is sitting upright, with the entry point on his back clearly being lower than where Kennedy’s neck wound was found.
The photo makes it obvious that any bullet passing through JFK’s body from the back to the neck would have had to have been on an upward trajectory.
So, a careful analysis of the Betzner and Willis photographs suggests a shot hitting Kennedy three to four inches down on the right side of his back would have passed through his body on a slightly upward trajectory, not the downward trajectory required by the single-bullet theory.
Various documents, including JFK’s death certificate, reveal that the back wound was located at the third thoracic vertebrae, which would place the bullet wound some three to four inches from the base of the neck.
This evidence, plus the three photographs taken at approximately the instant the first shot was fired, suggests that JFK’s suit coat bunched up in back, but not bunched so high as to reverse the bullet trajectory.
At most, the angle would have been horizontal instead of downward, and a horizontal angle would have missed altogether the entry point on Connally’s back near the angle of the shoulder blade.
Two standins are sitting in the JFK limo, one in JFK’s seat and the other in Connally’s seat.
The person in Connally’s seat is wearing the same suit jacket Connally wore when he was shot.
This gave Specter an exact location within which to point the tip of his metal rod.
Examined closely, it is clear Specter had placed the pointer on JFK’s shoulder to make the angle work.
Had Specter placed the pointer four or five inches down on the JFK actor’s back —much closer to the actual location in which the bullet hit JFK, the bullet passing through JFK’s neck according to this photograph would have had to travel an upward trajectory, making it highly likely the bullet would have missed Connally altogether.
First, we have to assume that there is absolutely no deflection in the bullet from the time it left the barrel until the time it exited from the Governor’s body.
That assumes that it has gone through the President’s body and through the Governor’s body.
I feel that physically this would have been possible because of the positions of the Presidential standin and the Governor’s standin , it would be entirely possible for this to have occurred.
However, I myself don’t have any technical evidence, which would permit me to say one way or the other.
In other words, that would support it as far as my rendering an opinion as an expert.
I would certainly say it was possible but I don’t say that it probably occurred because I don’t have the evidence on which to base a statement like that.
We are dealing with hypothetical situations here of placing people in cars from photographs which are not absolutely accurate.
They are as accurate as you can accurately place the people but it isn’t absolute.
Secondly, we are dealing with the fact that we don’t know whether, I don’t know technically, whether there was any deviation in the bullet which struck the President in the back, and exited from his throat.
If there were a few degrees deviation then it may affect my opinion as to whether or not it would have struck the governor.
We are dealing with an assumed fact that the Governor was in front of the President in such a position that he could have taken.
Even if that straight-line hypothetically—tfrom the sixth floor corner window to JFK’s back wound to JFK’s throat wound to Connally’s back wound to Connally’s wrist wound to Connally’s thigh— existed at the moment of the JFK assassination, that still does not prove that a single bullet actually hit both men as speculated.
As a consequence, the single-bullet theory at best assumes the status of a clever solution to a whodunit parlor game —a possible, but not proven explanation for who committed a crime, and how.
As such, the single-bullet theory is not definitive proof Lee Harvey Oswald pulled off the greatest political crime of the twentieth century with an Italian Army World War II surplus rifle he purchased by mail order for a total cost of around twenty dollars, including tax and shipping.
The facts that were established leave us with an unexplained entry wound in JFK’s neck that, by itself, proves the presence of a second shooter from the front.
We are also left with CE399, a pristine bullet that strains credibility by mysteriously appearing at Parkland Hospital and causing massive damage in two adult men without fragmenting or becoming distorted in the process.
With the autopsy failing to establish a bullet path through JFK’s body connecting his back wound with his neck wound, there is no proof whatsoever that CE399 is the missile that wounded both JFK and Governor Connally.
A Sniper Looks at Dealey Plaza, 19949° KEY TO DECIPHERING THE JFK ASSASSINATION is the geography of Dealey Plaza.
During his year in Vietnam, Roberts recalled he had “numerous occasions to line up living, breathing human beings in the crosshairs of my precision Unertl scope and squeeze the trigger of my bolt-action Winchester and send a .30 caliber match-grade round zipping down range.
Roberts concluded that acting alone, even with the precision equipment he used in Vietnam; he doubted he could duplicate the shooting feat the Warren Commission ascribed to Oswald.
Normally, Roberts pointed out, the smallest team would consist of two men, a sniper and a spotter who would double as security.
Even in police SWAT teams, a spotter equipped with a scope or binoculars typically accompanies a marksman.
This was the street on which the motorcade approached Dealey Plaza and Roberts concluded it was his second choice as a zone of engagement.
The sharp angle turn onto Elm meant the limousine would be virtually stopped directly below the sniper’s nest window, affording the sniper a close-range full-body shot at JFK as he sat in the back seat closest to the window.
Once the limousine made the hard left turn from Houston onto Elm, there was no choice but to continue west along Elm until the triple underpass had been reached.
The only part of JFK’s body likely to be visible from the sixth floor corner window, as the limo receded down Elm Street toward the triple underpass, was a distant shot at JFK’s back and shoulders, with the view partly blocked by a tree.
Imagining himself in Oswald’s position, Roberts noted that the “highlow formula,” also known as the minute-of-angle rule, demanded a sniper had to aim low at the range selected to avoid missing the target by shooting high by as much as a foot.
Also not obvious from watching the Zapruder film is that Elm Street makes a pronounced S-curve as it winds toward the triple underpass, with the result that the angle of the shot from the sixth floor corner window to the back of JFK’s head was changing constantly as the limo headed west down Elm Street.
By comparison, Houston Street is straight and level, without the shooting complications Elm Street involves.
Also, Roberts realized the Mannlicher-Carcano with its bolt-action complicated the use of the telescopic scope.
Roberts concluded the shots the Warren Commission reported Oswald took were the farthest and most difficult he could have taken from the sixth floor corner window, given the geography of Dealey Plaza.
The third, fatal headshot was the most distant of the available shots, at a range Roberts estimated somewhere between eighty and ninety yards.
This is absurd considering that Oswald had a full-body shot only a few yards away when the limo came to a near stop before making the sharply angled left turn from Houston onto Elm, directly below the sniper’s window.
The only more difficult shot Oswald could have taken would have been to fire an additional last shot as the limo disappeared at an accelerated rate, escaping under the triple underpass.
A sniper who knows weapons, Roberts observed one additional critical fact that made the Mannlicher-Carcano rifle Dallas Police found on the sixth floor unlikely to be involved in the shooting.
The clip for a Model 1891 6. mm Mannlicher-Carcano rifle holds six cartridges, and is supposed to fall out of the bottom of the magazine after the last round is chambered.
Furthermore, the Dallas Police Department found the clip in the rifle had been loaded not with original Italian ammunition, but with old surplus bullets considered highly unreliable that had been manufactured in the United States by the Western Cartridge Company decades earlier.
Or was the fact no clip was found on the floor with the three cartridge shells an indication that the weapon was planted as a decoy.
Remarkably, after finding the Mannlicher-Carcano the Dallas Police Department ran no tests on the Mannlicher-Carcano to determine if the weapon had been fired recently.
What Roberts concluded was that for an amateur like Oswald, Dealey Plaza was far too difficult a kill zone to have any reasonable chance of success.
Of all the thousands of NCAA Division I men’s football players, only 1. percent make the pros; In men’s baseball, it’s only 1. percent that make the big leagues.
Sure, a high school baseball player might be able to get lucky and knock a professional’s pitch out of the park once, but it is not the way to bet.
The curve in all athletics to get the improvement needed to be world class is incredibly steep.
Typically the transition to world class involves a transformation where the pro learns to see the game differently than the amateur.
Studies have shown chess masters truly see no more moves ahead in a chess game than beginners.
The difference is that where beginners see moves, chess masters see patterns.
The easy shot from the sixth floor window as the limo came down Houston or turned the corner onto Elm would draw too much attention to the location where the shots originated.
Successful sniping requires not only the ability to plan and take the shot so as to hit the target, but also the ability to take the shot undetected and to escape without being captured after the shot has been taken.
The tree that blocked much of the view complicated the shot from the sixth floor window, to say nothing of the diminishing target as the car went down Elm Street away from Houston Street.
If there were multiple shooters, the prime spot for the kill zone was as the car cleared the tree just before the Stemmons Freeway sign.
A little further down Elm past the Stemmons Freeway sign, a shooter on the grassy knoll behind the picket fence close to the railroad would have a close distance shot that would include JFK’s torso as well as his head.
Triangulating the kill shot by positioning additional shooters behind JFK in the buildings along Houston perpendicular to Elm would afford multiple opportunities to hit the target simultaneously from the front and the back, even if all the shots from the rear of the limo were difficult at best.
But for the full advantages of multiple shooting to be gained, the shooting had to be timed perfectly.
Random shooting by will from multiple shooters would convey to onlookers the impression of crossfire, making it difficult, if not impossible, to pin the shooting on a fall guy—a “patsy” as Oswald described himself.
If Oswald was to be framed as the lone shooter, it was imperative the gunshots had to be timed so that onlookers would assume that one gunman was firing three shots when the reality might be that three gunmen were firing three shots each, for a total of nine shots.
To achieve the effect of synchronized shooting, the team had to have a fixed signal or target point for when the shooting was to begin.
From the first shot fired, each shooter could count—one one thousand shoot, two one thousand shoot, three one thousand shoot—so that each shooter would have sufficient time to chamber the next round and aim.
If the shooters had a spotter, the spotter could receive the signal to shoot by walkietalkie, to keep the shooter in sequence.
Synchronized shooting from multiple concealed locations was a solution that made Dealey Plaza an ideal kill zone, provided each shooter also had an accomplice to assist with communications, sighting, and escape.
Professionally planned, Dealey Plaza quickly transformed from a nearly impossible kill zone for an amateur acting alone into a near-sure thing for a team of world-class marksmen.
This could not be the first kill for any of the shooters or their accomplices.
The adrenalin flow in seeing JFK alive and knowing you were about to assassinate the president of the United States required steely nerves only a proven sniper with a track record of success would have.
Only shooters with the demonstrated ability to remain dispassionate and calculating—a skill not reliable without a proven track record—could get this particular job done.
An amateur could be expected to fumble with the bolt-action loading an old World War II Italian Army rifle.
Moreover, a high-powered scope that filled the shooter’s vision with a highly magnified vision of a small part of the target’s body might make finding and locking on the target more difficult for an amateur.
One foul-up and the target might be wounded but not killed, or the shooter might be detected and brought into custody.
Taking the shots after the limo passed the Stemmons Freeway sign would take advantage of a relaxed entourage.
It was the last leg of a long motorcade that began at Love Field and wound through downtown Dallas.
The VIPs in the JFK limo would be looking forward to getting out of the sun and into the ample shade under the triple underpass.
They were anticipating getting to the Trade Center where JFK was to give a luncheon address and a cool drink and something to eat would be waiting.
The crowd was expected to thin as the limo traveled Elm Street as it was assumed spectators would prefer downtown vantage points where the passage of the limo would be slower.
After successfully negotiating downtown without an incident, the Secret Service and Dallas police accompanying the motorcade were likely also to be ready to relax their guard.
The back entrance wound penetrated less than one joint of a doctor’s little finger, as measured at the autopsy.
Yet, the headshot or headshots shattered JFK’s skull and splattered brain tissue in a mist that reached a foot or more in the air and wafted back to bathe the motorcycle police immediately tailing the limo.
This difference in ballistic impact on the target would suggest each shooter had a different type of ammunition and very likely a different weapon.
It is hard to imagine requiring shooters to change weapons and/or ammunition as the kill proceeded.
This would imply each shooter could have had in mind or had been assigned a particular kind of shot that required a particular weapon and type of ammunition.
In other words, it is conceivable the various shots taken during the assassination could well have been designed to have different effects.
The first two shots to hit JFK—in the neck and the back—may have been set-up shots.
JFK was only wounded by these shots and the surprise of being shot was obvious on his face.
Security personnel and others in the car could be expected to react relatively slowly, or so it would seem to shooters in the slow-motion bubble that surrounds professional snipers at the moment of their kill.
Films taken during the assassination, especially the film taken by Orville Nix, show that Greer applied the brakes, slowing down enough to bring the limo to a near halt.
Ironically, the therapeutic back-brace that JFK habitually wore was wrapped tightly around his torso under his shirt that day.
An experienced sniper designing the assassination may have known the back-brace JFK habitually wore would hold his torso upright and straight, provided the bullets selected to hit his neck and back were a sufficiently low caliber.
A wounded JFK was partially immobilized, held upright, and struggling to react—a perfect set-up for the final headshot, or headshots, to end his life.
Each shooter on the team could have been given a particular objective, a particular weapon, and a particular shot to achieve a particular effect.
Attempting the fatal headshot from the rear was risky because that shot was the most difficult.
The only way it made sense for shooters positioned in the buildings behind the limo to attempt a head shot was if their head shots were designed as a back-up to the more sure-fire head shots planned to be taken by the shooters planned at the front of the motorcade.
The first shots that entered JFK’s back from behind and his throat from the front involved lower-powered ammunition most likely fired by low-powered weapons.
These two shots might have been aimed as head shots, but a .22-caliber bullet that entered the head might not have sufficient velocity or power to exit the skull.
A .22 caliber bullet would have most likely done irreparable damage to JFK’s brain, but not nearly as much damage as a higher-caliber bullet or a custom-designed explosive bullet.
Consider that the headshot from the back that blew out the head-flap at JFK’s forehead or the headshot from the front that blew out the back of JFK’s head may have been done with a custom-designed bullet where the point had been hollowed out, or filled with mercury, and sealed with paraffin or some other type of sealant to keep the mercury contained within the shell.
A modified hollowpoint bullet was the favorite of many assassins because it explodes upon impact and causes massive damage.
An exploding, hollow-point bullet could explain the fracture damage seen in the autopsy photos of JFK’s skull, as well as the plume of brain tissue and blood that shot out of JFK’s head on impact.
THE WITNESSES In the immediate aftermath of the shooting, witnesses in Dealey Plaza rushed the grassy knoll, searching for the killers.
Lane was extremely critical of the interview the Warren Commission had conducted with Bowers in Dallas on April 2, 1964.11° Bowers testified to the Warren Commission that he observed three suspicious automobiles enter the area in the half-hour preceding the assassination.
The first car was a 1959 blue-and-white Oldsmobile, with an out-of-state license plate, and a “Goldwater for President” bumper sticker.
The second car, a 1957 black Ford with a Texas license plate, driven by a white male that was driving with one hand while holding what looked like a microphone with his other hand, entered the area around 12:20m., some ten minutes after the first car.
Bowers explained the black Ford came in from the extension of Elm Street in front of the school depository and left after three or four minutes.
The third car, a 1961 or 1962 four-door white Chevrolet Impala with an out-of-state license plate and driven by a white male, circled the area and probed one spot right at the tower in an attempt to get out.
Bowers was too busy to watch to see if the car left the area, but the last he remembered, the car paused just above the assassination site.
Bowers also observed the first and third car were covered with a red mud.
Just prior to the shooting, Bowers observed two men standing behind the picket fence toward the mouth of the underpass.
Bowers described one of the men as “middle-aged, or slightly older, fairly heavy set,” and wearing a white shirt and fairly dark trousers.
The second, younger man was in his mid-twenties, wearing either a plaid shirt or plaid coat or jacket.
Bowers observed the two men were within ten or fifteen feet of each other, facing the motorcade as it approached.
All the others Bowers saw in the area, he knew, including two policemen standing on the overpass, a railroad signal man, two welders, a labor’s assistant helping the welders, and a couple of parking lot attendees.
I just am unable to describe rather than it was something out of the ordinary, a sort of milling around, but something occurred in this particular spot which was out of the ordinary, which attracted my eye for some reason, which I could not identify.
Mark noted that Ball’s interruption prevented Bowers from concluding his most important sentence in which Bowers would have explained what it was in the area behind the fence that caught his attention at the time JFK was shot.
At the time of the shooting, in the vicinity of where the two men I have described were, there was a flash of light or, as far as I am concerned, something I could not identify, but there was something I could not identify, but there was something which occurred which caught my eye in this immediate area on the embankment.
Now, what this was, I could not state at that time and at this time I could not identify it, other than there was some unusual occurrence—a flash of light or smoke or something which caused me to feel like something out of the ordinary had occurred there.
In reading your testimony, Mr Bowers, it appears that just as you were about to make that statement, you were interrupted in the middle of the sentence by the Commission counsel, who then went into another area.
I was simply trying to answer his questions, and he seemed to be satisfied with the answer to that one and did not care for me to elaborate, /15 Both Vincent Bugliosi and Gerald Posner discount the testimony of Lee Bowers, arguing that echoes in Dealey Plaza made difficult the determination of where shots came from.
Holland, at the time a railroad employee since 1938, who was standing at the bannister of the triple underpass, by the railroad yard, at the time of the shooting, testified he heard four shots fired and saw a puff of smoke emerge from under the trees on the grassy knoll.
Holland also supported Governor Connally’s recollection, stating JFK was hit by the first shot and Connally by the second shot.
It looked to me like somebody had been standing there for a long time,” he testified.
William E Newman Jr. and his wife Gayle were standing on the north curb of Elm Street with their two children, waving at the president as the limousine passed, some fifteen feet from the president at the time of the head shot.
In several different interviews, including an interview he gave to Dallas police in Dealey Plaza at the time of the shooting and an interview on Dallas television immediately after the shooting, Newman insisted that the shots were fired from directly behind where he was standing with his wife and children, from behind the picket fence at the top of the grassy knoll.
After describing the fatal headshot, Newman swore to the truth of his recollection the shots came from directly behind where he and his family were standing, identifying the shots as having come from behind the picket fence on the grassy knoll.
Very likely, since both believed the shots were fired from behind them on the grassy knoll, their affidavits were ignored by the official inquiry and neither was called to give testimony to the Warren Commission.
Brennan claimed to have had a clear view of the assassin in the sixth floor corner window of the depository building, directly above his vantage point.
Well, as it appeared to me he was standing up and resting against the left window sill, with gun shouldered to his right shoulder, holding the gun with his left hand and taking positive aim and fired his last shot.
At a police lineup the night of the assassination, Brennan evidently was either unable or unwilling to positively identify Oswald as the shooter, a failure that should have badly damaged his credibility.
As I understand your testimony, then, you said that you told him that this particular person looked the most like the man you saw on the sixth floor of the building there.
I believe I reached home quarter to three or something of that, 15 minutes either way, and I saw his picture twice on television before I went down to the police station for the lineup.
Brennan later said he hesitated to give a positive description of Oswald at the lineup because he was afraid doing so might place him and his family in personal danger of a reprisal, although Brennan did not specify who might do what to him or to his family.
Nor do the Warren Commission or Bugliosi provide any proof that Brennan’s description was the basis for the police radio suspect description.
Neither the Warren Commission nor Bugliosi provide any testimony or evidence that would resolve the question with certainty.
Certainly, Posner’s insistence that Oswald acted alone would not allow him to posit the idea of an accomplice who might seek to silence witnesses.
Reading the Warren Commission testimony closely, there does not seem to be support for McKnight’s supposition.
Immediately went into—well, talked to some of the officers around there who told me the story that they had thought some shots had come from one of the floors in the building, and I think the fifth floor was mentioned, but nobody seemed to know who the shots were directed at or what had actually happened, except there had been a shooting here at the time the President’s motorcade had gone by.
Brennan claimed to have seen the shooter so that he could describe his physical characteristics and his actions in detail, commenting even that when Oswald had fired his last shot, he paused to contemplate the scene with satisfaction.
Sawyer could not remember the man’s name and he could not provide a physical description of the witness, except to say he was around thirty-five years old.
Brennan was forty-five years old on November 22, 1963, and he was wearing a white construction hard hat in Dealey Plaza during the motorcade.
Sawyer remembered none of these details about the man who gave him the suspect description.
Sawyer testified he never saw the man again, not even at the lineups the Dallas Police Department held that evening with Oswald.
Brennan also testified that he gave his story to Secret Service Agent Forrest V Sorrels, the head of the Dallas Secret Service office.
In Commission Exhibit 479, Brennan is twisted around to his left, supporting his twisted body by bracing his left hand, palm down, on the top of the concrete wall.
Brennan has his back still facing Zapruder’s camera, watching JFK as the limousine disappears behind the Stemmons Freeway sign.
Examining the Zapruder film frame by frame, Brennan can be seen in the Zapruder film from frame 133, the first frame of the Zapruder film in which the JFK limo appears after it has turned onto Elm from Houston, through frame 208, when the limo is heading down Elm and JFK’s head is all that can be seen above the Stemmons Freeway sign.
With his back tured to the book depository throughout the shooting sequence, it is hard to see how Brennan could have observed as much as he claims to have seen.
Further, Brennan said he observed two African-Americans he thought were watching the motorcade from the fifth floor window below the sniper’s nest.
Shooting through this narrow opening so low to the floor, a standing shooter would have a difficult time getting the angle needed to hit the motorcade as the limo passed the Stemmons Freeway sign on Elm Street.
Furthermore, the obviously dirty windows would have made it, difficult if not impossible, to identify a standing man with any clarity from his belt up.
The shape of a man might have been visible, but the dirty windows would have obscured any details.
SECRET SERVICE ON THE GRASSY KNOLL When bystanders rushed the grassy knoll, with many going behind the picket fence to examine the parking lot and railroad yard, several people reported encountering Secret Service agents, even though no Secret Service agents were assigned duty in Dealey Plaza that day.
Seymour Weitzman, a Dallas County deputy constable who played a major role in the search of Dealey Plaza immediately after the assassination, was one such bystander.
Weitzman’s recollection of the Secret Service being there is particularly vivid because it involves a fragment of JFK’s skull.
We noticed numerous kinds of footprints that did not make any sense because they were going different directions.
Yes, sir; other officers, Secret Service as well, and somebody started, there was something red in the street and I went back over the wall and somebody brought me a piece of what he thought to be a firecracker and it turned out to be, I believe, I wouldn’t quote this, but I turned it over to one of the secret Service men and I told them it should go to the lab because it looked to me like human bone.
Mr Smith: Yes, sir; and this woman came up to me and she was just in hysterics.
I was checking all the bushes and I checked all the cars in the parking lot.
There was some deputy sheriff with me, and I believe one Secret Service man when I got down there.
I felt awfully silly, but after the shot and this woman, I pulled my pistol from my holster, and I thought, this is silly.
Sorrels rode in the lead car of the motorcade, and he stayed with the motorcade to Parkland Hospital, at which time he went back to Dealey Plaza to join in the criminal investigation.
Few mysteries in the case are as important as this one, and it is appalling that the Commission ignored or failed to recognize the grounds here for serious suspicion of a well-planned conspiracy at work.
Dealey Plaza was at the end of the motorcade route, with the entrance to Stemmons Freeway just beyond the triple underpass.
Within minutes of the shooting, the sparse crowd in Dealey Plaza was enlarged by a surge of onlookers who rushed from downtown in the vicinity of Houston and Main to see if they could find out what had happened.
The photographs of the Dealey Plaza area immediately after the shooting show large numbers of people climbing the grassy knoll to mill around in the parking lot and railroad yard beyond.
An assassin handing off a rifle for deposit in a case or the trunk of a parked car, could easily walk away, mixing in with the crowd.
If a person looked official enough, perhaps dressed in a suit and tie and claimed to be a Secret Service agent, he could have easily slipped away.
Nor does it seem even experienced Dallas Police officers took the time or trouble to study credentials even when they were presented.
The escape strategy for a professional team of assassins in Dealey Plaza on November 22, 1963, was simple—blend into the crowd and walk away.
If stopped and questioned, claim to be a Secret Service agent and flash what looked like credentials.
In the interview with James Tague, the bystander whose cheek was nicked by a bullet that ricocheted in the shooting, Warren Commission Liebeler acknowledged this exact point.
The only thing that I saw that I thought was wrong was that there was about 5 or 6 or 7 minutes in there before anybody done anything about anything.
There was no action taken except for the one policeman that I could see that stopped his motorcycle, and it fell over on him at first, and he got it standing upright and drew his gun, and he was the only one doing anything about it.
Studying the various videos of the assassination aftermath in Dealey Plaza, it is unclear if the grassy knoll or the parking lot and railroad yard beyond were ever secured as a crime scene.
With the instant flood of onlookers into the kill zone, the value of Dealey Plaza as a crime scene was irreparably lost.
Any evidence of the assassination that might have been found and properly identified for use in subsequent criminal proceedings was squandered, as bystanders and police picked up pieces of evidence—even fragments of JFK’s skull—from the pavement and handed them over to people they perceived as authorities, or possibly even to pocket as souvenirs.
The swarm of people, still in the grip of shock and disbelief, that descended on Dealey Plaza in the aftermath of the shooting is a case study only in how rapidly police can and do lose control of a crime scene in a downtown outdoor venue open to the public.
THE FATAL HEADSHOT Josiah Thompson conducted an analysis of the Zapruder and the Nix films of the assassination for his 1967 book, Six Seconds in Dallas.
He concluded the headshot that killed JFK was a double shot, with one bullet hitting him in the back of the head, followed a fraction of a second later by a shot from the front.
These findings suggested crossfire on Elm Street, as the car approached the triple underpass.
More than one shooter, by definition, means JFK was assassinated by a conspiracy.
The Zapruder film then shows JFK’s head being thrown violently back and to the left, a motion that suggests a shot came from the front and left side of the limo to the front.
The right part of his forehead flaps open and a massive section of JFK’s skull in the back is blown out.
Bone fragments and brain matter from JFK’s skull and brain spew out onto the trunk of the limousine, spraying the Dallas Police Department motorcycle officers riding to the rear left of the limo and Secret Service Agent Clint Hill as he rushes forward to get his foot on the left running board at the back of the limo and grab the left handrail on the limo’s trunk.
Thompson argued his findings of a double headshot almost simultaneously hitting JFK from the front and rear explain the contradictory medical testimony from Parkland Hospital that identified JFK’s head wounds as entry wounds and the medical testimony from Bethesda Naval Hospital where autopsy photographs show the back of JFK’s head appeared virtually intact, except for a small, round bullet hole that appeared to be an entry wound.
The puzzle remains that the Bethesda autopsy photos fail to show the large gaping exit wound in the right back of JFK’s head that the doctors at Parkland described.
That there was a headshot from the front would also explain why Jackie Kennedy climbed out onto the back of the limousine, not to help Secret Service Special Agent Clint Hill to get into the moving vehicle, but to pick up a piece of her husband’s skull.
And why the “Harper fragment” found in Dealey Plaza the day after the assassination—the largest fragment of JFK’s skull to have flown clear of JFK’s body in the explosion of his head resulting from the headshots—has been identified as occipital bone, from the back of JFK’s skull.
The pattern that emerges from this study of medical evidence is a dual one.
From the Parkland doctors we get the picture of a bullet that struck the right front of the President’s head on a tangent, ranged backward causing massive damage to the right brain hemisphere, sprung open the occipital and parietal bones, and exploded out over the rear of the limousine.
From the Bethesda surgeons we get the picture of a bullet entering the rear of the President’s head and driving forward to the midtemple region.
Putting the two pictures together, we discern the outlines of the double impact.
First, a bullet from behind exploding forward, and in that same split second another bullet driving into the exploding mass, forcing tissue and skull in the opposite direction.
This is not a pretty picture, but it reconciles the evidence of the Zapruder film, eye-and ear-witness reports, and the curious double dispersion of impact debris.
Much of the confusion interpreting the ballistics of JFK’s headshot involves attempting to explain all the conflicting damage observed by one bullet, either from the front or from the rear.
The goal, Lifton argued, was to alter JFK’s body—the “best evidence” of the crime that had been committed—so the medical examiner would conclude all shots had been fired from the front, a requirement if a patsy like Lee Harvey Oswald was to take the fall as the lone shooter.
If the body were altered in accordance with the trajectory-reversal scheme, plotters must have put a rifle and a sniper’s nest behind and above the motorcade, but shot Kennedy from the front.
Lifton’s point is that a conspiracy to assassinate JFK required a conspiracy to alter or eliminate any medical evidence that contradicted the one-shooter theory.
In a sense, this is precisely what the Warren Commission did, even if Lifton’s postulated secret autopsy is dismissed as unlikely or impossible.
Arlen Specter invented the single-bullet theory to force all the evidence into a conclusion that Lee Harvey Oswald was a lone-nut gunman whose psychological problems led him to plan and commit the JFK assassination without accomplices.
Once the ballistic evidence frees us from this conclusion, for instance, simply by a realization that the throat wound was an entry wound or that JFK’s back wound was a superficial wound that did not penetrate the body, we are open to a whole new range of possible solutions.
Josiah Thompson argues, for instance, that even if ballistic evidence shows bullet fragments found in the limousine after the shooting were fired from the Mannlicher-Carcano, that does not prove Lee Harvey Oswald fired the weapon.
What becomes untenable as evidence accumulates, however, is the assumption the Mannlicher-Carcano, or any one particular weapon for that matter, was the only weapon fired.
One of the key witnesses in Lifton’s book was Paul O’Connor, a laboratory technician at Bethesda Naval Hospital who witnessed the autopsy.
This too startled Lifton because he knew that a sheet of plastic had been used to line the Dallas casket before JFK’s body was placed into the casket.
O’Connor’s testimony supported Lifton’s hypothesis that JFK’s body had been taken from Andrews Air Force Base and was transported by helicopter to the Army’s Walter Reed Hospital, or one of the outlying hospitals the Army maintains as part of the Walter Reed system where a secret autopsy was performed to remove any bullet fragments or medical evidence that would prove JFK was shot from the front.
Lifton believes JFK’s body was then delivered to Bethesda Naval Hospital for the official autopsy.
There was no intermediate stop recorded on the official timetable where any “surgery” on JFK’s skull had been done.
CST in Dallas and the autopsy at Bethesda Naval Hospital beginning at 8:00m.
EST in Washington the FBI and LBJ had assumed control over the criminal investigation and the “best evidence of the crime,” namely, JFK’s body.
There was no way to know how any fingerprint or palm print information gained from the rifle was not planted there.
The FBI had taken over the investigation of the crime, despite lacking the legal justification to do so.
With control of the case moving to Washington, altering of evidence to fit the official theory of the assassination was a possibility that could no longer be ruled out.
Earl Rose, a physician and lawyer who became county medical examiner six months before the assassination, stood in the doorway at Parkland Hospital while insisting JFK’s body remain in Dallas so he could conduct a proper autopsy, as was required by Texas law.
Federal agents threatened Rose with automatic weapons to get him to stand out of the way.
They seemed to command a lot of respect and attention — sinister looking people.
Boswell’s shoulder, then they’d go back and have a little conference in the comer.
Paul Peters used his right hand to indicate the back of his head behind his right ear to describe JFK’s head wound that he saw as having blown out the right occipital-parietal part of JFK’s brain and skull.
Robert McClelland said on film that almost a fifth to a quarter to “the right back part of the head” had been blasted out, along with most of the brain tissue in that area while reaching behind his right ear to indicate the back right of JFK’s head was where he too saw the massive wound.
The JFK autopsy photographs, however, show the back of JFK’s head intact, with his hair in place.
DEAD JFK RISING At the end of the Zapruder film, as the presidential limo is about to go under the triple overpass, a remarkable series of frames shows a frantic Jackie Kennedy in the back seat propping her husband up to a full sitting position, as if he were alive.
The sequence of the Zapruder film, rarely watched or studied, begins around frame 454.
In the instants after the fatal headshot, Jackie Kennedy reacted with the type of hysteria that some unfortunate victims experience who have lost an appendage or part of an appendage, such as a finger, a hand, or even an arm.
Just as those victims will try to jam the severed appendage back in place, in the film Jackie scrambles onto the trunk of the limo trying to grab some part of JFK’s skull or brain matter.
Once Jackie gets back in the seat, it appears she desperately tries to put Jack back together again to the point of moving the head flap back in place.
In her testimony to the Warren Commission, Jackie Kennedy was asked if she remembered Secret Service Agent Clint Hill who climbed on the back of the limo to help.
Kennedy and Me, in 2012 in which he describes his experience during the JFK assassination.
In the same instant, blood, brain matter, and bone fragments exploded from the back of the president’s head.
The various photographs of the JFK assassination make clear that Hill was running to get on the trunk.
For Hill to have seen brain matter explode out of JFK’s head meant the wound at the back of JFK’s head had to have been an exit wound.
The importance of these few frames at the end of the Zapruder film is that we get a fleeting view at the back of JFK’s head.
The hair around the back head wound is a richer brownish-red color, and the wound adjacent to the right ear is the size of a grapefruit.
At the Parkland Hospital press conference held one hour and fifteen minutes after JFK had been pronounced dead, Dr.
Malcolm Perry, one of the attending physicians in the emergency room, and Dr.
Either way, it’s clear the two doctors considered the gaping hole at the back of JFK’s skull to have been an exit wound and the bullet hole observed in JFK’s neck to have been an entrance wound.
Charles Carrico, a surgeon doing his residency at Parkland Hospital at the time, was the first physician to treat JFK in the emergency room.
This was a 5-by 51-cm defect in the posterior skull, the occipital region.
There was an absence of the calvarium or skull in this area, with shredded tissue, brain tissue present and initially considerable slow oozing.
Then after we established some circulation there was more profuse bleeding from the wound.
Summoned to the emergency room, McClelland arrived after the tracheotomy had been given.
Putting on surgical gloves, McClelland also observed a massive wound to the back of JFK’s head.
The Warren Commission, in its effort to portray Lee Harvey Oswald as the lone assassin, had to ignore or otherwise obfuscate the abundant medical evidence and testimony that confirmed JFK suffered an exit wound in the back of his head.
Dallas County deputy constable Seymour Weitzman, the same police officer who found a piece of JFK’s skull and encountered what he thought was a Secret Service agent in the aftermath of the shooting, was present when the rifle was found.
At this time Captain Fritz [Dallas Police Department] arrived and ordered all of the sixth floor sealed off and searched.
I was working with Deputy S Boone of the Sheriff’s Department and helping in the search.
The rifle was a 7.65 Mauser bolt action equipped with a 4/18 scope, a thick leather brownishlooking sling on it.
Captain Fritz took charge of the rifle and ejected one live round from the chamber.
I proceeded to the sixth floor of the building to search for the rifle.
I started on the east end of the building and worked my way to the west end of the building.
In the northwest corner of the building approx. three feet from the east wall of the stairwell and behind a row of cases of books I saw the rifle, what appeared to be a 7.65 Mauser with a telescopic site.
The rifle had what appeared to be a brownish-black stock and blue steel, metal parts.
Fritz DPD was called to this location and along with an ID man DPD took charge of the rifle.
He had knelt down there to look at it, and before he removed it, not knowing what it was, he said that is what it looks like.
This is when Lieutenant Day, I believe his name is, the ID man was getting ready to photograph it.
The story appeared to change on Saturday, November 23, 1963, the day following the assassination, after the FBI tracked the purchase and shipment of an Italian Mannlicher-Carcano carbine to an A Hidell in Dallas, Texas.
That name matched a forged Selective Service card with a photograph of Oswald and the name Alex James Hidell that Dallas police claimed to have found in Oswald’s wallet at the time Oswald was arrested.
Warren Commission critic Mark Lane, in his 1966 book, Rush to Judgment, pointed out as a condition of testifying to the Warren Commission, he obtained permission to examine the rifle.
Finding that the words “MADE ITALY” and “CAL 6.5” were stamped on the rifle, Lane found it not credible that any policeman finding the rifle on the sixth floor of the School Depository could possibly mistake the weapon for a German-made 7.65 Mauser.
For the answer, consider CE399, the pristine bullet Warren Commission counsel Arlen Specter used as the foundation for his single-bullet theory.
MannlicherCarcano, Specter felt he had a “lock” on the case, if only he could establish that CE399 was the bullet that hit both JFK and Connally.
The problem remained that no authoritative chain of custody could be established for CE399, since the suspicion remained that CE399 might have been planted on the stretcher at Parkland Hospital where it was found by Darrell C Tomlinson, a senior engineer in charge of the hospital’s power plant.
Mannlicher-Carcano was the government’s rifle of choice after the alias A Hidell established a link between Oswald as the buyer of the weapon and a mail-order shop in Chicago as the seller of the weapon.
The German rifle simply disappears from the case once the Commission realizes linking the murder weapon to Oswald becomes a lot easier to establish if the weapon used to assassinate JFK was the 6.
Or, to put the chain of deduction more simply, if Oswald was A Hidell, he had to be the lone gunman, as proved by the Mannlicher-Carcano rifle and CE399.
CE399 was not found in the body of JFK or Connally, and no bullet or bullet fragment pulled out of JFK or Connally could be traced back to the Mannlicher-Carcano with certainty.
Evidently, the Warren Commission hoped the American public would just forget the Mannlicher-Carcano was a notoriously inaccurate weapon to fire and that the ammunition was World War II vintage.
Having just murdered the president of the United States, the first and only thought that should have been on Oswald’s mind was getting away undetected as fast as possible.
If the shooter had been professional, no shell casings or rifle would ever have been found, unless, of course, the shell casings and rifle were planted, in order that they would be found.
The Mannlicher-Carcano, as we have just seen, was easily traceable back to Lee Harvey Oswald via the mailorder receipt in the name of the alias Alex Hidell.
Not only would it frame Oswald as the shooter, the three spent shell casings would lead investigators anxious to solve the crime to conclude no more than three shots had been fired, a conclusion that would help rule out multiple shooters organized in a conspiracy.
A Dallas Police Department incompetent enough to have allowed the assassination to have occurred in the first place could clearly attempt redemption by solving the crime this expeditiously.
Lost in the rush-to-judgment was any explanation as to why the first law enforcement investigators on the scene identified the rifle as a 7.65 Mauser when they found it.
The truth is the Warren Commission simply dismissed any evidence that contradicted the pre-determined, politically acceptable solution to the crime, namely, that Lee Harvey Oswald was the lone-gun assassin.
As we have seen, the Warren Commission ignored the testimony of the many eyewitnesses who were convinced the shots had come from the grassy knoll.
Carolyn Walthers, for instance, was a spectator who watched the motorcade from Houston Street, some fifty to sixty feet south of the corner of Elm and Houston, from a vantage point in front of the Criminal Courts building.
Witnesses disagreed regarding how many shots were fired, whether the first and second shots came in rapid sequence, or whether the rapid sequence involved the second and third shots.
Some witnesses heard the shots, especially the first shot, as a firecracker, while others reported the shots boomed like a cannon.
The Warren Commission did not probe whether more than one weapon may have accounted for the different ways witnesses heard the shots.
The Warren Commission typically ignored testimony that did not conveniently fit the theory that Oswald was the lone shooter.
Maybe the Warren Commission deemed publishing twentysix volumes of hearings that included more than two thousand documents as sufficient weight of evidence to silence doubters.
The problem from the beginning was that careful doubters took the time and trouble to read and study the twenty-six volumes.
Combining this with their own independent research, skeptics were soon able to raise questions the Warren Commission could not easily answer.
But if the goal of the Warren Commission was to solve the crime, it took exactly the wrong approach.
Rather than exclude evidence and testimony contrary to its pre-determined conclusion, the Warren Commission should have avoided forming any hypothesis regarding who killed JFK and how, until after all available evidence had been collected and all available testimony had been taken.
Instead, LBJ and the Justice Department pushed a political conclusion that demanded dissenters be dismissed as “conspiracy theory” nut cases.
By violating the pursuit for truth, the Warren Commission has committed a more serious crime on the nation than was committed in the JFK assassination itself.
For fifty years now the Commission has committed violence against our most sacred of freedoms, our First Amendment right to free speech and the ability to dissent respectfully.
OSWALD IN THE LUNCH ROOM Dallas Police Department motorcycle patrolman Marrion L Baker testified to the Warren Commission on March 25, 1964, that he was trailing the JFK limo in the motorcade by about a block.
He heard the first shot as he was proceeding down Houston, as JFK’s limo was heading down Elm toward the triple underpass.
Baker said he recognized the first shot as a rifle shot because he had just returned from deer hunting, where he had heard rifle fire for about a week.
As I was looking up, all these pigeons began to fly up to the top of the buildings here and I saw those come up and start flying around.
Yes, sir; I heard—now before I revved up this motorcycle, I heard the, you know, the two extra shots, the three shots.
He parked his motorcycle approximately 45 feet from the doorway of the Texas School Depository Building.
Together, they ran to the northwest side of the building and started taking the stairs after they realized waiting for the elevator was going to take too long.
On the second floor, he got a glimpse of a man who later turned out to be Oswald.
As I came out to the second floor there, Mr Truly was ahead of me, and as I came out I was kind of scanning, you know, the rooms, and I caught a glimpse of this man walking away from this—I happened to see him through the window in this door.
I don’t know how I came to see him, but I had a glimpse of him coming down here.
Baker testified he had his revolver in his hand and the man he observed had nothing in his hands.
And he said yes, and I turned immediately and went on out up the stairs.
Later that night, when Baker saw Oswald in custody in the homicide office of the Dallas Police Department, he recognized Oswald as the man he saw in the second floor lunchroom within minutes of the shots being fired.
After he says, “Yes he works here,” I turned immediately and run on up, I halfway turned then when I was talking to Mr Truly.
Truly told the Warren Commission he and Baker encountered Oswald on the second floor, just inside the lunchroom.
Baker had his gun drawn and pointed toward the middle portion of Oswald’s body.
Once Truly vouched for Oswald as an employee, Baker resumed running up the stairs, determined to search the roof.
He left immediately after I told him—after he asked me, does this man work here.
He might have been a bit startled, like I might have been if somebody confronted me.
Reid had been standing in the street in front of the depository as the motorcade went by.
After the shooting, she ran back into the building and went directly to her office.
Well, I kept walking and I looked up and Oswald was coming to the back of the office.
He had gotten a Coke and was holding it in his hands and I guess the reason it impressed me seeing him in there I thought it was a little strange that one of the warehouse boys would be up in the office at that time, not that he had done anything wrong.
The only time I had seen him in the office was to come and get change and he already had his Coke in hand so he didn’t come for change and I dismissed him.
He stated that as he was leaving, two men intercepted him at the front door, identified themselves as Secret Service agents, and asked for the location of a telephone.
Pierce Allman, a newsman with WFAA-TV in Dallas telephoned the news of the shooting from a phone in the book depository, after a man he could not identify directed him and one of his fellow workers, Terry Ford, to a telephone.
Dallas Police did not question Allman regarding whether the man in the book depository who directed him to a telephone was Oswald.
Shown pictures of Oswald by the Secret Service, Allman could not state for certain whether Oswald was the person at the book depository he asked for a phone.
After running on top of the grassy knoll to look over the concrete barrier at the top of the triple underpass to see into the railroad yard, MacNeil did run to the book depository and did ask someone at the entrance for a phone.
MacNeil saw Oswald several times at the jail but he reported nothing clicked in his mind to recognize him.
Oswald said the man who asked for the phone was a young blond crew cut Secret Service man, a description to which MacNeil admits fitting at the time.
Then, Oswald walked quietly out the front door, pausing to give directions to what he thought were Secret Service agents as to where they could find a telephone to use inside the building.
What nerves of steel it would take after having just assassinated the president of the United States to hang around the building long enough to drink a soda and simply stroll through the building, exiting through the front door.
Rather than rushing out of the building through the back exit to escape law enforcement who could be rushing in to seal off the building, he took his time.
The eyewitness testimony of Oswald’s behavior in the minutes immediately following the assassination suggest instead that Oswald was either in the secondfloor lunchroom or on his way there when the shooting actually happened.
After seeing the fatal head shot, Adams and her coworker Sandra Styles ran to the stairwell and raced down the stairs to the first floor, determined to get out the back of the building to see what they could find in the railroad yard behind the fence on the grassy knoll.
The key aspect of her testimony was that the stairway Adams took was the same stairway Lee Harvey Oswald would have had to have taken to get from the sixth floor to the lunchroom where he was found by Baker and Truly.
Yet, Adams testified she saw and heard nobody else on the stairs at that time.
She estimated the time between hearing the shots and leaving the window to head for the stairway was between fifteen and twenty seconds.
She estimated it took less than a minute to run down the stairs from the fourth floor to the first floor.
She explained how various government officials, including the Dallas Police Department, had harassed her over her testimony.
She produced for Ernest a 1964 letter her attorney had written to J Lee Rankin, the chief counsel for the Warren Commission, complaining that someone had made changes in her deposition, altering her meaning.
She explained to Ernest that she left Dallas after the assassination because she was seeking to disappear.
There is no photograph showing Lee Harvey Oswald on the sixth floor during the JFK shooting, and there is no testimony from anyone who worked in the building to suggest that he was there either.
The Warren Commission dismissed Victoria Adams, saying she must have come down the stairs later than she estimated—enough later that Oswald had already passed by.
Then, on Sunday, November 24, 1963, two days after the JFK assassination, Dallas nightclub owner Jack Ruby gunned down Lee Harvey Oswald in the basement of Dallas Police headquarters adjacent to Dealey Plaza, on Houston and Main Streets in downtown Dallas, a distance of only about two blocks from where JFK was murdered.
The Warren Commission concluded these were independent events, with no prior connections between Oswald, Tippit, and Ruby.
Tippit was acquainted with either Ruby or Oswald,” the Warren Commission Report declared emphatically.
According to the Warren Commission’s version of events, approximately 1:15m. on the day of the assassination, Tippit was cruising east on 10th Street in Oak Cliff, just past the intersection of 10th and Patton, when he saw someone walking whom he considered suspicious.
He approached the car and apparently exchanged words with Tippit through the right front or vent window.
This is where the Warren Commission assumes Oswald shot Tippit before Tippit could draw his weapon on Oswald.
Why Oswald walked away from the book depository to get a bus when he could have easily walked home is not known.
In a reconstruction of the bus trip, Secret Service and FBI agents walked the seven blocks from the entrance of the book depository to the corner of Elm and Murphy, averaging six and a half minutes.
A bus moving through heavy traffic on Elm from Murphy to Lamar was timed as taking four minutes.
From there, Oswald walked to the Greyhound Bus Terminal at Lamar and Jackson Streets, where he entered a taxicab at 12:47 or 12:48m.
The cab ride to Neely and Beckley in Oak Cliff took approximately six minutes, placing Oswald there at approximately 12:54m.
Walking from Neely and Beckley to his rooming house, the Warren Commission calculated Oswald arrived there about 12:59 to 1:00m., approximately one-half hour after the assassination.
Oh, maybe not over three or four minutes—just long enough, I guess, to go in there and get a jacket and put it on and he went out zipping it up.
Roberts testified she couldn’t remember the color of the shirt Oswald put on and she couldn’t remember if it was long sleeve or short sleeve.
Her testimony that she saw Oswald zipping up the jacket as he left was significant because she did not report noticing a gun stuffed in Oswald’s pants.
Roberts testified that she cleaned Oswald’s room and she did not recall ever seeing a gun, but she also clarified that it was “against the rules” to go through the belongings of a roomer.
She also acknowledged that when police searched Oswald’s room, they found a gun holster she had never seen before.
Assassin or Fall Guy?, personally went and viewed Oswald’s room at 1026 North Berkeley.
Her voice was trembling with the indignation of a law-abiding, respectable landlady who had told the police there had not been a gun in the room only to have her words disregarded.
Yet as I stood there it was obvious that there was absolutely no hiding place in that room unless there was some elaborate cavity in the floor or in the walls which certainly would have been discovered and would also militate against the account that Oswald ran in and out of his room.
Roberts said that in the three or four minutes Oswald was in his room, a police car drove up and stopped in front of the house, with the police in the car tapping the horn, as if signaling Oswald before driving off.
Right direct in front of that door—there was a police car stopped and honked.
I had worked for some policemen and sometimes they come by and tell me something that maybe their wives would want me to know, and | thought it was them, and I just glanced out and saw the number, and I said, “Oh, that’s not their car,” for I knew their car.
I don’t know—I didn’t pay any attention to it after I noticed it wasn’t them—I didn’t.
And then they just eased on—the way it is—it was the third house off of Zangs and they just went around the corner that way.
Roberts looked out the window and saw Lee Harvey Oswald standing on the curb at a bus stop.
Nor did she know whether he took a bus, whether the police car returned to pick him up, or if someone else picked him up.
She did not continue watching Oswald long enough to know how much time he spent there waiting, or how precisely he decided to move on.
Tippit,” observed experienced journalist Henry Hurt who spent years with a research team sifting through JFK assassination data, cross-checking and corroborating facts, and tracking down participants and witnesses to interview.
Roberts observed Oswald standing at the bus stop, Oswald was simply waiting for Officer Tippit to come around and pick him up, as had been pre-arranged.
The Warren Commission concluded that if Oswald left his rooming house a few minutes after 1:00m., he needed to have reached 10th and Patton before 1:16m.
The timing was important because Tippit’s murder was recorded on the police radio tape at 1:16m., when a citizen witness to the shooting went into Tippit’s patrol car and used the police radio in Tippit’s patrol car to let Dallas Police know Tippit had been shot.
The JFK assassination occurred at approximately 12:30m., and in the following forty-six minutes, Oswald had to have had sufficient time to walk leisurely out of the book depository’s front door, walk to a bus stop, get stuck in traffic, exit the bus, walk to the bus terminal, grab a cab, ride a short distance to his rooming house, change clothes, walk to the bust stop, stand for a while, and then walk down 10th just as Tippit was driving by—all within the span of no more than forty-six minutes.
The Warren Commission’s reconstruction of the Tippit killing on East 10th Street near Patton Avenue in Oak Cliff had Tippit’s patrol car pulling up on Oswald, who stopped casually, bended by resting both his elbows on the passenger door so he could see Tippit through the passenger window, and spoke to Tippit through the open window vent.
Oswald then stepped back from the car and shot Tippit three times in the chest, as Tippit got level with the car windshield on the driver’s side of the car, before Tippit ever reached for his gun.
After Tippit fell to the pavement, Oswald moved around the front of the car to shoot him in the head, execution style.
Witnesses gave conflicting testimony over whether Oswald was walking east or west when Tippit’s patrol car came up on him.
There was also conflicting testimony over whether Tippit’s patrol car first passed Oswald, or whether Oswald tured and went the opposite direction when he saw Tippit’s patrol car approaching.
What was a consensus was that Tippit stopped and Oswald, or whoever the person was, approached the car from the passenger’s side to begin what seemed at first to be an amicable conversation.
Again, there was conflicting testimony whether Tippit was reaching for his gun after he got out of the patrol car, but what was Clear was that the assailant opened fire suddenly, pumping three shots into Tippit’s chest with a revolver held casually at hip level.
Calmly, the assailant pumped one more round into Tippit—a headshot on a severely wounded man lying helpless and bleeding on the pavement—just to make sure he was dead.
Then, walking away, the assailant reloaded, casually tossing the spent shells away at the scene of the crime, seemingly unconcerned about witnesses the assailant knew were watching.
We surely cannot believe that Tippit, presumably alerted that a presidential assassin was on the loose, would have given an unknown suspect the chance to draw first.
The manner of shooting—three shots to the chest, followed by a shot to the head after the man was already down—bear all the earmarks of a cold-blooded, professional, gangland slaying, not the nervous or impulsive reaction of a person like Oswald who had no prior history of ever having shot or killed anyone.
In her testimony to the Warren Commission, Grant said that one of her coworkers at the Las Vegas Club, Leo Torti, showed her a magazine photo of Tippit after he was killed and Grant remembered that Tippit had been in the Vegas Club around a month prior to his murder.
Journalist Joachim Joesten also confirmed Ruby knew Tippit as part of Ruby’s policy of working with the cops.
Yet that conclusion is belied by evidence the Warren Commission had, but refused to consider seriously.
Commission Exhibit 3001 is an FBI report filed by Special Agent James W Swinford, dated July 30, 1964, that documented Oswald, Jack Ruby, and Officer Tippit all frequented the same restaurant, Dobbs House Restaurant in Oak Cliff.
She related she recalled the person now recognized as Oswald was last seen by her in the restaurant at about 10:00 AM, Wednesday, November 20, 1963, at which time he was “nasty” and used curse words in connection with his order.
Miss Dowling professed not to have known Jack Ruby as a customer, but she said she had heard from another employee he was a night customer.
Sylvia Meagher took the Warren Commission to task for what she termed a “well-defined pattern” in the Commission’s “fact-finding” in which the Commission first discounted information inimical to its thesis Oswald was the lone assassin, and then followed by proclaiming that such information did not exist.
But when Tippit realized that JFK had been assassinated and that he had been set up to help the assassin escape, Tippit changed his mind.
Oswald, pleased to find Tippit, was relaxed as he approached Tippit’s patrol car, as indicated by Oswald leaning against the passenger door with both forearms and speaking to Tippit though the window vent.
What surprised Oswald was that Tippit was not reacting according to how the script had been written.
Tippit was being aggressive, acting as if he intended to arrest Oswald—something that took Oswald completely by surprise.
Buchanan notes Jim Lehrer, then reporting for the Dallas Times Herald, wrote on December 20, 1963, that Ruby had made five reservations on a plane leaving for Mexico.
When Oswald turned the tables and killed Tippit, the most upset was Oswald.
Bowley, then a thirty-five-year-old Dallas resident, was driving on 10th Street when he noticed Tippit’s patrol car and Tippit lying in the street injured.
I traveled about a block and noticed a Dallas police squad car stopped in the traffic lane headed east on 10th Street.
A man was trying to use the radio in the squad car but stated he didn’t know how to operate it.
As we picked the officer up, I noticed his pistol laying on the ground under him.
When the ambulance left, I took the gun and put it inside the squad car,231 When the police arrived, Bowley explained he did not see the shooting.
Assuming Bowley’s watch was accurate, this would place the Tippit shooting at a few minutes before 1:10m., making it impossible for Oswald to be the shooter.
Lane noted that the police radio broadcast log for November 22, 1963, substantiated Bowley’s affidavit, with the log showing a citizen call over the police radio to the dispatcher was responsible for notifying the Dallas Police Department that Tippit had been shot.
Benavides testified to the Warren Commission that he was driving in his 1958 Chevrolet pickup truck on 10th Street about fifteen feet from Officer Tippit’s stopped police car when he saw the first shot.
After that, I set there for just a few minutes to kind of, I thought he went in back of the house or something.
At the time, I thought maybe he might have lived in there and I didn’t want to get out and rush right up.
Mr Benavides: Then I don’t know if I opened the car door back further than what it was or not, but anyway, I went in and pulled the radio and I mashed the button and told them that an officer had been shot, and I didn’t get an answer, so I said it again, and this guy asked me whereabouts all of a sudden, and I said on 10th Street.
Then he started to—then I don’t know what he said; but I put the radio back.
I mean, the microphone back up, and this other guy was standing there, so I got out of the car, and I don’t know, I wasn’t sure if he heard me, and the other guy sat down in the car.
He was standing at the door of the car, and I don’t know what he said to the officer or the phone, but the officer told him to keep the line clear, or something, and stay off the phone, or something like that.
That he already knew about it,299 Again, Mark Lane focused on the timeline.
Lane estimated that Earlene Roberts saw Oswald standing at the bus stop at 1:04m.
He calculated that the testimony of Benavides and Bowley put the Tippit murder at no later than 1:12m.
The distance between the bus stop and the 10th Street Tippit shooting was just under one mile.
Sylvia Meagher, in her 1967 book, Accessories After the Fact, is also very critical of the Warren Commission regarding the Tippit murder timeline.
There is no evidence Oswald took the shortest route; Warren Commission counsel David Belin re-enacted the route, with a stopwatch in hand, taking what he described as the “long way around route,” finding the walk took 17 minutes and 45 seconds.
I wanted to know if that day when you were in there if you saw anyone in there— Mrs.
When I saw this man I wasn’t sure, but I had cold chills just run all over me.
Sylvia Meagher commented that when reading the testimony about the “identification” on which the Commission relied for determining Oswald killed Tippit, she felt a few cold chills too.
Markham, who had been greatly upset by her experience, was able to view a lineup of four men handcuffed together at the police station.
Markham confirmed her positive identification of Lee Harvey Oswald as the man she saw kill Officer Tippit.
We should also note that in an affidavit Markham signed on November 22, 1963, she placed the time of the Tippit shooting at 1:06m.—a fact the Warren Commission omitted in the final report.
Taxicab driver William Scoggins, was eating his lunch at the corner of 10th and Patton when Tippit was killed.
He cannot truly be considered an eyewitness because his view was obstructed by shrubbery.
Scoggins claims to have caught a glimpse of the assailant’s face as the assailant looked back over his shoulder while running from the scene through some shrubbery about twelve feet away from where Scoggins was sitting in his cab.
Whaley’s description of the lineup makes clear picking Oswald out was not a difficult task, whether or not a positive identification could be made.
Then they took me down in their room where they have their show-ups, and all, and me and this other taxi driver who was with me, sir, we sat in the room awhile and directly they brought in six men, young teenagers, and they all were handcuffed together.
At that time he had a pair of black pants and white T-shirt, that is all he had on.
But you could have picked him out without identifying him by just listening to him because he was bawling out the policemen, telling them it wasn’t right to put him in line with these teenagers and all of that and they asked me which one and I told them.
Not much younger, but just young kids, they might have got them in jail.
He showed no respect for the policemen, he told them what he thought about him.
They knew what they were doing and they were trying to railroad him and he wanted his lawyer.
No, sir; it wouldn’t have at all, except that I said anybody who wasn’t sure could have picked out the right one just for that.
It didn’t aid me because I knew he was the right one as soon as I saw him.
But the interesting point is that Oswald’s action in offering to give up the cab is not consistent with the behavior that might be expected from a vicious criminal who had just assassinated the president of the United States and was desperate to escape capture.
The Warren Commission never interviewed two neighbors who told private investigators two men were involved in the Tippit shooting.
Acquilla Clemons claimed to have seen two assailants flee the scene after the shooting.
She saw a second taller thinner man across the street who looked like he was giving a “go-ahead” sign to the shooter.
After the shooting, the taller-thinner man went in one direction while the shorter-stocky man went in the other.
Frank Wright, who lived nearby, went to his front porch on hearing the shooting.
He described the shooter as being of medium height and wearing a long coat.
In 1978, Anthony Summers, a former investigative journalist for the BBC, had William Alexander, an assistant Dallas district attorney in 1963, drive him around the area of the Tippit shooting.
Alexander told Summers that Dallas police had measured the routes Oswald might have taken, interrogated bus drivers, and examined taxicab records, but still were unable to determine how precisely Oswald got to the scene of the Tippit shooting or what he was doing there.
Summers reported Alexander slapped the dashboard and repeated, “Oswald’s movements don’t add up then, and they don’t add up now.
The letter indicated that Tippit had been having an affair with a “small blonde waitress” who worked at Austin’s Barbecue Drive-in, a Dallas restaurant where Tippit moonlighted as a security officer on weekends.
On November 22, 1963, Tippit evidently knew the waitress was pregnant with his child.
On August 6, 1963, the former waitress was granted a divorce by the court, giving her custody of her four children; the woman’s husband evidently did not show up at court to contest the divorce.
Tippit the type of financial problems that could send him in the direction of Jack Ruby and the Dallas underworld, making Tippit a candidate for the role of “corrupt policeman” who author Thomas Buchanan speculated was involved with gangsters attempting to get Oswald out of town following the assassination.
Another issue may have been that the former husband of the waitress evidently had a history of stalking Tippit and his wife when they went out together, leading some to speculate the Tippit murder may have been simply an act of revenge by a jealous husband.
At approximately 12:45m., about a half hour before he was killed, Tippit was observed in his police car on the Oak Cliff side of the Houston Street viaduct.
He sat in his car ata GLOCO gas station and observed traffic crossing the bridge for about ten minutes.
Tippit suddenly sped out of the gas station and headed south on Lancaster.
At 12:54m., Tippit answered his dispatcher and said he was at “8th and Lancaster,” about a mile south of the GLOCO gas station.
Tippet let the number he dialed ring seven or eight times, and hung up without saying a word.
Without speaking to Stark or Cortinas, Tippit rushed out of the store, jumped in his squad car, and sped north across Jefferson Boulevard, where he ran a stop sign, turned right on Sunset, and was last seen by multiple witnesses speeding east, one block from North Beckley, the location of Oswald’s rooming house.
The FBI disregarded the story because Oswald was supposed to have been at work in the book depository all day on November 22, 1963.
The story also conflicts with the Warren Commission narrative that had Oswald spending the night of the twenty-first in Irving, Texas, with his wife and daughters, who were then living with Ruth Paine.
The Commission had reported that Oswald returned to the Paine home on Thursday night, November 21, 1963, to pick up “curtain rods,” a cover story for what the Commission maintained was in reality the Mannlicher-Carcano rifle hidden in a crudely constructed paper bag container.
When Oswald left the Paine residence at 7:15m. the morming of the assassination, his wife, Marina Oswald, was still in bed.
The Commission reported Oswald was driven to work on November 22, 1963, by Buell Wesley Frazier, a neighbor of Ruth Paine.
Stark confirmed that Oswald was waiting at the store around 7:30m. when Stark arrived the day of the assassination.
Stark recalled that Oswald bought a ticket to the Dick Clark Show and left by bus.
Stark did not know anyone by the name of Whitten and did not believe there was a Whitten who had a connection to the store.
No one has established the identity of the person Tippit called from the record store moments before he was shot to death.
Nor is it clear why police dispatch assigned Tippit to patrol Oak Cliff, an area Tippit did not normally patrol, when police units around the city were being called downtown to assist in the assassination investigation.
Dallas Police dispatch records show that when Tippit called at 8th Street and Lancaster, he was told to stay at large for any emergency that came in.
Tippit had stepped away from his patrol car without notifying the dispatcher, a habit Tippit evidently had developed over the last few years.
The next mention of Tippit in the Dallas Police dispatch records is when a citizen calls in saying, “We’ve had a shooting out here,” at what appears to be 1:16m.
Markham’s contemporaneous description of the gunman and her positive identification of Oswald at a police lineup, the Commission considers her testimony reliable.
Dallas Police found a light-gray Eisenhower-style zipper jacket evidently abandoned under a two-door Oldsmobile parked at Ballew’s Texaco service station at Crawford and Jefferson.
The Commission felt these facts warranted the finding that Lee Harvey Oswald disposed of his jacket as he fled from the scene of the Tippit shooting.
The assumption appeared to be that Oswald must have felt he would be less recognizable if he changed his appearance by discarding the jacket.
Even witnesses who testified Oswald was wearing a jacket when he left the rooming house disagree when describing the jacket.
Others claimed the jacket they saw Oswald wear was more “tan” in color.
Westbrook, the senior Dallas Police officer on the scene of the Tippit shooting, and several other officers concentrated their search along Jefferson Boulevard.
When things like this happen—it was happening so fast you don’t remember these things.
Westbrook’s testimony under oath would have been a gift to a competent defense lawyer representing Oswald at trial.
What Westbrook established under friendly questioning from counsel was that the Dallas Police Department at the scene failed to establish a chain of custody for the jacket seen in Commission Exhibit 162.
The problem is that Westbrook, the Dallas Police officer credited with finding the jacket, did not initial the jacket as required by Dallas Police Department policy to establish a chain of custody that could be utilized in court if necessary.
Even if CE162 was the jacket found at the scene of the Tippit killing, tying that jacket to Oswald would be difficult.
Eyewitnesses may have agreed Oswald was wearing a jacket when he left his rooming house, but they disagreed over the description of the jacket.
In both cases, handwriting experts established that the signature and other writing on the mail order applications belonged to Oswald.
This was evidently sufficient for the Warren Commission to dismiss the possibility an expert forger may have completed the mail-order application without Oswald’s knowledge.
The Warren Commission established that four bullets were removed from the body of Officer Tippit.
Of the four recovered bullets, three were copper-coated lead bullets of Western-Winchester manufacture, and the fourth was a lead bullet of Remington-Peters manufacture.
But of the four cartridge cases recovered at the scene of the Tippet shooting, two were Western-Winchester and two were Remington-Peters.
Granted, the weapon, a .38 Special Smith & Wesson Victory Model snub-nose revolver could fire a wide range of ammunition, but the problem was the recovered bullets did not match the make of the cartridge cases recovered at the crime scene.
Oswald had in his pocked five live cartridges, all Western-Winchester .38s.
Perhaps most important, no bullets of either kind were found in Oswald’s rooming house in Oak Cliff or in the Paine home in Irving, Texas, where his wife and daughters were living.
Meagher stressed that Oswald’s purchase of this ammunition was never established.
There is nothing whatsoever to suggest that he ever fired the .38 Smith & Wesson revolver at any time before November 22, 1963.
If he did purchase supplies of each brand, there is no evidence of the transaction, no evidence of use, and no left-over ammunition among his possessions.
Benavides explained he watched as the shooter emptied the spent shell cases and tossed them into some shrubs.
Still, he did not pick up the cases until some twenty minutes after the shooting had taken place.
Neighbors Barbara and Virginia Davis found two other spent shell casings outside their apartment.
Poe, who gathered all four of the spent shell casings found at the scene of the Tippit shooting, neglected to place his initials on any of them.
Day, confirmed the Dallas Police in 1963 did not consistently follow rules for the marking of evidence, with the result that no reliable chain of custody could be established for any of the expended shell cases found at the site of the Tippit murder, just as no reliable chain of custody could be established for the discarded jacket found by Dallas Police Capt.
That the murderer would reload the weapon on the scene, throwing the spent shell cartridges in some bushes, strains credibility, unless the person wanted the shell cartridges to be found.
Given that the weapon was just used to kill a policeman, the discarded spent cartridges would obviously provide a positive identification of the murder weapon.
The strange mix of WesternWinchester and Remington-Peters bullets would reinforce this identification.
There is no proof Oswald kept a .38 weapon in his rooming house or that he left the rooming house the afternoon of the assassination with a .38 weapon.
When he was apprehended at the Texas Theater, Oswald was in possession of a .38 handgun loaded with that particular strange mix of bullets.
The person who shot Tippit was observed leaving the scene, but no one reported observing where Tippit’s murderer was headed.
Oswald was observed leaving the rooming house, but was not identified with certainty until he was apprehended at the Texas Theater.
There is nothing in the record of the case to rule out that Tippit’s murderer might have been someone different who met up with Oswald and gave him the .38 pistol that was in his possession when he was apprehended at the Texas Theater.
FBI agent Robert M Barrett confirmed with McDonald that one of the cartridges in the .38 when Oswald was captured displayed a primer indentation, confirming that Oswald had pulled the trigger in the theater, but the gun did not fire.
Again, the Warren Commission merely assumed that the two weapons were the same, ignoring the need to conduct ballistic tests to establish the fact, and ignoring the inconsistency that a revolver that fired to murder Tippit had misfired in the scuffle with McDonald.
THE WALLET In one of the more bizarre aspects of the Tippit shooting, there is credible evidence that a wallet belonging to Lee Harvey Oswald was found by police at the scene of the Tippit shooting.
Near the puddle of blood in the street where Officer Tippit lay slain, Dallas Police Captain Westbrook found a man’s wallet that contained IDs.
If any clue suggests the Tippit murder was done in a fashion so as to frame Lee Harvey Oswald for the shooting, that detail was the wallet found on the scene.
Now, I don’t know where he found it, but he had the wallet in his hand.
Had the FBI agent on the scene of the Tippit murder been James P Hosty, Jr., instead of Bob Barrett, Westbrook might have learned about Lee Harvey Oswald immediately.
Hosty, the FBI agent assigned by Washington to keep track of Oswald in Dallas, had held repeated meetings with Oswald prior to the assassination.
Oswald, saying: Near the puddle of blood where Tippit’s body had lain, Westbrook had found a man’s leather wallet.
In it, he discovered identification for Lee Oswald, as well as other identifications for Alek J Hidell.
Westbrook called Barrett over and showed him the wallet and identifications.
Westbrook asked Barrett if the FBI knew anything about Oswald or Hidell.
Westbrook took the wallet into his custody so that it could be placed into police property later.
Barrett told me that if I had been at the scene with Westbrook, I would have immediately known who Oswald was.
Although official police reports would later state that Oswald’s wallet and identification were found on Oswald’s person when he was arrested in the movie theater, Barrett insists that Westbrook found them near where Tippit was slain.
I have to speculate that at the theater, Westbrook had handed the wallet to a lower-ranking officer, and in the confusion it was assumed that wallet had been retrieved from Oswald’s person.
The FBI decided to go with the official police version, even though Barrett’s version was further proof Oswald had in fact gunned Officer Tippit down.
In news footage Reiland took immediately after the Tippit shooting, Dallas Police Sargent Calvin “Bud” Owens is seen holding Tippit’s service revolver in his left hand and a man’s leather wallet in his right.
Owens then shows the wallet to Dallas Police Captain George Doughty, who is standing to his left.
As Owens holds open the wallet and Doughty examines an item in the wallet in a plastic sleeve, a third person approaches Owens and Doughty.
Reiland narrated the film sequence during its first showing on television.
When the close-up of Tippit’s revolver and the wallet were shown, Reiland reported, “This gun you see in the background here in hand is the one that was allegedly used to shoot the police officer.
Reiland was helpful in documenting that a wallet was picked up at the crime scene but he was wrong in his identification of both the weapon and the billfold.
The weapon turned out to be Tippit’s weapon, and although the wallet was positively identified as Oswald’s, its origins are questionable.
If Owens found the wallet himself or whether the wallet was handed to Owens by a bystander has never been determined.
In his sworn testimony to the Warren Commission, Westbrook said nothing about finding a wallet belonging to Oswald at the scene, although Westbrook gives extensive testimony about finding a jacket.
At the Tippit murder scene, Tippit’s service revolver was reported to be found, but no mention was made in the police reports of finding a wallet belonging to Oswald.
Butler confirmed that a police service revolver was found near Tippit’s body.
All Tippit’s personal items, including his wallet, were removed from his pockets at Methodist Hospital after his death.
A list of Tippit’s personal effects prepared by the Dallas Police Crime Scene Search Section lists one “black billfold” as among Tippit’s personal effects at the time of his death.
The only item brought to the Methodist Hospital and added to Tippit’s personal effects after his death was his service revolver, which by all accounts was left behind at the murder scene, most likely in the possession of Captain Westbrook.
The wallet found loose at the crime scene was believed to have belonged to Oswald.
At the Texas Theater, it is debatable whether or not Oswald paid for a ticket prior to entering the theater, but it is well established that Oswald bought popcorn before sitting down.
After apprehending Oswald, Dallas Police reported he had $13.87 on his person at the time of arrest.
It strains credibility that Oswald bought refreshments at the Texas Theater with loose change, not realizing he lost his wallet.
Once Oswald’s employment at the book depository was established, police would naturally link Oswald to the JFK assassination.
The Tippit shooting then would be the key to establishing Oswald’s guilt.
Whoever planned the JFK assassination knew the police would immediately conclude Oswald killed Tippit because he was on the run and he wanted to avoid arrest.
If Tippit had stopped Oswald, he did not follow Dallas Police Department procedure.
Tippit did not radio to the police dispatcher that he had identified a suspect.
If Tippit had suspected the man he encountered had a weapon and that his life was in danger, he did not act like it.
David Belin, assistant counsel to the Warren Commission, characterized the Tippit killing as the Rosetta Stone to the JFK assassination.
Belin is right, but not because the Tippit murder proves Oswald was JFK’s assassin.
The Tippit killing is the Rosetta Stone to the JFK assassination, because it proves the gunman who killed Tippit set Oswald up as the killer.
In the ballistic evidence, the JFK entrance wound in the neck was sufficient evidence to prove JFK was killed by a conspiracy, every bit as much as finding Oswald’s wallet at the scene of the Tippit murder proves there was a gunman complicit in the plot who got away.
However, it is hard, if not impossible, to shake the suspicious nature of the evidence.
The Oswald wallet was one of three Oswald wallets positively identified in the case.
The wallet was dropped in the lap of the Dallas police and the FBI and conveniently contained documents linking “Lee Harvey Oswald” to “Alex James Hiddel,” the alias used to purchase via mail order the MannlicherCarcano rifle identified as the assassin’s weapon.
The only problem was there was no evidence to establish that Lee Harvey Oswald had ever owned this wallet or created the ID papers found in the wallet Like much of the evidence in the case against Lee Harvey Oswald, the wallet was just too good and too conveniently found to be believable.
Julia Postal was the Texas Theater ticket taker the afternoon that JFK was murdered.
Postal had testified to the Warren Commission that both she and Warren “Butch” Burroughs, the ticket taker who also worked the concession stand inside the movie theater, were both preoccupied, listening on a transistor radio to early news report about the JFK shooting.
Objectively viewed, we have to ask why Oswald decided to go to the movies.
Or, was he following instructions to head to this movie theater after the assassination to meet a contact that would provide him money, his next instructions, and possibly a plan to get out of Dallas.
Going to the movies has to be seen as reflecting a desire to drop from public view, at a time when Oswald had to know police all over the city were looking for JFK’s killer.
Whatever Oswald’s motivation to go to the movies may have been, it is hard to understand why he would have wanted to draw attention to himself by sneaking into the movie theater without paying the ninety cents for a ticket when he had nearly $15.00 with him.
Butch Burroughs sold Oswald the popcorn without confronting Oswald about not paying for a movie ticket.
Returning to the theater, Oswald picked a different seat and sat next to a pregnant woman sitting alone in the mid-seat section of the movie theater’s lower floor.
Minutes before the police arrived, this woman got up and moved to a seat in the balcony, and Oswald moved to a seat alone in the center section three rows from the back, in the second seat from the aisle.
This is where Oswald was found when a small army of Dallas police and sheriff’s deputies stormed the Texas Theater.
One possible explanation is that Oswald had been instructed that after the assassination he would meet a person who would give him an airplane ticket or a car ride out of Dallas, some much needed cash, and instructions regarding what he should do next.
Very likely, Oswald had nothing to do with the Tippit murder and was never at the Tippit murder scene.
The Dallas police made a complete list of everyone who was in the Texas Theater at the time.
That list, however, had disappeared by the time the Warren Commission began taking testimony in 1964.
Note also that Oswald had been in the Texas Theater for some fifty minutes before police apprehended him at approximately 1:51m., less than an hour-and-a-half after JFK’s fatal shooting.
FBI Agent Barrett and Dallas Police Captain Westbrook both rushed to the Texas Theater when the Dallas police radio call went out, and were both in the theater standing in the aisle when a police rush subdued Oswald following the scuffle with Dallas policeman McDonald.
Having examined the photographs of Lee Harvey Oswald on the identification papers found in the wallet at the Tippit murder, Barrett and Westbrook immediately identified the man apprehended in the Texas Theater as Oswald.
It is interesting to surmise that the possibility that one or more of the officers had missed an assignment.
Oswald had to have been startled in the Texas Theater when the movie stopped and the house lights went on.
Seeing police move into the seating area from various directions, Oswald must have quickly figured out the police were after him.
Drawing a gun on officer McDonald, Oswald had to have been prepared for his life to end, right then and there.
If it had, the course of history would have changed—at least for Jack Ruby.
With Oswald dead, there would have been no need for Jack Ruby to kill him.
RUBY AND OSWALD One of the first indications that Ruby knew Oswald prior to the assassination came at a press conference given by District Attorney Henry Wade in the Dallas Courts Building on Saturday, November 23, 1963, at 12:30m., almost precisely twelve hours after the assassination.
Remarkably, the suspect for both the Tippit murder and the JFK assassination, Lee Harvey Oswald, had been in police custody since approximately 2:00m., within an hour and a half of the shooting.
News film footage shot within the Dallas Police Department offices showed Jack Ruby, the owner of a well-known downtown strip joint and nightclub named The Carousel, had been present in Dallas Police headquarters continuously since shortly after the assassination, mixing freely with the news reporters and Dallas police as if he had an official purpose being present.
At the press conference, Wade was asked about Oswald’s motive, whether he belonged to any Communist organizations.
Jack said, nodding his head toward the man on his right, who was sitting at the table in his own cloud of detachment.
Beverly tried to extend a simple hello to acknowledge Jack’s friend but he seemed as if he could care less about meeting anyone.
When Beverly met people she saw them as having either light or dark personalities, and this man disturbed her.
Not that he said anything to warrant that impression, it was an unsolicited gut-feeling she had.
Oswald was dressed in casual drab; he was slouched in his chair, his arms folded defiantly across his chest.
Beverly didn’t know what the CIA was but she thought it must be important or Jack wouldn’t have brought it up.
She wondered if Lee Oswald really was a friend, or if Jack was once again a little loose with his terminology.
She also described an incident a few days later when Oswald stood up in the club and verbally assaulted a comic named Wally.
Oliver was also suspicious when a dancer at the Carousel Club named “Jada” disappeared after telling reporters that Ruby had introduced her to Oswald at the club a couple of weeks before the assassination.
Oliver was doubly suspicious when she found out Jada had disappeared leaving part of her wardrobe at the club.
L Lee” was talking with Jack Ruby about plans to kill the governor of Texas, John Connally.
Jarnagin, in his cover letter to FBI Director J Edgar Hoover, noted he had passed this information on to the Texas Department of Public Safety on October 5, 1963, by telephone.
Jarnagin related that he heard Oswald ask Ruby for money because he just returned from New Orleans where he got put in jail over a street fight.
This appeared to coincide with Oswald’s arrest in New Orleans on August 16, 1963, when Oswald was arrested for disturbing the peace in an incident that developed out of his distributing leaflets for the Fair Play for Cuba Committee.
FBI Special Agents Ralph Rawlings and Bardwell Odum interviewed Jarnagin and filed a report on December 19, 1963.
The FBI report documents that Jarnagin, interviewed at the Dallas office of the FBI, related once again the same details of the conversation he overheard between Ruby and Oswald on October 4, 1963, at the Carousel Club when Jarnagin was in the company of a striptease dancer he identified as Robin Hood, plotting to kill the governor of Texas.
The FBI report noted the Texas Department of Public Safety had no record of any call being received from Jarnagin or anyone else regarding an alleged attempt to assassinate Governor Connally; the report also indicates the FBI tracked down Shirley Ann Mauldin, the dancer known as Robin Hood.
She admitted to being at the Carousel Club with Jarnagin and meeting Jack Ruby there, but denied overhearing any conversation about a plan to assassinate the governor.
At approximately 11:00m. on the day of the assassination, Julia Ann Mercer claimed she was driving west on Elm Street when she was brought to a stop just beyond the triple underpass because a green Ford pickup truck, with a Texas license plate and the words “Air Conditioning” painted on the side, was parked and blocking her lane, sitting partly on the curb.
She waited approximately three minutes as a younger man in a plaid shirt got out of the passenger side of the truck and went around to the rear.
From the tailgate of the pickup truck, the younger man opened a long tool compartment in the back of the truck and removed a package she believed was a rifle case.
The young man walked up the embankment with the package in the direction of the grassy knoll area.
As she moved her car to get around the green truck, her eyes locked with those of the man driving the truck.
Miss Mercer said she was able to see him very clearly, identifying him as heavy built with a round face.
Officers from the Dallas Sheriff’s office and the FBI interviewed Mercer the night of the assassination.
On November 22, 1963, Mercer signed an affidavit at the Dallas County Sheriff’s office that described her sighting of the green Ford pickup truck.
In the deposition she said, “A man was sitting under the wheel of the car and slouched over the wheel.
This man had on a green jacket, was a white male and about in his 40’s and was heavyset.
On Sunday morning after the assassination, she was watching television with friends and saw Ruby shoot Oswald.
Instantly, she recognized these two men as the ones she had identified for the FBI on Friday.
She realized she had seen Ruby as the driver and Oswald as the young man with the rifle.
She could not believe it included a statement attributed to her that said she did not see the driver clearly enough to identify him.
Neither Oswald nor Ruby turned out to be the “loners,” as they had been painted in the 1964 investigation.
The scientific evidence mentioned in the above quote involved acoustics evidence obtained from a police dictabelt believed to contain sounds of the shooting recorded in Dealey Plaza that recorded a channel of police transmissions due to a microphone switch stuck open on a motorcycle in JFK’s police escort.
The point is that the House Select Committee on Assassinations realized the minute scientific evidence challenged the assumption Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone.
As noted in chapter 1, if all the damage done to JFK, Governor Connally, and witness James Tague could not be done by three shots from a bolt-action Mannlicher-Carcano rifle in the time span available for the shooting, then one or more additional gunmen were involved.
If Oswald was merely the fall guy or the patsy he insisted he was, Oswald had to be silenced.
The risk was that if Oswald began talking, he knew enough to implicate those in the conspiracy above him.
THE NEED TO SILENCE OSWALD As much as the Tippit murder looks like a gangland slaying, the Oswald murder looks even more so.
From the moment Oswald was captured on Friday, November 22, 1963, Jack Ruby began stalking him in the halls of the Dallas Police and Courts Building.
News film taken within the Dallas Police Department shows numerous clear and unmistakable views of Ruby mixed in with police and reporters.
While in polite Dallas society, the Carousel Club might have been called a nightclub, a more correct designation would have been to characterize the establishment as a strip joint.
A holdover from the 1930s and 1940s burlesque theater, strip joints in America in the 1960s were typically connected to the underworld.
Second-rate comics mixed openly with striptease dancers, a free flow of alcohol, and relatively cheap but passable food.
If Jack Ruby had lacked underworld connections, it is unlikely he would have been the proprietor of the Carousel Club in downtown Dallas in the 1960s.
Once in police custody, Oswald was subjected to a rigorous schedule of questioning by seasoned police detectives accompanied by FBI, all without legal representation.
When Dallas police apprehended Oswald at the Texas Theater, Oswald had $13.87 in cash on his person, a paltry sum for a man who planned in advance to make a run for it.
In custody, Oswald called for “someone to come forward,” suggesting he expected that possibly a lawyer or maybe even some official in the government would come forward to explain he was not an assassin.
When Oswald was told by reporters at a press conference held in the Dallas Police Department that he had been charged with the JFK assassination as well as the Tippit shooting, Oswald appeared shocked.
Clearly, the post-assassination getaway was not going as planned, at least not as far as Oswald was concerned.
Once Oswald realized fully that he had been set up as the fall guy, his silence was not likely to last.
Under police questioning, Oswald displayed a calculating intelligence and a wry wit.
In his few brief televised press conferences or in his off-the-cuff responses to questions reporters threw him in the halls of the Dallas Police Department, Oswald was clearly continuing to think and calculate.
Oswald appeared after his arrest to be a highly intelligent individual who was doing his best to cope with a near impossible situation.
Observed closely, Oswald’s patience appeared to be running thin in the short time he was held under arrest before he was murdered.
Viewed from an underworld or intelligence agency perspective, the only way to protect other conspirators higher up was to silence Oswald permanently.
When sedated in the hospital, Cheramie predicted that JFK would be assassinated in Dallas that coming Friday.
Rose Cherami, or Cheramie, was one of some thirty aliases used by Melba Christine Marcades, born Melba Christine Youngblood.
She was a thirty-fouryear-old drug and substance abuser with a long list of prostitution and other arrests since she turned eighteen.
She had worked as a B-girl for Jack Ruby in his Carousel Club in Dallas and had been mainlining heroin for nine years.
A staff report compiled by the House Special Committee on Assassinations reported Cheramie had taken her last injection of heroin around 2:00 pm on Nov., 1963.7°° Lt.
Francis Fruge of the Louisiana State Police was the first to interview Cheramie at Moosa Memorial Hospital in Eunice, Louisiana.
Because the hospital was a private hospital and Cheramie had no funds or insurance, Fruge placed Cheramie in the Eunice City Jail.
Derouin, a local doctor from the coroner’s office, who administered a sedative to calm her from the effects of drug withdrawal.
Derouin made the decision to commit her to the state hospital in Jackson, Louisiana.
According to a deposition Fruge gave the House Select Committee on Assassinations, Cheramie told him that “she was coming from Florida to Dallas with two men who were Italians or resembled Italians.
They stopped at this lounge ... and they’d had a few drinks and got into an argument or something.
With further investigation, Fruge found Cheramie’s farfetched story had a basis in fact.
Fruge tracked down the owner of the Silver Slipper Lounge, Mr Mac Manual, who told him Cheramie had come into the bar with two men who were pimps engaged in the business of hauling prostitutes in from Florida.
When Cheramie became intoxicated and rowdy, one of these men supposedly “slapped her around” and threw her outside.
At that time, Aracha Smith befriended anti-Castro activist and commercial pilot David Ferrie, a shadowy New Orleans figure who figured prominently in the investigation of New Orleans prosecutor Jim Garrison.
In the investigation of the Cheramie case, there is a suggestion Louisiana state police found diagrams of the sewer system in Dealey Plaza among the contents of Aracha Smith’s apartment in Dallas.
The following morning, Cheramie told Fruge the two men traveling with her from Miami were going to Dallas to assassinate the president.
Cheramie claimed her role was to obtain $8,000 from an unidentified source in Dallas, who was evidently holding her child, and proceed to Houston with the two men to complete a drug deal.
She said the trio was to meet a seaman who was bringing in eight kilos of heroin to Galveston by boat.
From Galveston, once the drug transaction was completed, the trio expected to head to Mexico.
Fruge took Cheramie into custody after customs chief in Galveston verified the scheduled docking of the boat and the name of the seaman.
During a flight from Houston, according to Fruge, Cheramie noticed a newspaper with headlines suggesting investigators were trying to establish a link between Ruby and Oswald.
According to the deposition Fruge gave the House Select Committee, Cheramie laughed at the newspaper article.
She explained to Fruge that she had worked for Ruby, or Pinky as she knew him, at his nightclub in Dallas, and she claimed Ruby and Oswald “had been shacking up for years” as homosexual lovers.
Fruge had his superior call Captain Will Frit of the Dallas Police Department with this information, only to find Fritz responded that he was not interested.
Other reports indicated that at the state hospital on November 22, 1963, several nurses were watching television with Cheramie when she again predicted the JFK assassination.
According to the hospital witnesses, “during the telecast moments before Kennedy was shot Rose Cheramie stated to them, “This is when it is going to happen’ and at that moment Kennedy was assassinated.
Victor Weis, a psychiatrist at the hospital, also confirmed that Cheramie told him she knew both Ruby and Oswald and had seen them sitting together on several different occasions in Ruby’s club.
Wayne Owen, who had been interning from LSU, later told the Madison Capital Times that Cheramie had warned him and other interns that the plot involved a man named Jack Rubenstein.
Owen said he and the other interns shrugged it off at the time but were shocked when they saw Ruby kill Oswald and found out that Jack Ruby was born Jack Rubenstein.
In one of the most intriguing studies conducted on the JFK assassination, researcher John Armstrong has argued that “Lee Harvey Oswald” was a case of double identity created by the intelligence community from the time Oswald was thirteen years old.
The plan was to merge the identity of a Russian-speaking refugee with that of American born Lee Harvey Oswald over a period of many years.
If the merging of the identities was successful the CIA could then place a native Russian-speaking young man, with an American identity, in the Soviet Union as a spy.
The young man known to the world as “Lee Harvey Oswald” successfully “defected” to the Soviet Union in 1959 and returned to the United States with a Russian wife in 1962.
A year anda half later this young man was set-up as the “patsy” in an elaborate scheme engineered by career CIA officials to assassinate John F Kennedy.
Two days after the assassination of President Kennedy the Russian-speaking refugee, Harvey Oswald, was shot and killed by Dallas nightclub owner/CIA gunrunner, Jack Ruby.
People’s descriptions of ‘Lee Harvey Oswald’ often vary widely with respect to eye color, height, weight, hair color, and physical characteristics.
Lee often got drunk, got into fights and never spoke or read Russian or supported communism.
Harvey rarely drank, was never known to get into a fight; he spoke, read, and wrote Russian, and supported communism.
On October 31, an Oswald applied for a job at the multistory Statler Hilton in downtown Dallas.
In a convincing manner, Armstrong wrote a one-thousand-page book published with a comprehensive CD-ROM of backup photographs and other documenting material, going through Oswald’s life history, demonstrating many instances where biographical discrepancies almost demand a concept of double identity to be explained.
Armstrong’s theory does help explain a lot of inconsistent Oswald descriptions and sightings, such as the sworn testimony of Dallas County Sheriff’s Department officer Roger Craig to the Warren Commission.
Even Armostrong’s book is insufficient to sort out all the complications involved in a two-Oswald double-identity theory.
Importantly, Armstrong pointed out the use of doubles has traditionally offered the intelligence community endless opportunities for deception.
Armstrong also admits prying apart the two lives creates a story that becomes very difficult, if not impossible to follow, with twists that are hard to comprehend and results that may seem bizarre at best.
The JFK assassination record contains many documented but inconsistent or conflicting stories of who exactly Lee Harvey Oswald was, stretching back at least to 1956 when Lee Harvey Oswald joined the marines.
Will Fritz’s office to see the suspect who had been apprehended for the murder of Dallas police officer Tippit.
Seeing Oswald, Craig gave a positive identification that Oswald was the man he had seen running down the grassy knoll to get into the Nash Rambler being driven by the dark-complected man.
According to Craig’s testimony, Oswald, on hearing how this discussion was proceeding, interrupted and said to Craig pointedly, “That station wagon belongs to Ruth Paine.
As noted earlier, at the time of the JFK assassination, Marina Oswald, Lee Harvey Oswald’s wife, was rooming with Ruth Paine in Irving, Texas, a suburb within the greater Dallas metropolitan area.
This is what Armstrong apparently believed, although we can only speculate what Oswald meant, as he did not expand on the comment.
In Murray’s photograph of the Nash Rambler, the Hertz rent-a-car sign on top of the School Depository building records the time as being 12:40m., approximately ten minutes after the shooting.
Just like walking home, hopping into the Nash Rambler heading west on Elm Street would have been a much more direct escape route for Oswald.
After entering the Nash Rambler, Oswald and the driver needed only to drive a few blocks on Elm to arrive at Elm and Beckley, a short distance from Oswald’s rooming house at 1026 North Beckley.
The problem was that if the Warren Commission accepted Officer Roger Craig’s testimony, then Oswald had an accomplice.
Ruth Paine, it turned out at the time of the assassination, owned a Nash Rambler that Craig described.
Although the Warren Commission did not ask Craig to identify the make of the rifle found on the sixth floor, he recalled deputy constable Seymour Weitzman declaring the weapon to be a 7.65 German Mauser and he remembered Captain Fritz agreeing.
Craig’s testimony was also at odds with the testimony of fellow workers in the book depository that insisted Oswald was seen in the lunchroom in the immediate aftermath of the shooting, calmly drinking a soda.
The first inclination would be that both could not be right, or that the witnesses in the book depository and Craig were describing two completely different people that resembled one another.
Craig was fired from the Sheriff’s office on July 4, 1967 and afterward had difficulty finding steady work.
After multiple documented but unsolved attempts made on his life that Craig suspected were attempts to silence him, Craig was alleged to have committed suicide on May 15, 1975.
In the next chapter, we will look at the involvement of intelligence agencies in the JFK assassination.
In chapter 5, we will consider the creation by the CIA of an assassination model plan that dates back to Guatemala in the 1950s, involving the creation of a patsy to take the blame.
FOUR OSWALD, THE KGB, AND THE PLOTS TO ASSASSINATE JFK IN CHICAGO AND TAMPA “Former marine, Lee Harvey Oswald gave up his American citizenship and moved to Russia.” —Ronald Reagan, Radio Broadcast, 1979319 “All I know is that my son is an agent, and that he deserves to be buried in Arlington Cemetery.” —Mrs.
He realized KGB involvement in the assassination, if proved, could well lead to a nuclear war with Russia.
If the CIA were involved, LBJ realized immediately the JFK assassination amounted to nothing less than a coup d’état.
But an official blue-ribbon commission packed with respected government officials with distinguished histories of service to the United States could put an end to the speculation, provided the commission concluded Lee Harvey Oswald was the assassin and that Lee Harvey Oswald had no accomplices in committing his crime.
This was an especially convenient solution because Lee Harvey Oswald was dead.
With Oswald already framed as the assassin, no trial would ever challenge a verdict already reached in the court of public opinion.
Speculation about Oswald’s motivation ought to be cut off, and we should have some basis for rebutting thought that this was a Communist conspiracy or a right-wing conspiracy to blame it on the Communists.
While there is credible evidence Oswald was a KGB agent, strong arguments can be made that Oswald was a double agent, actually working for a combination of naval intelligence and the CIA when he defected to the Soviet Union, a cover that permitted Oswald to penetrate Soviet intelligence.
The problem with Oswald is determining whether he was a committed Marxist or whether he was just pretending to be a committed Marxist.
The similarities between the three plots leaves no doubt it was a conspiracy that involved the KGB, the CIA, the mob, or some combination of all three.
That the assassination of JFK was a conspiracy becomes inevitable once we realize two counterparts with remarkable parallels to Lee Harvey Oswald had been setup equally as patsies, one positioned in Chicago and the other in Tampa.
Pacepa, one of three deputy chiefs of the Departamentul de Informatii Externe , Romania’s Department of Foreign Intelligence, was living in his native Bucharest when JFK was assassinated.
In January 2013, I e-mailed Pacepa specifically regarding his direct experience in Romania’s intelligence operations.
Lee Harvey Oswald, the Soviet KGB, and the Kennedy Assassination, Pacepa makes a convincing argument that Oswald was a KGB agent.
In 1990, after he became a United States citizen, Pacepa began examining the documents on the JFK assassination published by the United States government.
He was impressed with the wealth of Soviet operational patterns visible throughout the material on Oswald that had been turned up by United States investigators who lacked the experience and familiarity with Soviet intelligence operations to recognize the telltale patterns that Oswald was a KGB agent.
He became convinced Oswald was recruited by the Soviets when he was a Marine stationed in Atsugi, Japan, outside Tokyo.
The Secret War of Lee Harvey Oswald, interviewed some four hundred people who knew Oswald, including Zack Stout, a Marine stationed with Oswald at the top secret U-2 Navy base at Atsugi, Japan.
Stout told Lipton that Oswald was spending time with an attractive girl who “worked” at the Queen Bee, one of the three most expensive nightclubs in Tokyo, and one that catered to American senior air officers and U2 pilots.
The Queen Bee, Stout noted, had more than one hundred strikingly beautiful Japanese hostesses.
To take a hostess out of a nightclub required paying not only for the girl and for a hotel room, but also compensating the nightclub for the bar business lost during her absence.
A “date” at the Queen Bee could cost anywhere from sixty to eighty dollars a night, at a time when Oswald was earning less than eighty-five dollars a month.
Still, Oswald saw her regularly, reportedly even bringing her back to the base area several times.
Other Marines less friendly to Oswald were astonished someone of her “class” would go out with Oswald at all.
Based on my twenty-seven years’ experience with Soviet intelligence, I am convinced that the PGU’s eye fell on Oswald soon after he began frequenting the bars around the base.
The incident was a severe embarrassment to the Eisenhower administration that was forced to admit the operation of the secret United States spy planes over Russia after the Soviet Union produced intact pieces of the U-2 airplane as well as Gary Powers, the surviving pilot, for the world press.
Edward Jay Lipton wrote that after Powers was returned to the United States he suggested it might have been Oswald who provided the Soviets with the secret information about his flight.
When Pacepa was an intelligence officer for Romania, the KGB in the summer of 1959 pressed him for confirmation that the U-2 spy plane could fly at altitudes of about thirty thousand meters, approximately ninety thousand feet.
Pacepa’s intelligence station in Romania was asked to make a special effort to check out that information and expedite to headquarters any confirmation or expansion of that information.
Pacepa has no doubt Oswald was the source of the Soviet’s U-2 intelligence.
In exchange for providing the intelligence needed, the Soviet government richly rewarded Oswald.
On that triumphant Moscow May Day, the U-2 became what Pacepa considered the crowning foreign policy success of Khrushchev’s career.
However, the commonly accepted version of Oswald’s helping the Russians know the U-2 altitude because of his specialized knowledge has been questioned.
Lee Harvey Oswald in the Far East, claims the Soviets had been tracking all U-2 flights from Atsugi.
The extensive Soviet tracking of U-2 flights should have given them sufficient knowledge of the altitude at which the flights flew.
Swike was confident Oswald’s appeal to the Soviets involved not specialized U-2 knowledge, but Oswald’s awareness of the nuclear possibilities the United States government was considering for U-2 flights.
Swike documented the presence of a Nuclear Weapons Assembly team on base at Atsugi, in addition to the U-2 program.
Swike directly questioned how much detailed technical information Oswald obtained at Atsugi concerning the U-2 program.
He also suggests that Oswald’s interest to the Russians may have been because of Oswald’s knowledge of the marine’s secret atomic weapons facilities at Atsugi.
In those years, the Soviets were intensely interested in tracking any and all United States nuclear facilities that may have violated international agreements at the end of World War II to keep Japan nuclear free.
This was an important subset of the larger interest the Soviets had in the 1950s in identifying and inventorying all United States nuclear facilities wherever they might be found.
THE CHINA ANGLE Little known even today, the United States foreign policy in 1963 was obsessed not only with Cuba and the threat of Soviet nuclear weapons being deployed only ninety miles from United States soil, but also with the mounting concern that Mao Tse-Tung and the Communist Chinese were on the fast track to testing an atomic weapon.
Finally, JFK selected veteran United States diplomat and Soviet expert W Averell Harriman to push forward with Moscow the idea the United States and the USSR would jointly launch a military attack on China’s atomic facilities to prevent or at least to slow China from advancing with atomic weapons.
While JFK ruled out attacking China unilaterally, a joint American-Soviet preemptive nuclear attack on China was actively discussed at the top levels of the Kennedy administration.
Chang documented that discussions continued within the White House even as LBJ assumed the presidency.
This puts an entirely different spin on what the CIA possibly may have had in mind for Lee Harvey Oswald.
First, it is important to recall that on August 16, 1963, just a few months prior to the JFK assassination, Oswald was filmed on the street in New Orleans handing out leaflets for the Fair Play for Cuba Committee.
By traveling to Cuba the students risked losing their passports, facing long court battles in the United States, and facing fines up to $5,000 plus five years in jail.
In his testimony to the Warren Commission, Lee tried to deny any knowledge of Oswald, claiming many people wrote letters to him that he did not personally know.
Tippit or an officer that apprehended Oswald at the Texas Theater, the CIA might have claimed that Oswald was not specifically a KGB agent, but a KGB agent who had evolved into a Maoist, following the Progressive Labor movement’s decision to embrace Chinese Communism in their support of Castro’s revolution in Cuba.
The storyline could have been that Oswald was a Marxist who became a KGB agent after he defected to Russia, but once in Russia, Oswald became disillusioned with Russian Communism, as he sided ideologically increasingly with China.
Realizing JFK was not going to launch a unilateral atomic attack on China’s nuclear facilities, the CIA’s goal could have been to cause the American people to rise up, not just against Castro’s Cuba for being responsible for JFK’s assassination, but also against Communist China.
Identifying Oswald as a Maoist would have focused public anger on China, allowing the CIA and State Department to leverage the United States resentment against China as a means of widening the Sino-Soviet split and possibly pressuring LBJ into launching a nuclear attack on China and maybe even invading Cuba just as the uprising after 9/11 allowed President George W Bush to invade Afghanistan and Iraq.
However, the CIA could not spread the disinformation that Oswald was a Maoist if Oswald remained alive.
With a lawyer’s assistance, Oswald might have exposed an intelligence operation that extended back into the 1950s, and likely with culpability of both the USSR and the United States.
But with Oswald dead before being arrested, the press would have had no chance to hear anything Oswald may have wanted to say.
Oswald never got the chance to make his criminal defense, or to give his explanation of how he had been manipulated in the run-up to the assassination.
Clearly, he appeared surprised, if not also disgusted, when a reporter shouted out to him the fact that he had been charged not only with the shooting of Officer Tippit but also the murder of the President of the United States.
CE399, the “magic bullet,” which likely was planted on the stretcher, could have been linked to the Mannlicher-Carcano rifle.
With the likelihood the wallet found at the Tippit murder scene was planted there, the evidence against Lee Harvey Oswald was circumstantial at best.
The only eyewitness that positively identified Oswald was Howard L Brennan and, as we saw in chapter 2, Brennan’s testimony would have been easy to challenge in court.
There was not proof beyond a reasonable doubt that Oswald shot anyone on November 22, 1963, and there never was a criminal trial at which Oswald had an opportunity to defend himself.
At any rate, if the plan was to gain public support against Cuba and China, once Oswald survived the post-assassination chaos and was in police custody, the CIA had to back off all attempts to leverage the assassination against China.
With the huge success of JFK’s assassination turning into a huge disaster with Oswald arrested, the CIA masterminds had no alternative but to frame Oswald as the lone-gun assassin, while simultaneously implementing the back-up plan to silence Oswald.
Not accidentally, Ruby had a history of working with both the mob as a young man in Chicago and then as a Dallas nightclub manager who ran a strip joint, as well as with the CIA as a gunrunner to Cuba.
While Ruby burst into the JFK assassination drama as if he were acting on his own, perhaps out of sympathy with JFK’s widow and children, one look at Ruby’s background quickly cast that myth into doubt.
Researcher Jones Harris has noticed a largely overlooked and seemingly out of context statement former CIA director Allen Dulles made during the Warren Commission hearings.
The date was June 9, 1964, and the witness was Abram Chaynes, a legal advisor to the State Department.
The issue before the Warren Commission was whether or not Oswald’s 1959-issued United States passport should have been returned to him in July 1961 for the purpose of returning to the United States, and even more specifically, whether Oswald should have been re-issued his United States passport in 1963, when Oswald applied to renew it on June 24.
Yet, the record clearly shows Allen Dulles was thinking about the possibility and had no problem pointing out the possibility to the Committee.
In 1994 an FBI memorandum dated November 26, 1963, four days after the JFK assassination, surfaced.
Wannell and addressed to William C Sullivan, then the head of FBI intelligence operations.
It referenced information provided by Bernard Weisman, an employee of the United States Information Agency, or USIA, that suggested the Communist Chinese were behind the JFK assassination.
The third paragraph of the memo indicated that “Oswald’s disillusionment with the Soviet Union, his recent activities in connection with the FPCC and the fact that he still reportedly held Marxist ideas” indicated that President Kennedy’s assassination could have at least advanced the interests of Communist China.
As assassination researcher Rose pointed out, J Edgar Hoover enjoyed juggling both the “lone nut” and “communist conspiracy” angles of the assassination.
ASSASSINATE JFK “For the last ten years of my military intelligence career I also supervised Romania’s ultra-secret equivalent of the United States National Security Agency, thus becoming familiar with Soviet ciphers and codes,” Pacepa wrote.
Pacepa is convinced Oswald’s mission upon his return to the United States was to assassinate President Kennedy in retaliation for his forcing Russia to erect the Berlin Wall in 1961 and withdraw their missiles from Cuba in 1962.
Khrushchev was Pacepa’s supreme boss for nine years, as he was promoted up to the top of the Soviet bloc intelligence community.
The next morning Romanian head of state Gheorghiu-Dej was having breakfast with Khrushchev when General Vladimir Yefimovich Semichansky, the new chairman of the KGB, presented the Soviet leader with a cable Soviet intelligence sent from Washington informing the Kremlin that Kennedy had canceled an eighteen-day trip to Brazil so he could personally manage a naval quarantine designed to block Russian cargo ships from reaching Cuba.
Pacepa recounted Dej’s astonishment when Khrushchev tumed purple reading the cable.
Khrushchev cursed violently as he threw the cable on the floor and ground his heel into it.
On Sunday, October 28, 1962, Pacepa was with Dej in Bucharest when Khrushchev decided to recall the Russian ships, avoiding a challenge to the United States naval blockade and bringing an end to the Cuban missile crisis.
Pacepa commented that Dej’s reaction was that while Kennedy had won this standoff, his life was now in danger.
While Dej appeared to enjoy witnessing Khrushchev’s humiliation, he was also troubled.
The Soviet espionage service PGU under General Sakharovsky had a distinct methodology in training an assassin.
The next step was solidly to imprint in the officer’s mind a future vision of the wonderful life he would have in the ‘proletarian paradise’ after completing his mission abroad.
The Thirteenth Department of the KGB, the unit assigned the responsibility of preparing and implementing foreign execution operations, prepared a cover story for Oswald, creating a life for him working at a radio factory in Mimsk.
It tested the waters by having Oswald write a letter to the United States embassy in Moscow, asking to return to the United States as a United States citizen since he had become disillusioned with his experience in the USSR and had never become a Soviet citizen.
The United States embassy gave Oswald his passport back and initiated immigration procedures for his Soviet wife, Marina.
ENTER GEORGE DEMOHRENSCHILDT One of the more enigmatic characters in the JFK assassination saga is George DeMohrenschildt, who together with his wife, Jeanne, befriended Lee Harvey Oswald and Oswald’s wife, Marina, when the couple returned to the United States and settled in the Dallas-Ft.
Both Pacepa and assassination researcher and author Edward Jay Epstein concluded DeMohrenschildt was Oswald’s KGB “handler,” the person Russian intelligence assigned to watch over and monitor Lee Harvey Oswald in the United States.
The Secret World of Lee Harvey Oswald, reported that DeMohrenschildt remained a mystery to the FBI, CIA, and Office of Naval Intelligence that had investigated his activities since 1941.
According to Epstein all that was known for certain about DeMohrenschildt was that he had arrived in the United States in May 1938 on the SS Manhattan, traveling under a Russian passport issued in Belgium.
Toward the end of World War II, when it was clear the Nazis were going to be defeated, the German baron became the French DeMohrenschildt who claimed to have attended a commercial school in Belgium founded by Napoleon.
After World War II, he claimed his father had been a Russian engineer in the Romanian Ploiesti oilfields where he was captured by the Soviet Army and executed.
Claiming to be a “petroleum” engineer, DeMohrenschildt worked for a series of American oil companies in Cuba and Venezuela.
In testifying to the Warren Commission, DeMohrenschildt was remarkably vague about how he and his wife, Jeanne, met the Oswalds.
Her vagueness on recalling how she and her husband first met Lee and Marina Oswald strains their credibility to the breaking point.
Attorney Bill Simpich has documented that DeMohrenschildts’s relationship to the CIA traces back to the 1950s when DeMohrenschildt was identified as part of an antiSoviet movement known by its Russian initials “NTS,” standing for the National Alliance of Russian Solidarists, a group founded in the 1930s by second generation Russian émigrés.
In the 1950s, the CIA included NTS within the Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty organization, a pet project of Cord Meyer, the CIA International Organization’s head who had a background of being a World War IT hero with excellent connections in Boston society.
Meyers reported directly to CIA Director Allen Dulles and his best friend in the CIA was Counterintelligence chief James Angleton.
DeMohrenschildt got in touch with Oswald as a result of a request from Dallas CIA station chief J Walton Moore.
In February 1963 Ruth Paine attended a party in Dallas especially to meet Marina supposedly because Ruth was looking for someone with whom to practice her Russian.
Marina Oswald subsequently moved into Ruth Paine’s home as a roomer, as noted earlier, and was living there at the time of the assassination.
Later, Ruth Paine’s testimony would be particularly damaging to Lee Harvey Oswald, describing him as being a deeply disturbed individual, extremely unhappy with his life in the United States, and always potentially violent to his wife.
The evidence that DeMohrenschildt’s CIA connections were the magnet that drew him to Oswald is a strong and important counterweight to Pacepa’s suggestion that DeMohrenschildt was a KGB agent assigned to be Oswald’s handler in Dallas.
Oswald posed in two backyard photographs holding a rifle, which the Warren Commission assumed was the Mannlicher-Carcano rifle Oswald bought by mail order, and wearing a holster containing a handgun that the Warren Commission assumed was the mail-order weapon used to kill Officer Tippit.
In the photographs, Oswald was holding up a March 24, 1963, issue of the newspaper The Worker and the March 11, 1963, issue of The Militant, two Communist publications to which Oswald subscribed.
By holding these two papers, Oswald made a statement that he supported the Trotskyite/Maoist side of the Sino-Soviet.
However, during his interrogation after being arrested by the Dallas police, Oswald claimed the photographs were doctored, with his head placed on someone else’s body.
Curiously, Marina gave DeMohrenschildt a copy of the photograph, which was signed “For George, Lee Harvey Oswald” and dated April 5, 1963.
Marina had scribbled on the photograph in Russian, “Hunter of Fascists.
On Sunday, March 10, 1963, Oswald photographed the alley behind Walker’s home in the wealthy Turtle Creek suburb of Dallas.
Oswald also took careful measurements of various points around the house, using a nine-power hand telescope.
Oswald collected bus timetables from the area, putting the photographs and other information into a journal he kept in his study.
Then, on April 10, 1963, Oswald left Marina a note in Russian instructing her to contact the Red Cross for help if he was apprehended by police, he was killed, or he had to flee.
Marina, while largely kept in the dark about most of Lee Harvey Oswald’s activities when he was away from her, certainly had knowledge of her husband’s intelligence agency connections, especially with regard to the Soviet Union.
At 9:00m. that evening, Walker was working on his income taxes when a bullet penetrated the window and slammed into the wall, narrowly missing his head.
According to the story as told by Epstein, Oswald got home around 11:30m., breathing hard and appearing extremely tense.
In his testimony to the Warren Commission, DeMohrenschildt recalled that he had seen the rifle in a closet at the home Oswald was renting from Ruth Paine, when George and Jeanne DeMohrenschildt stopped by on Orthodox Easter Sunday 1963 to leave off a rabbit toy for their young daughter.
When DeMohrenschildt confronted Oswald as to why he had the gun, Oswald explained it was for target shooting.
For some unexplained reason, DeMohrenschildt associated this rifle with the attempt on General Walker.
And he smiled to that, because just a few days before there was an attempt at General Walker’s life, and it was very highly publicized in the papers, and I knew that Oswald disliked General Walker, you see.
So I took a chance and I asked him this question, you see, and I can clearly see his face, you know.
Became tense, you see, and didn’t answer anything, smiled, you know, made a sarcastic—not sarcastic, made a peculiar face.
Marina went in the garden and picked up a large bouquet of roses for us.
They have nice roses downstairs and gave us the roses to thank for the gift of the rabbit.
He stresses that she should contact the “embassy,” and that they have “friends here,” and that the “Red Cross” (written in English, so that she will know how to ask for it) will help her financially.
At that time, the code for embassy was “office,” but it seems Oswald wanted to be sure Marina would understand what she should immediately inform the Soviet embassy.
Pacepa also found it noteworthy that Marina did not mention this note to United States authorities after Oswald’s arrest.
The ace in the hole for Pacepa involves his personal experience operating in the upper ranks of the Soviet’s Eastern Bloc intelligence network.
What makes Pacepa’s claims about Oswald and DeMohrenschildt so credible is that Pacepa was there.
What he reported, he knew from what he saw and heard in person operating as a Soviet Bloc intelligence operative.
For instance, he knew for a fact that DeMohrenschildt was in contact with the KGB in 1957.
Pacepa further concluded that de Mohrenshildt’s efforts to minimize and distort his contact with Oswald suggest DeMohrenschildt was still acting under PGU guidance during the time he was in contact with Oswald in Texas.
The attempt on General Walker played an important role in the Warren Commission’s conclusion that Oswald was the sole shooter in the JFK assassination, not only because of the physical evidence involved, but also because it provided insights into Oswald’s motivation.
That Oswald left the photographs of him with the rifle and Communist papers at home when he made his attack on Walker suggests the he may have been concerned about his place in history.
If the attack had succeeded and Oswald had been caught, the photos would probably have appeared on the front pages of newspapers and magazines all over the country.
A serious problem remains is trying to reconcile why Oswald would have been equally enthusiastic to murder General Walker, a right-wing member of the John Birch Society, and President John F Kennedy, a moderate Democrat who right-wing extremists in Dallas at the time tended to view as being virtually a Communist himself.
The Warren Commission’s determination to use the attempt on Walker as proof that Oswald was the JFK assassin demands we accept Oswald as an equal opportunity murderer.
Even if Oswald were an expert shot, he never had any military sniper experience.
An expert sniper understands how to succeed, choosing a high probability shot that takes the best advantage of the physical circumstances of the setting.
Obviously Oswald was no expert, having missed an unsuspecting older man sitting largely stationary in a chair with all the time in the world.
Further, an expert sniper not only would have no trouble hitting such an easy target, he wouldn’t brag about having taken it.
If anything, the conclusion from hearing that Oswald shot at General Walker but missed would have been to assume JFK had nothing to worry about.
That DeMohrenschildt’s testimony before the Warren Commission was one of the most extensive sworn testimonies taken indicates the importance the Commission believed it was to providing insight into Oswald’s psychological state and motivations at the time of the assassination.
Subtly, DeMohrenschildt’s testimony supplied the basis for the Warren Commission to conclude Oswald was a lone loser.
He claimed no government would be stupid enough to trust Oswald with anything important.
DeMohrenschildt told the Warren Commission that Oswald was unhappy in his marriage.
Jeanne DeMohrenschildt advanced the same themes, claiming Oswald was “cruel” to his wife.
This, after George DeMohrenschildt testified that in their arguments Marina became so enraged she scratched Oswald with her fingernails.
Everything he did ended up in failure, and Jeanne contrasted Oswald’s life with JFK’s.
For the Warren Commission, the testimony George and Jeanne gave reinforced their impression of Lee Harvey Oswald as a misfit, a loner, a loser who made a pathetic husband to his young, attractive but neglected Russian wife.
Reading the extensive testimony given by George and Jeanne DeMohrenschildt conveys the impression the pair were engaged in a classic example of intelligence disinformation, as if their goal was to build a story that would frame Oswald as being a confused, Communistsympathizing misfit who was capable of a violent act, such as killing the President.
If this was the assignment the KGB gave George and Jeanne DeMohrenschildt, the husband-wife pair did an excellent job befriending the Oswalds from out of nowhere and getting to know them well enough that their testimony to the Warren Commission would convey at least surface credibility.
KHRUSHCHEV CHANGES HIS MIND In a political trial at the end of 1962, the West German Supreme Court mounted a public trial of Bogdan Stashinsky, a Soviet intelligence officer who had been decorated by Khrushchev for assassinating two enemies of the Soviet Union living in the West.
Having backed down in the Cuban missile crisis, the last thing top Soviet officials wanted was to cause another provocation that could bring the United States and the Soviet Union into direct confrontation.
Shortly after the attempt on Walker, on April 19, 1963, DeMohrenschildt and his wife abruptly left Dallas for Haiti.
Papeca attributes this to a decision Khrushchev made that he was no longer interested in having Kennedy assassinated.
The DeMohrenschildts returned to Dallas only briefly, at the end of May, to pack up their household belongings in two days and leave again, without saying good-bye to the Oswalds.
From Dallas, the DeMohrenschildts drove to Miami, to fly on to Haiti, where they arrived on June 2, 1963.
They remained in Haiti until April 1964, when the Warren Commission called them to testify.
Pacepa reported that a short time after the Kennedy assassination, a “substantial” sum of money, in the range of $200,000 to $250,000 had been deposited in the DeMohrenschildts’s account in a Port-au-Prince bank.
Epstein, evidently determined to confront DeMohrenschildt about serving as Oswald’s KGB handler, was in the process of interviewing DeMohrenschildt at the Breakers Hotel in Palm Beach, Florida, on March 29, 1977, when they broke for lunch.
Planning to meet again at 3:00m., DeMohrenschildt returned to the Palm Beach where he was staying.
He found a card informing him that he had been subpoenaed to testify before the House Select Committee on Assassinations.
Even though shotguns are not typically used in suicides, the death was ruled a suicide and never investigated.
OSWALD’S TRIP TO MEXICO Pacepa is convinced Moscow tried to deprogram Oswald to no avail and that despite Moscow’s instruction that Oswald should not assassinate JFK, Oswald proceeded with his original plans, convinced he was fulfilling his “historic” task.
This would have meant Oswald had to find a way to convince the KGB that allowing him to go ahead with the original plan remained a good idea.
But first, Pacepa believes Oswald took a secret trip to Mexico in April 1963 to meet with the KGB in an effort to convince the Russians he was able to carry out the mission without adverse consequences to the Soviet Union.
Comrade Kostikov, as Valery Kostikov, an officer of the KGB’s Thirteenth Department responsible for foreign assassinations.
Kostikov was assigned under diplomatic cover to the Soviet embassy in Mexico.
Pacepa notes that after the assassination, Oswald’s handwritten draft of the letter to the Soviet embassy was found among Oswald’s effects in the garage of Ruth Paine’s home.
This is to inform you of recent events since my meetings with Comrade Kostin [of new events since my interviews with comrade Kostine] in the Embassy of the Soviet Union, Mexico City, Mexico.
I was unable to remain in Mexico indefinitely because of my Mexican visa restrictions which was for 15 days only.
I could not take a chance on requesting a new visa unless I used my real name, so I returned to the United States.
While the Warren Commission had no knowledge of a meeting Oswald may have had with Kostikov in April 1963, the Commission managed to deepen the mystery over Oswald’s subsequent trip to Mexico that Oswald took in September 1963, arriving in Mexico City on September 27.
The Warren Commission reported Oswald went almost directly to the Cuban embassy and applied for a visa to Cuba in transit to Russia.
Representing himself as the head of the New Orleans branch of the pro-Castro organization Fair Play for Cuba, Oswald noted his previous residence in the Soviet Union and indicated his desire to return there to live.
The Cubans would not give Oswald a visa until he received one from the Russians, which would take several months.
The Warren Commission reported that Oswald became agitated at being given the runaround, and that he left Mexico City on October 2, 1963, after having been rebuffed by both the Cuban and the Soviet embassies.
The Warren Commission was forced to publish the photo in order to quash her allegations.
To this day, the person photographed by the CIA in Mexico has not been identified, but the person in the photograph is clearly neither Oswald nor Ruby.
The CIA advised that on October 1, 1963, an extremely sensitive source had reported that an individual identified himself as Lee Harvey Oswald, who contacted the Soviet Embassy in Mexico City inquiring as to any messages.
Whether or not Oswald visited Mexico in 1963 remains one of the most hotly debated issues in the JFK assassination mystery.
The person in the photograph the CIA released bears no resemblance whatsoever to Lee Harvey Oswald.
The person in the photograph the CIA released has never been identified.
Still, Pacepa remains convinced that Oswald did connect with Kostikov in Mexico City.
Pacepa focused on a Mexico City guidebook for the week September 28—October 4, 1963, found among Oswald’s effects, as well as a Spanish-English directory.
The guidebook had the Soviet embassy’s telephone number underlined in pencil, with the names Kosten and Osvald written in Cyrillic on the page listing Diplomats in Mexico, as well as checkmarks next to five movie theaters listed on the previous page.
Also marked on the map is the Palace of Fine Arts, a place Pacepa notes was a favorite place for tourists to assemble on Sunday mornings to watch the Ballet Folklorico.
All this suggested to Pacepa that Oswald and Kostikov had a secret “iron meeting” in Mexico City.
Iron meetings, or invariable meetings, were meetings the KGB used as standard procedure for emergency situations.
Since Oswald knew too much about the original KGB plan, Moscow arranged for him to be silenced forever, fearing that sooner or later Oswald would break down and begin talking to the police more openly and honestly.
Most likely, Pacepa is correct that Oswald was on a mission only he truly understood.
For all Oswald knew, as Pacepa argues, the information that Khrushchev had lost his nerve and called off the JFK assassination might just be disinformation best disregarded.
Even if Pacepa is right in arguing that Oswald followed the KGB methodology of acting alone, we must draw a distinction between what Pacepa means by “lone-gun assassin” and what the Warren Commission meant by using the same term.
The Warren Commission clearly intended to dismiss the idea Oswald had accomplices in order to rule out the possibility of a conspiracy.
Pacepa understands that Oswald was Carrying out a KGB-ordered foreign assassination that by definition involved an international conspiracy tracing back to Moscow.
Still, nothing about unraveling the mystery surrounding the JFK assassination is so easy as to lay all the blame on the KGB alone.
Not unless we want to make the KGB responsible for launching multiple look-alike plans to assassinate JFK, and we are willing to turn a blind eye to the recently discovered evidence of the involvement of the mob and the CIA in the assassination plots.
John and Robert Kennedy, the Plan for a Coup in Cuba, and the Murder of JFK, assassination researcher Lamar Waldron and syndicated radio talk-show host Thom Hartmann documented that in addition to the plan to assassinate JFK in Dallas, two earlier plots were thwarted: one in Chicago on November 2 and one in Tampa on November 18.
THE PLOT TO ASSASSINATE JFK IN CHICAGO The assassination attempt in Chicago was scheduled for Saturday, November 2, 1963.
JEK was scheduled to proceed from Chicago’s O’Hare Airport via motorcade to Soldier Field, where he was to watch the Army-Air Force football game with Mayor Daley.
The eleven-mile motorcade was planned to proceed down what was then known as the Northwester Expressway to the Loop in downtown Chicago.
At Jackson Street, the motorcade would make a difficult left-hand turn off the exit ramp onto the street to the stadium.
The Jackson Street turn, like the turn from Houston onto Elm, involved a ninety-degree turn that would bring the presidential limousine to a virtual standstill.
According to Secret Service agent Abraham Bolden, the FBI sent a teletype message on October 30, 1963, to the Secret Service in Chicago, stating that an attempt to assassinate JFK would be made on November 2, by a four-man team using high-powered rifles.
On November 2, Secret Service agents in an unmarked car tailed two of the four men after they left the rooming house together.
The two men being tailed caught onto the surveillance after they doubled back and overheard the agent’s radio.
With their cover blown, the Secret Service agents apprehended the two men, bringing them to the Chicago Secret Service office for questioning.
When no weapons were found in their possession or back at the rooming house, they were ultimately released.
Vallee was awarded the Purple Heart for wounds he suffered in the Vietnam War.
A member of the John Birch Society at the group’s zenith, Vallee was known in Chicago for his outspoken criticism of JFK’s foreign policy views.
Vallee worked for a printing company located in a warehouse building along the JFK motorcade route.
When arrested, Vallee had in his automobile an M-1 rifle, a handgun, and three thousand rounds of ammunition.
Vallee’s meeting could have been scheduled for a secluded spot or warehouse near Vallee’s place of work on Jackson, along the route of the JFK motorcade.
Vallee had worked at a secret U-2 base commanded by the CIA at Camp Otsu, Japan; Vallee later worked with the CIA at a camp near Levittown, Long Island, helping to train Cuban exiles to assassinate Fidel Castro, much as Oswald participated in a CIA training camp with Cuban exiles near Lake Pontchartrain near New Orleans.
Kennedy’s trip to Chicago on November 2, 1963, was unexpectedly canceled that day at 10:10m.
It also noted that Vallee, while being released from Chicago police custody on the evening of November 2, 1963, remained under “extensive, continued investigation” until 1968.4°° THE PLOT TO ASSASSINATE JFK IN TAMPA The JFK motorcade planned for Tampa on November 18, 1963, was one of the longest amounts of time in the open for JFK of his presidency; the only longer exposed time was in Berlin.
The motorcade in Tampa was scheduled to go from MacDill Air Force Base to Al Lopez Field to downtown Tampa and the National Guard Armory, then to the International Inn, ending back at MacDill.
He also disclosed that while the Secret Service had warned the Tampa Police Department of the threat, no information had been shared about the assassination plot in Chicago earlier that month.
Waldron and Hartmann also report that JFK had been briefed of the danger in Tampa; however, he did not feel a second motorcade could be canceled after Chicago without raising suspicion.
It was not brought to light until Waldron and Hartmann brought the plot to the attention of the JFK Assassination Review Board in 1995.4°° Of particular concern in the forty-minute motorcade was the Floridian Hotel, the tallest building in Tampa at the time.
Deputies from the sheriff’s office controlled the roofs of the major buildings in the downtown and suburban areas; every Overpass was lined with police officers on alert.
JFK rode in the back of the same SS-100-X Lincoln limousine he used in Dallas.
The “bubbletop” typically used on the limo in bad weather was not deployed on that beautiful Tampa day, and given that the bubbletop was not bulletproof, JFK felt placing it on the car in good weather gave the wrong message.
JFK stood in the limo for much of the motorcade, making him an easily visible target.
In contrast to Dallas, two Secret Service agents rode on the running boards on the back of the JFK limo for much of the motorcade and the motorcycle escort was properly deployed, surrounding the limo in motorcycle escort coverage.
LOOK-ALIKES The patsy in the Tampa assassination plot was Gilberto Policarpo Lopez, a young Cuban exile who had moved from the Florida Keys to Tampa in the fall of 1963 and was under surveillance by the FBI as a possible assassination threat.
This need to get a favorable determination on his status could make him amenable to taking risks for a United States agency or make him subject to manipulation by someone saying they could help with his document problems.
In addition to sometimes appearing to be a Castro supporter, each had a Russian connection in their background, meaning the CIA could blame any problem on the Russians if they were caught.
These same attributes would also make both good Mafia patsies for the JFK assassination.
Waldron and Hartmann conclude the parallels strongly suggest that in the months preceding the JFK assassination, the same people were manipulating both men, for the same reasons.
But that Lopez was allowed to travel to Cuba, while Oswald was denied a visa, may indicate that Lopez’s KGB mission in Tampa was finished as soon as the assassination attempt was canceled due to increased security.
On November 22, 1963, a Cubana Airlines flight from Mexico City to Havana, Cuba, was delayed for five hours awaiting a passenger.
That afternoon, just hours after the JFK assassination, the airfield in Mexico City was particularly clogged with diplomatic personnel.
Finally, around 10:30m. local time, the passenger arrived aboard a private twin engine airplane.
Reportedly, the passenger got out of the private airplane and boarded the Cubana flight directly, without going through customs.
Once aboard, the passenger entered the cockpit of the airplane, where he remained for the duration of the flight.
None of the passengers recognized him well enough to make a positive identification.
Examination of various CIA declassified documents has identified the passenger as Miguel Casas Saez, also known as Angel Dominquez Martinez, the name under which he entered the United States in early November 1963.
A source informed the CIA that Casas left Cuba on September 26, 1963, by small boat; after being caught in a hurricane off the coast of Florida, he landed in Puerto Rico and entered Miami from Puerto Rico, using the alias Angel Dominguez Martinez.
Sources told the CIA that Casas spoke Russian well and that he was an infiltrator who entered the United States on an espionage mission.
A CIA report filed November 2, 1964, also gives a strange account of airplane activity the CIA investigators felt was possibly connected with the JFK assassination.
A source identified only as “a well-known Cuban scientist” reported that by chance he was at the Havana airport on the afternoon of November 22, 1963, when at 5:00m. local time an airplane with Mexican markings landed and parked at the far side of the field.
The scientist determined the aircraft had just arrived from Dallas, Texas, via Tijuana and Mexico City.
Pacepa recounts how on the evening of November 26, 1963, four days after the assassination of JFK, he was paid a surprise visit in Bucharest by General Sakharovsky, the chief Soviet intelligence advisor for Romania.
He was told Oswald’s closest friend in the United States had been arranged to be a Russian émigré by the name of George DeMohrenschildt.
This was enough to convince Pacepa that Oswald had been recruited to be a Soviet agent.
The next day, Pacepa and his intelligence colleagues in Romania began working on the ultra-secret directive Sakharovsky had brought with him.
That Kennedy wanted to end the Cold War was seen as a threat to the CIA’s power.
Pacepa related that the cover story was to focus on Lee Harvey Oswald, an enlisted marine the CIA had chosen for carrying out the operation.
Moscow instructed Romanian intelligence to represent Oswald as a CIA agent who had been dispatched to the Soviet Union under cover as a defector, who was repatriated to the United States almost three years later, after completing his CIA-assigned espionage mission in Russia.
The directive instructed Romanian intelligence to construct the story so as to make the world believe the assassination had been perpetrated by the United States government.
Pacepa noted that Sakharovsky’s directive had been transformed into a disinformation operational plan under the code name Operation Dragon.
Soon, Pacepa found himself drafting an attachment to Operation Dragon containing guidelines for another rumor that was to be circulated, that Lyndon Johnson had orchestrated the JFK assassination because the vice president feared JFK would replace him with a member of the Kennedy clan for the 1964 elections.
Pacepa was bombarded with nearly frantic cables from the KGB demanding that Operation Dragon be put into high gear.
Pacepa’s assertion that a Soviet disinformation campaign was the origin of the various “conspiracy theories” that have sought to explain the JFK assassination in the last fifty years got strong support in 1992 when the British Secret Intelligence Service extracted retired KGB officer Vasili Mitrokhin, along with some twenty-five thousand pages of notes Mitrokhin had made in the course of twelve years, describing top-secret KGB files.
The Mitrokhin Archive and the Secret History of the KGB, history professor Christopher Andrew and Vasili Mitrokhin listed a number of prominent books financed by the KGB to promote JFK assassination conspiracy theories.
Together with student assistants and other volunteers, Lane founded what he called the “Citizens’ Committee of Inquiry” in a small office in Manhattan and rented a small theater at which he gave nightly renditions of what became known as “The Speech,” a rendition of Lane’s conspiracy theories that Lane updated nightly, as his research progressed.
Through a trusted intermediary, the KGB sent Lane fifteen hundred dollars to help finance his research.
The same intermediary also provided five hundred dollars to pay for Lane to travel to Europe to continue his research.
WARREN COMMISSION DISINFORMATION Remarkably, neither Khrushchev nor LBJ wanted a thorough and honest investigation.
Better to declare Lee Harvey Oswald the guilty party and move on, free of the risk that a trial could embarrass either Russia or the United States.
So remarkably the Warren Commission’s result—that neither the CIA, the FBI, nor the KGB knew anything about Oswald—was exactly the result the United States government wanted.
The Soviets preferred a result that put the blame on the CIA, but in the final analysis, the Soviets were satisfied as long as the Warren Commission did not blame the Russian government or the KGB for having ordered and arranged that JFK be murdered.
Neither Khrushchev nor LBJ wanted to go to war over JFK’s assassination.
That Lee Harvey Oswald shot JFK and acted alone was a good story, and both Khrushchev and LBJ were sticking to it.
According to Pacepa, Soviet disinformation was aimed at putting the blame back on the USA, as a defensive policy, just so no one would take too seriously Oswald’s KGB ties.
As far as Pacepa is concerned, the success of the argument that the CIA was behind the JFK assassination is evidence not in the facts of the CIA’s involvement but in how well designed and effective the Soviet disinformation campaign to blame the CIA turned out to be.
Pacepa’s assessment was that Epstein unfortunately bought into some of the conspiracy theories later in his career.
As a consequence, Pacepa felt Epstein’s “very well documented story is left hanging in mid-air,” a defect Pacepa felt he could correct in a future manuscript, simply by providing insights gained from his years of experience with the techniques, codes, and ciphers common to agents communicating within the KGB sphere of intelligence operations.
That conspiracy theorists like Joesten or Lane knowingly or not knowingly accepted funding from Soviet intelligence sources does not disqualify the value of the questions asked.
A particular argument or theory is not wrong simply because it can be traced to a KGB disinformation directive.
Had the Warren Commission case against Oswald been ironclad, conspiracy theorists, no matter how creative, would not have been interesting enough to command an audience.
The truth is, LBJ and the United States Justice Department assigned the Warren Commission a fool’s errand when assigning it the mission of finding Oswald guilty as the lone-nut gunman.
LBJ wanted the Warren Commission to reach that conclusion as soon as possible, so a final report could be published before the 1964 presidential election.
In the final analysis, the Warren Commission failed in its disinformation efforts to pin all the guilt on Oswald because the case against Oswald is not ironclad, while the Soviets succeeded in their disinformation campaign because the evidence supporting the conclusion the CIA was involved in the JFK assassination is more convincing than the official Warren Commission cover story.
A PAYOFF TO MARINA OSWALD In the aftermath of the JFK assassination, the CIA brokered a substantial financial pay-off to Marina Oswald.
The anti-communist journalist and author Isaac Don Levine befriended Marina Oswald shortly after the JFK assassination.
The book was never written, and Marina Oswald reportedly ended up receiving over $200,000 in what has been described as a “payoff” that Levine arranged.
In 1948 Jackson had become managing director of Time-Life International.
Jackson subsequently became the publisher of Fortune magazine, another Henry Luce creation.
In February 1953 Jackson was appointed as a special assistant to President Eisenhower in a role that included coordinating with the CIA and advising Eisenhower on cold war planning and the tactics of psychological warfare.
Jackson suppressed making the Zapruder film available for the public to view, arguing the film was too graphically violent for widespread distribution.
He spent an intensive week coaching Marina Oswald just prior to her first session before the Warren Commission on February 3, 1964.
Editing a magazine on behalf of the China Lobby called Plain Talk, Levine published a stream of articles analyzing the dangers to the United States from China after its fall to the Communist Chinese following Mao’s revolution, which began in 1949.
Levine’s history as an anti-Communist also included credits for encouraging Whittaker Chambers to speak out against Alger Hiss.
In either event, Oswald perfectly fit the type of person sought out by serious assassination planners who needed a dupe to play the role they had written for the patsy.
He could not have been more perfect, especially since he probably did not fully appreciate the extent to which he had been set up and abandoned, not until he saw Jack Ruby jump out at him with a gun in his hand in the basement of the Dallas Police Department.
Oswald often acted as if he expected to be misunderstood, or at least as if he were indifferent as to whether or not those in positions of authority understood him.
He was vulnerable not because he wanted to be understood, but because he dreaded being seen as unimportant.
Testifying to the Warren Commission, Marguerite told them she asked her son why he came back to the United States.
She knew he had a good job in Russia because he sent her expensive gifts, and he was married to a Russian girl.
She believed her son died in the service of his country—the United States of America—and that he laid down his life playing out his assigned counter-intelligence role as a loyal secret agent, whatever precisely that role may have been.
But Marguerite Oswald did not understand and certainly could not explain anything Lee Harvey Oswald had done, probably since he was a child, including why he went to Russia, or why he chose to come home.
FIVE ROOTS OF THE JFK ASSASSINATION—A BANANA REPUBLIC, THE CIA, AND THE MOB “Anyone perched above the crowd with a rifle could do it. —President John F Kennedy, in Fort Worth, Texas, the morning of November 22, 1963 “In Guatemala the political transition was unexpectedly smooth, and Castillo Armas became a popular elected president until his untimely assassination by a member of his personal bodyguard.
Memoirs of an American Secret Agent, 1974 THE MORNING HE DIED, John F Kennedy had talked about being assassinated.
Kennedy and myself, perhaps a half hour before he left the Hotel Texas to depart for Carswell Air Force Base.
And tell us, as nearly as you can recollect, exactly what he said at that time, please.
Well, as near as I can recollect he was commenting to his wife on the function of the Secret Service, and his interpretation of their role once the trip had commenced, in that their main function was to protect him from crowds, and to see that an unruly or sometimes an overexcited crowd did not generate into a riot, at which the President of the United States could be injured.
But he said that if anybody really wanted to shoot the President of the United States, it was not a very difficult job—all one had to do was get a high building some day with a telescopic rifle, and there was nothing anybody could do to defend against such an attempt on the President’s life.
JFK had discussed being shot by a high-powered rifle from a tall building so frequently he appeared to have been obsessed with that assassination method.
The reason he was obsessed with being assassinated by a sniper was because he had been warned that is precisely how he would be killed.
THE DAY JFK WAS SHOT Jim Bishop, the author of The Day Kennedy Was Shot, recounts that the last time he saw JFK was on October 24, 1963, approximately one month before the assassination.
Bishop recalled JFK selected assassination as the subject for their last chat, commenting how much he had enjoyed reading Bishop’s earlier book, The Day Lincoln Was Shot.
Every modern-day president is aware, at least intellectually, that the possibility of assassination is very real.
The roots of his premonition were not psychic in nature; he was aware of the threat because he had been warned a plot to assassinate him was in the works.
Before Dallas, JFK had been given ample warnings of specific and credible threats to his life.
On the morning of November 22, 1963, the rain had stopped, probably a reason for the assassination to take place.
The bubbletop would have been placed on the car if the rain had continued, and although it wasn’t bulletproof, it might have caused refractions in the bullets’ trajectories, which could have been sufficient to call off the mission.
When JFK visited Ireland in June, five months before he was assassinated, the Irish police took extra security precautions after receiving three death threats, including a warning a sniper with a rifle would take up a position on a rooftop overlooking the president’s motorcade route from the Dublin airport to the president’s family residence.
There had been multiple recurring credible threats of assassination surfacing that indicated specific plans were in the works to assassinate JFK soon.
Even more seriously worrisome, the plans all had a common element—a sniper with a high-powered rifle equipped with a scope, shooting from a tall building.
As we shall see in this chapter, disturbing parallels between the CIA-engineered assassination of Carlos Castillo Armas in Guatamala on July 26, 1957, and the assassination of JFK on November 22, 1963, suggest what the CIA had learned in Central America might have been duplicated in Dallas.
If the JFK assassination was a rerun of Carlos Castillo Armas in Guatemala, professional politicians, such as Richard Nixon and Lyndon Johnson, could look the other way and deny complicity.
A STEPPED-UP THREAT LEVEL On November 9, 1963, union organizer William Somersett, a former member of the Ku Klux Klan who had become a paid informant for the intelligence division of the Miami Police Department in 1962, allowed the Miami police to record surreptitiously a telephone conversation Somersett had with his old friend, the right-wing extremist Joseph Milteer.
Milteer insisted the plan was “in the works” and that a patsy would be blamed for the crime.
Somersett replied that somebody would have to go to jail if JFK got killed.
Milteer responded by saying it would be just like Bruno Hauptman in the Lindberg kidnapping case, implying Hauptman had taken the punishment for a crime he did not commit.
Former prosecutor Vincent Bugliosi, convinced Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone, reported that Miami-based Secret Service Special Agent Robert Jamison took the threat seriously enough to have Somersett call Milteer on November 18 to verify that Milteer was in Valdosta, Georgia, that day and not in Miami, Florida.
When Somersett confirmed that no violence-prone associates of Milteer were in Miami that day, the Protective Research Section of the Secret Service closed the case.
And they failed to notify the Washington, D.C., Secret Service detail in charge of the upcoming Dallas trip or the Secret Service in Dallas about Milteer’s remarks.
While Bugliosi chooses to interpret Milteer’s recorded comments as nothing more than idle speculation in response to Somersett’s leading questions, the conversation is one more indication that a wide conspiracy was in the works.
Secret Service Special Agent Forrest V Sorrels, who was in charge of the Dallas District, described to the Warren Commission the advance work done to plan the JFK motorcade on November 22.
That insofar as I have been concerned—and I am sure that every member of the Service, especially the Detail—that is always of concern to us.
During the time that we were making this survey with the police, I made the remark that if someone wanted to get the President of the United States, he could do it with a high-powered rifle and a telescopic sight from some building or some hillside, because that has always been a concern to us, about the buildings.
For a popular president in the JFK-era, the danger was unavoidable since riding in a motorcade in a closed limousine or under the cover of a bubble top would have conveyed a level of cowardice that itself would have been fatal to JFK’s political future.
What remains intriguing about Milteer is that his information dovetails with what we now know about the plot to assassinate JFK in Tampa.
The motorcades in both Tampa and Miami were not canceled, but security was increased in both cities.
During the Secret Service check of the Dallas motorcade route, Special Agent-in-Charge Sorrels commented that if someone wanted to assassinate the President, it could be done with a rifle from a high building.
President Kennedy himself had remarked he could be shot from a high building and little could be done to stop it.
Unless the Secret Service had a specific reason to suspect the occupants or activities of a certain building, it would not inspect it.
The committee found that at the time of the Dallas trip, there was not sufficient concern about the possibility of an attack from a high building to cause the agents responsible for the trip planning to develop security precautions to minimize the risk.
Had the Secret Service office in Dallas been made aware of the threats in Chicago and Tampa earlier in the month, they likely would have taken extra precautions.
Both the Secret Service and the Dallas police were unusually lax about allowing windows in tall buildings along the motorcade route to remain open.
The testimony of Secret Service agent Forrest Sorrels to the Warren Commission was important on these points.
Sorrels rode in the lead car along with Dallas Police Chief Jessie Curry, immediately in front of JFK’s limousine.
He continued watching the building as the motorcade turned left onto Elm Street.
Sorrels testified that he saw two African-Americans watching the motorcade from a window a couple of floors from the top of the book depository, but he did not recall seeing any activity in the windows of the building that caused him particular concern.
And as noted earlier, there is nothing in the record to suggest Lee Harvey Oswald ever received specific training to be a sniper.
A Report to the Public from an FBI Agent Involved in the Official JFK Assassination Investigation, Adams disputes the official Secret Service account that places Milteer in Georgia on November 22, 1963.
Their images of the JFK limousine proceeding down Houston Street show a man in the crowd who looks very much like Milteer.
The House Select Committee on Assassinations, after an extensive photographic examination conducted by experts, concluded the man in the photo was “substantially taller,” by more than six inches, than Milteer, who was estimated to be five feet four inches tall.
In a footnote, the House Select Committee noted that no evidence could be found that Milteer was in Dallas on the day of the assassination.
Adams first saw the photograph of Milteer in the Dallas crowd in 1993, when he picked up a copy of Robert Groden and Harrison Edward Livingstone’s 1989 book, High Treason.
Here was someone who had threatened to kill the President of the United States, standing alongside the motorcade route that fateful day in Dallas.
I had been sent to find Milteer in Georgia the afternoon of the assassination, but didn’t locate him until Wednesday the 27th.
After being retained as legal counsel, Dulles bought a large block of United Fruit stock.
He was Harvard trained, a clerk for Supreme Court Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, and a confidante of President Franklin D Roosevelt.
Since the 1940s, the company had also retained Edward L Bernays, the genius consultant credited for inventing public relations as a profession, whose 1928 book, Propaganda, was openly admired by Nazi Minister of Propaganda Joseph Goebbels.
The company’s workers formed a union and demanded $2.50 a day for each worker, up from $1.36, cutting into the firm’s profits.
As was typical in Central America at that time, some 3 percent of the landholders held some 70 percent of the land in Guatemala.
By 1954, the CIA in Washington became concerned Communists in Guatemala were organizing behind Arbenz, a concern that intensified when intelligence reports suggested the U.S.S.R. had begun covertly supplying the Arbenz regime with arms.
Arbenz permitted the existence of a small Communist party in Guatemala, though he had no avid Communists at any top positions in his government.
Ultimately, Arbenz nationalized over 1. million acres, including some of his family land, to turn over to the nation’s peasants.
Finally, President Eisenhower and Vice President Richard Nixon ordered the National Security Council to overthrow the Arbenz regime in Guatemala.
After Hunt accepted the assignment, President Eisenhower called a meeting in the Oval Office to introduce Hunt to Edward Bernays, the public relations consultant retained by United Fruit to promote the company.
Between early 1952 and the spring of 1954, Bernays had organized at least five two-week “fact-finding” junkets to Guatemala, with as many as ten news reporters on each trip.
The United Fruit Company spared no expense, claimed Thomas McCann, the former company official who worked with Bernays to organize the trips.
Speaking candidly, McCann concluded the trips represented “a serious attempt to compromise objectivity” of the press.
To provide the Eisenhower administration the required “plausible deniability,” Hunt determined that within the CIA the Guatemalan operation would be conducted on a need-to-know basis.
Hunt’s unit had its own funds, communications center, and chain of command within the CIA’s Western Hemisphere Division.
Hunt was issued forged documentation from the CIA’s Central Cover Division, and he set up field headquarters in a two-story barracks at a former United States Navy training camp at the Opa-Loca Airport in a suburb of Miami.
THE CIA-ENGINEERED GUATEMALAN COUP D’ETAT In Honduras, Hunt and the CIA trained a small band of mercenaries under Colonel Carlos Castillo Armas, a Guatemalan military officer who had escaped from prison after an unsuccessful coup against Arbenz in November 1950, as Arbenz was assuming power.
On June 17, 1954, Armas and his band of mercenaries crossed the Honduran border into Guatemala.
For several days, Hunt and the CIA organized American jets and American pilots to strafe and bombard Guatemala City, the capital of Guatemala.
The CIA-financed “rebel army” mercenaries numbered fewer than two hundred armed men, a “shadow army” at best.
Yet, the CIA propaganda campaign was designed to make the Guatemalan people and government believe supporting Arbenz was hopeless.
A CIA-funded and operated clandestine radio program recorded by the CIA in Miami and broadcast in neighboring countries pretended to be the “Voice of Liberation,” broadcasting from within Guatemala, spreading false reports about legions of rebel soldiers who never existed defeating government troops in fierce battles that never happened.
The propaganda campaign designed by Hunt and Bernays was designed to make Arbenz and his government appear to be an “instrument of Moscow” and “a pawn in the Communist propaganda campaign” and a “spearhead of the Soviet Union,” as the Arbenz government complained to the United Nations.
In an emergency session of the Security Council held at the request of Guatemala, only the Soviet Union supported Guatemala.
The Lodge family, including Henry Cabot Lodge, had investments in the United Fruit Company.
On June 25, 1954, Arbenz resigned and went into exile in the Mexican embassy.
On July 3, 1954, Carlos Castillo Armas returned to Guatemala City aboard a United States embassy airplane.
One hundred thousand cheering Guatemalans gathered at the palace balcony to usher him into power.
On July 8, 1954, a Guatemalan military junta elected Carlos Castillo Armas to power; in August 1954, Armas suspended all civil liberties.
Within a week of taking power, the Armas government arrested four thousand people accused of participating in communist activity; within four months, some seventy-two thousand Guatemalans were registered as Communists.
Land appropriated in nationalization efforts was taken away from the peasants and returned to the United Fruit Company.
Former CIA director General Walter Bedell Smith, who had served in World War II as Eisenhower’s chief of staff in the Tunisia Campaign and during the invasion of Italy, became a director of the United Fruit Company.
THE ASSASSINATION AND THE PATSY Within three years, the United States soured on Armas.
On July 26, 1957, President Armas was assassinated at around 9:00m., as he and his wife prepared to enter the dining room of the Presidential Palace.
Two bullets were fired, one of which severed his aorta and killed him instantly.
The assassin, identified as twenty-year-old Romeo Vasquez Sanchez, was said to have committed suicide immediately, using the same rifle he had used to kill Armas.
Yet, somehow, Romeo Vasquez Sanchez managed to rehabilitate himself sufficiently to have been a member of the Presidential Palace Guard when he committed the assassination.
The parallels between Romeo Vasquez Sanchez and Lee Harvey Oswald are obvious.
Both were ex-military who left the service expressing distinct sympathies for Communist Russia.
Waldron and Hartman note that in comparison, the Guatemala patsy was described by the Guatemalan government as a Communist fanatic who was expelled from the Guatemalan army only six months before he assassinated Armas, yet somehow Romeo Vasquez Sanchez had still been allowed to join the Presidential Palace Guard.
Surely the Presidential Palace Guard would have been a sufficiently elite military unit to require a background check before they were hired.
Waldron and Hartman further note that both men were ex-military who killed a president with a rifle.
There were both described as Communist nuts who conveniently left behind diaries rambling in Communist propaganda.
There is no photographic evidence proving either Romeo Vasquez Sanchez or Lee Harvey Oswald were the assassins who pulled the trigger.
There were no eyewitnesses in either case and both men have gaps and questions in their alibi timelines.
Both assassins were dead and buried a short time after the assassinations, avoiding a prolonged time for grief or for unanswered questions to surface.
In neither case has any written record been released of any government interrogation—not in Oswald’s case of the interrogation by Dallas Police, FBI, and/or Secret Service after his arrest—nor in Romeo Vasquez Sanchez’s case of interrogation records prior to his being released from the military because of suspicions he was a Communist.
In both cases, Romeo Vasquez Sanchez and Lee Harvey Oswald made perfect patsies because authorities openly proclaimed their guilt before trial and their deaths made sure neither would have the opportunity of a trial to counter the accusations leveled against them.
The fact that Armas was assassinated just four days after trying to close a casino owned by an associate of United States mob figure Johnny Roselli, at a time when Roselli and Carlos Marcello, the “godfather” from New Orleans, were expanding their presence in Guatemala, received little coverage by the international press.
The sting involved a then-fifty-six-year-old prisoner named Jack Van Laningham.
He was from Tampa and was serving an eight-year sentence in Texarkana for bank robbery.
In March 1985, Van Laningham managed to befriend Marcello, and after being moved to share a cell with Marcello, Van Laningham agreed to work cooperatively in an FBI undercover operation directed by FBI agent Thomas Kimmel with the goal of recording Marcello to find out how he controlled his criminal organization from prison.
CAMTEX evolved beyond taping the Texarkana phones to placing a bug ina transistor radio for Van Laningham to place in the private prison cell he shared with Marcello.
In the course of their conversations, Marcello confessed to Van Laningham the role he played in the JFK assassination.
Marcello explained to Van Laningham that his hatred of the Kennedy family traced back to the early 1960s, when then-Attorney General Robert Kennedy had Marcello deported to Guatemala where Marcello was dropped and left to his own devices to survive.
Marcello, born in Tunisia, North Africa, had obtained false documentation claiming he had been born in Guatemala.
In an arduous journey, aided by pilot David Ferrie, Marcello managed to make his way back to the United States through Florida.
Ferrie, a shady character in his own right, traced back to Oswald because the two were photographed together at the New Orleans Civil Air Patrol in 1955, where Ferrie was a leader and Oswald a teenager.
One of the first revelations Marcello made to Van Laningham was that David Ferrie had introduced him to Lee Harvey Oswald in New Orleans.
Oswald and Marcello met at various locations in several subsequent meetings before Oswald left New Orleans for Dallas.
Marcello also claimed to have set Jack Ruby up in the bar business in Dallas.
Van Laningham told the FBI that Marcello knew Jack Ruby was a homosexual and understood Ruby was paying off the corrupt police in Dallas.
Marcello claimed Ruby came to visit him in New Orleans regularly in order to report on what was happening in Dallas.
A federal judge found Van Laningham’s reliability sufficiently credible to authorize extraordinary surveillance of Marcello while he was in prison, including putting an FBI bug in a transistor radio Van Laningham bought in prison to share with Marcello.
In the summer of 1963, Oswald worked in Marcello’s downtown bookmaking network as a runner, while his cousin Dutz Murret worked as a longtime bookie, working out of the Felix Oyster House, a mob-owned restaurant in the French Quarter of New Orleans.
Davis questioned whether three months before the JFK assassination if Oswald was being unwittingly manipulated by the Marcello organization to play the role of the patsy in the plot to assassinate the president.
Davis reported Ruby was a frequent visitor of Civello and his partner Frank LaMonte at their Italian import business in Dallas—a business whose real purpose Davis suspected was importing narcotics.
Davis further reported the FBI deliberately suppressed evidence of the relationship between Ruby and Civello from the Warren Commission.
The Story of the Man Who Controlled America, Chicago gangster Sam “Mooney” Giancana confessed to his younger brother, Chuck Giancana, the deepest secrets of how he had gained mob power.
As part of the confession, Sam Giancana revealed his role in the JFK assassination.
Giancana went on to make sure the parallel between Guatemala and Dallas was clear.
He further claimed Ruby had demonstrated extreme loyalty and his ability to work with the CIA during the planning for the Bay of Pigs invasion.
Giancana asserted Oswald had been a spy for the United States government in the Soviet Union, and that he had been trained to speak fluent Russian.
Giancana scoffed at the idea that Oswald was a Communist sympathizer, characterizing as misinformation the Warren Commission’s argument Lee Harvey Oswald was a Fidel Castro supporter.
Ruby did the job, knowing it was better to be executed in the electric chair for having committed murder than suffering a death being tortured by the mob for failing to carry out an order.
Giancana explained that when his superiors had ordered Oswald to Dallas, Oswald linked up with Giancana’s representative in Dallas, Jack Ruby, at Ruby’s Carousel Club, where Oswald also reestablished contact with David Ferrie.
Roselli also traveled to Dallas on Giancana’s orders, coordinating with Ruby in preparation for the assassination.
Giancana claimed it was early spring 1963 when he and his CIA associates made the decision to finalize plans for the elimination of the president.
Then it fell to Roscoe White to kill Tippit, not just because Tippit failed to carry out his part in the plan, but also because Tippit knew too much about the conspiracy.
Giancana claimed Tippit not killing Oswald was “the only screwup” in the entire plan to assassinate JFK.7°° Interestingly, Lee Harvey Oswald and Roscoe White had crossed paths before.
They were both stationed at the Marine Corps Air Station in El Toro, California, in 1957.48° That same year, they both sailed to Japan on the USS Bexar, and they served in Japan at the same time.
Even though Lee Harvey Oswald and Roscoe White crossed paths in the marines, there is no evidence they knew each other at the time.
Roselli, like Giancana, came up in the mob as a hit man for Al Capone in Chicago.
When Giancana advanced to head the Capone mob, Roselli became his “eyes and ears” in Las Vegas and Los Angeles.
Going back to the Eisenhower administration, Roselli had been the primary mob contact in the CIA plot to assassinate Fidel Castro, a plot that continued through the Kennedy administration.
As part of this plot, Roselli had involved both Giancana in Chicago and Santo Trafficante in Tampa Bay.
The plot to assassinate Castro was directed within the CIA by James Jesus Angleton’s Executive Action program that was headed by William Harvey, and implemented through the Italian Mafia under Chicago mob boss Sam “Mooney” Giancana.
Robert Maheu, the secondin-command under Howard Hughes, introduced Roselli to Harvey.
Maheu had been second-in-command to Guy Bannister when Bannister was an FBI agent in Chicago.
When he fled to Chicago in 1922, after committing his first mob murder, he changed his last name to Roselli, in honor of the Italian Renaissance sculptor Cosimo Roselli, and to avoid any possible association with the anarchist Ferdinando Sacco who became infamous in the Sacco and Vanzetti robbery and murder case in South Braintree, Massachusetts, that was dominating news headlines in the 1920s.
Known as “Handsome Johnny,” Roselli joined the Capone mob, only to be ordered to relocate in Los Angeles in 1925, after skipping bail in a federal narcotics case.
Once established in Los Angeles, Roselli spearheaded the mob entrance into the movie industry, welcoming Joseph P Kennedy, the patriarch of the Kennedy clan, to Hollywood in 1926.
In the early 1950s, Roselli helped the eastern mob to establish a foothold in the emerging gambling industry in Las Vegas.
In the 1960s, after Castro closed the casinos in Havana run by mobster Meyer Lansky, Robert Maheu, a CIA operative who had served as a top aide and CEO of the Nevada operations for billionaire Howard Hughes, recruited Roselli to find mob assassins to participate in a planned CIA assassination of Fidel Castro.
In carrying out this assignment Roselli was responsible for introducing Maheu to Sam Giancana in Chicago and to Santo Trafficante in Tampa.
Roselli went so far back with the Kennedy family that he had intervened at the request of Joseph P Kennedy to cover-up a marriage that a youthful John F Kennedy had entered into unwisely.
At the request of JFK’s father and the instructions of Sam Giancana, Roselli had completely wiped all legal documents from the public record that attested to the matrimony.
The clean slate placed JFK back on his father’s political agenda, planning for JFK to be elected president.
In 1975 the Senate Select Committee to Study Government Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities, better known as the Church Committee, named after chair Sen.
Judith Campbell, who Frank Sinatra introduced to JFK in Las Vegas on February 7, 1960, at the Sands Hotel.
On March 22, 1962, in a private lunch at the White House, J Edgar Hoover made clear to the President that the FBI was aware of the affair he was having with Campbell, stressing the FBI had also documented Kennedy was sharing his mistress with Sam Giancana.
The Hidden History of the Kennedy Years, revealed that Robert Kennedy was also aware of the affair after one of his investigators tracking racketeers’ phone calls came across the relationship.
Around midnight, he was shot once in the back of his head, once in the mouth, and five times under his chin, in a mob-style killing that suggested he was about to break the mob code of omerta, requiring silence on all mob related matters.
Since Roselli let Joseph P Kennedy into the club by ushering Kennedy into Hollywood in the 1920s, it was Roselli who would have to take care of the problem, once the mob decided JFK had to go.
When Joseph P Kennedy experienced a disabling stroke on December 19, 1961, at the age of seventythree, John F Kennedy and his brother, Robert lost a major protector.
After years of professing his innocence, Roselli finally confessed to his lawyer his involvement in the JFK assassination.
This first shot supposedly went through the windshield of JFK’s limousine and hit him in the throat.
Roselli claimed the second shot hit JFK in the back and the third shot hit Connally.
On July 9, 1976, Johnny Roselli’s legless body was found stuffed in a fiftyfive-gallon oil drum, floating in Dumfoundling Bay near Miami, Florida.
Roselli had completed two rounds of testimony before the House Select Committee on Assassinations.
His murder prevented him from being called a third time to testify about the JFK assassination.
On March 29, 1977, Charles Nicoletti was murdered gangland style, with three .38 slugs pumped into the back of his head while he was sitting in his Oldsmobile in the parking lot of the Golden Horns Restaurant in Northlake, Illinois, another suburb of Chicago.
On the same day Nicoletti was murdered, George de Mohrenschildt supposedly committed suicide.
At the time of their deaths, de Mohrenschildt, Roselli, and Nicoletti were all scheduled to testify before the House Select Committee on Assassinations, while Giancana was scheduled to testify before the Church Committee when he was killed.
The murders of Sam Giancana, Johnny Roselli, and Charles Nicoletti remain even today unsolved open cases.
TRAFFICANTE AND HOFFA IMPLICATED Mob lawyer Frank Ragano, years after the deaths of two of his clients—Jimmy Hoffa and Santo Trafficante—wrote a book, Mob Lawyer, in which he disclosed some remarkable information about the JFK assassination.
Hoffa knew Ragano was flying that day to New Orleans to meet Carlos Marcello and Santo Trafficante, and he wanted Ragano to deliver the message.
At breakfast the next morning, Ragano explained to Marcello and Trafficante that Hoffa had a favor he wanted the two mob bosses to do.
Ragano reported their initial reaction was so icy he felt he had intruded into a minefield he had no right to enter.
Ragano concluded Marcello and Trafficante were uniquely capable of arranging the murder of a president.
They had the motive, means, and opportunity to have JFK assassinated, though it was impossible to develop conclusive evidence that would prove their guilt.
The House Select Committee also discussed various threats that Hoffa had made regarding both John and Robert Kennedy and that JFK had been made aware of the threats.
In direct contrast with the Warren Commission, the House Select Committee concluded Lee Harvey Oswald, much like Jack Ruby, had contact with organized crime, specifically with Marcello and Trafficante.
THE MCCLELLAN COMMITTEE AND THE WESTERN MOB The bad blood between the mob and the Kennedy family that led to the JFK assassination traces back to the 1957 McClellan Committee hearings, named after the chairman, Arkansas Democratic Sen.
The committee was officially constituted as the Select Committee on Improper Activities in the Labor or Management Field.
The initial focus of the committee was to investigate organized crime’s penetration into the labor union movement, specifically the mob penetration of the Teamsters Union.
While the target of the hearings at the start involved corrupt Teamster boss Dave Beck who lived and worked out of Seattle, the hearings are best known for the conflict that developed between Jimmy Hoffa, the infamous Teamster Boss from Detroit who took over the Teamsters after Beck resigned in disgrace, and the committee’s chief counsel Robert Kennedy.
On the committee was the freshman senator from Massachusetts John F Kennedy.
In 1957 two reporters for the Portland paper the Oregonian—William Lambert and Wallace Turner—won a Pulitzer Prize for a series of articles exposing the infiltration of organized crime into the Teamster Union operating in Washington State and Oregon.
The source of the Lambert-Turner articles involved hundreds of hours of wiretaps the Elkins family had taken of various gangsters and public officials in Portland and Seattle as they bribed and extorted their way into control of the Teamster’s Union in the northwest.
The rub came after organized crime gained control of the Teamster’s Union in Portland and the gangsters involved moved to take over the Elkins family’s lucrative crime empire involving bootlegged liquor and gambling.
The Elkins family, rather than concede a portion of their profits and control of the crime syndicate to the eastern mobsters, had decided to fight back, even if fighting back meant exposing themselves to criminal prosecution and the likely loss of their syndicate operations.
In a hotly contested fight in which Stevenson preferred Kennedy to be his vice presidential running mate, the convention chose Senator Estes Kefauver who had come to national prominence as chairman of the Senate Special Committee to Investigate Crime in Interstate Commerce, better known as the Kefauver Committee, which held a series of nationally televised hearings investigating organized crime.
After being forced to concede to Kefauver in 1956, the Kennedy family realized the importance of the media, especially television, in gaining national political prominence.
Wanting to duplicate what Kefauver had accomplished, the Kennedy family seized upon the Lambert-Tumer articles as evidence new labor racketeering hearings could be held to investigate the Teamsters.
The Kennedy family quickly realized the importance of the exhaustive wiretapping done by the Elkins family.
If these tapes had not existed, the Kennedy family might never have gone forward with the McClellan Committee hearings.
The Kennedy family could never afford the wrath of organized labor if the evidence of organized crime penetration of the Teamsters was not certain.
After a series of discussions with organized labor figures, including those in the then-five railroad operating unions, the conclusion was reached that the union movement would not oppose the public hearings, provided the Kennedy family limited the investigation to the organized criminals who had taken over the Teamsters Union, being careful to distinguish that the target of the investigation was not the union itself.
The consent of the railroad unions at the time was critical, given the extent to which the railroad unions cooperated at the time with the Teamsters.
Before the interstate highways truck trailers “piggy backed” on railroad train flat cars for transit across the nation, and then they were picked-up by Teamster Union truck cabs for local delivery.
A TALE OF TWO FAMILIES In the months leading up to the hearings, the Kennedy family realized the mob takeover of the Teamster Union involved a move by the eastern mobs to muscle into the territory of the western mobs.
The western mobs were largely Protestant, as evidenced by the Elkins family.
At stake was not only the Elkins family crime empire in the Pacific Northwest, but the future development of what was expected to be a highly lucrative gambling industry, originally developed in Reno and Las Vegas by the Elkins mob.
Joseph Kennedy, a mobster who had controlled the importation of Scotch liquor into the United States going back to the days before Prohibition, had never comfortably been accepted by the eastern mobs even though he was Catholic.
Rejected largely because he was of Irish descent, not Italian, Joseph Kennedy encouraged his sons to develop a partnership with the Elkins family to launch the McClellan hearings as a springboard to advance JFK’s presidential ambitions.
Elkins began his testimony to the McClellan Committee on the opening day of the hearings, February 26, 1957.
Then, outraged by their self-aggrandizing tactics and prodded by the Oregonian, he squealed.
Kennedy admitted Elkins was reluctant to talk the first time they met, but in subsequent meetings, Elkins talked freely.
Elkins warned the Kennedys that going after the Teamsters might cost them their lives.
Despite the risk, all four committed to working together to expose the organized criminals who had penetrated the Teamsters Union.
Elkins assisted Robert Kennedy in running a complete background check, disclosing to the Kennedy family details that had not before been shared with anyone outside the family.
Robert Kennedy also documented that Elkins had worked with military intelligence during World War II, although the nature of that work was never fully disclosed.
Nevertheless, Jim Elkins was one of the three or four best witnesses the Committee ever had.
Because his background was so unsavory, we checked his story up and down, backward and forward, inside and out.
Later, as we came to know each other better, he would answer the question but tell me not to use the information.
Elkins than he did with any other witness, both because of the tremendous amount of information he had and because of the difficulty he feared the Committee would have in understanding him.
Kennedy wrote that he “needed to know the story almost as well as did, so that I could clarify some of his complicated answers.
This was confirmed by a note found in 1986 in the correspondence collection of the JFK Library at Columbia Point in Boston.
On December 17, 1957, Elkins posted a Christmas card to Robert Kennedy and his family, addressed to the Kennedy offices in the Senate Office Building.
A personal handwritten note written by Colleen Elkins, J B.’s wife, addressed to Robert and Ethel Kennedy and family, commented that Colleen and J B. had watched the Edward R Morrow television show Person to Person.
John L McClellan’s Select Committee investigating labor racketeering,” Newsweek commented, crediting Elkins with a phenomenal memory.
Without Elkins, there might have been no indictment of Teamster vice president Jimmy Hoffa.
The Elkins family continued to advise Attorney General Robert Kennedy in his war on organized crime, a war the Elkins family interpreted as having been ordered by the Kennedy family patriarch, Joseph Kennedy, to even the score and get revenge for perceived slights the Kennedy family had suffered at the hands of the eastern mob going back decades.
The Kennedy war on organized crime particularly rankled the eastern mob, given the effort the Giancana family and Chicago mayor Richard Daley went to in order to deliver, both legally and illegally, the critical votes in Cook County that JFK needed to win the 1960 presidential campaign.
The eastern mob felt betrayed that the Kennedy family did not have more respect and appreciation for the mob efforts taken to make sure JFK became president.
The Elkins family joined the Kennedy family in the grudge match between Robert Kennedy and Jimmy Hoffa.
Truthfully, Robert Kennedy and Jimmy Hoffa hated each other in part because they were both so very much alike—small men with an irrepressible determination to prove how tough they were.
Pulitzer Prize— winning journalist Clark Mollenhoff reported that at the arraignment of Jimmy Hoffa for having McClellan Committee papers in his possession, Robert Kennedy and Jimmy Hoffa got into a friendly debate, arguing with each other who could do the most push-ups, although neither actually did any.
Elkins explained to JFK the details of the hit, that it was planned to be done from a tall building by a shooter armed with a high-powered rifle with a scope with the intent to shoot JFK in a motorcade.
The top Elkins family consigliere flew to Portland, Oregon, in 1968 to warn Robert Kennedy an assassination attempt had been planned on him in Los Angeles during the California presidential primary.
RFK was warned that when the shooting started a small-caliber handgun discharged from the rear would be used to kill him.
RFK was advised the assassin being a person who was supposedly there to protect Robert Kennedy.
The Elkins family consigliere urged Robert Kennedy to postpone his planned return to Los Angeles, under the assumption that even a few hours change in schedule might derail the plan.
If Robert Kennedy resolved to go ahead as planned and return to Los Angeles to be there for the primary results, the Elkins family warned him to fire his bodyguards and hire new ones.
The car he was driving was pushed off the road by another driver who was never apprehended or identified.
Elkins reportedly died of massive chest injuries suffered when he collided with the steering wheel of his car.
Representatives of the Portland Police Department were sent to Arizona to view Elkins’ body to validate the Portland crime czar was actually deceased.
At the time of his death, Elkins was free on a twenty-thousand-dollar bond.
He was facing indictments in Portland, Oregon, for possession of a firearm, conspiracy to commit a felony, possession of dangerous drugs, and several counts of receiving and concealing stolen property.
Howard] Hunt and David Phillips were both veterans of the CIA’s 1954 Guatemala campaign.
The Secret War Against Castro, 1981 THE CIA-ENGINEERED COUP D’ETAT in Guatemala going back to 1954, set the stage both for the Bay of Pigs and for the JFK assassination.
Although the Bay of Pigs typically is considered a Kennedy administration initiative, the historical record demonstrates the CIA undertook the planning for the Bay of Pigs invasion during the last year of the Eisenhower administration.
The original plan was to provide Vice President Richard Nixon with an “October Surprise” that Nixon could use to defeat John F Kennedy in the 1960 presidential election.
The idea was that the American public would rally around Vice President Nixon taking the lead in an Eisenhower administration effort to support a popular uprising of Cuban patriots invading Cuba from the United States in order to rescue their homeland from Castro and Communism.
The plan was to allow the American public to see Richard Nixon directing the American military in support of the Bay of Pigs invasion from within the White House.
Nixon would score a knockout blow over Kennedy as the American public saw Nixon using his superior foreign policy expertise to depose Castro via a popular uprising in Cuba stirred by the invasion.
Nixon’s plan to win the 1960 election was disrupted when insider sources tipped-off the Kennedy campaign that the Bay of Pigs invasion was planned for the last weeks of the 1960 presidential campaign.
THE EISENHOWER PLAN TO INVADE CUBA In March 1960 President Eisenhower approved a plan to train a group of Cuban exiles to invade their homeland, with the anticipation that the Cuban people and various elements of the Cuban military would support the invasion.
The goal was to overthrow Castro and to establish a non-Communist government favorable to the United States.
Richard Bissell, the CIA deputy director for plans who had successfully developed the Lockheed U-2 spy plane program, spearheaded the plan within the CIA to invade Cuba that ultimately became the Bay of Pigs fiasco.
Once Eisenhower approved Bissell’s plan to invade Cuba, the CIA set up training camps in Guatemala where a small army was prepared for an amphibious assault landing and guerrilla warfare.
E Howard Hunt was selected to train the Cuban invasion army in Guatemala.
Hunt leaves no doubt that the plan to invade Cuba was a direct copycat of his plan to overthrow Arbenz in 1954.
Hunt’s principal assistant was a Cuban-American named Bernard “Macho” Barker who had worked for years for the CIA station in Havana.
Baker and Hunt chose then-twenty-seven-year-old Manuel F Artime to head the provisional government.
Artime, a Jesuit-trained psychiatrist, had joined Castro’s forces in the Sierra Maestra and served as a regional agricultural official after Castro ousted Cuba’s ruling dictator Fulgencio Batista.
Artime fled to Miami after becoming disillusioned with the number of anti-Communist friends who were being executed by Castro even though they had supported the revolution.
Bernard Barker later turned up as one of the burglars apprehended in the break-in of Larry O’Donnell’s Democratic National Committee offices in the Watergate complex.
Artime later figured into the many plots to assassinate Castro that Robert Kennedy advanced in the Kennedy administration, right up to the time of the JFK assassination.
The Kennedy plan was to replace Castro with the commander of the Cuban army, Juan Almeida, another Castro supporter who reportedly had turned against the revolution after Castro took power.
From Cuba, the provisional government would broadcast to the world a declaration that it was a government-in-arms, making an appeal for aid in overthrowing Castro.
Following this declaration, a sizable contingent of United States Marines waiting offshore in the United States aircraft carrier Boxer was ready to land on the island once the provisional government was establish and had a chance to appeal to the United States for assistance.
To hide the secret war planning, the CIA trained the Cuban exiles in Guatemala and utilized agency covers in the United States that included businesses and individuals who shared rentals with organized crime and radical right-wing paramilitary organizations.
CANDIDATE KENNEDY’S GAMBIT ON CUBA On July 23, 1960, CIA director Allen Dulles visited JFK at the family compound at Hyannis Port on Cape Cod to brief the candidate on the Eisenhower administration’s anti-Castro efforts.
This put the Kennedy campaign on notice that the invasion of Cuba was possibly an October Surprise, an event to effect the election.
Increasingly, the Kennedy camp became paranoid as rumors out of Miami talked about the creation of a CIA-sponsored invasion force consisting of Cuban exiles.
On October 20, 1960, on the eve of the fourth and final presidential debate, JFK put out a statement that said the United States “must attempt to strengthen the non-Batista democratic anti-Castro forces in exile, and in Cuba itself, who offer eventual hope of overthrowing Castro.
Again, while the statement stopped short of endorsing a United States government—sponsored invasion of Cuba, JFK was trying to pre-empt the aggressive rhetoric on Cuba, positioning himself to claim credit for the idea, if Nixon and the Eisenhower administration were to go forward with the Cuban exile plan prior to election day.
The Kennedy campaign had correctly calculated that Nixon’s training as a debater would induce him to take the opposite approach, urging a policy of restraint while charging that Kennedy was being irresponsible in suggesting a United States military invasion of Cuba.
Nixon acknowledged in Six Crises that he knew President Eisenhower had arranged for Kennedy to receive regular briefings by Allen Dulles on CIA covert activities around the world.
But, when Nixon read the headlines in the newspapers, he could hardly believe his eyes.
Nixon asked his aides to call the White House and find out if Allen Dulles had briefed Kennedy specifically on Cuba, on the fact that for months the CIA had been training Cuban exiles in Guatemala for the purposes of an invasion.
Within a half hour, Nixon discovered Dulles had briefed Kennedy on the impending Cuban invasion.
Nixon’s reaction was rage, not at Dulles for informing Kennedy, but at Kennedy for exploiting this highly sensitive information for political advantage.
But in this instance I thought that Kennedy, with full knowledge of the facts was jeopardizing the security of a United States foreign policy operation.
Nixon was particularly enraged that, although the idea of providing the Cuban exiles cover training was actually his idea, Kennedy, by exploiting the classified information Dulles had shared with him about United States training activities, managed to pull off the illusion he had thought of it first.
If Eisenhower and Nixon were successful with the Cuban invasion, Kennedy could claim they were simply implementing a plan Kennedy himself was the first to advocate publicly.
He had been planning the operation—the arms, ammunition, and training for the Cuban exiles—for six months before the 1960 campaign had gotten under way.
It was Nixon’s program, but now he could not say a Single word about it.
Consequently, under Kennedy’s attacks and his new demands for ‘militant’ policies, I was in the position of a fighter with one hand tied behind his back.
He had to “attack the Kennedy proposal to provide such aid as wrong and irresponsible because it would violate our treaty obligations,” Nixon explained.
By taking the aggressive position on Cuba, JFK effectively blocked the October Surprise by exposing it.
While Kennedy’s stratagem may well have been critical to preserving JFK’s chance to beat Nixon in 1960, the strategy ultimately backfired.
Once JFK was elected president, he suddenly became vulnerable to Bissell and the CIA, who blackmailed him over Cuba.
If JFK as president did not keep good on his campaign promise to support the Cuban exiles in their effort to regain their country, Bissell and the CIA would leak to the public the reality that JFK’s hard-line stand against Cuba during the campaign was nothing more than a stratagem to get elected.
Once JFK blocked Nixon from executing the CIA covert plan to invade Cuba, he committed himself to following through with the plan shortly after taking office, with no assurance the plan would work.
THE RELUCTANT WARRIOR JFK approved the Bay of Pigs operation despite serious reservations the plan had any chance of success.
Presidential historian Robert Dallek reported that two days after JFK became president, the CIA began pushing him to move against Cuba.
At a January 22, 1961, meeting of Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Secretary of Defense Robert MacNamara, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, Army General Lyman Lemnitzer, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, and various national security and foreign policy experts, CIA director Allen Dulles stressed the United States had only two months “before something had to be done about” the Cubans being trained in Guatemala.
To abandon the invasion would make Kennedy look like an appeaser of Castro, appearing as if Eisenhower had approved the plan and JFK dropped it.
Even his adviser Arthur Schlesinger and the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee Senator William Fulbright agreed.
There was no assurance the invasion would trigger a popular uprising, and there was little likelihood the invasion would succeed even with direct United States military support.
The CIA, knowing JFK would never go along with direct United States military involvement, calculated the only plan with any chance of success was to promote an invasion plan the CIA knew would fail, in order to force JFK’s hand to approve the B-26 air attacks and approve United States jets from the aircraft carrier USS Essex thirty miles offshore to provide support.
On Sunday night, April 16, 1961, the last thing JFK did before he went to bed was to call Dean Rusk and tell him to order the cancellation of a dawn aerial attack by the entire exile force of sixteen B-26s, leaving Castro with airplanes to use in strafing the invading exiles on the ground, in what was called Brigade 2506, that were planning to hit the beach in the Bay of Pigs at dawn.
On Monday morning, April 17, 1961, JFK refused to allow the United States jets from USS Essex to provide air cover.
On April 19, destroyers USS Eaton and USS Murray moved into the Bay of Pigs, in the face of fire from Cuban tanks on shore, to evacuate from the beaches the retreating soldiers of what had been the invading Brigade 2506 of paramilitary Cuban exiles.
Within days of becoming president, he realized how little power he truly had.
The CIA had played him, disregarding his expressed concern that the United States not be involved militarily and only support an invasion by Cuban exile patriots trying to take back their country for democracy.
JFK fired Bissell and Dulles in a threat to break the CIA up into a thousand pieces.
Unfortunately, that impulse—to destroy the CI[A—was one JFK never followed to completion, a mistake that contributed to him losing not only his presidency, but also his life.
Howard Hunt, Bernard Barker, and Frank Sturgis—were also involved in the planning of the invasion of Cuba.
Because dating back to the Eisenhower administration, Nixon became closely involved with the CIA and Mafia when he helped plan the Guatemala coup.
He continued those relationships when he called on the CIA and Mafia to kill Castro.
JFK assassination researcher Lamar Waldron has documented that Nixon received a $1 million Mafia bribe from Carlos Marcello and Santo Trafficante just prior to the start of the 1972 presidential campaign as part of a deal to release Jimmy Hoffa from prison, which occurred less than four months before the first Watergate break-in.
These men were veterans of the Eisenhower administration plots and had worked Nixon in the past.
G Gordon Liddy has long maintained that the Watergate burglary was motivated by the desire to wiretap a telephone in the Democratic National Committee headquarters that top Democratic officials and their political friends were using as part of a call girl ring.
Haldeman and President Richard Nixon in the Oval Office on June 23, 1972, from 10:04m. to 11:39m.
He was looking for a way to justify telling then-FBI acting director Patrick Gray to back off.
Nixon: Of course, this is a— Hunt will—that will uncover a lot when you open that scab there’s a hell of a lot of things and then we just feel it would be very detrimental to have this thing go any further, that this involves these Cubans, and Hunt, and a lot of hanky-panky that we have nothing to do with ourselves.
Nixon recommended having the CIA instruct the FBI to stop investigating Watergate on national security concerns.
Haldeman, in his 1978 book, The Ends of Power, argued that Nixon’s references in the Watergate tapes to “the whole Bay of Pigs thing” suggested the Watergate burglars were also involved with the JFK assassination.
When you get in these people when you ... get these people in, say: “Look, the problem is that this will open the whole, the whole Bay of Pigs thing, and the President just feels that” ah, without going into the details ... don’t, don’t lie to them to the extent to say there is no involvement, but just say this is sort of a comedy of errors, bizarre, without getting into it, “the President believes that it is going to open the whole Bay of Pigs thing up again.
And, ah because these people are plugging for, for keeps and that they should call the FBI in and say that we wish for the country, j936 don’t go any further into this case,” period In a separate conversation with Haldeman in the Oval Office on June 23, 1972, from 1:04m. to 1:13m., Nixon returned to the Howard Hunt theme.
And I would just tell them that it’d be very bad to have this fellow Hunt, you know, it’s—‘“he knows too damn much, and he was involved, we happen to know that.
And if it gets out that the whole...” this is all involved in the Cuban thing, that it’s a fiasco, it’s going to make the FBI—the CIA—look bad, it’s going to make Hunt look bad, and it’s likely to blow the whole Bay of Pigs thing, which we think would be very unfortunate for CIA and for the country at this time, and for American foreign policy.
Yeah, that’s the basis we’re going to do it on and just leave it at that,237 In the later years of Haldeman’s life, he repudiated the “Bay of Pigs meaning the JFK assassination” statement, attributing it to the invention of his ghostwriter, Joseph DiMona.
By 1990 Haldeman was repudiating much of what he wrote in The Ends of Power, the book he published as he was preparing to be released from prison on parole.
Nixon’s seemingly out-of-context comment forced Watergate inquiries to circle back to the invasion plans against Cuba that began under Richard Bissell at the CIA when Nixon was vice president under Eisenhower.
Hunt was beginning to demand as much as one million dollars in hush money and Nixon was concerned at how many dark secrets would be exposed if Hunt began to talk.
The FBI had begun to suspect the Nixon White House had begun to solicit one million dollars from the Teamsters to keep the imprisoned Watergate burglars quiet.
Nixon’s extreme tactics suggest there was a deeper secret behind the Watergate break-in, that the Bay of Pigs plotters, including Howard Hunt, were also Watergate burglars and very possibly participants in the JFK assassination.
Howard Baker, the vice-chairman of the Senate Watergate hearings, famously asked about Watergate.
Perhaps this question should have been asked of Richard Nixon about not only the Watergate break-in, but also about the JFK assassination.
Nixon knew that E Howard Hunt not only was a culprit in Watergate, but was also involved in the coup d’état in Guatemala in 1954 and the staged political assassination that followed in 1957.
Then, too, Nixon may have been keenly aware of the evidence that suggested E Howard Hunt was involved not only in the Bay of Pigs and the various plots to assassinate Castro, but very possibly in the JFK assassination as well.
E Howard Hunt had just been indicted some months before for his role in the Watergate affair and he was prohibited from traveling.
Assassination researcher Harrison Edward Livingstone, believes Dorothy Hunt was carrying White House hush money to pay off the Cuban exiles whose involvement with Hunt stretched from the Bay of Pigs through the JFK assassination to Watergate.
Witnesses to the crash charged that immediately after the crash, some two hundred FBI and Defense Intelligence Agency officials came in and took over the crash scene.
Finally, William Ruckelshaus, the acting director of the FBI, explained to the Washington Post on June 14, 1973, that the FBI had primary jurisdiction in possible cases of sabotage, including airline crashes.
On December 19, 1972, Nixon moved former CIA agent Alexander Butterfield to serve as the head of the Federal Aviation Agency.
Butterfield had been secretary to the Cabinet and he achieved fame for revealing to the Senate Watergate Committee that he had been responsible for maintaining for Nixon a secret audiotaping system in the White House.
Finally, in January 1973, Dwight Chapin, Nixon’s appointments secretary and dirty tricks supervisor was made an executive in the Chicago headquarters office of United Airlines.
THE STRANGE CASE OF MARITA LORENZ A self-proclaimed mistress and longtime lover of Fidel Castro, Marita Lorenz set off a firestorm of speculation with a story that involved soldier-of-fortune Frank Fiorini, also known as Frank Sturgis, as well as E Howard Hunt and the various CIA-mob plans to assassinate Castro.
On May 31, 1978, in sworn testimony before a closed session of the House Select Committee on Assassinations, Lorenz testified to having been involved with E Howard Hunt and Frank Sturgis in the CIA training provided to Cuban exiles in the Everglades in Florida after the Bay of Pigs attack.
It was a meeting of several key players—Frank Sturgis, Pedro Diaz Lanz, Alexander Rorke (a rabid antiCommunist and former-FBI agent who was the wealthy son-in-law of Sherman Billingsley), Orlando Bosch, Guillermo and Ignacio Novo (brothers and Cuban exile leaders), and Jerry Patrick Hemming—in the CIA assassination unit known at the time as Operation 40.
She also testified that E Howard Hunt was known as “Eduardo,” and that his role in the group appeared to involve periodically bringing Frank Sturgis large quantities of cash delivered in an envelope.
Lorenz testified that in a private meeting with several of the Operation 40 players in September 1963, Frank Sturgis led the group as they studied street maps of Dallas that Sturgis laid out on a coffee table.
Lorenz placed Oswald at the meeting, saying that at the conclusion of the discussion, Sturgis folded up the maps and put them in his pocket.
Then, about a week before November 22, 1963, Frank Sturgis, Lorenz, and the Novo brothers left Orlando, Florida, in a two-car caravan with the second car containing Lee Harvey Oswald; Petro Diaz Lanz, the former chief of the Cuban Air Force; Orlando Bosch, a Cuban exile leader and CIA operative; and Jerry Patrick Hemming, a former United States Marine who became a mercenary and a CIA operative.
She testified that on the trip they rotated drivers and stopped to eat only at drive-in roadside restaurants.
They drove nonstop over two days from Orlando to Dallas, Texas, where the group checked into adjoining hotel rooms in a hotel outside Dallas.
She further testified that once the group had settled into the two adjoining hotel rooms, Frank Sturgis took rifles and scopes that had been wrapped in green waterproof paper, with blankets thrown on top, from the trunk of his car.
Sturgis placed the rifles and scopes between the two twin beds in his hotel room.
Lorenz said she recognized three or four automatic rifles, but she did not know the specific makes, and she did not pay attention to the rifles or scopes, except to notice the rifles were equipped with slings.
She testified that Jack Ruby showed up at the hotel to have a private discussion with Frank Sturgis, and that Ruby ignored Oswald during this visit.
She claimed she had acted as a decoy in several such missions previously staged in Florida and adjoining states.
Why a CIA-supplied operation needed to steal weapons from an armory, Lorenz did not explain.
After a few days in the hotel, Lorenz began to feel homesick for her daughter and wanted to go home.
She testified that Frank Sturgis took her to the airport in Dallas and she flew home to Miami on November 19 or 20, 1963.
One Woman’s Extraordinary Tale of Love and Espionage in the CIA, Lorenz details her experiences in Cuba, disclosing her belief that Joseph Kennedy, the patriarch of the Kennedy clan, had financed Castro with the expectation that if Castro managed to depose Cuban president Batista, then Kennedy would be able to take control of the Havana nightlife and destroy mobster Meyer Lansky’s influence.
She also claimed Teamster Union boss Jimmy Hoffa and Bill Bresser, a labor union boss in Cleveland, Ohio, made money selling guns “to both sides”— namely Batista and Castro—and that Santo Trafficante, Jack Ruby, and Frank Fiorini/Sturgis were among the gun runners providing weapons to Castro in his fight against Batista.
Gaeton Fonzi, a lead investigator for the House Select Committee on Assassinations, ultimately concluded that Lorenz’s story was unreliable; he successfully urged the House Select Committee to ignore the account when it could not be independently corroborated.
Marita Lorenz would have become just another weird footnote to the JFK assassination investigation except that she figured into an important libel case as a key witness where Lane set out to prove E Howard Hunt had been in Dallas on November 22, 1963.
The case developed when The Spotlight, a newspaper published by Liberty Lobby, Inc., ran an article in 1978 authored by former-CIA officer Victor Marchetti in which Marchetti accused E Howard Hunt of having been in Dallas on November 22, 1963, and of having played a role in the JFK assassination.
Marchetti had achieved notoriety in 1974 by publishing a heavily redacted book entitled The CIA and the Cult of Intelligence.
Mark Lane, even though he disagreed with the Liberty Lobby, took the case on appeal because the case offered him a chance to apply the knowledge he gathered in two decades he had then spent studying the JFK assassination.
A critical point in the retrial was reached when Hunt, under crossexamination by Lane, was forced to admit his children were never fully convinced Hunt was in Washington, D.C., on November 22, 1963, as he had always claimed.
Lane asked Hunt about his testimony in the first trial of the Liberty Lobby case, on December 16, 1981.
And that you were being persecuted for reasons that were unknown to you.
Through the years, Hunt had produced several explanations of the day JFK was assassinated, including a claim he had stopped to get Chinese food on his way home from the office.
Hunt’s coworker at the CIA said he could not recall seeing Hunt at work between November 18, 1963, and sometime in December 1963.
On August 20, 1978, Joseph Trento and Jacquie Powers, reporters for the Wilmington Sunday News Journal, wrote an article very similar to the Marchetti article, claiming a secret 1966 CIA memo placed Hunt in Dallas on November 22, 1963.
He claimed when the tramp pictures were made public, he had to “remind” his children he was never in Dallas that day.
Finally, Lane got Hunt to admit that each time a new allegation asserting Hunt had been in Dallas on the day JFK was assassinated was made, his children, even as adults, demanded to know if it was true.
In a unanimous decision, the jury agreed with the Liberty Lobby and decided against the plaintiff E Howard Hunt.
The jury foreman, Leslie Armstrong, told reporters “the evidence was clear The CIA had killed President Kennedy.
THE SILVIA ODIO INCIDENT House Select Committee on Assassinations investigator Gaeton Fonzi wrote that meeting Cuban exile Silvia Odio played an important role in his conviction that a conspiracy was involved in the JFK assassination.
In 1963 Odio was a member of the Cuban Revolutionary Junta, known as JURE, and both her parents were then political prisoners of the Castro regime.
She said two of the men appeared to be Cubans, although she also thought they had characteristics associated with Mexicans.
The third man, an American, was introduced to her as “Leon Oswald,” and she was told he was interested in the Cuban cause.
She further told the Warren Commission that the next day, after the meeting in her apartment, Leopoldo called her and asked her what she thought of the American.
When Odio replied, “I didn’t think anything,” Leopoldo went on to describe the American in more detail.
That was more or less—I can’t repeat the exact words, because he was kind of nuts.
Leopoldo also told Odio that this Leon had been a marine and he was interested in helping the Cubans.
On November 22, 1963, seeing photographs of Lee Harvey Oswald on television, Sylvia Odio recognized him as Leon Oswald, the man who came to her house.
The Warren Commission rejected Odio’s testimony largely because the dates deemed most likely for the suspect visit to Odio’s apartment, September 26 and 27, 1963, were the same dates the Commission placed Oswald in Dallas.
In so concluding, the Warren Commission discounted the possibility that someone was using the Oswald identity to create the impression Oswald had visited Mexico in the time period of late-September 1963.
As noted in chapter 4, no United States government agency has released a photograph that confirms Oswald had visited the Cuban and Russian embassies in Mexico City in late-September 1963, despite extensive United States intelligence surveillance of both embassies at that time.
Odio thought he was, the Commission requested the FBI to conduct further investigation to determine the validity of Mrs.
Fonzi, after locating Sylvia Odio and conducting extensive research on the incident, wrote a special report for the House Select Committee on Assassinations.
The House Select Committee was unable to reach a conclusion regarding Oswald’s motives, assuming the visit had come from Oswald himself.
The House Select Committee also could come to no definite conclusion regarding the precise date of the visit, or whether Oswald might have been in Dallas on those dates.
As far as Fonzi was concerned, the important conclusion was that Sylvia Odio was telling the truth.
John Hunt, the son of E Howard Hunt, began making public the deathbed confessions of his father.
If the deathbed confession is truthful, then Hunt had been lying since 1963 and was not in Washington D.C. on November 22, 1963, and did have something to do with JFK’s murder.
Conceivably, the deathbed confession represents Hunt’s last effort to come to grips with the truth, or perhaps his first effort to gain notoriety by confessing his guilt when it was too late to bring him to justice.
What Hunt’s deathbed confession manages to accomplish then is not to solve the case, but to confirm the CIA’s involvement from the beginning, and highlight the failure of the Warren Commission and the House Select Committee on Assassinations to investigate thoroughly the CIA’s role in the JFK conspiracy.
By so characterizing his role, Hunt implies he played a role in the JFK assassination, but that he was not the first team on the field, and/or that he may have had organizational responsibilities but more qualified players had been assigned the operational roles.
Hunt claimed Vice President Lyndon Johnson enlisted the help of Cord Meyer in the CIA to prepare the operational plan and organize the team of coconspirators.
This was not the first time that Hunt had fingered LBJ as the prime mover in the JFK assassination.
With LBJ in the White House, Life magazine would have little to gain pressing ahead with the Bobby Baker scandal.
LBJ could have reasonably calculated a grieving nation would rally behind him as JFK’s successor.
LBJ had ample motives to remove the sitting president, motives LBJ shared with many other powerful people, including Allen Dulles, who equally had come to want to see JFK’s presidency come to an end.
THE MARY PINCHOT MEYER SAGA E Howard Hunt explained Meyer was another person with motive since John F Kennedy had been having an affair with his wife, Mary Pinchot.
A then-young JFK spotted Pinchot on the dance floor at Choate Rosemary Hall, in Wallingford, Connecticut, where JFK had attended prep school.
That weekend, JFK returned to Choate to attend the Winter Festivals Saturday Night Dance.
JFK tapped her date, William Attwood, on the right shoulder to cut in so he could dance with Mary.
The incident occurred when JFK was spending his brief time as an undergraduate at Princeton, before his father had him transfer to Harvard.
JFK’s relationship with Meyer, however, did not become intimate until many years later, after Jack was in the White House.
Mary Pinchot met Cord Meyer, a Yale graduate, in 1944, when he was a Marine Corps lieutenant.
During World War II, Meyer distinguished himself in combat, losing an eye from shrapnel wounds suffered in the Pacific when a hand grenade rolled into his foxhole on Guam and exploded in his face.
Cord emerged from World War II determined that those who died in combat, including his twin brother, would not have died in vain.
The couple split apart in 1958, two years after their middle son, nine-year-old Michael, was killed in an auto accident outside their home in McLean, Virginia.
David Talbot reported that Mary Meyer consulted Timothy Leary about JFK. “ wanted Leary’s advice about how to guide him on a psychedelic journey,” Talbot wrote.
Mary Pinchot’s sister, Antoinette, better known as “Tony,” married Ben Bradlee, the managing editor of the Washington Post.
He is best known for publishing the Watergate stories investigated and published by Carl Bernstein and Bob Woodward.
When JFK was a United States Senator from Massachusetts, the Kennedys’ and Bradlees’ homes were literally across the street from one another in Georgetown.
In those years, the Kennedys and Bradlees were close friends, prominent Georgetown socialites, and frequent dinner companions.
Mary Pinchot reconnected with Georgetown after she divorced Cord Meyer and moved into a studio behind the Bradlees’ home on N Street in Georgetown, determined to focus her energies on her emerging career as an artist.
Hunt had discussed Cord Meyer’s role in the assassination not only in his deathbed confession, but also in his 2007 book, American Spy. “ was a high-level CIA operative whose wife, journalist Mary Pinchot, was having an affair with John F Kennedy,” Hunt wrote.
Hunt noted Allen Dulles recruited Meyers to the CIA in 1951, placing him under Frank Wisner in what was then known as Operation Mockingbird, a CIA operation in which journalists were secretly paid by the CIA to report on world affairs with a CIA perspective, all unbeknownst to the American public.
The rivalry with JFK was not only that both shared a love interest in Mary Meyers, but also that each had contrasting views about foreign policy.
Meyer believed that JFK’s view of foreign policy was dangerously set on pre-World War II ideas of United States national interests.
JFK was suspicious of the CIA based on his experience in Cuba and, as we will see in the next chapter, with his experiences with the CIA in Laos and Vietnam.
Meyer aligned with Dulles and believed in an internationalist “one-world government” view that transcended nationalism.
Because of their rivalry Cord Meyer would have been ripe for LBJ to recruit into organizing a JFK assassination plot.
In what police judged to be an apparent rape attempt, Meyer fought for her life, only to be killed by two bullet shots, one to the head and the other to the heart, both fired at close range.
Within minutes of the assault, Raymond Crump, an African-American, was arrested near the murder scene.
Failing to find any gun or forensic evidence, such as hair, clothing fibers, blood, semen, skin, urine, or saliva, that linked Raymond Crump to either the murder scene or the body and clothing of Mary Meyer, the jury voted to acquit Crump.
Longtime Pinchot family friend Peter Janney accused the CIA of murdering Pinchot and of setting Crump up to be the patsy.
She encouraged the Bradlees to go to Mary Meyer’s home to recover her diary.
When Ben and Tony Bradlee got there, they found high-ranking CIA official James Jesus Angleton inside.
After Ben Bradlee realized they had not searched Mary’s studio, he and his wife returned to the house, only to run into Jim Angleton again.
According to Ben Bradlee, after Angleton left, he and his wife found the diary and took it home with them.
They claimed they found a few phrases that confirmed the relationship between Mary Meyer and JFK, and that they were stunned.
Still, there is a second, more sinister version of what happened to Mary’s diary.
Author Peter Janney argued that Ben and Tony Bradlee could not have recovered the diary because Angleton recovered Mary’s diary on the night of her murder.
Janney wrote that the night of Mary’s murder, the Bradlees were unable to find the diary, and that Anne Truitt called Angleton to tell him where in the house to find the diary.
According to Janney’s reconstruction of events, after getting the phone call from Anne Truitt, Angelton returned to Mary’s home a second time on the night of her murder and found the diary.
It strains credibility to believe that a mature woman such as Mary Pinchot, with her access to the smug Georgetown elite of the early 1960s, would have confided intimate details of her relationship to JFK to a diary.
Angleton was not interested in Mary because of Mary’s affair with JFK or because of what Mary might have written in her diary about that love interest.
Angleton was interested in Mary and her diary because of what Mary knew and might have written about Angleton himself.
The story is that author C David Heymann, author of The Georgetown Ladies’ Social Club, asked Meyer some six weeks before his death if he thought he knew who killed Mary.
But from the beginning of her marriage to Cord Meyer, Mary knew her husband and Angleton were close, as both men in their earlier years shared literary ambitions.
Angleton, as we shall see in the next section, also had reason to know Lee Harvey Oswald, for nearly a year before Oswald’s name surfaced as the likely suspect in the JFK murder case.
ANGLETON AND OSWALD’S INTELLIGENCE FILE James Angleton, a well-educated and highly literate individual, directed counterintelligence for the CIA from 1954-1975.
Most intelligence professionals who knew Angleton respected his intelligence—before joining the CIA he edited a literary journal that published the works of cummings and Ezra Pound— and his fierce loyalty to the agency.
Angleton appears to have become involved in the JFK assassination primarily to cover-up the agency’s involvement.
Angleton is typically not named as a coconspirator in planning the JFK assassination but clearly appears in the narrative when he was assigned after JFK’s death to be the CIA liaison to the Warren Commission.
False defectors were double agents that “defected” to the Soviet Union with the intention of acting as undercover assets or spies.
In the CIA, an important part of Angleton’s job involved recruiting soldiers among the United States military who were intelligent enough to learn Russian and clever enough to convince the Russians they were disgruntled idealists disillusioned with the United States and eager to adopt a political system that embraced real social justice, such as Soviet Communism.
Even if Angleton had not recruited Oswald to defect, Angleton most likely managed Oswald through the process of defection and engineered Oswald’s return to the United States the moment his return met the needs of the Agency.
As early as October 1960, the Department of State undertook a project to identify and research all Americans who had defected to the Soviet Union, to Soviet bloc nations, or to Communist China.
At the Department of State’s Office of Intelligence/Resources and Coordination, Robert B Elwood wrote to Richard Bissell, the CIA’s then-deputy director of plans—the position from which Bissell began planning the Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba under the Eisenhower administration.
Elwood wanted to identify all CIA assets that as former United States military had participated in the “false defector” program.
The assignment to follow through at the State Department fell to Otto F Otepka, deputy director of the State Department Office of Security.
From sometime shortly after he joined the Marines in 1957, Oswald was likely targeted and recruited by the CIA to be a top player in the CIA “false defector” program.
Walker, the Justice Department evidently also got involved in the Oswald file.
The Justice Department evidently intervened, asking the Dallas Police not to pursue, investigate, or arrest Lee Harvey Oswald in the matter of Oswald supposedly having fired a shot at Gen.
Walker urged the House Select Committee on Investigations to look into this extraordinary intervention that he believed had to trace back to Robert Kennedy.
Conceivably, as we saw in chapter 4, a trained Soviet bloc intelligence officer like Pacepa had good reason for perceiving everything Oswald did resulted from Oswald being a KGB asset, and the CIA may have assumed Oswald was a KGB asset.
This could be a key part of the deep secret the CIA could not afford the United States public to know in the aftermath of the JFK assassination when the Warren Report was issued in 1964.
THE CONSPIRACY EXPANDS In his deathbed confession, E Howard Hunt identified a small group of people from within the CIA that Cord Meyer recruited into the assassination plot.
In an organizational chart designed to describe the plot, Hunt placed David Morales below Cord Meyer but with a direct line to the contract killers on the grassy knoll.
On the same level as Morales, but off to the side, Hunt placed CIA agent William Harvey.
David Morales had a dark Latin, possibly even Mexican or Indian appearance.
He first showed up as El Indio in the CIA training of guerillas for the staged “invasion” of Guatemala engineered by E Howard Hunt in 1954.
Fonzi notes Morales bragged of killing people for the CIA in Vietnam, in Venezuela, and in Uruguay, among other places.
JMWAVE operated under the guise of Zenith Technical Enterprises, Inc, a front company created as a cover for the covert operations JMWAVE staged against Cuba.
Fonzi described an all-night drinking session during which Morales flew off the handle at the mention of JFK’s name.
Morales started yelling about what a wimp JFK was and talking about how JFK was responsible for the men who died in the Bay of Pigs operation.
Finally, Morales stopped, sat down on the bed and remained silent for a moment.
Harvey, like Morales, was involved in the CIA staged coup d’état in 1954 that overthrew the government of Jacobo Arbenz in Guatemala.
Harvey, head of ZR/RIFLE—the operation assigned to eliminate foreign political leaders—also directed Task Force W, a group appointed to oversee JMWAVE operations.
The Plot to Kill Kennedy and Castro, Harvey drew up policies and oriented the execution of the Cuba project for all CIA foreign stations, as well as for CIA operatives who worked in embassies in countries where Cuba had strong diplomatic representation.
Harvey could definitely be a person of interest, as he was a strange character hiding a mass of hidden aggression.
Hunt noted the association between Harvey and the Corsican assassins involved in the Marseilles drug connection known as the “French Connection,” stemmed from a memo Harvey authored when running the Executive Action program, advocating a desire to hire Corsicans because of their expertise and proficiency as contract hit men.
DAVID PHILLIPS AND ANTONIO VECIANA At the next level of the conspiracy, Hunt claimed Cord Meyer recruited David Phillips, the CIA operative who had played a major role in the propaganda campaign overthrowing the Arbenz government in Guatemala in 1954.
The House Select Committee on Assassinations concluded that Phillips, assuming the identity of the mysterious Maurice Bishop, worked with Antonio Veciana, the Cuban exile leader who established Alpha 66 to oppose Castro after the Communists assumed power in Cuba in 1959.
When Alpha 66 attacked a Soviet ship on March 23, 1963, a furious JFK ordered that Veciana and other leaders of Alpha 66 should be arrested and placed in confinement in Florida.
Veciana met Bishop in the lobby of a large downtown office building that House Select Committee investigator Gaeton Fonzi believed was the Southland Center, a forty-two-story office complex built in Dallas in the late 1950s.
After seeing the news photographs and television coverage portraying Lee Harvey Oswald as the long-gun shooter of JFK, Veciana told Fonzi he was certain the man with Bishop that day had been Oswald.
Fonzi was convinced anti-Castroism was the unifying theme within the CIA that served as the trigger to the CIA’s decision to participate in the JFK assassination.
He was skeptical that Oswald actually made his controversial trip to Mexico, believing instead that the CIA staged the entire sequence of events in Mexico by using a CIA operative who was instructed to assume the Oswald identity.
Phillips was CIA station chief in Mexico City at the time of Oswald’s visit.
Commenting about his certainty David Atlee Phillips was the man who assumed the Maurice Bishop persona.
In September 1979 Veciana was ambushed on his way home from work in an apparent assassination attempt.
Veciana survived, but after the attack he refused to discuss his work with Alpha 66.
Tippit, and was also suspected of having been a shooter in the JFK assassination.
White also served in the same marine platoon with Oswald in Japan and later in the Philippines.
Both Roscoe White and Lee Harvey Oswald were candidates for having been recruited into the CIA when they were marines.
As discussed in chapter 2, Former marine sniper Craig Roberts argued that Roscoe White was recruited by William Harvey to participate in ZR/RIFLE under the codename Mandarin.
In his 1994 book, Kill Zone, Roberts noted that Roscoe White had access to a Dallas police uniform and badge on November 22, 1963.
The address is approximately ten blocks to the east of Dealey Plaza on Elm Street.
The distinctive Edsel automobile, customized as an advertising vehicle, featured on its hood an oversized mock fifty-caliber machine gun.
From the vantage point of having jumped on top of the car, White may have been the shooter who hit JFK’s neck.
There is ample testimony in the Warren Commission hearings about the Honest Joe’s Pawn Shop vehicle being driven in the motorcade route the day of the assassination.
Jean Hill and Mary Moorman, two assassination witnesses who were on Elm Street directly across from the concrete monument when JFK was shot, both reported observing the Honest Joe’s vehicle.
Hill recalled talking to a uniformed policeman of the Dallas Police Department on the sidewalk near the main entrance to the Depository building.
Hill noticed an automobile circling the area,” the FBI report of her interview noted.
Millican gave testimony to the Dallas County Sheriff’s office that he was standing on the north side of Elm Street about halfway between Houston Street and the triple underpass.
Millican contradicted Jean Hill in claiming the Honest Joe’s vehicle drove off five or ten minutes before the JFK motorcade came by.
He gets write-ups in the paper, free advertising about different things he loans money on, like artificial limbs and things like that.
Evidently, Sorrels thought mentioning Honest Joe to Ruby would break the ice because Ruby was also Jewish.
This is where Ruby explained to Sorrels he had been emotionally upset by the JFK assassination, and he did not want Jackie Kennedy to have to go through the ordeal of Lee Harvey Oswald’s trial.
He stated the car was brightly painted and carried slogans advertising his pawnshop.
GOLDSTEIN said the police permitted him to drive on the route used by President JOHN F KENNEDY’s Motorcade.
He stated, however, that he was parked on Pacific Avenue, one block from the parade route, when President KENNEDY was shot,908 The FBI report further stated that while Rubin Goldstein claimed not to know Lee Harvey Oswald, Goldstein admitted that he knew Jack Ruby.
Goldstein told the FBI that Ruby purchased some equipment from him several years prior to the JFK assassination.
Goldstein insisted he was not a personal friend of Jack Ruby and that he had no other business dealings with Ruby since Ruby bought the equipment from him.
Almost immediately after the assassination, Sorrels had suspected Goldstein and his Honest Joe vehicle were involved.
Assassination researcher Jones Harris had the relevant frame from the Nix film enlarged.
Startlingly there appears to be a man standing on the running board of the Honest Joe vehicle, with a weapon in his hands, shooting at JFK as the limo passes on Elm Street.
Harris interviewed Sorrels shortly after the assassination, and Sorrels admitted he had visited Honest Joe’s store on the afternoon of November 22, 1963.
Harris believes Sorrels was well along the way to solving almost single-handedly the JFK assassination.
Harris is convinced Sorrels was in the process of implicating both Goldstein and Roscoe White, the shooter Harris insists fired from the running-board of the Honest Joe vehicle visible in the early versions of the Nix film.
Sorrels was largely taken off the case after the FBI began assuming jurisdiction over the investigation.
By Sunday morning, when Jack Ruby shot Lee Harvey Oswald, there was no possible way Washington would allow Sorrels to continue his investigation in Dallas, even though Sorrels was the special agent in charge of the Dallas district of the United States Secret Service.
If Sorrels had been given enough time, he would have located James P Hosty Jr., the FBI agent in charge of Oswald’s case in Dallas, so as to begin probing Oswald’s relationship to the FBI prior to the assassination.
Beverly Oliver was a performer in Jack Ruby’s Carousel Club who also turned out to be the long-unidentified “Babushka Lady,” and an eyewitness to the JFK assassination.
Taking photographs of the JFK limo as it traveled along Elm Street in Dealey Plaza, she positively identified Roscoe White on the grassy knoll in the immediate aftermath of the shooting.
In her book, Nightmare in Dallas, Oliver describes running across Elm Street to join the people running up the grassy knoll as JFK’s limousine sped under the triple underpass.
As she ran up the steps heading to the concrete pergola monument, she felt scared.
Her heart was pounding, her hands were perspiring, and her stomach was in knots.
That’s when she describes encountering the man she knew as “Geneva husband” walking across the steps in front of her.
Oliver reported that Jack Ruby had hired Geneva White to be a hostess at the Carousel Club and Geneva relied on her husband to pick her up after work.
The officer seen in the Hughes film in the railroad yard behind the fence on the grassy knoll is wearing a Dallas Police Department uniform, but he is conspicuously seen not wearing a Dallas Police Department cap and not carrying a gun.
Viewing the Hughes film, Oliver identified Roscoe White as the Dallas Police officer seen in the Hughes film standing in the railroad yard behind the picket fence on the grassy knoll in the moments following the assassination.
After Roscoe White’s death in 1971, his son, Ricky White, claimed to have found a military footlocker belonging to his father.
In it, Ricky claimed, was a handwritten diary in which his father supposedly admitted to shooting JFK and some never-before-seen photos of the assassination and Lee Harvey Oswald.
When Ricky later went to sell the footlocker, he discovered that the diary and photos were missing.
About a year later, Ricky White claimed to find a metal artillery powder canister in his grandmother’s attic that contained Roscoe White’s Marine Corps service papers and his dog tag, as well as three messages written in military style and addressed to an individual codenamed Mandarin.
Former Marine sniper Craig Roberts claims to have seen the messages and verified that the number in the top right-hand corner of each was identical to Roscoe White’s Marine Corps serial number.
Roberts insists he has personally inspected the three messages and believes them to be authentic, with the format, content, and composition of the messages exactly as he would expect, given his extensive military experience as a sniper.
NIXON IN DALLAS ON NOVEMBER 22, 1963 Richard Nixon did not want the American public knowing he was in Dallas, Texas, on November 23, 1963, when JFK was assassinated.
L Fletcher Prouty, the retired United States Air Force colonel who was the real-life model for the “Mr X” character played by actor Donald Sutherland in Oliver Stone’s 1991 movie, JFK, notes Nixon told three different stories designed to cover up the truth that he was in Dallas at the very moment JFK was killed.
So, in the first version, Nixon claims he was in the air when Kennedy was shot and a man told him the news.
A woman came screaming out of a house, and when Nixon rolled down the window of the taxi, the woman told him JFK had been shot in Dallas.
Nixon was there representing outside counsel to work with Harvey Russel, Pepsi-Cola’s general counsel.
The Dallas Morning News also printed a picture of Nixon staying in the Baker Hotel at 1400 Commerce in downtown Dallas, six blocks from the spot where JFK was assassinated.
The newspaper reported Pepsi-Cola had rented the entire third floor of the hotel for their “convention” that included a suite for Pepsi heiress and movie star actress Joan Crawford, a suite for attorney Richard Nixon, and various rooms for Pepsi executives and unnamed dignitaries.
When Nixon entered the room, the Don Ragon Band was playing “April in Portugal,” a song Nixon said was his wife’s favorite.
The newspaper further reported that Nixon and Crawford sat ringside in the Empire Room during the dinner show and drew tremendous applause when introduced.
The Pepsi meeting in Dallas on November 22, 1963 was interrupted by the announcement JFK had been shot.
With that deeply disturbing news, the convention session Nixon was attending broke up.
Nixon returned to his hotel room and was driven later that afternoon to Love Field by a Pepsi-Cola official named DeLuca.
In 1960 Nixon was convinced Chicago mayor Richard Daley had stolen enough votes at the order of Kennedy family boss, Joseph P Kennedy, and with the help of Chicago crime boss Sam Giancana to tip the narrow balance of the presidential election away from Nixon.
By the time of the JFK assassination, the mob’s 1960 honeymoon with JFK was over, and Giancana had abandoned JFK, feeling betrayed by Bobby Kennedy’s war against the Italian and Jewish mobs in the east.
Giancana maintained the JFK assassination had taken months to mastermind and dozens of men were involved, planning the assassination hit for several different cities, including Chicago, Tampa/Miami, Los Angeles, and Dallas.
Giancana claimed that ultimately JFK had to be lured to Dallas because Dallas afforded the best opportunity for a successful assassination.
Giancana insisted the JFK assassination was a joint mob-CIA action, done with the approval and complicity of both Lyndon Johnson and Richard Nixon.
Giancana further claimed Dallas mayor Earle Cabell, the brother of former CIA deputy director Charles Cabell, made sure security along the motorcade in Dallas was lax at best.
Charles Cabell also had a grudge with JFK because he was one of the CIA officials JFK forced to resign in January 1962 after the Bay of Pigs invasion.
Tippit were part of the conspiracy, with Oswald unbeknownst to him having been marked to play the role of the patsy.
They coordinated with field operatives via state-of-the-art walkie-talkie telecommunications equipment at that time available only to government spooks.
Inconspicuously positioned along the motorcade route, spotters with unseen field communications gear reported the progress of the JFK limo to alert sniper teams positioned for action.
The best shooters were reserved for final shots planned to occur as the limo approached the sweet spot of the kill zone, along Elm Street before the final curve of the street into the triple underpass.
He hated the Kennedys as much as anybody, and he wasn’t about to help Bobby find his brother’s killers.
SEVEN VIETNAM, DIEM, THE FRENCH CONNECTION, AND LBJ “T remember saying that the CIA frequently did things he didn’t know about, and he was unhappy about it.
He told me he believed the CIA had arranged to have Diem and Trujillo bumped off.
Dallas and Beyond, 1976623 In the final months, spoke with friends about his own death with a freedom and frequency that shocked them.
Senator George Smathers said, “I don’t know why it is, but death became kind of an obsession with Jack.” —Senator George Smathers, quoted in James W Douglass, JFK and the Unspeakable, 2008624 JFK WAS DEEPLY MOVED by the poem “Rendezvous,” a poem about death.
Written by Alan Seeger, who graduated from Harvard in 1910 and volunteered for the French Foreign Legion before the United States entered World War I, the poem first seems to prefigure his own death.
Seeger was killed on July 4, 1916, at Belloy-en-Senterre, attacking a French position.
But I’ve a rendezvous with Death At midnight in some flaming town, When Spring trips north again this year, And I to my pledged word am true, I shall not fail that rendezvous.
He suffered from Addison’s disease and had a degenerative back ailment that plagued him for life.
Kennedy’s charismatic appeal rested heavily on the image of youthful energy and good health he projected.
Among those he trusted, Jack could be seen occasionally during the middle of a meeting calmly taking a syringe and injecting himself into his thigh, passing the needle straight through his pants—an act he performed without comment, not breaking a sentence as he kept stride with the conversation.
Dallek commented that JFK’s medical ailments in a strange way contributed to his demise.
He wore a corset-like back brace every day, and after an initial shot hit him in the back, the corset held him upright, positioning him perfectly for the final fatal headshots.
Jack’s preoccupation with death may have been due to the fact that he knew he would almost certainly become a cripple in old age, confined to a wheelchair.
When JFK was told that an assassination plot was underway, that he would be shot by a high-powered rifle from a tall building, Jack took the information stoically.
Rather than take extraordinary precautions to protect his safety, he commented matter-of-factly that sometimes a person has no choice but to do what they must do.
Still, as his rendezvous with death approached and the calendar entered November 1963, news from South Vietnam did not permit Jack Kennedy to view the potential of an assassination attempt in a fateful or stoic manner.
Suddenly, the prospect he might be assassinated, and soon, became all too real a prospect for JFK to dismiss.
The emotional impact of the realization of his impending death finally hit JFK uncharacteristically hard.
THE CIA HIT ON DIEM On Saturday, November 2, 1963, less than three weeks away from his own assassination, President John F Kennedy was deeply disturbed to learn that South Vietnamese President Ngo Dinh Diem and his younger brother Ngo Dinh Nhu had been arrested and killed by the South Vietnamese army.
They were victims of a CIA-engineered coup led by South Vietnamese Maj.
The moment JFK heard Diem had been killed, he knew the CIA had most likely signed his own death warrant.
Washington time, Ambassador Lodge sent a cable from Saigon to the White House describing the death of Diem and Nhu.
National Security Council staff aide Michael V Forrestal handed the message to JFK in the Cabinet Room of the White House as a crisis meeting of the National Security Council was about to begin.
Reading the cable, Kennedy “leaped to his feet and rushed from the room with a look of shock on his face,” as described by General Maxwell Taylor who was attending the meeting.
Presidential historian Robert Dallek, in his 2003 book, An Unfinished Life, noted Taylor attributed Kennedy’s reaction to his belief that any change of government in South Vietnam would be carried out without bloodshed.
Even more precisely, JFK had specifically ordered the CIA not to assassinate Diem in a coup d’état.
If Diem could be assassinated despite his orders, JFK knew he, too, could be assassinated.
He suspected the same people in the CIA who had disregarded his instructions to Ambassador Lodge were capable of plotting directly against him as well.
Insightfully, Schlesinger commented he had not seen JFK so depressed since the Bay of Pigs crisis.
On Monday, November 4, 1963, JFK taped a message on the Diem assassination for future historians.
While became increasingly difficult in the last months, nevertheless over a ten-year period, he’d held his country together, maintained its independence under very adverse conditions.
Diem and his brother placed themselves at risk by agreeing to surrender to forces loyal to General Minh.
In exchange for the trust Diem and his brother placed in JFK, they were brutally killed.
On orders from General Minh, Captain Nguyen Van Nhung assassinated Diem and Nhu with a pistol at point-blank range in an armored personnel carrier, finishing the job off with a bayonet, as Diem and Nhu were en route to a South Vietnam military base and then out of the country.
The Diem murder was especially ironic due to the fact that the CIA positioned Diem to head South Vietnam after the Geneva Agreements of 1954 partitioned Vietnam and after the defeat of the French at Dien Bien Phu.
Ngo Dinh Diem established his nationalist credentials in the early 1930s when he resigned his position as Vietnam’s Interior Minister.
Living in the United States in the 1950s, he won over key United States legislators who began to see him as the best hope for anti-Communist leadership in Vietnam.
By mid-1954 there was ample precedent for the CIA to take a lead role in Vietnam.
On June 18, 1954, at the direct encouragement of the CIA, Vietnamese Emperor Bao Dai invited Diem to form a government to replace that of the Francophile courtier Prince Buo Loc.
It calculated that the overthrow of Diem committed Washington to Saigon more deeply.
After the assassination of Diem, JFK found it impossible to dismiss the warning from the Elkins family.
DIEM AND THE CANCELED TRIP TO CHICAGO November 2, 1963, was coincidentally the day Chicago police arrested a wellarmed Thomas Arthur Vallee on suspicion of planning to assassinate the president.
A Treasury Department official ordered Chicago Police Lieutenant Berkeley Moyland to forget his encounter with Thomas Arthur Vallee.
The Secret Service Agent in Charge, Maurice Martineau, ordered his Chicago agents to forget their investigation of the four-man sniper team.
The Dallas assassination was allowed to happen, unimpeded by the intelligence community’s knowledge of its forerunner,” wrote James W Douglass in his 2008 best-selling book, JFK and the Unspeakable.
Yet, curiously, the intelligence about the Chicago assassination plot never surfaced beyond Chicago.
Kennedy, on being briefed about the danger in Chicago, decided the trip had to be canceled.
So at 10:15m. on November 2, at the last possible moment, White House Press Secretary Pierre Salinger announced to the press that JFK had decided to cancel his scheduled visit to Chicago, implying concerns over Vietnam were the reason.
The White House never specifically attributed the Diem assassination as the reason for canceling the Chicago trip, nor did the White House make public the intelligence information about the arrest of Thomas Arthur Vallee.
It didn’t matter that Chicago failed, reasoned Douglass, because Dallas followed a similar pattern.
Haldeman discusses State Department cables that E Howard Hunt had in his safe at the White House.
Haldeman admits there were many indicators along the way that the investigation of the Watergate burglary was only the tip of the iceberg.
In his testimony to the Senate Watergate Committee, Hunt admitted to forging CIA cables linking JFK to the Diem assassination under questioning from committee counsel Samuel Dash.
Hunt established that his analysis of authentic State Department cables indicated “a gap” in the sequence leading up to the Diem assassination.
In the segment of Hunt’s testimony presented below, Charles Colson, who served in the White House as special counsel to President Nixon from 1969 to 1973, is exposed as playing a central role in the Watergate cover-up.
I told him that the construction I placed upon the absence of certain cables was that they had been abstracted from the files maintained by the Department of State in chronological fashion and that while there was every reason to believe, on the basis of an accumulated evidence of the cable documentation, that the Kennedy administration was implicitly, if not explicitly, responsible for the assassination of Diem and his brother-in-law, that there was no hard evidence such as a cable emanating from the White House or a reply coming from Saigon, the Saigon embassy.
To create, to fabricate cables that could substitute for the missing chronological cables.
He indicated to me that he would be probably getting in touch with a member of the media, of the press, to show the cables.
Lambert was suspicious of the authenticity of the cables, based in large part on the advice from the surviving members of the Elkins family that the document had been falsified and that JFK had nothing to do with ordering the Diem assassination.
Haldeman, and John Erlichman, counsel and Domestic Affairs assistant to President Nixon, Dean handed to Gray two legal-sized white manila folders that contained copies of classified papers that E Howard Hunt had been working on while in the White House.
Dean explained the files had “national security implications or overtones,” but that they had nothing to do with the Watergate burglary or investigation.
Before putting the files in the fire, he opened one and saw that it contained what appeared to be copies of “top secret” State Department cables.
Had there been proof JFK had ordered the Diem assassination, E Howard Hunt would never have needed to forge State Department documents.
Moreover, that Hunt broke the law to create falsified State Department documents underscores the explosive nature of the Diem assassination, even in 1972 and 1973, ten years after the JFK assassination.
One of the tantalizing aspects of the Watergate investigation involves the possibility that the “plumbers unit” in the White House fabricated and stole yet unseen documents that would tarnish the record or the character of JFK and his two brothers.
Nixon’s purpose very possibly was not just to change the historical record regarding the Diem assassination, but to make sure no evidence existed that could implicate him in the JFK assassination.
Quite possibly Nixon feared that Hunt knew enough about the JFK assassination to implicate him.
Even if in revealing the truth Hunt implicated himself, Nixon feared he might do it if he got a good deal for trading off the information.
What is certain is that if Hunt knew the full extent of the CIA’s involvement in the JFK assassination, Nixon knew it too.
UNWISE TO FIGHT IN LAOS In the first one hundred days after taking office, President Kennedy was faced with escalating Soviet military involvement supporting the Pathet Lao, a Communist nationalist group in Laos engaged in a civil war seeking to overthrow the Royal Laotian Government.
On March 23, 1970, JFK held a press conference in the then-new State Department auditorium.
He spoke against a background of three maps of Laos illustrating the advance of the Russiansupported Pathet Lao.
Moreover, for JFK, the problem remained of justifying the intervention against Communism in Laos if we were resolved to reject intervention against Communism in Cuba.
McArthur advised strongly that the United States should never again fight a land war in Asia, a part of the world where indigenous military forces could subsist for days on a pocketful of uncooked rice, while the United States military required extensive bases and forward supplies just to sustain battleready troops.
McArthur added that if we intervened in Southeast Asia, the United States must be prepared to use nuclear weapons, should China enter in force.
The lesson of the Korean War was that fighting a limited warfare war fought with conventional troops and conventional weapons was a risky strategy.
When the Korean War was being fought, China was still more than a decade away from developing its own nuclear war capability.
Yet, China could enter the war at any moment with thousands of fresh troops at precisely the right moment, calculating to overwhelm United States troops fighting at near exhaustion in the bitterest of winter conditions.
Combat in Southeast Asia promised to be even more difficult than combat in Korea.
In Korea, China was still forced to rely on regular army troops to secure victory.
In Laos or Vietnam, combatants fighting against the United States included a shadow army that could easily blend back unseen into the village and countryside.
Even when regular North Vietnamese troops entered the war, the North Vietnamese were fighting in their own country, in terrain they knew and understood.
In Laos and Vietnam, United States troops were vulnerable to defeat in what was asymmetrical combat against an enemy that could be organized loosely as guerilla insurgents.
War in Laos and Vietnam was as much about controlling the infrastructure of the local communities as gaining or losing territory in a conventional sense.
In the peasant civil war typically fought in Southeast Asia, fighters lived where they fought, often with only a pocketful of uncooked rice to sustain them.
Insurgent guerilla fighters entered and exited the field of battle as often as not unseen, if not necessarily unsuspected, typically without the niceties of uniforms or a formal command structure.
The Laos crisis ended when the Russians stepped down and Khrushchev decided to negotiate.
But this did not occur before Kennedy had given the order, on April 20, 1961, for the corps of American military advisors in Laos to discard their civilian clothes and to put on their military uniforms, transforming into a Military and Advisory Group authorized to accompany Laotian troops into combat.
In Laos, JFK was not willing to commit United States military forces, but he was willing to commit military advisors.
With Laos, JFK had begun to develop a limited warfare theory for Southeast Asia that would rely upon military assistance and foreign aid, not combat troops.
As Kennedy reflected on Laos, he resolved he would not make in Vietnam the mistake he had avoided in Laos.
As he studied Vietnam, JFK came to the conclusion he would not make the mistake Truman had made in Korea.
JFK had no intention whatsoever of committing to Vietnam regular United States troops, as he had also refused to commit in Laos.
THE SPEECH JFK NEVER GAVE On the day JFK was assassinated, he was on his way to the Dallas Trade Center to give a luncheon address.
This, the “Unspoken Speech,” contained a strong and clear statement of Kennedy’s determination to support our allies and to fight back Communism worldwide through a military and economic assistance program, not through the direct intervention of United States military forces.
With this speech, JFK would have expressed a clear policy preference for providing military aid to nations such as Vietnam, rather than committing troops.
Beginning in the first days of his administration over Laos to the last hours of his administration over Vietnam, JFK was constantly pressured by the military to ramp up the United States military presence in Southeast Asia.
Edward Lansdale presented to him the same proposal he had developed for Eisenhower.
Howard Hunt in the CIA who saw benefits to Lansdale’s thinking in covert coups, such as what the CIA engineered in Guatemala in 1954 and 1957.
Landsdale recommended to JFK a direct United States military intervention in Vietnam, just as he had recommended the same to Eisenhower in 1954 when the French faced defeat at Diem Biem Phu, and were at the point of being pushed out of what was then known as Indochina.
THE PLAN TO WITHDRAW JFK properly worried that no direct United States military intervention in a region like Southeast Asia could succeed, regardless how many troops were sent or what type of arms they had, unless the indigenous population was ready to fight and die for their own freedom.
By offering a wide range of financial assistance, military training, and sophisticated military equipment, JFK felt he could test the resolve and the ability of the citizens of a nation like Vietnam to help them win in a war against indigenous Communists supported by China and Russia.
It proved that strategic bombing achieved no true military advantage unless there were Strategic targets to bomb, especially fuel and chemical production sites.
Yes, the “rolling-thunder” effect of massive B-52 raids would be frightening.
On the day JFK died, the United States had fifteen thousand American military advisors in South Vietnam; the same number JFK had decided to send there in 1961.
Kennedy told Mansfield that while he was in agreement, a pull out was not possible until 1965, if JFK were reelected.
Maxwell Taylor for the withdrawal of one thousand United States military personnel by the end of 1963 and by the end of 1965, the withdrawal of the bulk of United States military personnel.
On Monday, September 2, 1963, Labor Day, at Hyannis Port, JFK had a relaxed interview outdoors with CBS television anchorman Walter Cronkite, who that sunny day was inaugurating a new CBS television news program.
Kennedy answered directly, careful to set the stage for explaining why a military withdrawal from Vietnam was beginning to make sense to him.
That document was a public White House statement of policy recommendations received from Defense Secretary Robert McNamara, Gen.
Secretary McNamara and General Taylor reported their judgment that the major part of the United States military task can be completed by the end of 1965, although there may be a continuing requirement for a limited number of United States training personnel.
They reported that by the end of this year, the United States program for training Vietnamese should have progressed to the point where 1,000 United States military personnel assigned to South Vietnam can be withdrawn, °©0 Even though Kennedy made public on October 2, 1963, the recommendations he received from McNamara and Taylor, Kennedy kept secret that he agreed with the recommendation.
The draft prepared by JFK national security advisor McGeorge Bundy for JFK’s review allowed for maritime operations against North Vietnam, but only by the government of South Vietnam.
Johnson changed this, realizing South Vietnam really had no navy of any consequence.
Johnson allowed American naval vessels to be involved in missions against North Vietnam.
This resulted in what was called OPLAN 44, specifying attacks be undertaken by fast patrol boats manned by South Vietnamese sailors, with the support and preparations undertaken by Americans.
Included in the mission specification were United States destroyers offshore North Vietnam monitoring enemy actions through electronic surveillance.
These patrols, code-named DESOTO, resulted in what became known as the Gulf of Tonkin Incident in which three North Vietnamese torpedo boats attacked the United States Navy destroyer Maddox on August 2, 1964.
Although the North Vietnamese launched a torpedo attack, the total damage done to the Maddox consisted of one bullet through the hull.
LBJ leveraged the incident into the congressional resolution known as the Gulf of Tonkin resolution that was subsequently utilized as constitutional authority for allowing the president to wage the Vietnam War.
LBJ’s first Vietnam meeting as president was held in the White House at 3:00 m., on November 24, 1963, the Sunday that JFK’s body lay in state for public viewing in the Rotunda of the Capitol.
In attendance at the meeting in the White House were Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Secretary of State Robert McNamara, National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy, Undersecretary of State George Ball, CIA Director John McCone, and Ambassador Lodge.
John Newman in his 1992 book, JFK and Vietnam, reported that LBJ made several dramatic statements about the course of the Vietnam War.
Newman argued the most tragic consequence of JFK’s assassination was the subsequent escalation of the Vietnam War.
Kennedy concluded, unfortunately, that he could not win reelection in 1964 if he served up to his Republican challengers the argument the United States should withdraw from Vietnam.
Former vice president Nixon was already calling for bombing North Vietnam as a strategy to win the war, and Arizona Senator Barry Goldwater, JFK’s most likely presidential challenger in 1964, would gain perhaps decisive political advantage in painting JFK as ineffective in foreign policy, having been embarrassed at the Bay of Pigs, unable to stop Khrushchev from erecting the Berlin Wall, and now, having abandoned South Vietnam to Communism.
But, as Newman pointed out, JFK also concluded correctly that a retreat from Vietnam could not happen unless he was reelected in 1964.
THE LBJ MISTRESS SAGA One of the more controversial sagas concerning LBJ involves Madeleine Duncan Brown and her claim to have been a longtime mistress to LBJ who bore him a son out of wedlock.
In her 1997 book, Texas in the Morning, Brown describes attending a party at the home of Texas oilman Clint Murchison on Thursday, November 21, 1963, the night before JFK was assassinated.
Hunt, lawyer and former World Bank president John J McCloy, Houston construction company entrepreneur George R Brown, and philanthropist and former Dallas mayor Robert L Thornton.
She described how LBJ arrived unexpectedly just as the party was breaking up.
In a final meeting with the coconspirators, including both Richard Nixon and J Edgar Hoover, evidently confirmation of the attempt to be made the next day on JFK’s life was given.
The problem with this spectacular revelation is that it is unlikely to be true.
On the evening of Thursday, November 21, 1963, JFK and LBJ attended a testimonial dinner honoring Texas Congressman Albert Thomas held in the Houston Coliseum.
William Manchester in his 1967 book, The Death of a President, noted it was after 9:30m. when JFK and the presidential party including LBJ left the head table to travel to Dallas.
Manchester noted it was 11:07m. when Air Force One and the other two airplanes in the presidential party touched down at Carswell Air Force base in Fort Worth.
When the presidential party arrived at the Hotel Texas in Fort Worth, JFK and Jackie went immediately to retire for the night in Suite 850, while LBJ entertained guests in the hotel’s Will Rogers Suite.
It is difficult to imagine how LBJ slipped away from Fort Worth, drove to Dallas, showed up while guests were still at the Murchison estate, and returned to Fort Worth, all the while unnoticed that he was gone.
The same goes for Richard Nixon, especially when Dallas newspapers noted he was out late in the evening dining with actress Joan Crawford at a wellknown Dallas dinner nightclub, with both of them very visible guests at the Pepsi-Cola convention.
Madeleine Brown may well have been an LBJ mistress, but her claim that LBJ was the father of her son was called into question when his lawsuit seeking rights as an LBJ heir was dismissed because son Stephen failed to appear in court.
Madeleine also did permanent damage to her own reputation when she was convicted of fraud in 1988 for forging the will of a relative, only to have the conviction reversed on appeal in 1994 because of a procedural error.
Still, it is highly possible, as we will soon discuss, that LBJ had some advanced warning that a plot to assassinate JFK was in the works, just as it is possible some wealthy Texans on the radical right might have provided funds to make sure LBJ would be president sooner rather than later.
Yet, the idea of a grand cabal meeting for a celebratory preassassination party at the home of a wealthy Texas oil family on the eve of the JFK assassination lacks solid documentary proof and strains credibility.
THE BOBBY BAKER SCANDAL In November 1963, the scandal that most threatened LBJ’s political future involved Bobby Baker, a Senate page who rose to the position of being secretary to Lyndon Johnson when Johnson was Senate Majority Leader.
After LBJ became vice president, Baker continued as his personal secretary and close private advisor.
The crux of the Bobby Baker scandal involved a vending machine company, Serve-U Corporation, from which Baker was deriving an annual gross income of $3. million at a time when his compensation from the Senate was under twenty thousand dollars a year.
Serve-U Corporation had links to Texas oil millionaire Clint Murchison, as well as ties to mobsters Sam Giancana and Meyer Lansky.
The company derived most of its earnings by placing vending machines in aerospace companies dependent upon the government for contract work.
What made the Bobby Baker scandal particularly titillating was a sex scandal involving what was known in Washington as the “Quorum Club,” a hostess affair Bobby Baker helped create.
The Quorum Club was run out of the Carroll Arms Hotel near the Senate Office buildings on Capitol Hill.
Basically, the “Q Club” operated to provide call girls to prominent lobbyists and influential members of Congress, with Baker positioned centrally, ready to advance his career politically and financially by trading on sex and power.
The Bobby Baker scandal broke wide open with a Life magazine cover story published on November 8, 1963, only three weeks before JFK was killed.
That issue of Life featured a front-page photograph of Bobby Baker in a costume with his mask lifted to show his laughing face at an unspecified Washington masquerade party.
The second page of the article featured a full-page photograph of a smiling LBJ with his arms around the shoulder of Bobby Baker.
The photograph was taken in the office of Senate Majority Leader Mike Mansfield, with Mansfield shown in the part of the photograph that continued past the magazine fold to adjoin the photo of the leggy ladies sitting on the Carousel motel’s barstools.
The article pointed out that in addition to his interest in the vending-machine business, Baker was half owner of the Carousel motel and nightclub in Ocean City, Maryland, as well as having business interests in a law firm, a travel agency, an insurance agency, and a Howard Johnson motel.
Commenting that Baker had just resigned from the Senate under fire, Life asked how his $19,612 annual salary had provided him sufficient resources to permit his family, consisting of wife, Dorothy, and five children ages ten to one, with the youngest named Lyndon Baines Johnson after the thenSenate majority leader, to move into the $124,500 Washington home a short walk from where LBJ and his family lived.
TARGETING LBJ The Life exposé escalated in seriousness when Life’s associate and Pulitzer Prizewinning journalist William Lambert sought out George P Hunt, the magazine’s managing editor, to explain that the nine-person investigative team assigned by Life to look into Bobby Baker had expanded the inquiry to look into how LBJ acquired his fortune.
Lambert asked for permission to expand the investigative team to pour over LBJ’s entire financial picture.
Lambert wanted to know how LBJ had managed to accumulate millions in personal net worth when he had been on the public payroll ever since he got out of college.
It Grows and Grows as Washington Shudders,” the article disclosed to readers that Life had assigned a nine-member team to investigate Bobby Baker.
Life magazine made clear that everything about Bobby Baker led back to Lyndon Johnson.
In his 2012 book, The Passage of Power, Robert A Caro, the Pulitzer Prize— winning biographer of LBJ noted that following the publication of this second article, Wheeler and Lambert scheduled a meeting with Hunt.
With these two Life magazine articles appearing as JFK was preparing to leave for his trip to Texas, the Bobby Baker scandal and the political future of LBJ were very much at the center of attention.
John Kennedy knew Lambert well enough from the McClellan hearings to appreciate that Lambert was like a bulldog, in that he was loathe to let go of a story once he sank his teeth into it.
With the resources of Life magazine behind him, Lambert was at the pinnacle of his career, able to leverage the magazine’s immense popularity and prestige to provide his investigative journalism with a stage nearly unequalled in the world of publishing at the time.
Now, with the increasing backing of the magazine’s managing editor, Lambert was on track to use the same dogged investigative research methods he had used in Portland, Oregon, to put the organized crime penetration of the Teamsters Union onto front pages of newspapers across the nation.
This time, he was on track to use the good graces of the ever-popular Life magazine to bring down not only the well-connected, powerful, and wealthy Bobby Baker, but also very possibly the vice president of the United States, Lyndon Baines Johnson.
The first suspect would have to be the president’s brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy.
From the Los Angeles Democratic National Convention in 1960 where Jack beat out Lyndon for the presidential nomination, to the end of his life, Bobby Kennedy’s enmity for LBJ was impossible to overestimate.
Elkins to bring down Dave Beck and go after Jimmy Hoffa was a Casual word or two in a coffee shop in Portland, Oregon.
That led to hundreds of hours of wiretaps, a Pulitzer-Prize series Lambert and Turner wrote for the Oregonian, and Senate crime hearings that springboarded Jack to national status, positioning JFK for a 1960 run for the presidency.
Elkins game on his own, dropping comments in casual with the goal of putting Lambert on the trail of Baker.
After Lambert got started, RFK was ready to spoon feed leads to Lambert, acting as a “deep throat” source willing to hand over information from within the Justice Department and FBI, all the while calculating the story would necessarily lead to LBJ’s downfall.
What worried Robert Kennedy was that Jack, left to his own devices, might have settled to keep LBJ on the ticket a second time, preferring if possible to avoid the political uproar a scorned LBJ would most certainly cause.
What Robert Kennedy figured was that the LBJ lion’s roar would be a lot tamer with the Bobby Baker thorn placed painfully in the lion’s paw.
But certainly after the first article was published, LBJ was aware Life magazine was gunning for him.
Rather than sit idly by waiting for the disclosures to ruin his political career, LBJ’s political instincts demanded he protect himself.
While the Kennedy administration took pains to keep from the public the assassination plots that had been stymied in Chicago and Tampa, surely LBJ was aware the talk of assassinating Kennedy was in the air in November 1963.
In the famous photograph taken by Associated Press photographer Altgens, Lady Bird Johnson can be clearly seen in the open car following JFK’s limo.
Many observers have suspected LBJ knew the motorcade was entering the pre-determined kill zone, and he ducked down as his car turned the comer in order to stay out of the crossfire.
JFK DECIDES TO DUMP LBJ Robert Caro reported in his 2012 book, The Passage of Power, that on Wednesday, November 13, 1963, JFK convened the first major planning session for the 1964 campaign in the Cabinet Room at the White House.
Not invited was Vice President Lyndon Baines Johnson or any member of his staff.
The meeting also included intense speculation over whether LBJ would be on the ticket since the primary reason he had been chosen in 1960 was that he would be influential in winning southern states and Texas.
Even with LBJ on the ticket in 1960, Jack Kennedy won Texas by fewer than fortyeight thousand votes of the approximately 1. million votes cast.
None less than Arthur Schlesinger Jr. dismissed the notion that dumping LBJ was seriously considered at the campaign strategy meeting.
Kennedy knew and understood Johnson’s moodiness in the Vice-Presidency, but he considered him able and loyal.
He wrote that in his conversation with Evelyn Lincoln, she repeated the conversation, explaining she wrote down word-for-word in her diary what Jack said about LBJ and that she used those notes when writing her 1968 book, Kennedy and Johnson.
The Diem decision weighed heavily in JFK’s decision to withdraw from Vietnam, given his conclusion that the nation was in such internal turmoil there could be no confidence the people in South Vietnam were sufficiently motivated to fight for and win their own freedom.
JFK was concerned that, when Life magazine got finished investigating and reporting on LBJ, an unfortunately large segment of the voting public would now see LBJ to be nothing more than a corrupt politician who had enriched himself at public expense.
What Kennedy had not yet resolved was how best to explain these decisions to voters across the nation, so as not to give impetus to a Goldwater candidacy from the conservative right.
THE FRENCH CONNECTION In response to a 1976 Freedom of Information Act request, the CIA released documents 632—796 confirming for the first time that a professional assassin was apprehended in Dallas on November 23, 1963.
Michel Mertz—a world-renowned Corsican hit man with a long history as an accomplished assassin and with ties to the French Connection drug trade stretching from Southeast Asia to Marseilles, France, to New Orleans.
In January he received mail from a dentist named Alderman living at 5803 Birmingham, Houston, Texas.
They would like a check of our files with indications of what may be passed on to the French.
The obvious assumption would be that Jean Souetre should have been placed at the top of the list of suspects in the JFK assassination.
If not a shooter, the possibility remains this Corsican assassin was in Dallas to observe, oversee, or perhaps even to direct and supervise the shooters hoping to catch JFK in a cross fire.
Seymour in their 2003 book, Triangle of Death, suggest the “Mr Papich” mentioned in the document may have been a CIA asset working in the legal attaché’s office as a surveillance operator, or simply as an employee who served as a liaison for the United States embassy.
The OAS, or Organization de l’Armée Secrétée, was a right-wing extremist group opposed to French President Charles de Gaulle that engaged in acts of terrorism and assassination and opposed France’s policy to grant the African nation of Algeria its independence from French rule.
O’Leary and Seymour argued that finding the CIA document implicated the OAS as one of its members, Jean Rene Souetre, was in Dallas the day JFK was assassinated, only to be captured and deported by United States authorities some fortyeight hours later.
Moreover, the CIA never shared the information with the Warren Commission.
When Mary Ferrell, the renowned archivist of assassination material, found the CIA document in early 1977, she described it as one of the poorest documents she had encountered, virtually looking like a copy of a copy of a faint carbon copy.
Hunt found independent documentation that the FBI knew Roux was visiting acquaintances in Fort Worth on November 22, 1963, and left the United States on December 6, 1963, at Laredo, Texas.
This Michel Roux had spent three years in the French Army in Algeria before deserting.
Lawrence Alderson, a respected dentist and longtime resident of Houston who insisted the FBI began trailing him immediately after the assassination and followed him for several weeks.
Finally, the FBI asked for an interview to discuss his relationship with Jean Souetre.
Alderson explained to the FBI that as a first lieutenant in the United States Army stationed in France, he met Souetre, then a captain in the French Air Force.
Alderson told Hurt the FBI said agents “had traced Souetre to Dallas a day before the assassination and then lost him,” adding the FBI was certain either Souetre killed JFK or knew who had done it.
Souetre argued that it was Mertz, using Souetre’s name, who was in the United States at the time of the Kennedy assassination.
THE DIEM HEROIN DYNASTY IN SOUTH VIETNAM Souetre claimed the reason Mertz was let go and deported from the United States was because Mertz, when he was apprehended in Dallas, worked at the same time both for the Marseille heroin crime syndicate and for SDECE, French intelligence service.
Souetre explained that at that time, the United States Mafia, and particularly crime bosses Carlos Marcello, Sam Giancana, and Santo Trafficante, all of whom ran vast heroin distribution networks in the United States, got their product from Antoine Guerini and his Marseille-based heroin enterprise.
The murder of Diem in the coup d’état staged by General Minh with the help and encouragement of the CIA was widely attributed to a decision made by JFK, even though JFK had given explicit orders that Diem was not to be killed.
Nhu imported opium into Vietnam from the Laotian poppy fields, with assistance from Air Laos Commerciale, a small charter airline managed by Indochina’s Corsican gangster Bonaventure “Rock” Francisci.
Conein, by the way, was widely reported to have carried forty-two thousand dollars in cash as a means of encouragement for the South Vietnamese generals planning the Diem overthrow.
In an important observation, McCoy noted there is a natural attraction between intelligence agencies and criminal syndicates.
Granted, Lyndon Johnson, Richard Nixon, and the United States military industrial complex all had the motive to see JFK forcibly removed from office, even if that meant assassinating him.
So, too, organized crime—and especially Carlos Marcello, Sam Giancana, and Santo Trafficante—along with the CIA had their own motives for seeing JFK dead.
This equation had the makings of a good coup d’état, aimed at putting LBJ in office, escalating the Vietnam War, and ramping up the Southeast Asian heroin trade.
LBJ and Richard Nixon would permanently put an end to the career of a hated rival who already had bettered both of them.
Organized crime stood to make billions not only in operating the French Connection drug trade with impunity, but also on the expectation Robert Kennedy would have to back off the Justice Department’s war on organized crime the moment Jack Kennedy was no longer in the White House.
The military industrial complex stood to make billions producing the new generation of weapons required to fight a prolonged ground war in Vietnam, as generals giving out contracts prepared for their industry homes in retirement.
What LBJ, Richard Nixon, and the military industrial complex lacked was the operational capabilities to pull off a covert plan as audacious as a coup d’état effected by assassinating the president of the United States without detection.
What LBJ, Richard Nixon, and the military industrial complex lacked in operational capabilities, the CIA and organized crime made up for in spades.
Moreover, the CIA and organized crime could look to the politicians and the military industrial complex for funds to pull off the operation.
LBJ and Richard Nixon had never pulled off an operation, but when it came to funding a political campaign, both were experts.
What putting LBJ in the White House before he left Dallas required was the field implementation of a complex criminal plot by a top team of experienced CIA and organized crime operatives that had successfully worked together before and could be counted upon to do so again.
Granted, that E Howard Hunt put LBJ at the top of his deathbed organizational chart for the JFK assassination, but that did not mean LBJ wrote the operational plan for the covert action.
To put the organizational plan of the coup d’état together, the CIA mobilized the Cuban exiles who had worked with the CIA since the Bay of Pigs was first being planned under the Eisenhower administration.
That a trained assassin such as Michel Mertz was walking the streets of Dallas the day JFK was murdered can hardly be taken as coincidental.
Even if Mertz pulled no triggers that day, the coordination of a complicated crossfire required expert management.
Mertz qualified for the job, given a curriculum vitae that stretched back to his days picking off Nazis for the French Resistance.
LBJ, the military industrial complex, and Richard Nixon were not necessarily relegated to the role of “benchwarmer,” as E Howard Hunt in his deathbed confession so humbly characterized his own role in the JFK assassination.
Nixon was in Dallas when JFK was killed, meeting with his financial ties to industry and his campaign financiers based in Texas.
In Dallas, Nixon reconnected with Howard Hughes, the eccentric multimillionaire whose fortune also traced back to the Texas and the Houston Tool Company.
In 1957, it was Howard Hughes who lent Donald Nixon, Richard’s brother, some two hundred thousand dollars to bail out his failed hamburger “drive-in” joint in Whittier, California.
Bobby Baker had extensive tentacles into Texas, too, having finagled along with LBJ the lucrative award of the F-111 fighter plane to General Dynamics, a company headquartered between Dallas and Fort Worth.
Before he left Texas on November 22, 1963, Nixon knew that those who financed his presidential run in 1960 would finance him again, as soon as the time was right.
Even if LBJ was not the “mastermind” of the JFK assassination, the point of the coup d’état was to put LBJ in office.
The campaign by investigative journalists like William Lambert and Life magazine to expose the rampant corruption at the core of Bobby Baker and LBJ’s politics eased off as soon as JFK was pronounced dead at Parkland Hospital and LBJ took the oath of office from his longstanding friend and judge Sarah T Hughes aboard Air Force One.
Eastern Time on November 22, 1963, LBJ could stop worrying that JFK might replace him and start worrying about picking his own 1964 vice presidential running mate.
Though his head was turned from the camera, LBJ most surely did not miss the wink of the eye captured on film that Congressman Albert Thomas gave LBJ the moment he lowered his right hand from just having taken the oath of office.
With a grieving Jackie still at his side, LBJ perfected the coup d’état by being sworn in as president before Air Force One lifted off to return to Washington.
From his first Vietnam War planning session as president even before JFK’s body was placed to rest at Arlington Cemetery, LBJ had signaled to the Pentagon there was no need to worry about the withdrawal of one thousand United States military advisors.
With LBJ likely to win a landslide victory in 1964 as the successor to a martyred president, the military industrial complex felt comfortable waiting until 1965 before LBJ ramped up the Vietnam War to provide the hundreds of thousands of troops the Pentagon truly felt would be needed to beat the North Vietnamese.
Everything was fine, as long as the nation concluded Lee Harvey Oswald as the lone-gun nutcase assassin had acted alone.
CONCLUSION THE JFK ASSASSINATION AND THE NEW WORLD ORDER “Under the direction of Allen Dulles, the CIA interpreted ‘plausible deniability,’ as a green light to assassinate local leaders, overthrow governments, and lie to cover up any trace of accountability—all for the sake of promoting United States interests and maintaining our nuclear-backed dominance over the Soviets and other nations.” —James W Douglass, JFK and the Unspeakable, 2008708 “A cover-up is like a magic trick.
Once you understand how it was accomplished, you can never be fooled by it again.” —Lisa Pease, co-editor of The Assassinations, 2012799 JFK, LIKE HIS FATHER BEFORE HIM and his brother Robert after him, had an uncanny ability to cause almost irrational anger and hatred in very powerful men that should never have been enemies in the first place.
The Kennedy family lived an outrageous lifestyle of social privilege despite the lack of a storied pedigree.
Family patriarch Joseph P Kennedy made a fortune in a series of fast and fortunate deals that years later would be outlawed.
But instead of being arrested for stock fraud, President Franklin D Roosevelt appointed Joseph Kennedy to be the first head of the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Perhaps a crook made the best cop, but when Joseph Kennedy became incapacitated, the patriarch’s ability to keep his sons out of trouble came to an end.
Even Johnny Roselli, the mobster who introduced Joseph Kennedy to Hollywood and assisted John and Robert Kennedy in their attempt to eliminate Castro, ultimately turned on the brothers.
Declaring war on organized crime and on the CIA at the same time had disastrous repercussions, especially because JFK failed to achieve his objectives in each.
Had Robert F Kennedy broken the back of organized crime in the United States, imprisoned mobsters would have had a much harder time planning revenge.
Had JFK closed down the CIA and fired all its employees, embittered intelligence operatives would have had a much more difficult time undertaking an assassination plot.
Organized crime felt betrayed, believing JFK owed his 1960 presidential victory to fraudulent votes delivered in Chicago in part by the Giancana organization.
The CIA felt the Bay of Pigs invasion would have succeeded if only JFK had resolved to commit the United States military to save the Cuban exiles being slaughtered on the beach.
The unfortunate truth is that by leaving in place dangerous mobsters who felt betrayed and an ever-treacherous CIA that felt endangered, JFK left relatively undamaged the two enemies most capable of developing and funding an operational plan to bring about his demise.
Having worked together since the Guatemala coup d’état in the 1950s, organized crime and the CIA needed no outside assistance to pull off a presidential assassination for which neither would be blamed.
With the patina of Kennedy charm running thin for men such as Allen Dulles, a key member of a family that had helped world leaders achieve prominence since before Hitler, scores were about to be evened.
While not capable of playing operational roles in the JFK assassination, each of these JFK enemies— LBJ, Richard Nixon, Allen Dulles, and the military industrial complex—could provide the financial support for a CIA/mob plan.
Each had access to Texas oil millionaires and other financiers on the political right willing to provide the funds needed to carry out such an operation.
LBJ, Richard Nixon, and the military industrial complex wanted to send troops to Vietnam.
The day JFK removed Allen Dulles from directing the CIA was the day JFK signed his death warrant.
Even removed from the CIA, Dulles was more than capable of organizing the coup d’état from behind the scenes, the place where Dulles was truly most comfortable.
It should come as no surprise that LBJ appointed Allen Dulles to the Warren Commission.
This completed the circle, positioning Dulles so he could make sure the Warren Commission assigned all the blame for JFK’s assassination to Lee Harvey Oswald, the operative chosen by the CIA to play the role of patsy.
Allen Dulles had a deep motive to see JFK killed that stemmed not simply from revenge, but more importantly from ideology.
Truly, Allen Dulles came to hate everything JFK represented, as did Richard Nixon.
Dulles and Nixon were Cold War warriors who embraced the idea the United States needed to maintain a large, well-funded, clandestine intelligence agency capable of covert operations abroad to ensure our freedom at home.
They agreed that this agency, formed as the CIA at the end of World War II, needed the authority to plan invasions of foreign countries, launch coups d’etat, and even assassinate foreign leaders as needed to contain the spread of Communism.
Because the missions were covert, the CIA had to lie to the American public that funded it.
By appointing John Foster Dulles as secretary of state and Allen Dulles as CIA director, Dwight D Eisenhower had turned over the key components of United States foreign policy to a team of brothers with a sordid history.
The Dulles brothers were presented to the nation as loyal and patriotic Americans, with a compliant press never probing the key role the Dulles family played in assisting Hitler to come to power.
Instead of being prosecuted as war criminals after the war, the Dulles family continued to make sure Nazi intelligence assets were employed by the United States and Western Europe.
In this clandestine history of the United States, the Bush family also rose to prominence.
Psychologist E Martin Schotz interpreted Isaac Don Levine’s 1959 book, Mind of an Assassin, which analyzed the motivates of Communist Ramon Mercader for assassinating Marxist revolutionary Leon Trotsky.
Schotz suggested that in Levine’s book, Kennedy could be substituted for Trotsky and Dulles could be substituted for Mercader.
The American power is an amalgam of a temporal state and a political religion.
It is in the nature of a military order in which the government authorities and the anti-communist party priesthood are one supreme source of faith and strength.
Bush and the Dulles brothers were among a small group of Americans working hard to finance Hitler’s rise to power in Germany.
Bush, traces back to these investment banking firms founded in the 1920s, and specifically to the Harriman family.
This was convenient because George Herbert Walker was Prescott Bush’s father-in-law when on August 6, 1921, Prescott Bush married George Herbert Walker’s daughter, Dorothy Walker.
Bush and his son, President George W Bush, date back to a prominent Wall Street investment firm where the patriarch grandfathers of the family worked together.
Allen Dulles, however, spent five years in the United States diplomatic corps before earning a law degree from George Washington Law School in 1926.
Allen then joined Sullivan & Cromwell where his older brother was already a partner.
President Franklin D Roosevelt ordered Union Bank closed after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor and the subsequent declaration of war by Nazi Germany on the United States.
Farben, the manufacturer during World War II of the Zyklon-B gas the Nazis used to kill Jews in the concentration camps.
ALLEN DULLES AND REINHARD GEHLEN In 1945, at the end of World War II, attorney Allen Dulles, then serving as chief of the OSS Berlin office under OSS founder and director General William Donovan, rescued out of a prison camp Nazi intelligence director Reinhard Gehlen.
Under Hitler, Gehlen had been responsible for Nazi military intelligence on the Eastern Front, including the Soviet Union.
Gehlen fit perfectly into the plan Dulles had developed to decline prosecuting Nazi intelligence assets so they could be employed by the United States.
Dulles wanted Gehlen and the Nazis to advise the newly forming CIA and to be re-employed as the backbone around which an anti-Soviet, anti-Communist intelligence network headquartered in what emerged as Western Germany could be formed to work undercover throughout Eastern Europe.
DiEugenio reported that by September 1945, Gehlen and six of his aides were flown to Washington by Eisenhower’s chief of staff, Gen.
As a result of high-level discussions in Washington, Gehlen’s Nazi intelligence organization was transferred under his control to work in Eastern Europe until Germany was reorganized.
In 1949 Gehlen signed a contract to work for the CIA for five million dollars a year.
In 1950 High Commissioner of Germany John McCloy appointed Gehlen as advisor to the German chancellor on intelligence.
Note also that Allen Dulles and John McCloy both ended up being appointed to the Warren Commission.
The Guatemalan plots of 1954 and 1957, extensively discussed in previous chapters as having set a model both for the Bay of Pigs invasion and the JFK assassination, were but two of a series of CIA actions aimed at dominating resources in the Third World for United States business interests.
In 1953 President Eisenhower authorized Operation AJAX to overthrow Prime Minister Mohammad Mossadegh in Iran after Mossadegh moved to nationalize Iranian oil interests.
In a coup d’état staged by the CIA, Mossadegh was deposed, the oil interests were returned to the disposal of United States and British petroleum corporations, and the Shah was returned to power.
Still, nothing better illustrates the chasm between the way the Dulles brothers saw the postwar world and JFK’s vision than Indonesia, where the threat of Communism drew CIA attention and intervention from 1957 through JFK’s thousand days in office and until the CIA was finally successful in engineering a coup in 1965.
Kennedy saw the potential of working with Sukarno to position him in a leadership position among the “non-aligned nations” of the Third World.
In 1965 the CIA engineered another coup and placed President Sukarno under house arrest.
Estimates are that as many as five hundred thousand Indonesians were killed in the massacre, political violence that took on a religious dimension in that Suharto and the vast majority of his supporters were Muslim and many of those slaughtered were Christian.
DiEugenio argued that one of JFK’s largest splits within the Eastern Establishment was that JFK was for Third World nationalism.
As noted in chapter 5, JFK’s father, Joseph P Kennedy, the patriarch of the Kennedy clan, was never accepted by the largely Catholic and Jewish eastern mob.
So too, Joseph P Kennedy’s pacifism as United States ambassador to Great Britain in the years prior to the start of World War II put him at odds with United States financial interests supporting the Nazis as enemies of the Soviet Communists.
As his first term progressed, JFK was moving away from a confrontational model of how he wanted to wage the continuing Cold War.
He learned in the Bay of Pigs not to trust the CIA and the military industrial complex.
Kennedy refused to use the United States military in both Laos and Vietnam, seemingly rejecting the Eisenhower-era notion of the “domino” theory that a victory for the Communists in any Third World country would inevitably spread Communism around the globe.
Kennedy understood that no country could experience freedom unless the people of that country were willing to fight for themselves.
He also understood that Communism in Laos or Vietnam would be different than Communism in China, as Communism in China was different than Communism in Russia.
Even if all these nations were Communist, nationalism in each country would still be the dominant characteristic.
JFK could deal with Sukarno as a Third World nationalist seeking to free itself from the shackles of European colonialism.
JFK’s nemesis, Allen Dulles, could only see Communism in terms of black and white.
Fundamentally, Dulles and those of his era—including Eisenhower and Nixon—were comfortable building the CIA around Nazis like Reinhard Gehlen.
JFK, in sharp contrast, seriously questioned whether the United States needed the CIA at all.
Where Eisenhower, Nixon, and Dulles saw covert action as a natural extension of foreign policy, JFK was distrustful—as distrustful of the CIA as he was of the military industrial complex in its totality.
In foreign policy, LBJ made a natural Cold War warrior, anxious to exert American might and will into the Third World in a determination to roll back Communism wherever it popped up.
When you have them by the private parts, their hearts and minds will follow, LJB liked to say.
This quotation would have made JFK uncomfortable, both for its statement of force and its denial of the principle that no people can be free unless that people exerts a right to self-determination, an extension of the statehood politics JFK understood as an essential condition of freedom.
Bush was in the CIA decades before he became CIA director under the presidency of Gerald R Ford in 1976.
Bush was in Dallas on November 22, 1963, despite his claims to the contrary.
On Wednesday, November 20, 1963, an advertisement under “Club Activities” was printed in the Dallas Morning News, stating that George Bush, president of Zapata Off-Shore Co., would be speaking for the American Association of Oilwell Drilling contractors on Thursday, November 21, 1963, at the Sheraton-Dallas Hotel.
Spokespersons for Bush suggested the reference might be to a different George Bush.
Hart replied that Vice President Bush denied any involvement with the CIA before President Ford named him CIA Director in 1975.
FBI Special Agent Graham Kitchel wrote a memo to the FBI’s Houston bureau, dated November 22, 1963, the day of the assassination.
Tyler is a small town about one hundred miles to the southeast of Dallas.
Others, noting the discrepancy that the Dallas Morning News claimed Bush would be at the Sheraton-Dallas on Thursday night, November 21, 1963, while the Kitchel memo suggests Bush would be at the hotel on the night of the assassination, have claimed Bush made the call to Kitchel to establish an alibi.
Russ Baker, author of the 2009 book, Family of Secrets, argued the real point of the call was “to establish for the record, if anyone asked, that Poppy Bush was not in Dallas when Kennedy was shot.
By telling the FBI in a phone call that he was planning to go there, he created a misleading paper trail suggesting that his stay in Dallas was many hours after the assassination, rather than the night before, since the phone call incoming to the FBI could have originated from anywhere.
Bush has been vague about where he was when he first learned JFK had been shot, a moment virtually every American old enough to remember has fixed distinctly in their mind.
Lyndon Johnson and Richard Nixon both made the Vietnam War a centerpiece of their presidential administrations, continuing the conflict until the fall of Saigon on April 30, 1975.
The Vietnam War was not a war the United States could win, if fought the way the military industrial complex wanted the war to be fought.
On August 2, 1990, some one hundred thousand Iraqi troops invaded Kuwait, starting what became known as the Gulf War.
The crisis in the Persian Gulf, as grave as it is, also offers a rare opportunity to move toward an historic period of cooperation.
An era in which the nations of the world, East and West, North and South, can prosper and live in harmony.
A hundred generations have searched for this elusive path to peace, while a thousand wars raged across the span of human endeavor.
Today that new world is struggling to be born, a world quite different from the one we’ve known.
A world in which nations recognize the shared responsibility for freedom and justice.
He and other leaders from Europe, the Gulf, and around the world understand that how we manage this crisis today could shape the future for generations to come.
Bush and his son, President George W Bush, have followed in the footsteps of LBJ and Richard Nixon.
Truthfully, millions of Americans who were politically aware when JFK was assassinated mark that day as a turning point in the history of this nation.
The protests of the Vietnam War and the resistance to the draft radicalized a generation of Americans.
Baby Boomers raised in the Eisenhower era came of age during the presidencies of LBJ and Nixon.
With Nixon, Watergate, and the subsequent disclosures of the Church Committee, we now see that much that has transpired since World War II needs to be written in a secret history of the United States.
In a recently released classified evaluation of the Taylor Committee Investigation of the Bay of Pigs established by JFK under the direction of Gen.
Maxwell Taylor, CIA historian Jack B Pfeiffer was particularly critical of CIA Director Allen Dulles.
Pfeiffer noted in blunt language after Dulles appeared before the Taylor Committee, that he was “headed for the elephants’ burial ground,” thanks to Robert Kennedy’s denigration of him and the CIA, and due in no small part to the “abysmal performance” of Dulles as a witness.
Before concluding, we need to add one more footnote to the story of the 1954 CIA-engineered coup d’état in Guatemala.
The Dulles brothers concocted a scheme where the Schroeder Banking Corporation, with brother Allen Dulles acting as general counsel and a member of the board, financed United Fruit to take control of the International Railways of Central America, or IRCA, the owner of most of the existing railroad tracks in the region that United Fruit relied upon in order to ship Guatemalan bananas to market in the United States.
The president of the Schroeder bank remained a member of the IRCA board through 1954.
New Orleans district attorney Jim Garrison entered Permindex into his JFK assassination investigation when he established that Clay Shaw, also known as Clay Bertrand, was a member of the boards of both Permindex and CentroMondiale Commercial.
Clay Shaw was head of the International Trade Mart in New Orleans; coincidentally, the speech JFK never gave was at a luncheon scheduled to be held at the Dallas Trade Mart.
Allegations published in an Italian newspaper in Rome, Paese Sera, on April 23, 1961, charged that Permindex was used by the CIA to shuffle funds covertly to fund assassinations, including funneling money to the French OAS to pay Corsican assassins like Michel Mertz to assassinate French president Charles de Gaulle.
All this may seem farfetched, except that, as we say in chapter 7, an authentic declassified CIA document verifies that Mertz had been in Dallas on November 22, 1963, and that he was apprehended and deported by United States authorities.
DiEugenio argued one of Kennedy’s largest splits with the Eastern Establishment was that he was a proponent of Third Word nationalism.
This, Eugenio contrasted to Clay Shaw, arguing that Shaw’s two agencies, the International Trade Mart and its sister organization, International House, were early advocates of globalism.
International House was founded by the Rockefeller Foundation and spread worldwide.
Both David and William Rockefeller III served as trustees of International House, and David served as chairman of the executive committee.
John McCloy, formally president of the World Bank, was chairman of the board of International House in the 1950s and 1960s.
Once again, recall that John McCloy, along with Allen Dulles, served on the Warren Commission.
Although examining Garrison’s prosecution of Clay Shaw is beyond the scope of this book, suffice it to note DiEugenio believed Clay Shaw was very close to cracking the JFK assassination case wide open.
When the answer turns out to be “all of the above,” as it is here, the inquiry turns from an identification of the players to an investigation of the political context in which these players worked together.
In other words, it is not enough to conclude the operational plot to assassinate JFK involved the CIA working in concert with organized crime.
So, too, it is important but not sufficient to note LBJ, Richard Nixon, and the military industrial complex all had motives for seeing a coup d’état carried out in the United States.
What is important is that all these actors shared a common belief in clandestine government operations.
In the postwar world, the Dulles brothers exemplified the intermixture of law, investment banking, foreign policy, and covert intelligence operations.
The shared principle was that foreign policy covert operations conducted by intelligence agencies under the principle of “plausible deniability” were justified, as long as the result was to create a “New World Order,” even if creating that new world order meant lying to the American people, now for a half century, and probably longer.
The innovation represented by the JFK assassination was to apply the covert operations model, initially designed as a foreign policy tool, into a tool that could be applied equally in domestic politics, causing a coup d’état in the United States rather than simply overthrowing an inconvenient foreign government.
JFK probably would have survived into a second term in office had only he agreed to go along.
All it would have taken would have been to green light the United States military to send in the air force and possibly the marines to invade Cuba at the Bay of Pigs, with the operation justified in the cause of saving the brave Cuban exile “freedom fighters” who were trying to recover their country and restore freedom to Cuba.
Instead of giving a speech in Dallas on November 22, 1963, focused on the United States military assistance program, JFK could have planned to explain to the world how his decision to commit United States troops to Vietnam was fulfilling the promise he made in his First Inaugural Address to defend freedom around the globe because no price for freedom was too great to pay.
The CIA shared a belief with LBJ, Richard Nixon, and the military industrial complex that even if United States military action failed in Cuba or in Vietnam, as it had in Korea, the military intervention would be good for business and the United States economy.
Again, the point is that the New World Order view was comfortable employing the United States military to preserve United States business interests, as had been done when overthrowing Mossadegh in Iran and Arbenz in Guatemala.
Bush did not blink when waging war with Iraq, fully realizing United States oil interests in Kuwait were being preserved.
Under the ideologies of nationalism and self-determination JFK used to analyze Cuba, Laos, and Vietnam, it was clear he felt United States military involvement was required in none of these conflicts.
JFK cared about United States business interests, but not necessarily to the point of going to war.
Bush made clear with his “New World Order” speech to Congress on September 11, 1990, was that the use of United States military to protect United States business interests was especially justified when backed by an international coalition.
Today, United States policy makers increasingly look to international organizations such as the United Nations, the World Bank, and the International Monetary Fund, when formulating United States policies.
While JFK respected international organizations, he did not spend much time worrying about going first to the United Nations before deciding whether or not to commit United States troops to Laos or Vietham.
Somehow, ironically, the internationalization of United States policy has proceeded apace, despite the obvious conclusion that by 1974, it was clear JFK was right about Vietnam, while nearly every calculation made by LBJ, Richard Nixon, and the military industrial complex turned out to be wrong.
In the final analysis, JFK was killed because he saw United States military action in shades of gray, where the Dulles brothers saw only black and white.
Still, despite this, JFK might yet have lived into a second term, but once he called out organized crime and the CIA, threatening to destroy both, he needed to succeed.
LBJ and Richard Nixon, the two politicians who stood the most to gain from a JFK assassination, may have resented JFK, but they could do nothing about that resentment without the operational capabilities offered by equally resentful CIA leaders and organized crime bosses.
Before he was finished, Robert Kennedy fired every member of the Dulles family he could find working in the federal government.
Bush are also suspect, if only because all three equivocated when asked where they were when they first heard JFK had been shot.
Not providing a forthright answer to this question is a sign of a guilty conscious at a minimum, topped with a desire to hide the truth.
E Howard Hunt, lacking a cover story for explaining why he might have been in Dallas on November 22, 1963, denied until the end of his life that he was there.
In Dallas, Richard Nixon had the opportunity to confer and possibly meet privately with one or more of the coconspirators, as well as to meet with those wealthy individuals who had helped finance his political career.
The evidence suggests the shooters were selected from a combination of Cuban exiles and mob hit men.
Top suspects for having participated as shooters would include Frank Sturgis, Roscoe White, and Sergio Arcaha Smith.
Most likely, E Howard Hunt, who played a direct role in both the Guatemala coup d’état in the 1950s and in the Bay of Pigs invasion, both under Eisenhower and Kennedy, was involved in planning the operation.
Corsican assassin Michel Mertz was in Dallas on November 22, 1963, most likely with a mission to oversee and manage the shooters.
When it came to coordinating mob involvement in the JFK assassination, Johnny Roselli was in charge.
The consequences of this conspiracy are immeasurable, if only because a group of traitors successfully flouted the constitution and got away with it.
After fifty years of abuse, those who have suspected JFK’s assassination was a conspiracy are about to be proven right.
History will need to be rewritten to condemn those responsible as traitorous criminals.
While prosecutions may no longer be possible simply because so many of the involved parties have already died, justice can be served by setting the historical record straight.
If we do not want to see this history repeated, all Americans have a responsibility to demand the full truth from the United States government now.
To do less would be to further dishonor the memory of John Fitzgerald Kennedy, the 35th President of the United States.
Hearings Before the President’s Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy, July 23, 1964, Vol.
Hearings Before the President’s Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy, March 20, 1964, Vol.
Hearings Before the President’s Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy, Vol.
Hearings Before the President’s Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy, June 2, 1964, Vol.
Hearings Before the President’s Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy, April 21, 1964, Vol.
Hearings Before the President’s Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy, page 113.
Hearings Before the President’s Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy, May 13, 1964, Vol.
Vincent P Guinn, House Select Committee on Assassinations, Sept., 1978, Vol.
Apologists and Critics of the Lone Gunman Theory: Assassination Science and Experts in Post-Modern America,” loc.cit, page 394.
Bracketed parentheses inserted for clarity; rounded parentheses in original.
Pierre A Finck, Physician, United States Army, Warren Commission Hearings, Vol.
John Bowden Connally, Jr., Warren Commission Hearings, April 21, 1964, Vol.
THE GRASSY KNOLL 95 Craig Roberts, Kill Zone: A Sniper Looks at Dealey Plaza , page 5.
UNSUB: Assassination of President JOHN F KENNEDY,” dated Nov., 1963, filed in Dallas, Texas.
Hearings Before the President’s Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy, at page 558.
Charles James Carrico, Warren Commission Hearings, March 30, 1964, Vol.
Robert Nelson McClelland, Warren Commission Hearings, March 25, 1964, Vol.
Marzani & Munsell Publishers Inc., 1964), page 103, italics in original.
John and Robert Kennedy, the Plan for a Coup in Cuba, and the Murder of JFK , page 704—707, at page 705.
How the CIA Framed Oswald, page Introduction, concluding paragraphs, no pagination given.
Hearings Before the President’s Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy, February 10, 1964, Vol.
Lee Harvey Oswald in the Far East (CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform, 2008), page 77.
The Man Who Really Knew Too Much ” The Assassination Chronicles: Inquest, Counterplot, and Legend , page 558.
The Lopez-Hardway Report, 2003 Release (Ipswich, MA: Mary Ferrell Foundation Press, 2006), pages vi-vii.
Memo from FBI Director Hoover to White House and Chief of Secret Service, Nov., 1963.
In the book, the second sentence is a footnote, referenced by an asterisk and placed at the bottom of the page in smaller type.
A Report to the Public from an FBI Agent Involved in the Official JFK Assassination Investigation (Chicago: Independent Publishers Group, 2012), page 98.
Card from Elkins Family, postmarked Dec., 1957, from Portland, Oregon, 6 pages.
Copies sent by Michael Desmond, Research Assistant, John Fitzgerald Kennedy Library, Columbia Point, Boston, Massachusetts, August 29, 1986.
The Hidden History—Nixon, the Mafia, and the CIA (Berkeley, CA: Counterpoint, 2012), page 6.
One Woman’s Extraordinary Tale of Love and Espionage in the CIA , pages 4-5, at page 5.
The CIA Conspiracy to Murder John F Kennedy, Mary Pinchot Meyer, and Their Vision for World Peace , page 133.
The Love Story of Madeleine Brown and President Lyndon Baines Johnson , page 166.
The Shocking Truth about the Role of South Vietnam and the French Mafia in the Assassination of JFK , page 63.
Aristocracy, Fortune, and the Politics of Deceit in the House of Bush , page 37.
The September 30th Movement and Suharto’s Coup d’Etat in Indonesia , page 13.
The CIA-MAFIA War Against Castro and the Assassination of J.F-K. , page 83.
A Biography of Eleanor, Allen, and John Foster Dulles and Their Family Network , page 473.
