For other uses, including electronic redistribution, please contact us.
January 2001 Features Game theory and the Cuban missile crisis by Steven J Brams Theory of Moves ""We're eyeball to eyeball, and I think the other fellow just blinked"" were the eerie words of Secretary of State Dean Rusk at the height of the Cuban missile crisis in October 1962.
Game theory and the Cuban missile crisis 1 Game theory and the Cuban missile crisis While ostensibly a game of Chicken, the Cuban missile crisis is in fact not well modelled by this game.
Moreover, for the games that will be analyzed − in which players can only rank outcomes but not attach numerical values to them − they may not always exist.
The Cuban missile crisis was precipitated by a Soviet attempt in October 1962 to install medium−range and intermediate−range nuclear−armed ballistic missiles in Cuba that were capable of hitting a large portion of the Classical Game Theory and the Missile Crisis 2 Game theory and the Cuban missile crisis United States.
Although in one sense the United States ""won"" by getting the Soviets to withdraw their missiles, Premier Nikita Khrushchev of the Soviet Union at the same time extracted from President Kennedy a promise not to Classical Game Theory and the Missile Crisis 3 Game theory and the Cuban missile crisis invade Cuba, which seems to indicate that the eventual outcome was a compromise of sorts.
To see this, assume play is at the compromise position , that is, the United States blockades Cuba and the S.U. withdraws its missiles.
If the United States were to defect by changing its strategy to airstrike, play would move to , improving the payoff the United States received; if the S.U. were to defect by changing its strategy to maintenance, play would move to , giving the S.U. a payoff of 4.
If the Soviets maintained their missiles, the United States preferred an air strike to the blockade.
As Robert Kennedy, a close adviser to his brother during the crisis, said, Theory of Moves and the Missile Crisis 5 Game theory and the Cuban missile crisis ""If they did not remove those bases, we would remove them,"" which is consistent with Alternative, since the United States prefers to but not to in Chicken.
By postulating that players think ahead not just to the immediate consequences of making moves, but also to the consequences of Rules of Play in Theory of Moves 6 Game theory and the Cuban missile crisis countermoves to these moves, counter−countermoves, and so on, TOM extends the strategic analysis of conflict into the more distant future.
A player will not move from an initial state if this moves leads to a less preferred outcome, or returns play to the initial state, making this state the outcome.
Rules of Play 7 Game theory and the Cuban missile crisis Rule l differs drastically from the corresponding rule of play in standard game theory, in which players simultaneously choose strategies in a matrix game that determines its outcome.
If they do not remain, they still know what payoffs they would have collected had they stayed; hence, they can make a rational calculation of the advantages of staying or moving.
Because United States prefers to the survivor at − namely, − the answer is no.
This, of course, is exactly what happened in the crisis, with the threat of further escalation by the United States, including the forced surfacing of Soviet submarines as well as an air strike (the United States Air Force estimated it had a 90 percent chance of eliminating all the missiles), being the incentive for the Soviets to withdraw their Backward Induction 9 Game theory and the Cuban missile crisis missiles.
Applying TOM Like any scientific theory, TOM's calculations may not take into account the empirical realities of a situation.
In the second backward−induction calculation, for example, it is hard to imagine a move by the Soviet Union from state 3 to state 4, involving maintenance of their missiles after their withdrawal and an air strike.
Plus is part of the family of activities in the Millennium Mathematics Project, which also includes the NRICH and MOTIVATE sites.
