To its neighbors, friendship, and the cooperation of men who respect each other.
The question emblazoned across the cover should have been preceded by a warning to readers to sit before they read further.
Foreign Policy is published by the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, a prestigious, left-leaning, and at times thoughtful foreign-policy voice in Washington.
It is rarely noted by the likewise left-leaning Washington establishment that the Carnegie Endowment was once headed by Alger Hiss, the communist spy who served the Soviet Union during Josef Stalin’s Red Terror.
The sophisticated set in Washington considers it inappropriate, impolite, and, of course, a form of McCarthyism, to make reference to this inconvenient fact concerning the endowment.
Yet, as I stood speechless at this inconceivable thought on the cover of FP, I couldn’t help but think of Hiss.
I had an eerie feeling his ghost was back at the endowment running its publications, maybe with his wife and partner Priscilla again behind the typewriter.
Worse, much like a motorist passing a car wreck, I couldn’t help but open the pages to peer at the carnage inside. cnxps.cmd.push { cnxps.render; }); To be fair, FP aims to be unpredictable and to challenge its readers, and this question was posed in a debate format with differing perspectives, plus an accompanying on-line forum, where, amazingly, 77 percent of the periodical’s respondents surmised that, yes, Fidel was good for Cuba.
Whether Fidel was good for Cuba is not a matter of debate, even if FP scares up the usual suspects to pay homage to the dictator’s personal trinity of “free” health care, collectivism and wealth redistribution.
Fidel’s failures are too numerous to recount, beginning with his 48-year postponement of elections or the tens of thousands of murdered victims or the countless dead at sea who tried to escape from an island prison forced to ban boats.
Of course, the best evidence for resolving the debate would be a simple poll of everyday Cubans — if only such polls were permitted.
If Fidel Castro had his way in October 1962, Cuba would literally have ceased to exist.
That, however, was not the sum total of missiles that would have been subsequently launched.
The United States in turn would have launched on Cuba, and also on the Soviet Union.
In response, of course, the Soviets would have launched on America from Soviet soil.
Under the terms of their NATO and Warsaw Pact charters, the nations of Western and Eastern Europe would also start firing.
Once the smoke cleared, there would be hundreds of millions dead, possibly more than a billion, with Western civilization in its death throes.
Given his way, Fidel Castro would have precipitated the greatest slaughter in human history.
Fidel didn’t care, and neither did his comrade Che Guevara, a cult hero to Hollywood and to college students brainwashed in anti-Americanism.
Fidel and Che were ready for martyrdom, with Cuba the eternal triumphant symbol of the glorious fight against capitalism and American imperialism.
Khrushchev quickly realized he was dealing with a lunatic and better immediately bring the missiles home.
Ronald Reagan and the Fall of Communism” , professor of political science and executive director of the Center for Vision & Values at Grove City College in Pennsylvania.
There's one extra <p> hard-coded on the * template after the comments for spacing purposes.
