He was the youngest person elected president and is among one of the most glamorous and popular presidents in American history.
An inept, lazy president who spent much of his time womanizing, President Kennedy was middle-of-the-road on domestic issues and conservative on foreign policy.
He nominated Byron White to the United States Supreme Court, who turned out to be pro-life.
As to foreign policy, Kennedy sent military forces into Vietnam and was somewhat hawkish against communist Cuba.
In Congress the Conservative Coalition blocked nearly all of his domestic programs, so there were few changes in domestic policy, while the civil rights movement gained strength.
This inexperience caused a national humiliation in 1961 as he sent CIA-trained Cuban exiles into an ill-prepared attack on Castro's Cuba.
Kennedy's supporters blamed the fiasco on Eisenhower and the CIA, for JFK inherited the plan; but Kennedy took the blame himself.
Russian leader Nikita Khrushchev, seeing for himself Kennedy's inexperience at a summit conference, had built the Berlin Wall as the Soviets escalated the Cold War regarding the status of Berlin, predicting that Kennedy's response would be weak.
Khrushchev went too far in 1962 when he sent nuclear missiles into Cuba aimed at the United States mainland.
For the first time since Pearl Harbor—or indeed since Washington and New Orleans were attacked in the War of 1812—the United States was vulnerable to a major attack by an enemy power.
Kennedy and Khrushchev reached a compromise whereby the Soviets removed their missiles from Cuba publicly, while Kennedy secretly removed obsolete American missiles from Turkey aimed at the Soviets, and also promised that America would never invade Cuba.
The Warren Commission concluded that Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone in assassinating JFK, and that there was no conspiracy, though a majority of the population believed that he was part of a conspiracy.
Although, among many contradictions, ""The Warren committee accepted that the same bullet killed Kennedy and gravely wounded Governor John Connally.
Primary sources 11 See also 12 External links Career Educated at private schools and Harvard College, young Kennedy was an indifferent student until the war in Europe focused his attention.
As second son in the powerful Kennedy Family, he was marked for an intellectual career as a writer or journalist, while his older brother Joseph was slated for politics by their manipulative father, Joseph P Kennedy.
In September 1941, Kennedy attempted to join the United States Army but was medically disqualified due the his chronic lower back problems.
He then joined the United States Navy and attended officer training school.
His older brother's death in combat during World War II, combined with JFK's heroic war record as skipper of the PT-109 in 1943, set the stage for his political debut as a Congressional candidate in 1946.
Although the father had abandoned Boston in frustration, JFK's return to the city restored the family's traditional power base among the large and powerful Irish-American community in Massachusetts.
Many liberal Democrats, led by Eleanor Roosevelt, distrusted JFK primarily because they could never forget the father's break with Franklin Roosevelt or the family's support for McCarthy.
Civil rights Kennedy voted against the 1957 Civil Rights Act and opposed to the 1963 March on Washington by Martin Luther King where King made his famous “I Have A Dream” speech.
The March on Washington was organized by A Phillip Randolph, who was a black Republican.
Not until the presidential election of 1960 when John Kennedy intervened for the release of Martin Luther King, who was jailed by local Democrats two weeks before the election in Atlanta following a non-violent protest, did the majority of Blacks begin voting Democratic en bloc.
His brother, Robert Kennedy, who managed the campaign, was furious as to the call with King, and felt it could cost them the election given the promise of three Southern governors not to support John Kennedy if he showed support for King.His 1957 book, Profiles in Courage, included Sen.
Andrew Johnson, which ended Republican Reconstruction reforms and paving the way for Democrat era of Jim Crow laws and the segregation era.
Nomination When Adlai Stevenson allowed the delegates to choose the vice-presidential nominee in 1956, Kennedy sought the position but was narrowly defeated by Stevenson's two-time primary rival, liberal Senator Estes Kefauver of Tennessee.
By 1960, Kennedy was the front-runner for the Democratic presidential nomination to face Richard M Nixon, with the biggest question mark whether his Catholic base of support would be outweighed by anti-Catholicism of the sort that hurt Al Smith in the 1928 race against Herbert Hoover.
Prohibition was no longer an issue, and fear of Tammany-like bossism had faded away with the demise of most big city machines.
The Kennedy juggernaut defeated rival Hubert Humphrey, a fellow liberal, in the West Virginia primary, a state with so much poverty and so few Catholics that party leaders were convinced they had a winner.
Although Kennedy's religiosity consisted of nominal attendance at Sunday Mass, he excited tens of millions of Catholics who saw his election as president as confirmation of their full recognition as true Americans.
Weeks after his memorable inaugural address sounded the tocsin for vigorous anti-communism, he encountered disaster when the invasion of Cuba failed at the Bay of Pigs in 1961, and he was forced to pay ransom of $53 million United States dollars in food and medicine in exchange for the 1,113 prisoners and 76 other exiles being held in Cuba.
The Cuban missile crisis reversed Kennedy's image of ineptness in foreign policy, but his quiet, escalation of military involvement in Vietnam set the stage for the whirlwind reaped by his successor.
A new issue that Kennedy had not anticipated blazed into view as the civil rights movement in the South, led by Martin Luther King, produced dramatic confrontations for JFK with segregationist Democrats, especially Governors George Wallace of Alabama, and Ross Barnett of Mississippi.
In addition, Robert Kennedy allowed the FBI to wiretap MLK Jr's phone on a trial basis due to suspicion that Dr.
The June 1963 confrontation in Alabama was nonviolent, and although Wallace did back down, the event boosted his visibility as a leader of segregationist southern Democrats.
Kennedy's assassination by self-proclaimed ""Marxist""Lee Harvey Oswald in November, 1963, was a stunning shock to all Americans.
To deflect attention from its ties to Oswald , the Soviet Union fabricated a disinformation campaign to blame the assassination on United States conservatives.
Agents passed the forged letter anonymously to unwitting United States conspiracy theorists; it appeared in a self-published assassination book, and a Dallas newspaper even claimed that a handwriting expert declared it to be genuine.
The book was positively reviewed by Victor Perlo in New Times, which was a KGB front at one time printed in Romania, according to Lt.
In 1966 came Mark Lane's bestseller Rush to Judgment, alleging that Kennedy was assassinated by a right-wing United States group.
Oswald's strong Communist ties were downplayed, and instead, the conservative city of Dallas was made the guilty party.
The Catholic community took his assassination hard, and immediately elevated JFK to a sort of sainthood status, celebrating that he had liberated them from second class citizenship.
Reports of JFK's affairs, and detailed reports of his multiple grave medical problems fascinated the public but failed to break the myth that if JFK had lived, his second term would be a story of political triumphs restoring people's faith in government.
Kennedy was arguably a moderate; his policies appeal to both conservatives and liberals.
He apparently offered symbols for the liberals while following a conservative course in foreign and most of his domestic policy.
After his death Kennedy's legacy was picked up by liberals, and there is a vague notion to the effect that Kennedy was a progressive in the same vain as his successor, Lyndon Johnson.To be a liberal in the days when Kennedy was in politics, 1946–63, meant supporting the programs of the New Deal, following in the footsteps of Franklin D Roosevelt, and upholding the New Deal Coalition.
On most of these points Kennedy was largely on the conservative or moderate side.
Kennedy explicitly exempted any such movements dominated by ""external""—meaning Communist—forces, thereby shutting the door on renewed diplomatic relations with Fidel Castro's Cuba.
On domestic issues, a pilot program for food stamps for low-income Americans was launched in 1961.
Further, Social Security benefits and food distribution to poor Americans was increased; including free school lunches.
In 1961, Kennedy signed Executive Order 10925, which required affirmative action by government contractors as to both applicants and employees.
Thereafter, in June 1963, Kennedy signed the ""Equal Pay Act"" which was to close the so-called wage gap based on sex, though it should be noted that it passed with overwhelming bipartisan support.
These tax cuts are heralded by many conservatives as landmark since they, like all other tax cuts, brought economic growth.
Kennedy planned deficit spending to promote growth but was hesitant to the displeasure of his more liberal advisers.
Liberals argue that he'd support raising the top income tax bracket rate today.
As a senator, Kennedy voted mildly on civil rights legislation and supported then Senate leader Lyndon Johnson's move of having Eisenhower's 1957 Civil Rights Act sent to the Senate Judiciary Committee which at the time was controlled by southern Democrats.
On dealing with unemployment, he never proposed New Deal-esque programs but instead had a package that was acceptable to conservative Republicans.Crime was a signature issue for Kennedy, and on taking office he promised a major crackdown on organized crime, thus appealing to conservatives.
Although liberals assert that the Vietnam War was initiated and supported by conservatives, Kennedy did increase the number of military advisers and special forces there which helped set up the full military combat commitment made by his successor, Lyndon Johnson.
Kennedy was very friendly towards Republicans and appointed some to positions in his cabinet, namely Robert S McNamara.
Kennedy was the former Jacqueine Lee Bouvier, later Jacqueline Onassis.
Both presidents Lincoln and Kennedy were elected the President of the United States in '60.
Time Feb., 1961 ↑ RADIO AND TELEVISION REPORT TO THE AMERICAN PEOPLE ON THE BERLIN CRISIS, JULY 25, 1961 Bibliography & Further reading Ballard, Robert.
The Inauguration of John F Kennedy and the Speech That Changed America ISBN 0805072136 excerpt and text search Clarke, Thurston.
JFK's World War II United States Navy service; PT-109 and PT-59 Freedman, Lawrence.
The Shocking Truth About the Role of South Vietnam and the French Mafia in the Assassination of JFK"", shows that JFK came from a globalist family but did not oppose the elites until he was going to be exposed by CIA Vietnamese drug operations Parmet, Herbert.
How the Assassination of John F Kennedy Shattered American Liberalism excerpt and text search, conservative interpretation Pietrusza, David.60: LBJ vs.
A Life of John F Kennedy highly critical assessment of his character flaws by conservative historian excerpt and text search Schlesinger, Arthur, Jr.
Kennedy , major biography by a close advisorSee also Gallery of American Heroes John F Kennedy, Jr.
