Ireeeived a message from Washington early in the morning. ..king whether I Mp«t«l to be in London today and tomorrow.
I teg** to get telephone call, and messages transmitted through three separate Embassy chunels. indicating that something unusual was astir in Washington.
There 1 was to be briefed on what would , later be required of me, before the plane went on to Paris and other destinations.
A telegram that followed mystified me slightly by naming as one of the passtngers on the plane Dean Acheson.
Archie Roosevelt and I motored out to the airfield, near Kewbury, a trip of over two hours.
They told us there had been a great commotion for several days in Washington, as a result of the discovery that the Soviets had been busily developing a missile potential in Cuba that would be useful for offensive $ SECRET 1*1 B(^ 21. purposes.
In fact, many missiles were already to place, and a large number of airplanes, including twin-engine bombers «*» ready to fly.
The moat dangerous thing about this capability was that medium-range ballistic missiles, with a range of 1100 nautical miles, could reach as far as Washington, and southward bwyond the Panama Canal.
The intermediate RBM's. with a range of 2200 nautical miles, could blanket the United States, with the exception of an area near Seattle, as well as reach south deep into Latin America.
In fact, the abandonment of his campaign tour on the grounds of having a cold was a pretext for returning to Washington to face this unexpected development.
The intelligence^^BM ascertained by high attitude reeonnaisance photography, the validity of which*, not in doubt.
I was instructed to see the Prime Minister tomorrow afternoon at four o'clock, while Acheson is to brief General de Gaulle and the NATO Council later that day. and Dowling is to report the affair to^hancellor tomorrow evening.
At midnight tomorrow the President is going on the air to declare how he intends to handle the crisis.
It appears there has been violent contention at home ■»«*, what should be done.
Some advocated the hard line of wiping out the bases and equipn *nt, but a temportoing policy seems to have won the day It is rather unclear as to what this consists of. but the President's talk will serve^gata elucidation, Archie.
Chet Cooper and myself returned to London about three The^lane went on to Paris, and thence to Bonn.
I was also told I would he furnished with a draft of the President's proposed speech, so that Ma cm ll l an could consider it and communicate any ideas it evoked from him to the President.
Cooper and myself went down to Admiralty House, but had not yet received the promised draft.
I had a long discussion wife the PM. attended also by Lord Home, and Philip de Zulueta.
Latter accepted \ validity evidence existence offensive capabilities and considered situation grave.
Both British officials speculated about Soviet reaction to any embargo They thought K might retaliate wife embargo against American aeeees to Berlin.
Or he might repty by some form of harassment our foreign 1 especially Turkish, bases.
They suspected K might suggest meeting with President and drag matter out.
But in absence knowledge contents speech such conversation was hypotbjtticaL Primin wttl consider text Immediately upon receipt and comment shortly thereafter.
Several calls to the Department o btained «sMM*onfy the reply that things had become fouled op. and they could not understand why we had not received the text.
FinaUy, In desperation, we suggested that the private channel between MacmiUan and Kennedy be used.
Thie was done, and about seven o'clock tonight we had the h umiliat ion of receiving from the British the copy of the speech, which had been promised for delivery to us before noon today.
Thus far this has bean a messy as respects this Embassy, affair, ill coordinated; which is surprising, in view of its serious and dangerous nature.
I had an engagement to lunch with Ken Galhraiih today, but he was suddenly called away, under inatnictions to return to India at once, where the difficulties between the Chinese and the Indians have erupted into war.
Reginald H Pettus. of Charlotte Court House, came to see me this afternoon, with his daughter.
October 23, 1962 Tuesday My morning started about midnight, when Al Wells called me regarding the Cuban affair, /t one o'clock, the Prime Minister telephoned me, saying be bad just had a telephone conversation with the President, and indicated that the British Government would go along with us.
Thf^PM was warm and friendly, as he MMMv earlier in the day. and said we would be discussing these matters again shorUy. /t about the same time, though I was unconscious of it. there was a demonstration in front of the Embassy office building on Grosvenor Square, protesting against the SECRET MZfr a delivered at midnight.
The / President's speech, which in London * <TW * / ^L British morning papers did net have time for editorial comment, nor will there be much such until tomorrows^ morning.
E and 1 lunched at Buckingham Palace, where the Queen entertained in honor of Laurie and Isabel Norstad, and their daughter, Mrs.
The other guests were Lord Mountbetten, the Homes, Antonia and Hugh Fraser.
There was the usual excellent Palace food, with aasflHMMt 8°°* 1959 Moselle.
I sat between the Queen and Antonia Fraser, the former of whom displayed a lively interest in the Cuban imbroglio.
The Embassy was picketed all day by placard carriers aaasjgsjg such signs as Cuba si, Yankees no.
Eugene T Kinnaly, Administrative Assistant to Speaker John McCormack, came with a friend to see me this afternoon.
Since he had been associated with the legislative branch for almost 45 yerrs, he had many stories, some of them droll, about happenings In the House of Representatives.
I have long considered having him paint my portrait, since 1 must leave one behind when I quit this poet.
He is an old friend, the son of Sir Edwin Lutyens, the famous architect.
I went to Archie Roosevelt's house . to meet Hugh Gaitskell and George Brown, who were to be briefed on Cuba by Chet Cooper. 1 called Joan Koch de Gooreynd this morning, to Inquire about Peter.
In the course of his remarks, Fleming I having Sir Stewart Menzies ft* been Chief of MJ6 during the war, de Gooreynd. as one of Menzies' deputies, took umbrage at this, saying it wee the first Ume the identity of his Chief had ever been disclosed. consider this an inaccurate statement, since it was well known after the war to many people that Menzies. known and addressed in his own organization only as ""C"", had been carrying on such work.
Joan Koch de Gooreynd s*ld Petered already gone to the hospital, where he would remain for two months. m uch of the ^ime under sedation.
She did not speak of an operation, so 1 begin to suspect he mj.y be slightly pff hid rocker.
The crowd attempted to br«* through the plate glass doors of the ground floor, but were repuisea by the Police.
The Police Force was augmented by officers brought In from ether parts of London.
The Commaadan^ o*\the Metropolitan Police Dirtrict appears in person, called away from a dinner Wdaridges.
Non-Com heading our United States Marine personnel, for the esceUeat way in which tfasydW handled matters last night.
Some hours later we received a reply, which 1 communicated to Philip de Zulueta.
Our people were generally agreeable to the draft passage proposed by the Prime Minister.
He was to go to see Page Smith immediately after lunch, to discuss the Cuban episode.
This afternoon, 1 opened the Embassy orientation course, by exhorting them to be good boys and girls, worthy of their privileges.
In the latterteapacity. he expects within a MM* period of eighteen months, to visit almost every country in the world, and make recommendations as to how TIME-LIFE reporting might be improved.
IS$7 & Draft passage for th« ph.. mi,!,,., . tot<lmeHt m 0ctobar 2B lflM WSfc ""In his message and through the United States Ambassador In London * President Kennedy made it clear to me on Monday, October 22 that had become very concerned about the Soviet supplies of offensive weapon, to Cuba in recent weeks.
It is of course true that the United State, authoritie. had known for some time the location of a number of surface to air missile sites in Cuba. but these missiles, even though carrying nuclear warheads, may be regarded as of a defensive nature.
Very recently, however, at least eight ballistic missile sites have been definitely identified in Cuba.
Normally .a*h such site has four launchers and each launcher has two missiles.
Report, from all American intelligence sources confirm that at least 30 missiles are already pre 3 ent in Cuba.
MRBM missiles, with their range of over a thousand miles, could reach a large area of the United States including Washington and nearly the whole of Central America and the Caribbean including the Panama Canal.
Intermediate range ballistic missiles have an operational range of 2200 nautical miles.
All these missiles are designed to carry and must be presumed to carry nuclear bombs.
In addition, Russia baa supplied Cuba with 1L 28 aircraft, of which over twenty have been definitely identified.
It is interesting to note that the Soviet Union do not appear to have denied the presence of these missiles in Cuba and indeed it may be difficult for them to do so since the United States believe thatlnere are at least five thousand Soviet military personnel already on the island.
Mildred Dilling Ooreen Lady Brabourne Mr Charles Harding General and Mrs.
Frazier Meade In connection with Embassy security, we hare given strict instructions to the Marines, as well as to the rest of our personnel, that under no circumstances are they to use pistols, even if attacked.
We have sent to Frankfort for a supply of tear gaa. with and would expectAt to repulse any attempt by rioters to penetrate above the first floor of the building.
I do. however, want to reconsider whether for the protection of the cede room we should not. as a last resort, open fire.
October 25, 1962 Thursday Chet Cooper returns to Washington this morning.
In the aftermath of his I viait we are still having repercussions from the release of some of the air reconnaisanee pictures to the London newspapers.
After midnight two days ago, Mike Forrestal called me from the Operations Room at the White House to inquire into which photograph* had been shown.
It seems there was a question as to whether the release in the United States should not be simultaneous.
As a result of a misconstruction of what occurred, Bill Clark, our PAO, has now been referred to in the Washington Post as the ""errant USIS Officer in London"" who made a mistake.
Buss Wiggins, of the Post, is coming to see me this afternoon, and 1 shall straighten it out with him.
Mm. of whet he told me to the Pr-ident, ffs I had beard it directly »y1f from Mac let the matter rest.
The unique identification numbers assigned to the documents are listed m the top ngnt-hand corner of the microfiche header.
