The Cuban Missiles Crisis, 1962 The Cuban Missile crisis was the crisis-point of the Cold War.
Superpower Tension All the tensions that had grown up between Russia’s assertive ‘peaceful competition’ and Kennedy’s promise to be tough on Russia – including the space race, the arms race and nuclear testing, American funding of anti-Communists in Vietnam and Laos, the failed Vienna summit and the Berlin Wall.
In 1960, Castro made a trade agreement with Russia, whereby Cuba sent sugar to Russia, in return for oil, machines and money.
This frightened the Americans more, and in 1960 they stopped trading with Cuba.
The Bay of Pigs In April 1961 the CIA encouraged, funded and transported an attempt by anti-Castro Cuban exiles to invade Cuba.
In September 1961, therefore, Castro asked for – and Russia publicly promised – weapons to defend Cuba against America.
On 14 October 1962 an American U2 spy-plane took pictures of a nuclear missile base being built on Cuba.
Kennedy’s advisers told him he had 10 days before Cuba could fire the missiles at targets in America.
The film Thirteen Days – although it is has historical inaccuracies in the detail and its portrayal has been questioned – shows the tension of the Cuban Missile crisis.
I call upon Chairman Khrushchev to stop and dismantle this secret, reckless and provocative threat to world peace.
Take each of the causes of the Cuban Missiles crisis, and explain how it caused the crisis.
U2 spy-plane takes pictures of Missile bases in Cuba experts tell Kennedy he has 10 days before they are operational.
Kennedy set up a Committee of the National Security Council to advise him.
B52 nuclear bombers were deployed, so that one-eighth of them were airborne all the time.
That night, Oleg Penkovsky – a Western spy working in Russia – was arrested.
Secretly, the United States government offered to remove United States missiles in Turkey in exchange for those in Cuba.
The Kennedy brothers saw the Russian ambassador, and again mentioned removing the missiles in Turkey.
Before Kennedy could reply, Khrushchev sent another letter, demanding that Kennedy also dismantle American missile bases in Turkey.
This would stop the missiles getting to the missile bases, but it was not a direct act of war.
Source B This British cartoon of 29 October 1962 shows Kennedy and Khrushchev arm-wrestling for power, sitting on nuclear weapons.
