Elizabeth Fogarty Production Manager: Savoula Amanatidis Text Design and Project Coordination: Elm Street Publishing Services, Inc.
Phoenix Color Corporation For permission to use copyrighted material, grateful acknowledgment k made to the copyright holders on 290, which are hereby made part of this copyright page.
If you purchased this book within the United States or Canada you should be aware that it has been wrongfully imported without the approval of the Publisher or Author.
He gracefully acknowledges having been my student, and we have taught together the Harvard course on conflict that served as a basis for this book.
But I have learned at least as much from him as he thinks he has learned from me—not only because of his expertise in international economic affairs, but also because he has brought to his understanding of world politics a precious practical experience as a high official in the Carter and Clinton administrations.
And he has brought to his study of international conflicts a thoughtful serenity worthy of one of those great American leaders of the end of the eighteenth century and the beginning of the nineteenth—a serenity made of a talent for rising high above the daily events; of a curiosity for, and knowledge of, political philosophy that helps him ask questions of permanent importance and put events in perspective; of a gift for understanding how theory can nourish the study of history, and how the latter leads inevitably to philosophical and ethical conclusions.
These are the skills of such authors as Tocqueville, Max Weber, and Raymond Aron.
These are qualities whose importance in world affairs is often undervalued, and which are more necessary than ever in American foreign policy.
A discriminating and penetrating intelligence has alerted him to the important innovations, which were introduced in the twentieth century into strategic and economic affairs, and yet safeguarded him from faddish enthusiasms and fashionable slogans.
He is a man of deep values and generous beliefs, but also of great discernrnent, detachment, and determination.
It IS, in my opinion, the best textbook available to intelligent students of world politics.
It blends perfectly history, political philosophy, political theory, and analysis.
It distinguishes the world of interstate conflict from that of “complex interdependence,” the term crafted by Nye and by his friend and mine, Robert Keohane.
It shows the tensions between the need to fight terrorism, to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons, and to support democracy against tyrannies, and the need to preserve the norms of international law and international legitimacy.
It shows both the originality and the limits of globalization and of the information revolution.
It is also wise because of the impeccable mix of humanity, common sense, prudence, and integrity that characterizes a personality so richly successful in writing, in teaching, in reflecting on the variety of human experiences, and in acting as an imaginative, farsighted, and dynamic academic entrepreneur. admire his balance and his gifts, and I like him as a fine and good man whose friendship I deeply appreciate.
It is also informed by five years of experience as a policy maker at the assistant secretary level in three national security bureaucracies in Washington—the State Department, the Pentagon, and the National Intelligence Council.
Its aim is to introduce students to the complexities of international politics by giving them a good grounding in the traditional realist theory before turning to liberal and constructivist approaches that became more prominent after the Cold War.
I try to present difficult concepts in clear language with historical examples so students will gain a practical understanding of the basic vocabulary of international politics.
Twice in the first half of the twentieth century, the great powers engaged in devastating world wars that cost nearly 50 million lives.
The second half of the century was wracked by a cold war, regional wars, and the threat of nuclearweapons.
No good teacher can honestly answer such questions with certainty, but we can provide our students with conceptual tools that will help them shape their own answers as the future unfolds.
This is not a complete textbook with all the concepts or history a student will need.
Instead, it is an example of how to think about the complex and confusing domain of international politics.
It should be read not for a complete factual account, but for the way it approaches the interplay of theory and history.
Historians who believe that understanding comes from simply recounting the facts fail to make explicit the hidden principles by which they select some facts rather than others.
Equally mistaken are political scientists who become so isolated and entangled in a maze of abstract theory that they mistake their mental constructs for reality.
Only by going back and forth between history and theory can we avoid such mistakes.
When combined with the suggested reading and the study questions, it can provide the central thread for an introductory course or for individual readers to teach themselves the equivalent of such a course.
Alternatively, it can be used as a supplementary text in a course as an xiv Preface example of one approach to the subject.
The text has been revised and updated throughout to reflect more recent developments on the international scene such as the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, the rise of China as a world power, and the growing roles of nongovernmental organizations, transnational corporations, terrorist networks, and other nonstate actors in international affairs.
In addition, each chapter’s suggested readings have been updated with new editions and more cunent texts for reference.
I have learned from all of them, and, I am sure, unconsciously stolen a number of their ideas.
The same is true of Stanley Hoffmann, who has taught me since graduate days and has been a constant source of inspiration.
I am grateful to him and to Robert Keohane, who has provided so many ideas as well as friendship.
David Dressier, Charles Maier, and Ernest May helped by commenting on the manuscript.
Vin Auger, Peter Feaver, Meryl Kessler, Sean Lyn-Jones, Pam Metz, John Owen, Gideon Rose, and Gordon Silverstein.
Veronica McClure was a wonderful colleague in transcribing and correcting my prose.
Richard Wood, Dan Philpott, Zachary Karabell, Carl Nagin, Neal Rosendorf, Alex Scacco, and Matt Kohut helped on earlier editions.
Sean Misko provided excellent assistance and wise judgment in helping to prepare this edition.
Chapter Marble relief commemorating Athenians who died in the Peloponnesian War The world is shrinking.
Global Internet communications are nearly instantaneous and transmission costs are negligible.
An environmentalist in Asia or a human rights activist in Africa today has a power of communication once enjoyed only by large organizations such as governments or transnational corporations.
On a more somber note, nuclear weapons have added a new dimension to war that one writer calls “double death,” meaning that not only could individuals die, but under some circumstances the whole human species could be threatened.
As the effects of distance shrink, conditions in remote poor countries such as Afghanistan suddenly become highly relevant to America and Europe.
Yet some other things about international politics have remained the same over the ages.
Thucydides’s account of Sparta and Athens fighting the Pelopon^ nesian War 2,500 years ago reveals eerie resemblances to the Arab'Israeli conflict after 1947.
The world at the beginning of the twenty-first century is a strange cocktail of continuity and change.
Some aspects of international politics have not changed since Thucydides.
There is a certain logic of hostility, a dilemma about security that goes with interstate politics.
Alliances, balances of power, and choices in policy between war and compromise have remained similar over the millennia.
On the other hand, Thucydides never had to worry about nuclear weapons, HIV/AIDS, or global warming.
The task for international relations students is to build on the past but not be trapped by it, to understand the continuities as well as the changes.
We must learn the traditional theories and then adapt them to current circumstances.
The early chapters of this book will provide you with a historical and theoretical context in which to place the phenomena of the information revolution, globalization, interdependence, and transnational actors that are discussed in the later chapters.
I found in my experience in government that I could ignore neither the age-old nor the brand-new dimensions of world politics.
International politics would be transformed if separate states were abolished, but world government is not around the comer.
And while nonstate actors such as transnational corporations, nongovernmental organizations, and terrorist groups present new challenges to governments, they do not replace states.
In fact, rather than vanishing, nationalism and the demand for separate states have increased.
Between the end of the Cold War in 1989 and the end of the twentieth century. armed conflicts occurred in 74 locations around the world.
Seven were interstate wars and nine were intrastate wars with foreign intervention.
The world has not always been divided into a system of separate states.
Over the centuries there have been three basic forms of world politics.
In a <world imperial system, one government controls most of the world with which it has contact.
Spain in the sixteenth century and France in the late seventeenth century tried to gain similar supremacy, but they failed.
In the nineteenth century, the British Empire spanned the globe, but even the British had to share the world with other strong states.
Ancient world empires—the Sumerian, the Persian, the Chinese—were actually regional empires.
They thought they ruled the world, but they were protected from conflict with other empires by lack of communication.
Their fights with barbarians on the peripheries of the empire were not the same as wars among roughly equal states.
A second basic form of international politics is a feudal system, in which human loyalties and political obligations are not fixed primarily by territorial boundaries.
An individual had obligations to a local lord, but might also owe duties to some distant noble or bishop as well as to the pope in Rome.
Political obligations were determined to a large extent by what happened to one’s superiors.
If a ruler married, an area and its people might find their obligations rearranged as part of a wedding dowry.
Townspeople bom French might suddenly find themselves made Flemish or even English.
Cities and leagues of cities sometimes had a special semiindependent status.
The crazy quilt of wars that accompanied the feudal situation were not what we think of as modem tenitorial wars.
They could occur within as well as across territories and were related to these crosscutting, nonterritorial loyalties and conflicts.
A third form of world politics is an anarchic system of states, composed of states that are relatively cohesive but with no higher government above them.
Examples include the city-states of ancient Greece or Machiavelli’s fifteenth-century Italy.
Another example of an anarchic state system is the dynastic territorial state whose coherence comes from control by a ruling family.
Large territorial dynasties reemerged in Europe about 1500, and other forms of international polities such as city-states or loose leagues of territories began to vanish.
In 1648, the Peace of Westphalia ended Europe’s Thirty Years’ War, sometimes called the last of the great wars of religion and the first of the wars of modern states.
In retrospect, that treaty enshrined the sovereign territorial state as the dominant form of international organization.
Thus today when we speak of international politics, we usually mean this territorial state system, and we define international politics as politics in the absence of a common sovereign, politics among entities with no ruler above them.
Think of a Texas town without a sheriff in the daysof the Old West, or Lebanon after its government broke down in the 1970s, or Somalia in the 1990s.
Hobbes’s state of nature is not benign; it is a war of all against all because there is no higher ruler to enforce order.
As Hobbes famously declared, life in such a world tends to be nasty, brutish, and short.
The result is that legal, political, and social differences exist between domestic and international politics.
Domestic law is generally obeyed and if not, the police and courts enforce sanctions against lawbreakers.
International law, on the other hand, rests on competing legal systems, and there is no common enforcement; no international police to enforce InternatiQual law.
In a wellordered domestic political system, the government has a monopoly on the legitimate use of force.
Because international politics is the realm of self-help, and some states are stronger than others, there is always a danger that they may resort to force.
Domestic and international politics also differ in their underlying sense of community.
In a well-ordered domestic society, a widespread sense of community gives rise to common loyalties, standards of justice, and views of what is legitimate authority.
In international politics, divided peoples do not share the same loyalties.
In such a world, most people place national concerns before international justice.
Law and ethics play a role in international politics, but in the absence of a sense of community norms, they are not as binding as they are in domestic politics.
Of the three basic systems— world imperial, feudal, and anarchic system of states — some people speculate that the twenty-first century may see the gradual evolution of a new feudalism, or less plausibly, an American world empire.
Two Views of Anarchic Politics International politics is anarchic in the sense that there is no higher government.
But even political philosophy offers two different views of how harsh a state of nature need be.
Hobbes, who wrote in a seventeenth-century England wracked by civil war, emphasized insecurity, force, and survival.
A half century later, John Locke, writing in a more stable England, argued that although a state of nature lacked a common sovereign, people could develop ties and make contracts, and therefore anarchy was less threatening.
Realism has been the dominant tradition in thinking about international politics.
Among modern Americans, realism is exemplified by the writings and policies of President Richard Nixon and his secretary of state, Henry Kissinger.
The realist starts from the assumption of the anarchic system of states.
Kissinger and Nixon, for example, sought to maximize the power of the United States and to minimize the ability of other states to jeopardize United States security.
According to the realist, the beginning and the end' of international politics is the individual state in interaction with other states.
The other tradition, liberalism, can be traced back in Western political philosophy to Baron de Montesquieu and Immanuel Kant in eighteenth-century France and Germany, respectively, and such nineteenth-century British philosophers as Jeremy Bentham and John Stuart Mill.
A modem American example can be found in the writings and policies of political scientist and President Woodrow Wilson.
Liberals see a global society that functions alongside the states and sets part of the context for states.
Trade crosses borders, people have contacts with each other , and international institutions such as the United Nations create a context in which the realist view of pure anarchy is insufficient.
Liberals complain that realists portray states as hard billiard balls careening off one another in the attempt to balance power, but that is not enough because people do have contacts across borders and because there is an international society.
Realists, claim liberals, overstate the difference between domestic and international politics.
Because the realist picture of anarchy as a Hobbesian “state of war” focuses only on extreme situations, in the liberals’ view it misses the growth of economic interdependence and the evolution of a transnational global society.
The “LInseen Vampire” OF War i If there were no other reason for making an end of war, the financial ruin it involves must I sooner or later bring the civilized nations of the world to their senses.
The burdens of militarism in time of peace are exhausting the « i strength of the leading nations, already overloaded with debts.
Of course, these predictions failed catastrophically in 1914, and the realists were vindicated.
The 1970s saw a resurgence of liberal claims that rising economic and social interdependence was changing the nature of international politics.
In the 1980s, Richard Rosecrance, a California professor, wrote that states can increase their power in two ways, either aggressively by territorial conquest or peacefully through trade.
But since then, Japan has used trade and investment to become the second largest economy in the world , and a significant power in East Asia.
Thus Rosecrance and modem liberals argue that the nature of international politics is changing.
Some new liberals look even further to the future and believe that dramatic growth in ecological interdependence will so blur the differences between domestic and international politics that humanity will evolve toward a world without borders.
For example, everyone will be affected without regard to boundaries if the depletion of ozone in the upper atmosphere causes skin cancer.
If carbon dioxide accumulation warms the climate and causes the polar ice caps to melt, rising seas will affect all coastal states.
Some problems such as AIDS and drugs cross borders with such ease that we may be on our way to a different world.
Transnational forces are undoing the Peace of Westphalia, and humanity is evolving toward a new form of international politics.
Iraq showed that force and war are ever-present dangers when it invaded its small neighbor Kuwait.
Liberals responded by arguing that politics in the Middle East is the exception.
Over time, they say, the world is moving beyond the anarchy of the sovereign state system.
These divergent views on the nature of international politics and how it is changing will not soon be reconciled.
Both claim the high ground of realism with a small Liberals tend to see realists as cynics whose fascination with the past blinds them to change.
A clear-cut answer might be nice, but it would also be less accurate and less interesting.
The mix of continuity and change that characterizes today’s world makes it impossible to arrive at one simple synthetic explanation.
For much of the past century Marxism, with its predictions of class conflict and warfare caused by problems among capitalist states, was a credible alternative for many people.
While dependency theory helped illuminate some structural causes of economic inequality, it lost credibility when it could not explain why, in the 1980s and 1990s, peripheral countries in East Asia such as South Korea, Singapore, and Malaysia grew more rapidly than “central” countries such as the United States and Europe.
This loss of credibility was underlined when Fernando Henrique Cardoso, an academic leader among dependency theorists in the 1970s, turned to liberal policies of increasing dependence on global markets after he was elected president of Brazil in the 1990s.
In the 1980s, analysts on both sides of the realist-liberal divide attempted to devise more deductive theories similar to those of microeconomics.
Neorealists and neoliberals increased the simplicity and elegance of theory, but they did so at the cost of discarding much of the rich complexity of classical realist and liberal theories.
Constructivists emphasize the importance of ideas and culture in shaping both the reality and the discourse of international politics.
They stress the ultimate subjectivity of interests and their links to changing identities.
There are many types of constructivists, but they all tend to agree that the two major theories are far from; being true pictures of the world, and that we need not just explanations of how things are, but explanations of how they become what they are.
Constructivists have focused on important questions about identities, norms, culture, national interests, and international governance.
Neorealists and neoliberals take for granted how the goals that states sought changed over time.
Constructivists draw on different fields and disciplines to examine the processes by which leaders, peoples, and cultures alter their preferences, shape their identities, and learn new behavior.
For example, both slavery in the nineteenth century and racial apartheid in South Africa were once accepted by most states, but later were widely opposed.
The world is full of political entities such as tribes, nations, and nongovernmental organizations.
Only in recent centuries has the sovereign state been a dominant concept.
Constructivists suggest that concepts such as nation and sovereignty that give meaning to our lives as well as to our theories are socially constructed, not just “out there” as permanent reality.
Constructivism is an approach rather than a theory, but it provides both a useful critique and an important supplement to the main theories of realism and liberalism.
Though sometimes loosely formulated and lacking in predictive power, constructivist approaches remind us of what the two main theories often miss.
As we shall see in the next chapter, it is important to look beyond the instrumental rationality of pursuing current goals and to ask how changing identities and interests can sometimes lead to subtle shifts in states’ policies, and sometimes to profound changes in international affairs.
Constructivists help us understand how preferences are formed and knowledge is generated prior to the exercise of instrumental rationality.
In that sense, constructivist thought complements rather than opposes the two main theories.
We will illustrate the questions of understanding long-term change in the next chapter and return to it in the final chapter.
I found all of them helpful, though in different ways and in different circumstances.
Sometimes practical men and women wonder why we should bother with theories at all.
The answer is that theories are the road maps that allow us to make sense of unfamiliar terrain.
Even when we think we are just using common sense, there is usually an implicit theory guiding our actions.
If we are more conscious of the theories that are guiding us, we are better able to understand their strengths and weaknesses and when best to apply them.
As the British economist John Maynard Keynes once put it, practical men who consider themselves above theory are usually listening to some dead scribbler from the past whose name they have Iqng forgotten.
In the traditional realist view of international politics, the only significant “actors” are the states, and only the big states really matter.
In 1945 there were about 50 states in the world; by the beginning of the twenty-first century, there were four times that many with more to come.
More important than the number of states is the rise of nonstate actors.
In terms of the economy, IBM is more important to Belgium than is Burundi, a former Belgian colony.
A picture of the Middle East without the warring states and the outside powers would be downright silly, but it would also be woefully inadequate if it did not include a variety of nonstate actors.
Multinational oil companies such as Shell, British Petroleum, and Exxon Mobil are one type of nonstate actors, but there are others.
There are nongovernmental organizations , including the Red Cross and Amnesty International.
There are also a variety of transnational ethnic groups, such as the Kurds who live in Turkey, Syria, Iran, and Iraq, and the Armenians scattered throughout the Middle East and the Caucasus.
Terrorist groups, drug cartels, and mafia organizations transcend national borders and often divide their resources among several states.
International religious move' ments, particularly political Islam in the Middle East and North Africa, add a further dimension to the range of possible nonstate actors.
The question is not whether state or nonstate groups are more important— usually the states are—but how new complex coalitions affect the politics of a region in a way that the traditional realist views fail to disclose.
States are the major actors in current international politics, but they do not have the stage to themselves.
Traditionally the dominant goal of states in an anarchic sys' tern is military security.
Countries today obviously care about their military security, but they often care as much or more about their economic wealth , about social issues such as stopping drug traffic or the spread of AIDS, or about ecological changes.
Moreover, as threats change, the definition of security changes; military security is not the only goal that states pursue.
CIA World Factbook, 2005. into Canada and capture Toronto again as it did in 1813, but that Toronto would be programmed out of relevance by a computer in Texas a rather different dilemma from the traditional one of states in an anarchic system.
Economic strength has not replaced military security (as Kuwait discovered when Iraq invaded in August 1990), but the agenda of international politics has become more complex as states pursue a wider range of goals.
Humanitarian and human rights issues have become more important, and some analysts refer to individual human security rather than the security of states.
Along with the goals, the instruments of international politics are also changing.
The realist view is that military force is the only instrument that really matters.
States obviously use military force today, but the past half century has seen changes in its role.
Many states, particularly large ones, find it more costly to use military force to achieve their goals than was true in earlier times.
One is that the ultimate means of military force, nuclear weapons, are hopelessly muscle-bound.
Although they have numbered more than 50,000, nuclear weapons have not been used in war since 1945.
The disproportion between the vast devastation nuclear weapons can inflict and any reasonable political goals has made leaders understandably loath to employ them.
So the ultimate form of military force is for all practical purposes too costly for national leaders to use in war.
In the nineteenth century, European countries conquered other parts of the globe by fielding a handful of soldiers armed with modern weapons and then administered their colonial possessions with relatively modest garrisons.
But in an age of socially mobilized populations, it is difficult to rule an occupied country whose people feel strongly about their national identity.
Americans found this out in Vietnam in the 1960s and 1970s; the Soviets discovered it in Afghanistan in the 1980s.
Vietnam and Afghanistan had not become more powerful than the nuclear superpowers, but trying to rule those nationalistically aware populations was too expensive for either the United States or the Soviet Union.
Over time there has been a growing ethic of antimilitarism, particularly in democracies.
Such views do not prevent the use of force, but they make it a politically risky choice for leaders, particularly when its use is large or prolonged.
It is sometimes said that democracies will not accept casualties, but that is too simple.
The United States, for example, expected some 10,000 casualties when it planned to enter the Gulf War in 1990, but it was loath to accept casualties in Somalia or Kosovo, where its national interests were less deeply involved.
And if the use of force is seen as unjust or illegitimate in the eyes of other nations, this can make it costly for political leaders in democratic polities.
Force is not obsolete, and terrorist nonstate actors are less constrained than states by moral concerns, but force is more costly and more difficult for most states to use than in the past.
Take, for example, economic relations between the United States and Japan.
In 1853, Commodore Perry sailed into a Japanese port and threatened bombardment unless Japan opened its ports to trade.
This would not be a very useful or politically acceptable way to solve current U.S.-Japan trade disputes.
Thus while force remains a critical instrument in international politics, it is not the only instrument.
The use of economic interdependence, communication, international institutions, and transnational actors sometimes plays a larger role than force.
Military force is not obsolete as an instrument—witness the fighting in Afghanistan, where the Taliban government had sheltered the terrorist network that carried out the September 2001 attacks on the United States, or the American and British use of force to overthrow Saddam Hussein in 2003.
But it was easier to win the war than to win the peace in Iraq, and military force alone is not sufficient to protect against terrorism.
While military force remains the ultimate instrument in international politics, changes in its cost and effectiveness make today’s international politics more complex.
Some political scientists argue that the balance of power is usually determined by a leading, or hegemonic state—such as Spain in the sixteenth century, France under Fouis XIV, Britain in most of the nineteenth century, and the United States in most of the twentieth century.
Eventually the top country will be challenged, and this challenge will lead to the kind of vast conflagrations we call hegemonic, or world, wars.
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR Thucydides is the father of realism, the theory most people use when thinking about international politics even when they do not know they are using a theory.
Many of today s leaders and editO' rial writers use realist theories even if they have not heard of Thucydides.
A member of the Athenian elite who lived during Athens’s greatest age, he participated in some of the events described in his History of the Peloponnesian War.
One of the things we learn from the Peloponnesian War is how to avoid too simplistic a reading of history.
Sparta was a conservative land-oriented state that turned inward after the victory over Persia; Athens was a commercial and sea-oriented state that turned outward.
In the middle of the century, Athens had 50 years of growth that led to the development of an Athenian empire.
Athens formed the Delian League, an alliance of states around the Aegean Sea, for mutual protection against the Persians.
Sparta, in turn, organized its neighbors on the Peloponnesian peninsula into a defensive alliance.
States that had joined Athens freely for protection against the Persians soon had to pay taxes to the Athenians.
Thus Greece enjoyed a period of stable peace before the second, more significant, Peloponnesian War.
Like a pebble that begins an avalanche, this event triggered a series of reactions that led ultimately to the Peloponnesian War.
Large conflicts are often precipitated by relatively insignificant crises in out--of--the'Way places, as we shall see when we discuss World War I In Epidamnus, the democrats fought with oligarchs over how the country would be ruled.
The democrats appealed to the city-state of Corcyra, which had helped establish Epidamnus, but were turned down.
They then turned to another city-state, Corinth, and the Corinthians decided to help.
This angered the Corcyraeans, who sent a fleet to recapture Epidamnus, their former colony.
Bust of Thucydides The Athenians, after listening to both sides, were in a dilemma.
They did not want to break the truce that had lasted for a decade, but if the Corinthians (who were close to the Peloponnesians) conquered Corcyra and took control of its large navy, the balance of power among the Greek states would be tipped against Athens.
They launched a small endeavor to scare the Corinthians, sending ten ships with instructions not to fight unless attacked.
But deterrence failed, Corinth attacked, and when the Corcyraeans began to lose the battle, the Athenian ships were drawn into the fray more than intended.
The Athenian involvement infuri' ated Corinth, which in turn worried the Athenians.
In particular, Athens worried that Corinth would stir up problems in Potidaea, which, although an Athenian ally, had historic ties to Corinth.
V(fhen a revolt did occur in Potidaea, Athens sent forces to put it down.
The Corinthians urged the Spartans to go to war and warned them against failing to check the rising power of Athens.
Megara, another important city, agreed with Corinth because contrary to the treaty, the Athenians had banned Megara’s trade.
Sparta was tom, but the Spartans voted in favor of war because they were afraid that if Athenian power was not checked, Athens might control the whole of Greece.
Sparta went to war to maintain the balance of power among the Greek city-states.
The Athenian mood was one of imperial greatness, with pride and patriotism about their city and their social system, and optimism that they would prevail in the war.
A truce was declared after ten years , but the truce was fragile and war broke out again.
It sent two fleets and infantry to conquer Sicily, the great island off the south of Italy, which had a number of Greek colonies allied to Sparta.
At the same time Sparta received additional money from the Persians, who were only too happy to see Athens trounced.
Sparta demanded that Athens pull down the long walls that protected it from attack by land-based powers.
After recounting the various events in Epidamnus, Corcyra, and so forth, he said that those were not the real causes.
What made the war inevitable was the growth of Athenian power and the fear this caused in Sparta.
Pericles, the Athenian leader in the early days of the war, had an interesting answer for his fellow citizens.
Perhaps they should not be where they were, but once they had an empire, there was not much they could do about it without even larger risks.
Perhaps the Athenians were carried away by emotional patriotism or anger that clouded their reason.
Under anarchy, independent action taken by one state to increase its security may make all states more insecure.
If one state builds its strength to make sure that another cannot threaten it, the other, seeing the first getting stronger, may build its strength to protect itself against the first.
The result is that the independent efforts of each to build its own strength and security makes both more insecure.
Neither has acted from anger or pride, but from fear caused by the threat perceived in the growth of the other.
After all, building defenses is a rational response to a perceived threat.
States could cooperate to avoid this security dilemma; that is, they could agree that neither should build up its defenses and all would be better off.
Imagine that somewhere the police arrest two men who have small amounts of drugs in their possession, which would probably result in one-year jail sentences.
The police have good reason to believe these two are really drug dealers, but they do not have enough evidence for a conviction.
The police know that the testimony of one against the other would be sufficient to convict the other to a full sentence.
The police offer to let each man off if he will testify that the other is a drug dealer.
They tell them that if both testify, both will receive 10-year sentences.
The police figure this way these dealers will be out of commission for 10 years; otherwise they are both in jail for only a year and soon will be out selling drugs again.
The suspects are put in separate cells and are not allowed to communicate with each other.
He can secure his own freedom by squealing on the other, sending him to jail for 25 years, and go free himself, or he can stay silent and spend a year in jail.
The best outcome for the individual is to cheat on the other and get to go free.
The second best outcome is for both to stay silent and spend a year in jail.
Worst of all is to be played for a sucker by staying quiet while the other talks and consequently spend 25 years in jail.
If each person does what is best for himself, they both wind up with a bad outcome.
Choosing the best outcome, freedom, is the expression of a rational preference, but if both independently seek their own best outcome, they both get a bad result.
If the two could talk to each other, they might agree to make a deal to stay silent and both spend one year in jail.
Continuing with the metaphor in the Prisoner’s Dilemma, each suspect could say to himself, “We are both drug dealers.
Similarly, in international politics the absence of communication and trust encourages states to provide for their own security, even though doing so may reduce all states to mutual insecurity.
The Peloponnesian War 17 “Don’t build up your armaments and I will not build up my armaments, and we will both live happily ever after,” but the second state may wonder whether it can afford to trust the first state.
In the middle of the century, the Athenians and Spartans agreed they were both better off to have a truce.
Even after the events in Epidamnus and the dispute between Corcyra and Corinth, the Athenians were reluctant to break the truce.
If Corinth gets control of us first, and you allow our navy to be united with hers, you will have to fight against the combined fleets of Corcyra and the Pelopom nese.
The Athenians decided to break the treaty, the equivalent of squealing on the other prisoner.
Inevitability and the Shadow of the Future Ironically, the belief that war was inevitable played a major role in causing it.
Athens felt that if the war was going to come, it was better to have two-to-one naval superiority rather than one-to-two naval inferiority.
The belief that war was imminent and inevitable was critical to the decision.
At first glance, it is best for each prisoner to cheat and let the other fellow be a sucker, but because each knows the situation, they also know that if they can trust each other, both should go for second best and cooperate by keeping silent.
Playing a game time after time, people can learn to cooperate, but if it is a onetime game, whoever cheats can get the reward and whoever trusts is a sucker.
Political scientist Robert Axelrod played the Prisoner’s Dilemma on a computer with different strategies.
Eventually, players find that the total benefit from the game is higher by learning to cooperate.
When you know you are going to be playing with the same people for a long time, you can learn to cooperate.
That is why the belief that war is inevitable is so corrosive in international poh itics.
When you believe war is inevitable, you are very close to the last move.
When you get to the last move (which may involve your survival—in other words, whether you will ever play in this game again), then you may worry about whether you can still trust your opponent.
If you suspect your opponent will cheat, it is better to rely on yourself and take the risk of defecting rather than cooperating.
Faced with the belief that war would occur, they decided they could not afford to trust the Corinthians or the Spartans.
It was better to have the Corcyraean navy on their side than against them when it looked like the last move in the game and inevitable war.
Thucydides had a pessimistic view of human nature; he stated, “My work is not a piece of writing designed to meet the taste of an immediate public, but was done to last forever.
His history shows human nature caught in the situation of the Prisoner’s Dilemma then and for all time.
Thucydides, like all historians, had to emphasize certain things and not others.
Thucydides concluded that the cause of the war was the growth of the power of Athens and the fear it caused in Sparta.
And though, says Kagan, the Spartans worried about the rise of Athenian power, he contends they had an even greater fear of a slave revolt.
Both Athens and Sparta were slave states and both feared that going to war might provide an opportunity for the slaves to revolt.
Thus the immediate or precipitating causes of the war, according to Kagan, were more important than Thucydides’s theory of inevitability admits.
Corinth, for example, thought Athens would not fight; it misjudged the Athenian response, partly because it was so angry at Corcyra.
Pericles overreacted; he made mistakes in giving an ultimatum to Potidaea and in punishing Megara by cutting off its trade.
Those policy mistakes made the Spartans think that war might be worth the risk after all.
Kagan argues that Athenian growth caused the first Peloponnesian War but that the Thirty-Year Truce doused that flame.
So to start the second Peloponnesian War, “the spark of the Epidamnian trouble needed to land on one of the rare bits of flammable stuff that had not been thoroughly drenched.
Even then the spark might have been extinguished had not the Athenians provided some additional fuel at the crucial moment.In other words, the war was not caused by impersonal forces but by bad decisions in difficult circumstances.
It is perhaps impudent to question Thucydides, the father figure of historians, but very little is ever truly inevitable in history.
Human behavior is voluntary, although there are always external constraints.
Karl Marx observed that men make history, but not in conditions of their own choosing.
The ancient Greeks made flawed choices because they were caught in the situation well described by Thucydides and by the The Peloponnesian War 19 Prisoner’s Dilemma.
The security dilemma made war highly probable, but highly proba^ ble is not the same as inevitable.
Accidents and personalities make a difference even if they work within limits set by the larger structure, the situation of insecurity that resembles the Prisoner’s Dilemma.
Some stmctural features of international politics predispose events in one direction rather than another.
That is why it is necessary to understand security dilemmas and the Prisoner’s Dilemma.
On the other hand, such situations do not prove that war is inevitable.
There are degrees of freedom, and human decisions can sometimes prevent the worst outcomes.
Cooperation does occur in international affairs, even though the general stmcture of anarchy tends to discourage it.
It is also necessary to beware of patently shallow historical analogies.
EXiring the Cold War, it was often popular to say that because the United States was a democracy and a sea-based power while the Soviet Union was a land-based power and had slave labor camps, America was Athens and the Soviet Union was Sparta locked into replaying a great historical conflict.
But such shallow analogies ignored the fact that ancient Athens was a slave-holding state, wracked with internal turmoil, and that democrats were not always in control.
Imagine trying to tell everything that happened in the last hour, much less the entire story of your life or a whole war.
A second-by-second account in which everything was replicated would take as long to tell as it took for the events to happen in the first place.
To write history, even the history of the last hour or the last day, we must simplify.
What we select is obviously affected by the values, inclinations, and theories in our minds, whether explicit or inchoate.
Thucydides was concerned about how Athenians were learning the lessons of the war, blaming Pericles and the democrats for miscalculating.
He therefore stressed those aspects of the situation we have described as the Prisoner’s Dilemma.
Yet while these aspects of the war were important, they are not the whole story.
Thucydides did not write much about Athenian relations with Persia, or the decree that cut off Megara’s trade, or about Athens’s raising the amount of tribute that Others in the Delian League had to pay.
Thucydides’s history was not deliberately misleading or biased, but it is an example of how each age tends to rewrite history because the questions brought to the vast panoply of facts tend to change over time.
The need to select does not mean that everything is relative or that history is bunk.
Good historians and social scientists do their best to ask questions honestly, objectively bringing facts to bear on their topic.
But they and their students should be aware that what is selected is by necessity only part of the story.
Always ask what questions the writer was asking as well as whether he or she carefully and objectively ascertained the facts.
The Rise of China . , ■ > ' ^ |i Ever since Thucydides’s explanation of the Peloponnesian War, historians have known ; I that the rise of a new power has been attended by uncertainty and anxieties.
The rise in the economic and military | I power of China, the world’s most populous country, will be a central question for Asia and | i for American foreign policy at the beginning of a new century.
Explaining why democrap i tic Athens decided to break a treaty that led to war, Thucydides pointed to the power of | I expectations of inevitable conflict.
Belief in the inevitability of conflict | I with China could have similar self-fulfilling effects.
However, ethics do play a role in interna' tional relations, although not the same role as in domestic politics.
However, moral arguments can also be used rhetorically as propaganda to disguise less elevated motives, and those with more power are often able to ignore moral considerations.
During the Peloponnesian War, the Athenians sailed to the island of Melos to suppress a revolt.
When Iraq invades Kuwait, or the United States invades Grenada or Panama, or the Indonesians suppress a revolt in East Timor, they all to some degree employ similar logic.
But, in the modem world, it is increasingly less acceptable to state one’s motives as plainly as Thucydides suggests the Athenians did in Melos.
For instance, when the activist Ethical Questions and International Politics 21 Phyllis Schlafly argued that nuclear weapons are a good thing because God gave them to the free world, we should wonder why God also gave them to Stalin’s Soviet Union and Mao’s China.
Moral arguments are not all equal The basic touchstone for moral arguments is impartiality—the view that all interests are judged by the same criteria.
Within this framework of impartiality, however, there are two different traditions in Western political culture about how to judge moral arguments.
One descends from Immanuel Kant, the eighteenth'Century German philosopher, the other from British utilitarians of the early nineteenth century such as Jeremy Bentham.
As an illustration of the two approaches, imagine walking into a poor village and finding that a military officer is about to shoot three people lined up against the wall.
The officer says, “Last night somebody in this village shot one of my men.
If only one shot was fired, then at least two of these people are innocent, perhaps all three.
The officer takes a rifle from one of his men and hands it to you saying, “You shoot one of them for me and I’ll let the other two go.
You could try to mow down all the troops in a Rambo-like move, but the officer has a soldier aiming his gun at you.
So your choice is to kill one innocent person in order to save two or to drop the gun and have dean hands.
The Kantian tradition that you do things only when they are right would require that you refuse to perpetrate the evil deed.
The utilitarian tradition might suggest that if you can save two lives, you shouM do it.
If you choose the Kantian solution, imagine the numbers were increased.
Or imagine you could save a city full of people from a terrorist’s bomb.
Although these dimensions are not always easily reconciled, good moral argument tries to take all three into account.
Limits on Ethics in International Relations Ethics plays less of a role in international politics than in domestic politics for four reasons.
There are cultural and religious differences over the justice of some acts.
States are abstractions, and although their leaders are individuals, statesmen are judged differently than when they act as individuals.
Presidents who saved their own souls but failed to protect their people would not be good trustees.
During the Peloponnesian War, the Athenians told the leaders of the island of Melos that if they resisted, Athens would kill everyone.
The point is when individuals act as leaders of states, their actions are judged somewhat differently.
A third reason ethics plays a lesser role in international politics is the complexity of causation.
That extra dimension makes it harder to accurately predict consequences.
Mindful of the 20 million people killed in World War I, the majority of students voted for a resolution that they would never again fight for king and country.
He concluded that democracies were soft and that he could press them as hard as he wanted because they would not fight back.
In the end, he pressed too far and the result was ^^orld W^ar II, a consequence not desired or expected by those students who voted never to fight for king and country.
A more trivial example is the “hamburger argument” of the early 1970s when people were worried about shortages of food in the world.
Many students stopped eating hamburger and felt good about themselves, but they did not help starving people in Africa or Bangladesh one bit.
The grain freed up by not eating hamburgers in America did not reach the starving people in Bangladesh because those starving had no money to buy the grain.
The grain was simply a surplus on the American market, which meant American prices went down and farmers produced less.
To help peasants in Bangladesh required getting money to them so they could buy some of the excess grain.
By launching a campaign against eating hamburger and failing to look at the complexity of the causal chain that would relate their well-intended act to its consequences, the students failed.
Finally, there is the argument that the institutions of international society are particularly weak and that the disjunction between order and justice is greater in international than in domestic politics.
In fact, sometimes protesters purposefully disrupt order for the sake of promoting their view of justice.
But if there is total disorder, it is very hard to have any justice; witness the bombing, kidnapping, and killing by all sides in Lebanon in the 1980s or in Somalia in the 1990s.
In international politics, the absence Ethical Questions and International Politics 23 of a common legislature, central executive, or strong judiciary makes it much harder to preserve the order that precedes justice.
Although there is no logical connection, people who are realists in their descriptive analysis of world politics often tend to be either skeptics or state moralists in their evaluative approach, whereas those who emphasize a liberal analysis tend toward either the state moralist or cosmopolitan moral viewpoints.
The skeptic says that moral categories have no meaning in international relations because no institutions exist to provide order.
In addition, there is no sense of community, and therefore no moral rights and duties.
If international relations are simply the realm of “kill or be killed,” then presumably there is no choice, and that would justify the skeptics’ position.
If choices exist in international relations, pretending choices do not exist is merely a disguised form of choice.
To think only in terms of narrow national interests is simply smuggling in values without admitting it.
The French diplomat who once told me, “What is moral is whatever is good for France,” was ducking hard choices about why only French interests should be considered.
The leader who says, “I had no choice,” often did have a choice, albeit not a pleasant one.
If there is some degree of order and of community in international relations—if it is not constantly “kill or be killed”—then there is room for choices.
Anarchy means without government, but it does not necessarily mean chaos or total disorder.
Each is critical to understanding why the skeptical argument is not sufficient.
Thomas Hobbes argued that to escape from “the state of nature” in which anyone might kill anyone else, individuals give up their freedom to a leviathan, or government, for protection because life in the state of nature is nasty, brutish, and short.
The reason, Hobbes said, is that insecurity is not so great at the international level as at the individual level.
Governments provide some degree of protection against the brutality of the biggest individuals taking whatever they want, and the balance of power among states provides some degree of order.
In othgj-.words, Hobbes believed that the existerice of states in a balance of power alleviates the condition of international anarchy enough to allow some degree of order.
Liberals point further to the existence of international law and customs.
Even if rudimentary, such rules put a burden of proof on those who break them.
Saddam Hussein claimed that he annexed Kuwait to recover a province stolen from Iraq in colonial times.
But because international law forbids crossing borders for such reasons, an overwhelming majority of states viewed his action as a violation of the UN charter.
The 12 resolutions passed by the UN Security Council showed clearly that Saddam’s view of the situation ran against international norms.
Law and norms did not stop Saddam from invading Kuwait, but they did make it more difficult for him to recruit support, and they contributed to the creation of the coalition that expelled him from Kuwait.
International institutions, even if rudimentary, also provide a degree of order by facilitating and encouraging communication and some degree of reciprocity in bargaining.
The energies and attention of leaders are not focused on security and survival all the time.
Cooperation occurs in large areas of economic, social, and military interaction.
And even though cultural differences exist about the notion of justice, moral arguments take place in international politics and principles are enshrined in international law.
Even in the extreme circumstances of war, law and morality may sometimes play a role.
The just war doctrine, which originated in the early Christian church and became secularized after the seventeenth century, prohibits the killing of innocent civilians.
Absolute pacifists say that no one should kill anyone else for any reason.
Sometimes, however, the failure to respond to violence can also beget more violence.
For example, it is unlikely that Osama bin Laden would have left the United States alone if President Bush had turned the other cheek after September 11.
In contrast to pacifism, the just war tradition combines a concern for the intentions, means, and consequences of actions.
It argues that if someone is about to kill you and you refuse to act in self-defense, the result is that evil will prevail.
If one is in imminent peril of being killed, it can be moral to kill in self-defense.
But we must distinguish between those who can be killed and those who cannot be killed.
For example, if a soldier rushes at me with a rifle, I can kill him in self-defense, but the minute the soldier drops the rifle, puts up his hands, and says, “I surrender,” he is a prisoner of war and I have no right to take his life.
In fact, this is enshrined in international law, and also in the United States military code.
An American soldier who shoots an enemy soldier after he surrenders can be tried for murder in an American court.
Some American officers in the Vietnam War were sent to prison for violating such laws.
The prohibition against Ethical Questions and International Politics 25 intentionally killing people who pose no harm also helps explain why terrorism is wrong.
However, under just war doctrine, you can fight for freedom, but you cannot target innocent civilians.
Though they are often violated, some norms exist even under the harshest international circumstances.
The rudimentary sense of justice enshrined in an imperfectly obeyed international law belies the skeptics’ argument that no choices exist in a situation of war.
We can therefore reject complete skepticism because some room exists for morality in international politics.
Morality is about choice, and meaningful choice varies with the conditions of survival.
Humans may not live wholly by the word, but neither do they live solely by the sword.
Many writers and leaders who are realists in their descriptive analysis are also skeptics in their views about values in world politics.
Some recognize that moral obligations exist, but say that order has to come first.
The disorder of war makes justice difficult, especially in the nuclear age.
The best way to preserve order is to preserve a balance of power among states.
For example, if the United States becomes too concerned about spreading democracy or human rights throughout the world, it may create disorder that will actually do more damage than good in the long run.
International order is important, but it is a matter of degrees, and there are trade-offs between justice and order.
For example, after the 1990 Soviet crackdown in the Baltic republics in which a number of people were killed, some Americans urged a break in relations with the Soviet Union.
In their view, Americans should express their values of democracy and human rights in foreign policy, even if that meant instability and the end of arms control talks.
Others argued that while concerns for peace and for human rights were important, it was more important to control nuclear weapons and negotiate an arms reduction treaty.
In the end, the American government went ahead with the arms negotiations, but linked the provision of economic aid to respect for human rights.
Over and over in international politics, the question is not absolute order versus justice, but how to trade off choices in particular situations.
The realists have a valid point of view, but they overstate it when they argue that it has to be all order before any justice.
State moralists argue that international politics rests on a society of states with certain rules, although those rules are not always perfectly obeyed.
The most important rule is state sovereignty, which prohibits states from intervening across borders into each others’ jurisdiction.
Thus respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of states is related to respect for individuals.
Others argue more simply that respect for sovereignty is the best way to preserve order.
In the last few decades, Vietnam invaded Cambodia, China invaded Vietnam, Tanzania invaded Uganda, Israel invaded Lebanon, the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan, the United States invaded Grenada and Panama, Iraq invaded Iran and Kuwait, the United States and Britain invaded Iraq, and NATO bombed Serbia because of its mistreatment of ethnic Albanians in the province of Kosovo—to name just a few examples.
Determining when it is appropriate to respect another state’s sovereignty is a longstanding challenge.
In 1979, Americans condemned the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in strong moral terms.
The Soviets responded by pointing to the Dominican Republic, where in 1965 the United States sent 25,000 troops to prevent the formation of a communist government.
The intention behind the American intervention in the Dominican Republic, preventing a hostile regime from coming to power in the Caribbean, and the intention of the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan, preventing the formation of a hostile government on their border, were quite similar.
In terms of the means used, very few people were killed by the United States intervention in the Dominican Republic, and the Americans soon withdrew.
In the Afghan case, many people were killed, and the Soviet forces remained for nearly a decade.
In the 1990s, some critics compared the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait with the American invasion of Panama.
In December 1989, the United States sent troops to overthrow the Intervention ] Imagine the following scene in Afghanistan in December 1979; •) i An Afghan communist leader came to power promoting a platform of greater indepenI dence from the Soviet Union.
This worried Soviet leaders because an independent regime I on their border might foment trouble throughout Central Asia (including Soviet Central g I Asia) and would create a dangerous precedent of a small communist neighbor escaping | I the Soviet Empire.
Imagine the Russian general in charge of the Soviet invasion force | i confronting the renegade Afghan leader, whom he is about to kill, explaining why he is | I doing these things against the international rules of sovereignty and nonintervention.
So by conquering I you, we shall increase not only the size but the security of our empire.
We rule the Central I Asian landmass and you are a border state, and weaker than the others.
I Those words are Thucydides’s Melian dialogue with the word China added and Central | I Asia substituted far sea and border state for islands.
In Panama, the Americans put into office a government that had been duly elected but that Noriega had not permitted to take office.
In Kuwait, the Iraqi government tried to annex the country and caused much bloodshed in the process.
Such considerations do not mean that the Panama case was all right or all wrong, but as we will see in Chapter 6, problems often arise when applying simple rules of nonintervention and sovereignty.
Cosmopolitans such as the political theorist Charles Beitz see international politics not just as a society of states, but as a society of individuals.
When we speak about justice, say the cosmopolitans, we should speak about justice for individuals.
If realists focused on issues of distributive justice—that is, who gets what—cosmopolitans contend that realists would notice the interdependence of the global economy.
Constant economic intervention across borders can sometimes have life-or-death effects.
For example, it is a life-and-death matter if you are a peasant in the Philippines and your child dies of a curable disease because the local boy who went to medical school is now working in the United States for a much higher salary.
Cosmopolitans argue that national boundaries have no moral standing; they simply defend an inequality that should be abolished if we think in terms of distributive justice.
Realists (who include both moral skeptics and some state moralists) reply that the danger in the cosmopolitans’ approach is that it may lead to enormous disorder.
Taken literally, efforts at radical redistribution of resources are likely to lead to violent conflict because people do not give up their wealth easily.
A more limited cosmopolitan argument rests on the fact that people often have multiple loyalties—to families, friends, neighborhoods, and nations; perhaps to some transnational religious groups; and to the concept of common humanity.
Most people are moved by pictures of starving Sudanese children or Kosovar refugees, for some common community existsbeyond the national level, albeit a weaker one.
Cosmopolitans remind us of the distributive dimensions to international relations in which morality matters as much in peace as in war.
Policies can be designed to assist basic human needs and basic human rights without destroying order.
And in cases of gross abuse of human rights, cosmopolitan views have been written into international laws such as the international convention against genocide.
President Clinton has said that one of his worst mistakes was not to have done more to stop genocide in Rwanda in 1994, and the United States and other countries have supported African peacekeeping troops in efforts to suppress genocidal violence in the Sudanese province of Darfur.
Of the approaches to international morality, the skeptic makes a valid point about order being necessary for justice but misses the trade-offs between order and justice.
The state moralist who sees a society of states with rules against intervention illustrates an institutional approach to order but does not provide enough answers regarding when some interventions may be justified.
Finally, the cosmopolitan who focuses on a society of individuals has a profound insight about common humanity but runs the risk of fomenting enormous disorder by pursuing massive redistributive policies.
Most people develop a hybrid position; labels are less important than the central point that trade-offs exist among these approaches.
Because of the differences between domestic and international politics, morality is harder to apply in international politics.
But just because there is a plurality of principles, it does not follow there are no principles at all.
The answer is to be careful, for when moral judgments determine everything, morality can lead to a sense of outrage, and outrage can lead to heightened risk.
Prudence can be a virtue, particularly when the alternative is disastrous unintended consequences.
Each person must study events and make his or her own decisions about judgments and trade-offs.
The enduring logic of international conflict does not remove the responsibility for moral choices, although it does require an understanding of the special setting that makes those choices difficult.
While the specific moral and security dilemmas of the Peloponnesian War are unique, many of the issues recur over history.
As we trace the evolution of international relations, we will see again and again the tension between realism and liberalism, between skeptics and cosmopolitans, between an anarchic system of states and international organizations.
We will revisit the Prisoner’s Dilemma and continue to grapple with the ethical conundrums of war.
We will see how different actors on the world stage have approached the crises of their time and how their goals and instruments vary.
The study of interrrational conflict is an inexact science combining history and theory.
In weaving our way through theories and examples, we try to keep in mind both what has changed and what has remained constant so we may better understand our past and our present and better navigate the unknown shoals of the future.
John Maynard Keynes, The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money , 383.
Sales and GNP are different measures, and this somewhat exaggerates the role of corporations.
Caporaso, James A., ed., “Dependence and Dependency in the Global System,” special issue.
International political systems are less centralized and less tangible.
The international political system is the pattern of relationships among the states.
Do not be misled, however, by the institutional concreteness of domestic political systems.
They also include intangible aspects such as public attitudes, the role of the press, or some of the unwritten conventions of constitutions.
The important point about any system, however, is that the whole pattern is greater than the sum of the parts, that is, the building blocks we defined in Chapter 1 as actors, instruments, and goals.
Systems can create consequences not intended by any of their constituent actors.
Every business firm in a perfect market tries to maximize its profits, but the market system produces competition that reduces profits to the break-even point, thereby benefiting the consumer.
The businessperson does not set out to benefit the consumer, but individual firms’ pattern of behavior in a perfect market leads to that effect.
In other words, the system produces the consequences, which may be quite different from the intention of the actors in the system.
The international political system can similarly lead to effects the actors did not originally intend.
For example, in 1917 when the Bolsheviks came to power in Russia, they regarded the whole system of interstate diplomacy that had preceded World War I as bourgeois nonsense.
They intended to sweep away the interstate system and hoped that revolutions would unite all the workers of the world and abolish borders.
Transnational proletarian solidarity would replace the interstate system.
But the Bolsheviks found that their actions were soon affected by the nature of the interstate system.
In 1922, the new communist state signed the Treaty of Rapallo with Germany.
It was an alliance of the outcasts, the countries that were not accepted in the post—World War 1 diplomatic world.
And in 1939, Josef Stalin entered a pact with his ideological archenemy, Adolf Hitler, in order to turn Hitler westward.
Soviet behavior, despite Trotsky’s initial proclamations and illusions, soon became similar to that of other actors in the international system.
The distribution of power among states in an international system helps us make predictions about certain aspects of states’ behavior.
The tradition of geopolitics holds that location and proximity will tell a great deal about how states will behave.
Because neighbors have more contact and points of potential friction, it is not surprising that half of the military conflicts between 1816 and 1992 began between neighbors.
For example, three centuries before Christ’s birth, the Indian writer Kautilya pointed out that the states of the Indian subcontinent tended to ally with distant states to protect themselves against their neighbors, thus producing a checkerboard pattern of alliances.
Machiavelli noted International Systems and Levels of Causation 35 the same behavior among the city-states in fifteenth-century Italy.
In the early 1960s, as West African states emerged from colonial rule, there was a great deal of talk about African solidarity, but the new states soon began to produce a checkerboard pattern of alliances similar to what Kautilya described in ancient India.
Ghana, Guinea, and Mali were ideologically radical while Senegal, Ivory Goast, and Nigeria were relatively conservative, but they were also balancing against the strength of their neighbors.
Another example was the pattern that developed in East Asia after the Vietnam War.
If the Soviet Union were colored black, China would be red, Vietnam black, and Cambodia red.
Ironically, the United States entered the Vietnam War because policy makers believed in a domino theory, according to which one state would fall to communism, leading another state to fall, and so forth.
With more foresight, the United States should have realized that the game in East Asia was more like checkers than dominoes, and the United States might have stayed out.
The checkerboard pattern based on “the enemy of my enemy is my friend” is an old tradition of geopolitics that helps us make useful predictions in an anarchic situation.
Levels of Analysis Systems are not the only way of explaining what happens in international politics.
Explanations at the level of the individual are rarely sufficient because the very nature of international politics implies states rather than individuals.
Too much emphasis on an individual’s intentions may blind us to the unintended consequences of individual acts caused by the larger systems in which individuals operate.
Taking the African example, if we focused primarily on the sincerity of African leaders’ intentions for pan-African unity, such as that of the first president of Tanzania, Julius K Nyerere, we would miss the importance of the effect of the anarchic structure on those new African states.
In 1991, Iraq’s Saddam Hussein was a critical factor in the Gulf War, as was George W Bush with the 2003 Iraq War.
In the 1962 Cuban missile crisis, John E Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev faced the possibility of nuclear war and the ultimate decision was in their hands.
But why they found themselves in that incredible position cannot be explained at the level of individuals.
Similarly, knowing something about the personality of Kaiser Wilhelm II or Hitler is necessary to an understanding of the causes of World War I and World War II, but it is not a sufficient explanation.
As we see later, it made a difference that Kaiser Wilhelm fired his chancellor, Otto von Bismarck, in 1890, but that does not mean World War I was brought about primarily by Kaiser Wilhelm.
This bipolarity I led to a loss of flexibility and.bi^ghtened insecurity.
One of the' new alliances developed | jl around an authoritarian land-based power, the other around a democratic power with | fi an expansive commerce and culture that held naval supremacy.
Each side feared that | I the other would achieve a decisive advantage in the conflict that both expected.
For example, we could take a Calvinist view of international politics and assign the ultimate cause of war to the evil that lies within each of us.
That would explain war as the result of an imperfection in human nature.
But such an explanation does not tell us why some evil leaders go to war and others do not, or why some good leaders go to war and others do not.
Such a theory overpredicts , meaning that while it accounts for some things, it also accounts for too much.
The hands of a stopped clock tell the correct time twice a day, but most of the time they mislead us.
Overpredicting also plagues some efforts to explain international politics at the second level of analysis, the nature of the state or society.
Insert your favorite description for “good” and “bad”—“democratic,” “communist,” “capitalist, or whatever.
For example, after World War I there was a great deal of enthusiasm for the belief that the victory of the democracies would mean less chance of war.
Marxist theorists argued that war would be abolished when all states were communist, but obviously there have been military clashes among communist countries—^witness China versus the Soviet Union or Vietnam versus Cambodia.
Thus the nature of the society, democratic or capitalist or communist, is not a sufficient predictor of how likely it is to go to war.
One proposition suggests that if all countries were democratic, there would be less war.
In fact, cases in which liberal democracies have fought against other liberal democracies are difficult to find, although democracies have fought against authoritarian states in many situations.
The cause of this empirical finding and whether it will continue to hold in the future is not clear, but it suggests something interesting to investigate at this second level of analysis.
Interesting explanations often involve an interplay between the second (the state or society) and third levels of analysis.
A system-level International Systems and Levels of Causation 37 analysis is explanation from the outside in—looking at the way the overall system constrains state action.
The second level is explanation from the inside out— explaining outcomes by what is happening inside the states.
A good rule of thumb is to start with the simplest approach, for if a simple explanation is adequate, it is preferable.
This is called the rule of parsimony or Occam’s razor, after the fourteenth-century philosopher William of Occam, who argued that good explanations shave away unnecessary detail.
Parsimony —the ability to explain a lot with a little—is only one of the criteria by which we judge the adequacy of theories.
Because systemic explanations tend to be the simplest, they provide a good starting point.
If they prove to be inadequate, then we can look at the units of the system and add complexity until a reasonable fit is obtained.
Some neorealists, such as Kenneth Waltz, argue for extreme parsimony and focus only on structure.
Liberals and constructivists argue that Waltz’s concept of system is so spare it explains very little.
The structure of a system refers to its distribution of power, and the process refers to patterns and types of interaction among its units.
Structure and process obviously affect each other, and may vary with the length of the period we examine, but structure is more basic and changes; more slowly than process.
Economists characterize the structure of markets by the concentration of sellers’ power.
A monopoly has one big seller, a duopoly two big sellers, and an oligopoly several big sellers; in a perfect market selling power is widely dispersed.
Similarly, political scientists describe as unipolar the structure of an international system with one preponderant power.
In bipolar systems, two major centers of power, either two large countries or two tightly knit alliance systems, dominate politics.
Multipolar structures have three or more centers of power, and where there is a large number of roughly equal countries, we speak of a dispersed distribution of power.
To return to the earlier economic example, the firms that tried to maximize profits in a perfect market found themselves benefiting the consumer, but that result depended on the structure of the market system.
If the market were a monopoly or oligopoly, the result would be quite different.
The large firm could increase profits by restricting production in order to raise prices.
Thus when the structure of the system is known, economists are better able to predict behavior and who will benefit.
Similarly, political analysts look at the structure of the international system to predict behavior of states and their propensity toward war.
In multipolar or dispersed-power systems, states form alliances to balance power, but alliances are flexible.
In bipolar systems, alliances become more rigid, which in turn contributes to the probability of a large conflict, perhaps even a global war.
This happened in the Peloponnesian War when Athens and Sparta tightened their grips on their respective alliances.
It was also true before 1914, when the multipolar European balance of power gradually consolidated into two strong alliance systems that lost their flexibility.
But predictions about war based on multipolarity versus bipolarity encountered a major anomaly after 1945.
During the Cold War the world was bipolar with two big players, the United States and its allies and the Soviet Union and its allies, yet no overall central war occurred for more than four decades before the system eroded with the decline of the Soviet Union.
Some people say nuclear weapons made the prospect of global war too awful.
Thus the structure of the international system offers a rough explanation, but this does not explain enough all by itself.
We learn more if we look beyond a system’s structure and examine its process, the regular pattern of interactions among the states.
The distinction between structure and process at any given time can be illustrated by the metaphor of a poker game.
The structure of a poker game is in the distribution of power, that is, how many chips the players have and how many high cards they are dealt.
The process is how the game is played and the types of interactions among the players.
For example, allowing the players in Prisoner’s Dilemma games to communicate with one another alters the nature of the game.
So, too, when states communicate with one another and reach mutually beneficial agreements or create well-understood norms and institutions, they add to the repertoire of state strategies and can thus alter political outcomes.
As constructivist theories point out, most systems exist in a cultural context that involves some basic rules or practices that define appropriate behavior.
States can challenge those rules and practices or they can accept them.
An international system may have either a stable or revolutionary process, depending on the identity and goals of the major states.
In the eighteenth century, for example, the basic rule of the game was the International Systems and Levels of Causation 39 legitimacy of the monarchical state—the divine right of rulers—and maintaining a balance of power among these monarchies.
The 1713 Treaty of Utrecht referred explicitly to the importance of the balance of power.
Consider Frederick the Great of Prussia and the way he treated his neighbor, Maria Theresa of Austria.
In 1740, Frederick decided he wanted Silesia, a province belonging to Maria Theresa.
Frederick had no great revolutionary cause, only a simple goal of aggrandizement.
He did not try to incite a popular revolution against Maria Theresa by appealing to the people in Silesia to overthrow the German-speaking autocrats of Vienna.
He took Silesia because he wanted it and was careful not to do anything else that would damage Austria or the basic principle of monarchical legitimacy.
Compare that to the French Revolution half a century later, when the prevailing view in France was that all monarchs should be sent to the gallows or the guillotine and that power should emanate from the people.
Napoleon spread this revolutionary idea of popular sovereignty throughout Europe, and the Napoleonic Wars posed an enormous challenge to both the rules of the game and the balance of power.
The moderate process and stable balance of the system in the middle of the century changed to a revolutionary process and unstable balance at the end of the century.
We refer to changes like the French Revolution as exogenous to a structural theory because they cannot be explained inside the theory.
This is an example of how a realist structural theory can be supplemented by constructivist work.
In addition to changing their goals, states can also change their means.
The process of a system is also affected by the nature of the instruments that states use.
For example, the development of new weapons such as the machine gun made World War I a particularly bloody encounter.
In the eighteenth century, Frederick the Great not only had limited goals, he was also limited by his means.
Eighteenth-century armies generally campaigned in the summer, when food was readily available or when the treasury had accumulated enough gold to pay soldiers who were often from the fringes of society.
The French Revolution changed the social organization of war to what the French called the levee en masse, or what we call the draft.
As constructivists point out, soldiers’ sense of identity changed as people came to understand themselves as citizens rallied to the concept of a motherland, and there was a feeling that all should participate.
War was no longer a matter between a few thousand mercenaries who campaigned far away; war now involved everyone.
This large-scale involvement and mass support overwhelmed the old mercenary infantries.
The change in the means available to states also helped change the process of the eighteenth-century international system.
II fi Statesmen regularly judged the European balance to be satisfactory or unsatisfactory on the p I basis of factors that had little or nothing directly to do with power and its distribution | Ig., the rank and status a state enjoyed, its honor and prestige, whether it was considered | i worthy of alliance, whether it was allowed a voice in international questions, etc.
It helps | I explain how crises could and did arise when the balance of power was not affected or | I threatened, but the balance of satisfactions was.
It shows how devices other than poweri| I political ones—international laws.
Concert practices, alliances used as devices for | I restraining one’s ally—were more common and more useful in promoting and preserving | I the European equilibrium than power-political ones such as rival alliances or blocking | I coalitions. ij I — Paul Schroeder, “The Nineteenth Century System’’^ | The Structure and Process of the Nineteenth-Century System These distinctions help us understand the nineteenth-century origins of the great twentieth-century conflicts.
By the rule of parsimony, we should first seek a simple structural explanation such as neorealists offer to explain what happened over the course of the nineteenth century.
At the beginning of the century Napoleon tried to create French hegemony over Europe, but he failed.
His efforts united the other countries in a coalition that eventually defeated France.
Had he succeeded, he would have changed the system to a unipolar structure.
Revolutionary France changed the process of the system for 20 years and threatened to change its structure, but in the end, France failed to make the structure of the European interstate system unipolar.
For realists who emphasize structure, the big change came with the unification of Germany in 1870.
The nineteenth-century system remained multipolar, but there was a major change in the distribution of power in central Europe.
Before that, Germany consisted of 37 states and had been an arena of international politics in which others intervened.
Furthermore, it was located right in the center of Europe, which had tremendous geopolitical consequences.
From a structural perspective, a united Germany was potentially either too strong or too weak.
If Germany was strong enough to defend itself against both Russia and France at the same time, it was also strong enough to defeat either the Russians or the French alone.
And if Germany was not strong enough to defeat Russia and France simultaneously, it might look weak enough to invite the Russians and the French to join together to invade it.
But the newly unified German state in the center of Europe did not produce instability because of its brilliant first chancellor, Otto von Bismarck.
From 1870 to International Systems and Levels of Causation 41 1890, Bismarck was such an agile diplomat that he allayed the sense of threat on the part of his neighbors, thus delaying the effects of this major structural change on the system’s political process.
From 1890 on, the alliance systems of Europe grew more rigid, with one alliance centered on Germany and another on Russia and France.
The bipolarity of alliances gradually grew more and more rigid and finally exploded in 1914.
This structural explanation of nineteenth-century change has a strong core of truth, but is not an adequate explanation by itself.
It does not account for the role of an individual such as Bismarck, and it does not tell us why the other European states allowed Germany to unify in the first place.
Perceptions and domestic politics must be invoked to answer those questions.
The structural explanation says little about why the bipolarity of alliances took 30 years to develop, and does not allow for the possibly crucial role of individual leadership.
If the kaiser had not fired Bismarck in 1890, or if Bismarck’s successors had kept his treasured alliance with Russia (which appealed to shared ideological interests in monarchical autocracy), perhaps the evolving bipolarity could have been avoided.
If Bismarck’s successors had not challenged Britain by launching a naval arms race, perhaps Britain’s role in the conflict could have been avoided.
Although the structural explanation of changes in the nineteenth-century system has much to offer, it is too narrowly deterministic.
It removes the role of human choice and makes World War 1 look inevitable in 1870.
As constructivists remind us, we also need to take into account the changes in European culture and ideas that influenced the process, or patterns of relations, in the nineteenth-century system.
There we find a change in states’ goals and instruments that altered the incentives for cooperation.
The ideology of democratization and nationalism grew stronger over the course of the nineteenth century and had a major effect on states’ goals.
In the eighteenth century, Frederick behaved in Prussia much as he wanted, bie was not constrained by elected ministers or parliamentarians.
Democratization added broader domestic influences to the complexity of international politics.
Napoleon earned the new ideas across Europe, challenging and fomenting nationalism in other countries.
The Napoleonic Wars may have failed to change the structure of European politics, but they certainly caused profound changes in the process.
The Austrian Prince Mettemich and his counterparts succeeded in restoring the old order at the Congress of Vienna in 1815, but beneath a surface of stability were the volcanic forces of nationalism and democracy that erupted in the revolutions of 1848.
As the century progressed, both peoples and leaders began to see themselves differently.
The nationalist challenge to the legitimacy of dynastic rulers led to some strange alliances that defied the classical balance of power.
For example, in 1866, France failed to support Austria when it was attacked by Prussia, a long-term error from the structural point of view.
France was opposed to Austrian repression of nationalism in the part of Italy that Austria occupied.
When Bismarck took Alsace-Lorraine from France in the war of 1870, he created nationalist resentment in France that prevented France and Germany from becoming potential alliance partners in the future.
As constructivist approaches point out, the new ideologies changed states’ goals and made the process of international politics less moderate over the course of the nineteenth century.
The application of new industrial technology to military purposes produced massive yet inflexible instruments of war.
Railway mobilization schedules, the ability to get large numbers of troops in one place at one time, began to play a key role in war by the middle of the century.
Near the end, machine guns and trenches made a mockery of the idea of short, sharp, limited wars that Bismarck used so successfully in the 1860s.
Both structure and process help explain the changes in the nineteenth-century international system in Europe and the origins of World War 1.
We started with neorealist structure because it is simpler, but found that it provided only a partial explanation.
Constructivist attention to process reminds us not to be blind to social change.
A Modern Sequel The so-called German problem from the nineteenth century reemerged in debates when East and West Germany were reunified in 1990.
Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze of the Soviet Union argued that the reunification of Germany would profoundly destabilize the balance of power in Europe.
As we have seen, the Congress of Vienna in 1815 included 37 German-speaking states.
He, did not want the Austrians included in his new German empire because he feared they would dilute Prussian control of the new state.
The decline of Soviet power in Eastern Europe in the late 1980s ended the bipolar structure of postwar politics and made possible Germany’s reunification.
But reunification created new anxieties about the union of 80 million people with Europe’s largest economy located in the heart of the continent.
He relied on structural realist analysis to reach pessimistic conclusions that the future will be like the past because the structure of the situation is similar to the past.
International Systems and Levels of Causation 43 The Berlin Wall coming down, 1989 But things have changed in three ways.
At the structural level, the United States is involved in Europe and the United States is nearly four times the ,size of the reunified Germany.
With the Cold War over, at some point the Americans may turn isolationist and go home.
The process of international politics in Europe has been transformed by the development of new institutions.
The European Union unites Germany and other European states in a way they were never tied together before.
Germany’s domestic politics represent a half century of democracy, and changes in popular values have transformed a warfare state into a welfare state.
The Germany that caused trouble in the heart of Europe in 1870, 1914, and 1939 was not democratic.
We should pay attention to all three, but thus far predictions based on process and domestic change seemed to have fared best.
Neorealism, which rests very heavily on the systemic level of analysis, says that states act similarly because of the international system.
A state’s position in the system makes it act in a certain way, and states with similar positions act similarly.
Because a parsimonious system level of analysis is often inadequate, we must look at what happens inside the units in the system.
After all, the Peloponnesian War began with a domestic conflict between the oligarchs and the democrats in Epidamnus.
The domestic politics of Germany and the Austro-Hungarian Empire played significant roles in the onset of World War I To understand the end of the Cold War, we must look inside the Soviet Union at the failure of its centrally planned economy.
Two major theories, Marxism and liberalism, rest heavily on the second level of analysis and the proposition that states will act similarly if they have similar domestic societies.
To predict foreign policy, these theories look at the internal organization of the state.
As we will see later, Marxism did not do a very good job of explaining the onset of World War 1.
Moreover, it does not fit the experience of the second half of the twentieth century.
Communist states, such as the Soviet Union, China, and Vietnam, were involved in military clashes with each other, while the major capitalist states in Europe, North America, and Japan maintained peaceful relations.
The arguments that capitalism causes war do not stand up in historical experience.
Like others of the Manchester School of British economists, he believed that it was better to trade and to prosper than to go to war.
If we are interested in getting richer and improving the welfare of citizens, asserted Cobden, then peace is best.
In 1840 he expressed the classical view, saying “We can keep the world from actual war, and I trust that the world will do that through trade.
A number of books, including a classic by Norman Angell, The Great Illusion , said that war had become too expensive.
To illustrate the optimism of classical liberalism on the eve of World War I, we can look at the philanthropists of that era.
Andrew Carnegie, the steel magnate, established the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace in 1910.
Carnegie worried about what would happen to the money he had given to this foundation after lasting peace broke out, so he put a provision in his will to cover this possibility.
Edward Ginn, a Boston publisher, did not want Carnegie to get all the credit for the forthcoming permanent peace, so he set up the World Peace Foundation devoted to the same cause.
Ginn also worried about what International Systems and Levels of Causation 45 to do with the rest of the money after peace was firmly established, so he designated it for low'cost housing for young working women.
Even though bankers and aristocrats had frequent contact across borders, and labor also had transnational contacts, none of this helped stop the European states from going to war with each other.
Statistical analysis has found no strong correlation between states’ involvement in war and whether they are capitalist or democratic.
The classical Marxist and liberal views are opposites in their view of the relationship between war and capitalism, but they are similar in locating the causes of war in domestic politics, and especially in the nature of the economic system.
Liberalism Revived The two world wars and the failure of collective security in the interwar period discredited liberal theories.
Most writing about international politics in the United States after World War II was strongly realist in flavor.
However, as transnational economic interdependence increased, the late 1960s and 1970s saw a revival of interest in liberal theories.
The political strand has two parts, one relating to institutions and the other to democracy.
Liberals argue that trade is important, not because it prevents states from going to war, but because it may lead states to define their interests in a way that makes war less important to them.
Trade offers states a way to transform their position through economic growth rather than through military conquest.
In the 1930s, Japan thought the only way to gain access to markets was to create a “Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere,” which in turn required conquering its neighbors and requiring them to trade.
Already in 1939, Eugene Staley, a Chicago economist, argued that part of Japan’s behavior in the 1930s could be explained by economic protectionism at the time.
Staley believed that when economic walls are erected along political boundaries, possession of territory is made to coincide with economic opportunity.
A better solution for avoiding war is to pursue economic growth in an open trading system without military conquest.
In contrast to the 1930s, Japan today has successfully transformed its position in the world through trade.
Realists reply that Japan was able to accomplish this amazing economic growth because somebody else was providing for its security.
Specifically, Japan relied on the United States for security against its large nuclear neighbors, the Soviet Union and China.
Some realists predicted that, with the Soviet Union gone, the United States would withdraw its security presence in East Asia and raise barriers against Japanese trade.
Japan would remilitarize, and eventually there would be conflict between Japan and the United States as predicted by theories of hegemonic transition.
The most attractive career opportunities in Japan are in business, not in the military.
Liberals argue that the realists are not paying enough attention to domestic politics and the way that Japan has changed as a result of economic opportunities.
Whatever the outcome, the liberal economic argument says trade may not prevent war, but it does lead to changes in how states see their opportunities, which in turn may lead to a social structure that is less inclined to war.
It argues that person-to-person contacts reduce conflict by promoting understanding.
Such transnational contacts occur at many levels, including through students, businesspeople, and tourists.
After all, bankers, aristocrats, and labor union officials had broad contacts in 1914, but that did not stop them from killing one another once they put on khaki uniforms.
Obviously, the idea that social contact breeds understanding and prevents war is far too simple.
Western Europe today is very different from 1914There are constant contacts across international borders in Europe, and textbook editors try to treat other nationalities fairly.
The images of the other peoples of Europe are very different from the images of 1914.
Public-opinion polls show that a sense of European identity coexists with a sense of national identity.
Transnational society affects what people in a democracy want from their foreign policy.
It is worth noting how France responded to the reunifica< tion of Germany in 1990.
A residue of uncertainty and anxiety remained among the foreign policy experts, but public-opinion polls showed that most French people welcomed German unification.
According to the Princeton political scientist Robert O Keohane, they provide information and a framework that shapes expectations.
They lengthen the shadow of the future and reduce the acuteness of the security dilemma.
Institutions reduce the effect of the A Modern Liberal View I What is interesting and different about the world since 1945 is that a peaceful trading i strategy is enjoying much more efficacy than ever before.
Through mechanisms of 5 industrial-technological development and international trade, nations can transform their P positions in international politics, and they can do so while other states also benefit from the enhanced trade and growth that economic cooperation makes possible.
He was careful to say that a state of war does not mean constant fighting, but a propensity to war, just as cloudy weather means a likelihood of rain.
In the same sense, a state of peace means a propensity toward peace, and that people can develop peaceful expectations when anarchy is limited and stabilized by international institutions.
First, they provide a sense of continuity; for example, most Western Europeans expect the European Union to last.
At the end of the Cold War, many Eastern European governments agreed and made plans to join the European Union.
That affected their behavior even before they eventually joined in 2004Second, institutions provide an opportunity for reciprocity.
If the French get a little bit more today, the Italians might get a little more tomorrow.
There is less need to worry about each transaction because over time it will likely balance out.
The institutions of the union provide information on how it is all working out.
In the European Union, bargaining goes on within the Council of Ministers and in the European Commission, and there is also a European court of justice.
Thus institutions create a climate in which expectations of stable peace develop.
Classical liberals expect “peace breaking out all over”; today’s liberals look for islands of peace where institutions and stable expectations have developed.
The political scientist Karl Deutsch called such areas “pluralistic security communities” in which war between countries became so unthinkable that stable expectations of peace developed.
The Scandinavian countries, for example, once fought each other bitterly, and the United States fought Britain, Canada, and Mexico.
The advanced industrial countries seem to have a propensity for peace, and institutions such as the European Union, the North American Free Trade Agreement , and the Organization of American States create a culture in which peace is expected and provide forums for negotiation.
Expectations of stability can provide a way to escape the Prisoner’s Dilemma situations that realists assume.
After the high hopes that greeted European integration in 1992, some opposition arose to further unity, particularly in disputes over the single European currency, the euro, which came into use in 2002.
Countries such as Great Britain feared that ceding further power to the government of the European Union would jeopardize the autonomy and prosperity of the individual nations.
Efforts in 2003 and 2004 to develop a new European constitution proved difficult, and in 2005 voters in France and the Netherlands refused to ratify it.
At the same time, Britain and others worried that if they opted out of the European Union entirely, countries such as Germany, France, and Italy that opted in would gain a competitive edge.
While the European Union was not becoming a superstate, its institutions helped transform relations between European states.
Germany today is a different country than the Germany of 1870, 1914, or 1939.
It has experienced a half century of democracy, with parties and governments changing peacefully.
Public-opinion polls show that the German people do not seek an expansive international role.
Thus liberals are skeptical of realist predictions that fail to account for the effects of democracy.
At a conference sponsored by the Institute of Peace in Washington in 1990, two former officials of the Reagan administration gave diametrically opposed views.
As Immanuel Kant and other classical liberals pointed out, in a democracy the people can vote against war.
But the fact that a country is democratic does not mean its people will always vote against war.
As we have seen statistically, democracies seem to be involved in wars as often as other countries.
In ancient Greece, Pericles roused the people of Athens to go to war; in 1898, the American electorate dragged a reluctant President McKinley into the Spanish-American War.
In 2003, opinion polls and a congressional vote supported President Bush’s calls for war against Iraq, though public opinion later soured as the conflict dragged on.
Michael Doyle, a political scientist at Columbia, has pointed to a more limited proposition that can be derived from Kant and classical liberalism; namely, the idea that liberal democracies do not fight other liberal democracies.
The fact that two democratic states do not fight each other is a correlation, and some correlations involve spurious causation.
Fires and the presence of fire engines are highly correlated, but we do not suspect fire engines of causing fires.
One possible source of spurious causation is that democratic countries tend to be rich countries, rich countries tend to be involved with trade, and according to trade liberalism, they are not likely to fight each other.
But that dismissal does not fit with the fact that rich countries have often fought each other—witness the two world wars.
Liberals suggest that the cause behind the correlation is a question of legitimacy.
Maybe people in democracies think it is wrong to fight other democracies because there is something wrong International Systems and Levels of Causation 49 Democil\cy and Peace I A coalition for democracy—it’s good for America.
Democracies, after all, are more likely p I to be stable, less likely to wage war.
They can provide peoI I pie with the economic opportunities to build their own homes, not to flee their borders. | i Our efforts to help build democracies will make us all more secure, more prosperous, and i more successful as we try to make this era of terrific change our friend and not our enemy.
Clinton, Remarks to the 49th Session | I of the UN General Assembly, September 26, 1994 p The survival of liberty in our land increasingly depends on the success of liberty in other I lands.
The best hope for peace in our world is the expansion of freedom in all the world.
So it is the policy of the | I United States to seek and support the growth of democratic movements and institutions | k in every nation and culture, with the ultimate goal of ending tyranny in our world. | a —President George W Bush, Second Inaugural Address, I p Washington, D.C., January 20, 2005 I with solving disputes through killing when the other people have the right of consent.
In addition, constitutional checks and balances on making war may work better when there is widespread public debate about the legitimacy of a battle.
It is harder to rouse democratic peoples when there is no authoritarian demon like Hitler or Saddam Hussein.
Although these liberal theories need exploration via detailed case studies to look at what actually happened in particular instances, they do have promise.
If the number of democracies in the world grows, there might be less propensity for war, at least among the democracies.
Some of the new democracies may be plebiscitary democracies without a liberal domestic process of free press, checks on executive power, and regular elections.
The warring governments of Croatia, Serbia, and Bosnia were elected, though they were far from liberal democracies.
The same was true of Ecuador and Peru, which fought a border skirmish in 1995.
The theorized relation is between liberal democracies, not all democracies.
That statement is normally true, but it does not tell us much unless we know how the states define their national interests.
Realists say that states have little choice in defining their national interest because of the international system.
So for the realists, a state’s position in the international system determines its national interests and predicts its foreign policies.
Liberals and constructivists argue that national interests are defined by much more than the state’s position in the international system, and they have a richer account of how state preferences and national interests are formed.
The definition of the national interests depends in large part on the type of domestic society and culture a state has.
For example, a domestic society that values economic welfare and places heavy emphasis on trade, or that views wars against other democracies as illegitimate, defines its national interests very differently from a despotic state that is similarly positioned in the international system.
Liberals argue that this is particularly true if the international system is moderate, that is, if it is not purely anarchic.
If institutions and channels of communication provide stable expectations of continuing peace, the Prisoner’s Dilemma may be escaped.
Because these nonpower incentives can help shape how states define their interests, it is important to know how closely a particular situation approximates the abstract concept of anarchy.
If an international situation is totally anarchic, if you may be killed by your neighbor tomorrow, then limited opportunities exist for democracy or trade preferences to influence foreign policy.
But if the system only partially approximates anarchy because of institutions and stable expectations of peace, then some of these other factors related to domestic society and culture are likely to play a larger role.
Realist predictions are more likely to be accurate in the Middle East, for example, and liberal predictions in Western Europe.
Knowing the context helps us gauge the likely predictive value of different theories.
Variations in Foreign Policies Even states in similar situations sometimes define their interests and strategies differently—witness Bismarck’s, the Kaiser’s, and Hitler’s solutions to Germany s security dilemma.
When systemic differences fail to explain different foreign policies, we tend to look at domestic causes.
A variety of factors in domestic affairs sometimes make states act similarly.
Revolutionary leaders often view their predecessors’ foreign policies and even the whole international system as illegitimate.
Revolutions often create instability in the entire region because revolutionary leaders frequently seek to export their ideology while neighboring states seek to contain it, as happened with France and its neighbors in the 1790s, with Russia after 1917, and with Iran and Iraq in 1980.
Sometimes the revolutionary state invades its neighbors; sometimes it is invaded.
Another low-level generalization is that poorly integrated countries, such as Germany or Austria before 1914, are more likely to project internal problems outward.
German leaders diverted attention away from social democracy at home to expansion abroad.
However, this Counterfactuals 51 tendency to find external scapegoats does not always hold true; some countries with poor internal integration, like Myanmar today, turn inward.
Because bureaucracies have standard operating procedures and do not change quickly, some analysts believe foreign policy can be predicted by looking at the inertia of foreign policy and military bureaucracies.
Certainly the German military bureaucracy resisted changes in its military plans in 1914.
After its defeat by mobile, irregular guerrilla forces in Vietnam, the American military adopted a strategy of high mobility during the Gulf War and won.
Scholars in the subfield of international political economy have sought parsimonious ways to explain foreign policies by linking the world economy to domestic interests.
For example, the different ways that open trade affects labor, landowners, and capital might influence policy in predictable ways, as we shall see in the case of Germany in the next chapter.
Moreover, political coalitions at home can shift as a result of changing international opportunities and pressures.
Many variations in foreign policy behavior yield only low-level generalizations.
Domestic politics matter, and liberal theories help, but in different ways and at different times and different places.
COUNTERFACTUALS In 1990, President Vaclav Havel of Czechoslovakia spoke before the United States Congress.
So this jolting experience of going from prison to standing before you today, I can adjust to this.
Humans sometimes make surprising choices, and human history is full of uncertainties.
Controlled experiments do not exist because it is impossible to hold other things constant while looking at the one thing that changes.
Aristotle said one should be as precise in any science as the subject matter allows.
International politics involves so many variables, so many changes occurring at the same time that events are overdetermined—there are too many causes.
But as analysts, we still want to sort out causes to get some idea of which ones are stronger than others.
As you will see when we look at World War I in the next chapter, one of the useful tools we can use is mental experiments called counterfactuals.
Counterfactuals are contrary-to-fact conditionals, but it is simpler to think of them as thought experiments to define causal claims.
Though often without admitting it, historians use a more elaborate version of the same procedure to weigh causes.
In this instance, the use of a counterfactual examines how important a particular personality was in comparison to structural factors.
Some political observers speculate that after the A1 Qaeda attacks on September 11, 2001, either man would have responded by using force against the Taliban government that had given haven to the terrorists, but that Gore might not have decided to invade Iraq, where the connection, to the September 11 attacks was not established.
Poorly handled counterfactuals may mislead by destroying the meaning of history.
The fact is that once something has happened, other things are not equal.
We say that historical events are “path dependent”; that is, once events start down a certain path, all possible futures are not equally probable.
Plausibility A useful counterfactual has to be within the reasonable array of options.
It must be plausible to imagine two conditions existing at the same time.
She may say that such a counterfactual is designed to test the importance of military technology, but it makes little sense to imagine twentieth-century technology in a nineteenth-century Counterfactuals 53 setting.
Although it might be good for laughs, it is not a fruitful use of counterfactual thinking because of the anachronism involved.
Proximity in Time Each major event exists in a long chain of causation, and most events have multiple causes.
The further back in time we go, the more causes that must be held constant.
The closer in time the questioned event is to the subject event , the more likely the answer is yes.
Consider Pascal’s famous counterfactual statement that if Cleopatra’s nose had been shorter, she would have been less attractive to Marc Antony, and the history of the Roman Empire would have been different.
If the history of the Roman Empire had been different, the history of Western European civilization would have been different.
Thus the length of Cleopatra’s nose was one of the causes of World War I In some trivial sense, that may be true, but millions of events and causes channeled down to August 1914.
The contribution of Cleopatra’s nose to the cause of World War I is so small and remote that the counterfactual is more amusing than interesting when we try to ascertain why the war broke out.
Proximity in time means that the closeness of two events in the chain of causation allows us better to control other causes and thereby obtain a truer weighing of factors.
Relation to Theory Good counterfactual reasoning should rely on an existing body of theory that represents a distillation of what we think we know about things that have happened before.
We should ask whether a counterfactual is plausible considering what we know about all the cases that have given rise to these theories.
Theories provide coherence and organization to our thoughts about the myriad of causes and help us to avoid random guessing.
For example, there is no theory behind the counterfactual that if Napoleon had had stealth aircraft he would have won the Battle of Waterloo.
The very randomness of the example helps explain why it is amusing, but also limits what we can learn from the mental exercise.
These counterfactual questions explore the theory that the Cold War was caused primarily by ideology.
An alternative hypothesis is that the bipolar international structure caused the Cold War.
Given the distribution of power after World War II, we could expect some sort of tension even if the United States had been socialist.
And the counterfactual reasoning can be bolstered by observing that countries with a similar communist ideology have fought each other.
The counterfactual allows us to assess theories of balance of power versus theories of ideological causation.
In general, counterfactuals related to theory are more interesting and useful because the mental exercise ties into a broader body of knowledge.
In examining the plausibility of a mental experiment, we must ask whether what is held constant is faithful to what actually happened.
We must be wary of piling one counterfactual on top of another in the same thought experiment.
Such multiple counterfactuals are confusing because too many things are being changed at once, and we are unable to judge the accuracy of the exercise by a careful examination of its real historical parts.
They are especially useful in international politics because there is no laboratory setting such as in physical science.
But we need to be careful in constructing counterfactuals, for some are better constructed and thus more fruitful than others.
Counterfactuals help us relate history to theory and make better judgments as we try to understand a world with no controlled experiments.
Some historians are purists who say counterfactuals that ask what might have been are not real history.
But such purists miss the point that we try to understand not just what happened, but why it happened.
To do that, we need to know what else might have happened, and that brings us back to counterfactuals.
So while some historians interpret history as simply the writing down of what happened, many historians believe that good counterfactual analysis is essential to good historical analysis.
The purists help warn us against poorly disciplined counterfactuals such as Napoleon’s stealth bombers.
But, as we see in the next chapter, there is a distinction between saying that some counterfactual analysis is trivial and saying that good counterfactual analysis is essential to clear thinking about causation.
The aftermath of battle BALANCE OF POWER World War I is often blamed on the balance of power, one of the most frequently used concepts in international politics and one of the most confusing.
Defenders of balance-of-power policies argue that they produce stability.
Peace was rare; during three-quarters of the time there was war involving at least one of the great powers.
Ten of those wars were large general wars with many of the great powers involved what we call hegemonic, or world wars.
Thus if we ask whether the balance of power preserved peace very well over the five centuries of the modem state system, the answer is no.
That is not surprising because states balance power not to preserve peace, but to preserve their independence.
The balance of power helps preserve the anarchic system of separate states.
For example, at the end of the eighteenth century, Poland was, indeed, cut up like a cheese, with Polands neighbors—Austria, Prussia, and Russia—all helping themselves to a large slice.
More recently, in 1939 Stalin and Hitler made a deal in which they caryed up Poland again and gave the Baltic states to the Soviet Union.
Thus Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia spent half a century as Soviet republics until 1991.
The balance of power has not preserved peace and has not always preserved the independence of each state, but it has preserved the anarchic state system.
More specifically, it is the ability to affect others to get the outcomes one wants.
Robert Dahl, a Yale political scientist, defines power as the ability to get others to do what they otherwise would not do.
But when we measure power in terms of the changed behavior of others, we have to know their preferences.
Otherwise, we may be as mistaken about our power as the fox who thought he was hurting Br’er Rabbit when he threw him into the briar patch.
Knowing in advance how other people or nations would behave in the absence of our efforts is often difficult.
The behavioral definition of power can be useful to analysts and historians who devote considerable time to reconstructing the past, but to practical politicians and leaders it may seem too ephemeral.
Because the ability to influence others is usually associated with the possession of certain resources, political leaders commonly define power this way.
These resources include population, territory, natural resources, economic size, military forces, and political stability, among others.
The virtue of this definition is that it makes power appear more concrete, measurable, and predictable than the behavioral definition.
Power in this sense means holding the high cards in the international poker game.
A basic rule of poker is that if your opponent is Power 61 showing cards that can beat anything you hold, fold your hand.
Some wars, however, have been started by the eventual losers, which suggests that political leaders sometimes take risks or make mistakes.
Often the opponent’s cards are not all showing in the game of international politics.
Even without deception, mistakes can be made about which power resources are most relevant in particular situations.
For example, France and Britain had more tanks than Hitler in 1940, but Hitler’s tanks had greater maneuverability and his military utilized better military strategy.
Power conversion is a basic problem that arises when we think of power in terms of resources.
Some countries are better than others at converting their resources into effective influence over other countries’ behavior, just as some skilled card players win despite being dealt weak hands.
Power conversion is the capacity to convert potential power, as measured by resources, to realized power, as measured by the changed behavior of others.
To predict outcomes correctly, we need to know about a country’s skill at power conversion as well as its possession of power resources.
Another problem is determining which resources provide the best basis for power in any particular context.
Tanks are not much good in swamps; uranium was not a power resource in the nineteenth century.
For example, in the agrarian economies of eighteenth-century Europe, population was a critical power resource because it provided a base for taxes and recruitment of infantry.
Thus at the end of the Napoleonic Wars , Pmssia presented its fellow victors at the Congress of Vienna with a precise plan for its own reconstruction in order to maintain the balance of power.
Its plan listed the territories and populations it had lost since 1805 and the territories and populations it would need to regain equivalent numbers.
In the prenationalist period, it was not significant that many of the people in those provinces did not speak German or feel themselves to be Prussian.
However, within half a century, nationalist sentiments mattered very much.
Another change of context that occurred during the nineteenth century was the growing importance of industry and rail systems that made rapid mobilization possible.
In the 1860s, Bismarck’s Germany pioneered the use of railways to transport armies in Europe for quick victories.
Although Russia had always had greater population resources than the rest of Europe, they were difficult to mobilize.
The growth of the rail system in western Russia at the beginning of the twentieth century was one of the reasons the Germans feared rising Russian power in 1914.
Further, the spread of rail systems on the Continent helped deprive Britain of the luxury of concentrating on naval power.
There was no longer time, should it prove necessary, to insert an army to prevent another great power from dominating the Continent.
The application of industrial technology to warfare has long had a powerful impact.
But the power derived from nuclear weapons has proven to be so awesome and destructive that its actual application is muscle-bound.
Indeed, there are many situations where any use of force may be inappropriate or too costly.
Even if the direct use of force were banned among a group of countries, military force would still play an important background role.
For example, the American military role in deterring threats to allies, or of assuring access to a crucial resource such as oil in the Persian Gulf, means that the provision of protective force can be used in bargaining situations.
Sometimes the linkage may be direct; more often, as we will see in Chapter 7, it is a factor not mentioned openly but present in the back of leaders’ minds.
Coercing other states to change is a direct or commanding method of exercising power.
A country may achieve its preferred outcomes in world politics because other countries want to emulate it or have agreed to a system that produces such effects.
In this sense, it is just as important to set the agenda and attract others in world politics as it is to force others to change in particular situations.
This aspect of power—that is, getting others to want what you want—is called attractive, or soft power behavior.
Soft power can rest on such resources as the attraction of one’s ideas or on the ability to set the political agenda in a way that shapes the preferences others express.
Parents of teenagers know that if they have structured their children’s beliefs and preferences, their power will be greater and will last longer than if they had relied only on active control.
Similarly, political leaders and constructivist theorists have long understood the power that comes from setting the agenda and determining the framework of a debate.
The ability to establish preferences tends to be associated with intangible power resources such as culture, ideology, and institutions.
Soft power is not automatically more effective or ethical than hard power.
The terrorist leader Osama bin Laden, for example, had soft power in the eyes of his followers who carried out the attacks in 2001.
Power is the ability to affect others to get the outcomes you want regardless of whether its sources are tangible.
Soft power is often more difficult for governments to wield, slower to show results, and not effective in many cases.
For example, in 1762, when Frederick the Great of Prussia was about to be defeated by a coalition of France, Austria, and Russia, he was saved because the new Russian Czar Peter idolized the Prussian monarch and pulled his troops out of the anti-Prussian coalition.
In 1917, Great Britain had greater soft power than Germany in American opinion, and that affected the United States’ entry on Britain’s side in World War I More recent examples would include Franklin Roosevelt’s Four Freedoms attracting European support in World War II; young people behind the Iron Curtain listening to American music and news on Radio Free Europe during the Cold War; and the recent ability of the European Union to attract other countries.
Material success makes a culture and ideology attractive, and decreases in economic and military success lead to self-doubt and crises of identity.
The soft power of the Vatican did not wane as the size of the Papal States diminished in the nineteenth century.
Canada, Sweden, and the Netherlands today tend to have more influence than some other states with equivalent economic or military capability.
The Soviet Union had considerable soft power in Europe after World War II but squandered it after its invasion of Hungary in 1956 and Czechoslovakia in 1968.
A look at the five centuries of modern state systems shows that different power resources played critical roles in different periods.
The sources of power are never static and they continue to change in today’s world.
Soft power is becoming more important in relations among the postindustrial societies in an information age in which the democratic peace prevails; hard power is often more important in industrializing and preindustrial parts of the world.
In an age of information-based economies and transnational interdependence, power is becoming less transferable, less tangible, and less coercive, as we shall see in more detail in Chapters 7 and 8.
Traditional analysts would predict the outcome of conflict mainly on the basis of whose army wins.
Today, in conflicts like the struggle against transnational terrorism, it is equally important whose story wins.
Hard power is necessary against hardcore terrorists, but it is equally important to use soft power to win the hearts and minds of the moderate population that might otherwise be won over by the terrorists.
The twentyfirst century will certainly see a greater role for informational and institutional power.
Economic scale, both in markets and in natural resources, will also remain important.
The service sector grows within modem economies, and the distinction between services and manufacturing continues to blur.
Information will become more plentiful, and the critical resource will be organizational capacity for rapid and flexible response.
Political cohesion will remain important, as well as the nurturing of a universalistic, exportable popular culture.
The difficulty of measuring changing power resources is a major problem for leaders trying to assess the balance of power.
For analysts of international politics, additional confusion ensues when the same word is used for different things.
We must try to separate and clarify the underlying concepts covered by the loose use of the same words.
The term balance of power commonly refers to at least three different things.
Balances as Distributions of Power Balance of power can mean, in the first sense, any distribution of power.
Sometimes people use the term balance of power to refer to the status quo, the existing distribution of power.
Thus in the 1980s, some Americans argued that if Nicaragua became a communist state, the balance of power would be changed.
If one little state changed sides, that might slightly alter the existing distribution of power, but it was a rather trivial change and did not tell us much about deeper changes occurring in world politics.
The term can also refer to a special set of situations in which power is distributed equally.
This usage conjures up the image of a set of scales in balance or equilibrium.
Some realists argue that stability occurs when there is an equal balance, but others argue that stability occurs when one side has a preponderance of power so the others dare not attack it.
A strong dominant power ensures stability, but when that strong power begins to slip and a new challenger rises, war is more likely.
As we will see later in this chapter, so does World War I However, we must be cautious about such theories, for they tend to overpredict conflict.
In the 1880s, the United States passed Great Britain as the largest economy in the world.
In 1895, the United States and Britain disagreed over borders in South America, and it looked as if war might result.
There was a rising challenger, an old hegemon, and a cause of conflict, but you do not read about the great BritishAmerican War of 1895 because it did not occur.
As Sherlock Holmes pointed out, we can get important clues from dogs that do not bark.
Realists point to the rise of Germany as a more proximate threat to Britain.
Liberals point to the increasingly democratic nature of the two English-speaking countries and to transnational cultural ties between the old leader and the new challenger.
The best we can conclude about the balance of Power 65 power in the first sense of the term is that changes in the unequal distribution of power among leading states may be a factor, but not the sole factor, in explaining war and instability.
Balance of Power as Policy The second use of the term refers to balance of power as a policy of balancing.
Balance of power predicts that states will act to prevent any one state from developing a preponderance of power.
Lord Palmerston, British foreign secretary in 1848, said that Britain had no eternal allies or perpetual enemies; Britain thought only of its interests.
Sir Edward Grey, the British foreign minister in 1914, did not want to go to war, but eventually did because he feared Germany would gain preponderance in Europe by controlling the Continent.
And in 1941, when Hitler invaded the Soviet Union, Prime Minister Winston Churchill said Britain should make an alliance with Stalin, against whom he had been fulminating just a few years before.
The structure of international politics is an anarchic system of states, and states value their independence above all else.
A balance-of-power policy does not necessarily assume that states act to maximize power.
In fact, a state might choose a very different course of action if it wished to maximize power.
It might choose to bandwagon, that is, join whoever seems stronger and share in the victor’s gains.
Bandwagoning is common in domestic politics in which politicians flock to an apparent winner.
Balance of power, however, predicts that a state will join whoever seems weaker because states will act to keep any one state from developing a preponderance of power.
Bandwagoning in international politics carries the risk of losing independence.
In 1939 and 1940, the Italian dictator Mussolini joined Hitler’s attack on France as a way to get some of the spoils, but Italy became more and more dependent on Germany.
Balance of power is a policy of helping the underdog because if you help the top dog, it may eventually turn around and eat you.
States can try to balance power unilaterally by developing armaments or by forming alliances with other countries whose power resources help balance the top dog.
This is one of the more interesting and powerful predictions in international politics.
Because Syria was worried about the growing regional power of its neighbor Iraq.
Syria chose to balance Iraqi power regardless of its ideological preferences.
Efforts to use ideology to predict state behavior are often wrong, whereas counterintuitive predictions based on balancing power are often correct.
Certain situa' tions predispose people toward a certain type of behavior, but we cannot always predict the details.
If all choose one exit, the stampede may prevent many from getting ouL Theories in international politics often have large exceptions.
Even though balance of power in a policy sense is one of the strongest predictors in international politics, its record is far from perfect.
Some countries may see no alternatives or believe they cannot affect the balance.
If so, a small country may decide it has to fall within the sphere of influence of a great power while hoping that neutrality will preserve some freedom of action.
For example, after World War II Finland was defeated by the Soviet Union and was far from the center of Europe.
The Finns felt neutrality was safer than trying to become part of the European balance of power.
They were in the Soviet sphere of influence, and the best they could do was bargain away independence in foreign policy for a large degree of control over their domestic affairs.
Another reason that balance-of-power predictions are sometimes wrong has to do with perceptions of threat.
For example, a mechanical accounting of the power resources of countries in 1917 would have predicted that the United States would join World War I on the side of Germany because Britain, France, and Russia had 30 percent of the industrial world’s resources while Germany and Austria had only 19 percent.
This did not happen, in part, because the Americans perceived the Germans as militarily stronger and the aggressor in the war and because the Germans underestimated America’s military potential.
Perceptions of threat are often influenced by the proximity of the threat.
A neighbor may be weak on some absolute global scale, but threatening in its region or local area.
Britain could have fought, but instead chose to appease the United States.
It conceded to the United States on many issues, including the building of the Panama Canal, which allowed America to improve its naval position.
One reason is that Britain was more worried about its neighbor Germany than it was about the distant Americans.
The United States was larger than Germany, but proximity affected which threat loomed larger in British eyes.
From the point of view of Europe and Japan, the Soviets were an immediate threat and the United States was far away.
The Europeans and the Japanese called in the distant power to rebalance the situation in their immediate neighborhood.
The fact that proximity often affects how threats are perceived qualifies any predictions based on simple mechanical toting up of power resources.
Another exception to balance-of-power predictions relates to the growing role of economic interdependence in world affairs.
According to a balance-of-power policy, France should not wish to see Germany grow, but because of economic Power 67 integration, German growth stimulates French growth.
French politicians are more likely to be reelected when the French economy is growing.
Therefore, a policy of trying to hold back German economic growth would be foolish because the French and German economies are so interdependent.
In economic considerations, joint gains would often be lost by following too simple a balance--of--power policy.
Finally, ideology sometimes causes countries to join the top dog rather than the underdog.
Even in Thucydides’s day, democratic city-states were more likely to align with Athens and oligarchies with Sparta.
Britain’s appeasement of the United States in the 1890s, or the Europeans joining with the Americans in an alliance of democracies after 1945, owed something to the influence of ideology, as well as to the proximity of the threat.
On the other hand, we must be careful about predicting too much from ideology, because it often leads to colossal mistakes.
Many Europeans believed that Stalin and Hitler could not come together in 1939 because they were at opposite ends of the ideological spectrum; but balance-of-power considerations led them to an alliance against the countries in the middle of the ideological spectrum.
Likewise, in the 1960s the United States mistakenly treated China, the Soviet Union, Vietnam, and Cambodia as similar because they were all communist.
A policy based on balance of power would have predicted that those communist states would balance each other , which would have been a less expensive way to pursue stability in East Asia.
Balance of Power as Multipolar Systems The third way in which the term balance of power is used is to describe multipolar historical cases.
Europe in the nineteenth century is sometimes held up as the model of a moderate multipolar balance-of-power system.
Historians such as Edward Gulick use the term classical balance of power to refer to the European system of the eighteenth century.
In this sense, a balance of power requires a number of countries that follow a set of rules of the game that are generally understood.
Since this use of the term balance of power refers to historical systems, we look at the two dimensions of systems, structure and process, that were introduced in Chapter 2.
The structure of the nineteenth-century European balance of power changed toward the end of the century.
From 1815 to 1870 five major powers often shifted alliances to prevent any one from dominating the Continent.
Over the next seven years, the two alliance systems, the Triple Entente and the Triple Alliance (Germany, Austria-Hungary, and Italy) polarized into tight blocs whose loss of flexibility contributed to the onset of World War 1.
At the Congress of Vienna, the states of Europe brought France back into the fold and agreed on certain rules of the game to equalize the players.
The states concerted their actions, meeting frequently to deal with disputes and to maintain an equilibrium.
They accepted certain interventions to keep governments in power domestically when their replacements might lead to a destabilizing reorientation of policy.
This became more difficult with the rise of nationalism and democratic revolutions, but a truncated concert persisted from 1822 to 1854.
This concert fell apart in midcentury when revolutions of liberal nationalism challenged the practices of providing territorial compensation or restoring governments to maintain equilibrium.
Nationalism became too strong to allow such an easy cutting up of cheeses.
The third period in the nineteenth-century balance-of-power system, from 1854 to 1870, was far less moderate and was marked by five wars.
One, the Crimean War, was a classic balance-of-power war in which France and Britain prevented Russia from pressing the declining Ottoman Empire.
The other conflicts, however, were related to the unification of Italy and Germany.
Political leaders abandoned old rules and began to use nationalism for their expedient purposes.
He was a deeply conservative man who wanted Germany united under the Prussian monarchy.
But he was quite prepared to use nationalist appeals and wars to defeat Denmark, Austria, and France in bringing this about.
He returned to a more conservative style once he had accomplished his goals.
The fourth period, 1870 to 1890, was the Bismarckian balance of power in which the new Prussian-led Germany played the key role.
Bismarck played flexibly with a variety of alliance partners and tried to divert France overseas into imperialistic adventures and away from its lost province of Alsace-Lorraine.
He limited German imperialism in order to keep the balancing act in Europe centered on Berlin.
Process of the Pre-World War I Balance of Power 1815-1822 Concert of Europe 1822-1854 Loose Concert 1854-1870 Nationalism and the Unification of Germany and Italy 1870-1890 Bismarck’s Revived Concert 1890-1914 The Loss of Flexibility Power 69 Bismarck’s successors, however, were not as agile.
From 1890 to 1914 there was a balance of power, but flexibility was gradually lost.
Bismarck’s successors did not renew his treaty with Russia; Germany became involved in overseas imperialism, challenged Britain’s naval supremacy, and did not discourage Austrian confrontations with Russia over the Balkans.
These policies exacerbated the fears of neighboring states that felt threatened by rising German power, further polarized the system, and led to World War I Alliances Balance of power as a multipolar system is intimately related to the concept of alliances.
Alliances are formal or informal arrangements that sovereign states enter into with each other in order to ensure their mutual security.
Traditionally, military alliances have been one of the focal points of international politics.
As mentioned earlier, ideology often draws states together, though it can also cause conflicts.
Economic concerns might be another reason for an alliance, particularly in those parts of the modern world where purely military concerns are receding.
Alliances collapse for as many reasons as they form, but in general states cease to ally when they come to see each other as irrelevant or as threats to their security.
Before, the two states might have shared a common ideology; now they are opposed.
Thus China and the United States were allies when the Nationalists were in power before 1949 and enemies after the Communists came to power in 1949.
It might view the other state as a rival, while the other state might view it as a threat and look for alliances elsewhere to balance that threat.
The hallmarks of Bismarck’s alliance system were its flexibility and its complexity.
The former made the resulting balance-of-power system stable because it allowed for occasional crises or conflicts without causing the whole edifice to crumble.
Germany was at the center of the system, and Bismarck can be likened to an expert juggler who keeps several balls in the air.
If one ball falls, the juggler can continue to keep the others aloft and even bend down to retrieve the errant one.
When Bismarck was succeeded by less adroit leaders, the alliance system could not be maintained.
Rather than channeling conflict away from Germany, as Bismarck did by encouraging France to expend its energies on colonial ventures in Africa, German decision makers in the years leading up to 1914 allowed alliances to lapse and tension to grow.
Instead of renewing the German entente with Russia, the Kaiser let Russia float into an alliance with France and later Britain.
What was once a fluid, multipolar alliance system gradually evolved into two alliance blocs, with dangerous consequences for European stability.
Compare that to 36,000 casualties when Bismarck defeated Austria in 1866.
World War I was a horrifying war of trenches, barbed wire, machine guns, and artillery that ground up a generation of Europe’s youth.
After World War 1, Europe still mattered, but the United States and Japan emerged as major players.
World War I also ushered in the Russian Revolution in 1917 and the beginning of the ideological battles that racked the twentieth century.
Prince Bernhard von Billow, the German chancellor from 1900 to 1909, met with his successor, Bethmann Hollweg, in the chancellor’s palace in Berlin shortly after the war broke out.
There is a picture by some celebrated English painter, which shows the wretched scapegoat with a look of ineffable anguish in its eyes, such pain as I now saw in Bethmann’s.
In many later polemics on war guilt I have often wished it had been possible to produce a snapshot of Bethmann Hollweg standing there at the moment he said those words.
Such a photograph would have been the best proof that this wretched man had never wanted war.
As we will see, it is impossible to isolate one cause, but it is possible to break the question down into distinct levels.
At each of these levels, the balance of power—as a multipolar system and as the policy of separate states and individual leaders—is essential to an understanding of the war’s outbreak.
As the alliance system became less flexible, the balance of power became less multipolar and the likelihood of war increased.
Parsimony suggests we start with the simplest causes, see how much they explain, and go on to more complexity as needed.
Thus we look first at the system-level explanations, both the structure and the process; then at the domestic societal level; and finally at the individuals.
The rise of German power was Trench warfare during World War I truly impressive.
German heavy industry surpassed that of Great Britain in the 1890s, and the growth of German gross national product at the beginning of the century was twice that of Great Britain’s.
In the 1860s, Britain had 25 percent of the world’s industrial production, but by 1913 its share had shrunk to 10 percent, and Germany’s share had risen to 15 percent.
Germany transformed some of its industrial strength into military capability, including a massive naval armaments program.
A strategic aim of Germany’s “Tirpitz Plan” of 1911 was to build the second largest navy in the world, thereby advancing itself as a world power.
Britain began to fear becoming isolated and worried about how it would defend its fat'flung empire.
These fears were increased during the Boer War due to German sympathy for the Boers, the Dutch settlers in South Africa, against whom Britain was fighting at the end of the century.
In 1907, Sir Eyre Crowe, permanent secretary of the British Foreign Office, wrote a document famous in the history of British foreign policy, a long memoran' dum in which he tried to interpret German foreign policy.
He concluded that although German policy was vague and confused, Britain clearly could not allow one country to dominate the continent of Europe.
In 1904, parting from its geographically semiisolated position as a balancer off the Europe, Britain moved toward an alliance with France.
In 1907, the Anglo-French partnership broadened to include Russia and became known as the Triple Entente.
Germany, seeing itself encircled, tightened its relations with Austria-Hungary.
The balance of power was no longer characterized by the shifting alignments that characterized the balance of power during Bismarck’s day.
The structural shift to bipolarity affected the process by which the nineteenth-century balance-of-power system had worked.
In addition, constructivists would point to three other reasons for the loss of moderation in the early twentieth-century balance of power.
These included transnational ideas that were common to several countries.
In eastern Europe there was a movement calling for all Slavic-speaking peoples to come together.
Pan-Slavism threatened both the Ottoman and Austro-Hungarian empires, which each had large Slavic populations.
German authors wrote about the inevitability of the TeutonicSlavic battles and schoolbooks inflamed nationalist passions.
Nationalism proved to be stronger than socialism when it came to bonding working classes together, and stronger than the capitalism that bound bankers together.
Just before the war broke out, the Kaiser wrote to Russian Czar Nicholas II and appealed to him to avoid war.
The Kaiser hoped that because war was impending over the assassination of a fellow royal family member, the Austrian Archduke Franz Ferdinand, the Czar would see things the same way he did.
But by then nationalism had overcome any sense of aristocratic or monarchical solidarity, and that family telegram had no impact in preventing war.
A second cause for the loss of moderation in the early twentieth-century balance of power was a rise in complacency about peace.
The great powers had not been involved in a war in Europe for 40 years.
There had been crises—in Morocco in 1905-1906, in Bosnia in 1908, in Morocco again in 1911, and the Balkan wars in 1912—but they had all been manageable.
However, the diplomatic compromises that resolved these conflicts caused frustration.
Charles Darwin’s ideas of survival of the fittest made good sense as a statistical construct about genetics of natural species over generations, but they were misapplied to human society and unique events.
Long wars seemed unlikely, and many leaders believed short decisive wars won by the strong would be a welcome change.
A third contributing factor to the loss of flexibility in the early twentiethcentury balance of power was German policy.
As Eyre Crowe said, it was vague and The Origins of World War I 73 confusing.
The Germans were no different in having “world ambitions,” but they managed to press them forward in a way that antagonized everybody at the same time—^just the opposite of the way Bismarck played the system in the 1870s and 1880s.
They antagonized the Russians over issues in Turkey and the Balkans, and they antagonized the French over a protectorate in Morocco.
The Kaiser tried to shock Britain into a friendship, believing that if he scared Britain enough, it would realize how important Germany was and pursue improved relations.
Instead, he scared the British first into the arms of the French, and then into the arms of the Russians.
So by 1914, the Germans thought they had to break out of this encirclement and thereby deliberately accepted the risk of war.
Russian revolutionary Vladimir Lenin’s argument that the war was caused by the financial capitalists.
But the war did not arise out of imperialist conflicts on the colonial peripheries as Lenin had expected.
In 1898, Britain and France confronted each other at Fashoda in the Sudan as the British tried to complete a north-south line from South Africa to Egypt, while the French tried to create an east-west line of colonies in Africa.
But, in fact, the war broke out 16 years later in Europe, and even then bankers and businessmen strongly resisted it.
Sir Edward Grey, the British foreign minister, thought he had to follow Eyre Crowe’s advice and that Britain had to prevent Germany from gaining mastery of the European balance of power.
But Grey also worried about getting the London bankers to go along with declaring war.
Gibraltar 2k Malta German naval base A"" Allied naval base Wi9 Triple Alliance 1 Triple Entente (Italy did not fight on Germany's side in 1914 and later joined the allies) Type Br.
The European Balance of Military Power in 1914 74 The Origins of World War I 75 Leninist explanation.
Both Austria-Hungary and Ottoman Turkey were multinational empires and were therefore threatened by the rise of nationalism.
In addition, the Ottoman government was very weak, very corrupt, and an easy target for nationalist groups in the Balkans that wanted to free themselves from centuries of Turkish rule.
The Balkan wars of 1912 pushed the Turks out, but in the next year the Balkan states then fell to war among themselves when dividing the spoils.
Austria feared disintegration from this nationalistic pressure and worried about the loss of status that would result.
In the end, Austria went to war against Serbia not because a Serb assassinated its Archduke, Franz Ferdinand , but because Austria wanted to weaken Serbia and prevent it from becoming a magnet for nationalism among the Balkan Slavs.
The monarchy had been seized by the throat and had to choose between allowing itself to be strangled, and making a last effort to prevent its destruction.Disintegration of an empire because of nationalism was the more profound cause of the war; the slain Franz Ferdinand was a pretext.
Another important domestic-level explanation of World War I lay in the domestic politics of Germany.
German historian Fritz Fischer and his followers argue that Germany’s social problems were a key cause of the war.
According to Fischer, Germany’s efforts toward world hegemony were an attempt by German elites to distract attention from the poor domestic integration of German society.
He notes that Germany was ruled by a domestic coalition of landed aristocrats and some very large industrial capitalists, called the Coalition of Rye and Iron.
This ruling coalition used expansionist policies to provide foreign adventures instead of domestic reform—circuses in place of bread.
Internal economic and social tensions are not sufficient to explain World War 1, but they do help explain one source of the pressure that Germany put on the international system after 1890.
What distinguished the leadership on the eve of World War 1 was its mediocrity.
The Austro-Hungarian emperor, Franz Josef , was a tired old man who was putty in the hands of General Conrad and Count Berchtold, his duplicitous foreign minister.
Ironically, Franz Ferdinand, the crown prince who was assassinated at Sarajevo, would have been a restraining force, for the potential heir had liberal political views.
In Russia, Czar Nicholas II was an isolated autocrat who spent most of his time resisting change at home.
He was served by incompetent foreign and defense ministers and was strongly influenced by his sickly and neurotic wife.
Most important was Kaiser Wilhelm II , who had a great sense of inferiority.
William II did not want war, if only because he did not trust his nerves not to give way under the strain of any really critical situation.
The moment there was danger, his majesty would become uncomfortably conscious that he could never lead an army into battle.
His more menacing jingo speeches were intended to give the foreigner the impression that here was another Frederick the Great or Napoleon.
There was something about the leaders, the Kaiser in particular, that made them significant contributory causes of the war.
When several causes exist, each of which could be sufficient, we call a situation overdetermined.
The answer is no, war was not inevitable until it actually broke out in August 1914.
And even then it was not inevitable that four years of carnage had to follow.
Let us distinguish three types of causes in terms of their proximity in time to the event we are studying.
The most remote are deep causes, then come intermediate causes, and those immediately before the event are precipitating causes.
The precipitating cause is that you flicked the switch, the intermediate cause is that someone wired the building, and the deep cause is that Thomas Edison discovered how to distribute electricity.
The logs are the deep cause, the kindling and paper are the intermediate cause, and the actual striking of the match is the precipitating cause.
In World War I, the deep causes were changes in the structure of the balance of power and certain aspects of the domestic political systems.
Especially important reasons were the rise of German strength, the development of a bipolar alliance system, the rise of nationalism and the resultant destruction of two declining empires, and German politics.
The intermediate causes were German policy, the rise in complacency about peace, and the personal idiosyncrasies of the leaders.
The precipitating cause was the assassination of Franz Ferdinand at Sarajevo by a Serbian terrorist.
Indeed, we might say that if the assassination had not occurred, some other precipitating incident ..would have caused the war.
Some say precipitating events are like buses—they come along every ten minutes.
Thus the specific event at Sarajevo was not all that important; some incident would probably have occurred sooner or later.
The deep and intermediate causes suggested a high probability of war, but a high probability is not the same as inevitability.
Using the metaphor of the fire again, logs and kindling may sit for a long time and never be lit.
Indeed, if it rains before somebody comes along with a match, they may not catch fire even when a Sarajevo occurs.
One possibility is that the growth in Russian strength might have deterred Germany from recklessly backing Austria.
In 1914, General von Moltke and Foreign Secretary Jagow, two of the German leaders who were most influential in precipitating the war, believed that war with Russia was inevitable.
They knew Germany would have a problem fighting a war on two fronts and would have to knock out one side before fighting the other.
Russia, although larger, was technologically backward and had a poor transportation system, so it could be put off for the second strike.
They reasoned that Germany ought first to rush westward to knock out the French.
After victory in the west, Germany could turn east and take its time to defeat the Russians.
Indeed, that was the Schlieffen Plan, the war plan of the German general staff, which called for a rapid sweep through Belgium to knock out France quickly, and then to turn east.
But this strategy might have become obsolete by 1916 because Russia was using French money to build railroads.
In the ISPOs it would have taken the Russians two or three months before they could have transported all their troops to the German front, giving Germany ample time to fight France first.
By 1910, that time had shrunk to 18 days, and the German planners knew they no longer had a large margin of safety.
By 1916, the margin would have been gone and Germany might have had to drop its two-front strategy.
If no assassination and crisis had occurred in 1914, and the world had made it to 1916 without a war, it is possible the Germans might have felt deterred, unable to risk a two-front war.
They might have been more careful before giving Austria a blank check, as they did in 1914Or they might have dropped the Schlieffen Plan and concentrated on a war in the east only.
Or they might have come to terms with Great Britain or changed their view that the offense had the advantage in warfare.
In summary, in another two years, a variety of changes related to Russian strength might have prevented ^he war.
Germany might have become so strong that France and Britain would have been deterred.
We can also raise counterfactuals about what might have happened in Britain s internal affairs if two more years had passed without war.
In The Strange Death of Liberal England, historian George Dangerfield tells of Britain’s domestic turmoil.
If the Ulster Revolt had developed, it is quite plausible that Britain would have been so internally preoccupied that it would not have been able to join the coalition with France and Russia.
Certainly many historically significant changes could have occurred in two more years of peace.
Another set of counterfactuals raises questions about what kind of war would have occurred rather than whether a war would have occurred.
It is true that Germany’s policies frightened its neighbors and that Germany in turn was afraid of being encircled by the Triple Entente, so it is reasonable to assume war was more likely than not.
The war did not have to be what we now remember as World War I Counterfactually, four other wars were possible.
Initially, the Kaiser expected a replay of the Bosnian crisis of 1908-1909 when the Germans backed the Austrians, and Austria was therefore able to make Russia stand down in the Balkans.
When the Kaiser returned from his cruise, he found that the Austrians had filled in the blank check he left them by issuing an ultimatum to Serbia.
When he realized that, the Kaiser made great efforts to keep the war from escalating, thus the Nicky-Willie telegrams referred to earlier.
If his efforts had been successful, we might today recall not World War I, but merely a relatively minor Austrian-Serbian War of August 1914A second counterfactual possibility was a one-front war.
The Kaiser asked General von Moltke whether he could limit the preparations to just the eastern front.
Von Moltke replied that it was impossible because any change in the timetables for assembling the troops and supplies would create a logistical nightmare.
He told the Kaiser that if he tried to change the plans, he would have a disorganized mass instead of an army.
However, after the war, General von Staab of the railway division of the German army admitted that it might have been possible, after all, to alter the mobilization schedules successfully.
Had the Kaiser known that and insisted, there might have been a one-frorit war.
If the British had not been there to make the difference, Germany might well have won.
It is possible that Britain might not have joined if Germany had not invaded Belgium, although Belgium was not the main cause of Britain entering the war.
For some people, like Sir Edward Grey and the Foreign Office, the main reason for entering the war was the danger of German control of the Continent.
But Britain was a democracy, and the Liberal party in the Cabinet was split.
The left Liberals opposed war, but when Germany swept through Belgium and violated Belgian neutrality, it allowed the prowar Liberals to overcome the reluctance of the antiwar Liberals and to repair the split in the British Cabinet.
Flawed Thinking on the Eve of War Finally, a fourth counterfactual is a war without the United States.
By early 1918, Germany might have won the war if the United States had not tipped the military balance by its entry in 1917.
One of the reasons the United States became involved was the German submarine campaign against Allied and American shipping.
There The Origins of World War I 81 was also some German clumsiness; Germany sent a message, now known as the Zimmermann telegram, instructing its embassy in Mexico to approach the Mexican government regarding an alliance against the United States.
Our counterfactual analysis first suggests ways in which the war might not have occurred in 1914, and second, ways in which the war that occurred did not have to become four years of carnage, which destroyed Europe as the heart of the global balance of power.
Events close in over time, degrees of freedom are lost, and the probability of war increases.
If we start in 1898 and ask what was the most likely war in Europe, the answer would have been war between France and Britain, which were eyeball to eyeball in a colonial dispute in Africa.
But after the British and French formed the Entente in 1904, a FrancO'British war looked less likely.
The first Moroccan crisis in 1905 and the Bosnian crisis in 1908 made war with Germany look more likely.
Britain implied that it would remain neutral in any European war if Germany would limit its navy.
At that same time, it looked as if renewed colonial friction between Britain and Russia in Asia and between the British and the French threatened a collapse or erosion of the Triple Entente.
When France sent troops to help the Sultan of Morocco, Germany demanded compensation in the French Congo and sent a gunboat to Agadir on the coast of Morocco.
French and German bankers lobbied against war, and the Kaiser pulled back.
But these events deeply affected public opinion and raised fears about German intentions.
Although the Balkan wars in 1912 and 1913 and the increased pressure on Austria set the scene for 1914, there was also a renewed effort at detente in 1912.
Britain sent Lord Haldane, a prominent Liberal politician, to Berlin, and the British and Germans resolved a number of the issues.
Also, by this time it was clear that Britain had won the naval arms race.
In June 1914, the feeling that relations were improving was strong enough for Britain to send four of its great Dreadnought battleships to Kiel, Germany, for a state visit.
If Britain had thought war was about to occur, the last thing it would have done was put four of its prime battleships in an enemy harbor.
In fact, on June 28, British and German sailors were walking together along the quay in Kiel when they heard the news that a Serbian terrorist had shot an Austrian archduke in a faraway place called Sarajevo.
History has its surprises, and once again, probable is not the same as inevitable.
Analogies can mislead, and many myths have been created about World War 1.
And if there was to be a war, Germany preferred a war in 1914 to a war later.
There were miscalculations over the length and depth of the war, but that is not the same as an accidental war.
While there was concern in Europe about the growing strength of the armies, the view that the war was precipitated directly by the arms race is too simple.
On the other hand, we can draw some valid warnings from the long slide into World War 1.
One lesson is to pay attention to the process of a balance-of-power system as well as to its structure or distribution of power.
Here the constructivists add an important point that some realists miss.
In addition, the experience of World War I suggests it is important to have military forces that are stable in crisis, without any feeling that one must use them or lose them.
The railway timetables were not the major determinants of World War I, but they did make it more difficult for political leaders to buy time for diplomacy.
The Road to World War I 83 Today’s world is different from the world of 1914 in two important ways: One is that nuclear weapons have made large-scale wars more dangerous, and the other, as constructivists note, is that the ideology of war, the acceptance of war, is j;nuch weaker.
In 1914, war was thought to be inevitable, a fatalistic view compounded by the social Darwinist argument that war should be welcome because it xvould clear the air like a good summer storm.
Unsatisfied by material prosperity, the nations turned fiercely toward strife, internal or external.
National passions, unduly exalted in the decline of religiorr, burned beneath the surface of nearly every land with fierce, if shrouded, fires.
War Deaths, 1914-1918 Country Deaths Austria-Hungary 1,250,000 Britain 900,000 Bulgaria 100,000 France 1,500,000 Germany 1,750,000 Italy 600,000 Romania 300,000 Russia 1,750,000 Serbia 50,000 Turkey 30,000 United States 112,000 nineteenth-century liberal who regarded balance-of-power policies as immoral because they violated democratic principles and national self-determination.
He argued, “The balance of power is the great game now forever discredited.
As we have seen, the balance of power is a way to preserve the sovereign state system.
The resulting balance of power allows for war or violations of self-determination if that is the only way to preserve independence.
However, World War I was so devastating, chaotic, and brutal that many people began to think that war to preserve the balance of power was no longer tolerable.
Sovereign states could not be abolished, Wilson admitted, but force could be tamed by law and institutions as it was at the domestic level.
The liberal solution was to develop international institutions analogous to domestic legislatures and courts so that democratic procedures could be applied at the international level.
Some liberals of the day thought that not only was World War I fought to make the world safe for democracy, but in turn democracy could make the world more peaceful.
In January 1918, Wilson issued a 14'point statement of America’s reasons for entering the war.
In effect, Wilson wanted to change the international system from one based on balance-of-power politics to another based on collective security.
The League of Nations Although critics called Wilson a utopian, he believed that organizing international security could be a practical approach to world politics.
He knew mere paper agreements and treaties would not be sufficient; organizations and rules were needed to The Rise and Fall of Collective Security 89 implement the agreements and enforce the rules.
This is why Wilson put so much faith in the idea of a League of Nations.
Moral force was important, but a military force was necessary to back it up.
If all nonaggressive states band^ together, Wilson believed that the preponderance of power would be on the side of the good.
International security would be a collective responsibility in which nonaggressive countries would form a coalition against aggressors.
Second, deter aggression by forming a coalition of all nonaggressive states.
If all pledged to aid any state that was a victim anywhere in the world, a preponderance of power would exist on the side of the nonaggressive forces.
Third, if deterrence failed and aggression occurred, all states would agree to punish the state that committed aggression.
This doctrine of collective security bore some similarities to balance-oTpower policies in that states tried to deter aggression by developing a powerful coalition, and if deterrence failed they were willing to use force.
But there were three important differences between the collective-security and balance-of'power approaches.
First, in collective security the focus was on the aggressive policies of a state rather than its capacity.
This contrasted with balanceof-power politics, in which alliances were created against any state that was becoming too strong; that is, the focus was on the capacity of states.
Second, unlike in a balance-of-power system in which coalitions were formed in advance, coalitions in a collective-security system could not be predetermined because it was not known which states would be aggressors.
However, once aggression occurred, all states would band against the aggressor.
Third, collective security was designed to be global and universal with no neutrals or free riders.
If too many countries were neutral, the coalition of the good might appear weak and diminish the coalition’s ability to deter or punish the aggressor.
The doctrine of collective security was embodied in the Covenant of the League of Nations, which, in turn, was part of the treaties that ended World War 1.
Several of the articles of the League of Nations Covenant were especially noteworthy.
In Article 10, states pledged to protect all members against aggression.
In Article 11, any war or threat of war was declared to be of concern to all states.
In Articles 12 and 15, states agreed to submit their disputes to arbitration and not to go to war until three months after arbitration failed.
Article 16, the critical article, said any war disregarding the League of Nations procedures would be .regarded as a declaration of war against all the members of the League of Nations.
The state that started a war would be immediately subject to economic sanctions, and the Council of the League might recommend further military measures.
When states signed the Covenant they agreed to abide by Article 16, but in practice it was up to each state to decide what kinds of sanctions to apply and how to implement them; they were not bound by any higher authority.
Thus the League of Nations was not a move toward world government in which a higher authority could commit the member states to certain policies.
As championed by state moralists and established by the League of Nations, the sovereignty of the state is absolute and inviolable; a state government has full authority within its borders.
It can limit that authority only with its own consent; that is, if a government signs a treaty allowing another government to have some influence in its domains, which is an agreed limitation rather than an infringement of sovereignty.
Thus by signing the pact of the League of Nations, states would voluntarily give up some sovereignty to the international community in return for the guarantees of collective security and international law.
Nations charter, international law transcended national law and hence sovereignty in particular situations.
Ever since the Peace of Westphalia in 1648, a central tenet of international law has been that states are sovereign except when they violate international law, in which case they are subject to punishment.
Collective security was to international law what the police are to domestic law.
However, international law enjoyed far less acceptance among states than domestic law.
Many states refused to be constrained by international law and saw compliance as voluntary rather than mandatory.
The American Senate refused to ratify the Treaty of Versailles, which contained language endorsing the creation of the League of Nations.
As a result, the collective-security system had to function without what would have been its biggest player.
Many defined “normal” as avoiding involvement in international affairs.
The leader of this opposition to the League of Nations, Senator Henry Cabot Lodge of Massachusetts, feared that Article 16 of the Covenant would dilute both American sovereignty and the constitutional power of the Senate to declare war.
Lodge suspected the United States might be drawn into distant wars on the basis of the League’s decisions to enforce collective security rather than by the Senate’s decision or the will of the American people.
The debate between President Wilson and Senator Lodge is sometimes portrayed as a clash between an idealist and a realist, but it can also be seen as a debate between The Rise and Fall of Collective Security 91 different forms of American moralism.
Wilson’s obdurate refusal to negotiate terms with Lodge was part of the problem.
But Lodge’s resistance reflected a long-standing American attitude toward the balance of power in Europe.
Opponents of the League believed that European states pursued immoral policies in the name of the bah ance of power, and that America should not become an active player in such games.
In fact, however, the United States was able to ignore the balance of power in the nineteenth century because Americans were enjoying a free ride behind Britain’s fleet.
Other European countries could not penetrate the Western Hemisphere to threaten Americans.
And though the United States was isolationist toward Europe, it was not at all isolationist when it came to interfering in the affairs of its weak neighbors in Central America, Mexico, or Cuba.
At the end of World War I Americans were tom between two forms of moralism, and the isolationist impulse toward the European balance of power won.
The result was that the country that had tipped the balance of power in World War I refused to accept responsibility for the postwar order.
My conception of the League of Nations is just this, that it shall operate as the organized I moral force of men throughout the world, and that whenever or wherever wrong and | aggression are planned or contemplated, this searching light of conscience shall be turned | upon them. j —Woodrow Wilson^ The Early Days of the League What France wanted more than anything else at the end of World War I was military guarantees that Germany could not rise again.
Because the United States would not join the League of Nations, France pressed Britain for a security guarantee and military preparations in case Germany recovered.
Britain resisted on the grounds that such an alliance would be against the spirit of collective security because it would identify the aggressor in advance.
Moreover, Britain saw France as stronger than Germany, and argued there was no need for an alliance, even on traditional balance-of'power terms.
Britain said it was important to reintegrate Germany into the international system, just as the Gongress of Vienna had brought France back into the Goncert of Europe at the end of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815.
War passions had abated more quickly in Britain than in France, and the British felt it was time to appease the Germans by bringing them back into the process.
Unmoved by these arguments, France formed alliances with Poland, which had been reborn at the end of World War I, and with the “Little Entente,” the states of Yugoslavia, Gzechoslovakia, and Romania, which had emerged out of the former Austro-Hungarian Empire.
The Little Entente states were destabilized by ethnic problems and domestic divisions, and as a result were also weak allies.
It lost 25,000 square miles of territory and 7 million members of its population.
Signed in June 1919, the Treaty of Versailles forced Germany to reduce its army to only 100,000 men and prohibited it from having an air force.
The treaty contained the famous “war guilt clause,” placing the blame for war solely on Germany.
Because Germany was responsible, the victors argued Germany should pay for its costs.
The reparations bill was $33 billion, a sum Germans thouglit impossibly high given their damaged economic position.
When they initially failed to pay, France sent troops to occupy Germany’s Ruhr industrial area until they did.
Germany’s Losses The Rise and Fall of Collective Security 93 resistance, Germany suffered enormous inflation that wiped out the savings of its middle class.
That in turn removed one of the sources of internal stability as the Weimar Republic struggled to create democracy.
Italy had never been keen on the Paris peace treaties or the League of Nations.
Italy had originally been allied with Germany and Austria'Hungary, but at the beginning of the war, the Italians decided they would get a better payoff from the Allies and switched sides.
In the secret Treaty of London signed in 1915, Italy was promised compensation at the expense of the part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire that became postwar Yugoslavia.
The Italians expected that these promises would be honored, but Woodrow Wilson objected to such old-fashioned spoils-of-war behavior.
In addition, after Benito Mussolini and the fascists took power in 1922, one of their foreign policy aims was to gain glory and finally fulfill the destiny of a new Roman Empire.
The goals were inconsistent with the new vision of collective security.
With such a start, it is remarkable the League was able to achieve anything at all.
In 1924, governments signed a protocol on the peaceful settlement of disputes in which they pr^rnised to arbitrate their differences.
Perhaps most important, in 1925, the Treaty of Locarno allowed Germany to enter the League of Nations and gave Germany a seat on its council.
In the west, Germany guaranteed that its borders with France and Belgium would be inviolable.
Alsace-Lorraine, taken by Bismarck in the War of 1870, had been returned to France by the Treaty of Versailles, and Germany promised to demilitarize a zone along the Rhine.
In the east, Germany promised to arbitrate before pursuing changes in its eastern border with Poland and Czechoslovakia.
This second clause should have set off a warning bell, however, for there were now two kinds of borders around Germany—an inviolable part in the west and a negotiable part in the east.
The League managed to settle some minor disputes, such as one between Greece and Bulgaria, and it began a process of disarmament negotiations.
Following up on the 1921 Washington Conference, in which the United States, Britain, and Japan had agreed to a measure of naval disarmament, the League organized a preparatory commission for broader disarmament talks, setting the scene for a worldwide conference that finally met in 1932.
In addition, in 1928, states agreed to outlaw war in the Kellogg-Briand Pact, named after the American and French foreign ministers.
Although not members, the Americans and the Russians began to send observers to the League meetings in Geneva.
But that optimism about the collective-security system was dispelled by two crises in the 1930s over Manchuria and Ethiopia.
Japan had transformed itself from a potential victim of imperialist aggression in the mid-nineteenth century to a very successful imperialist power by the century’s end.
Japan defeated Russia in a war during 1904-1905, colonized Korea in 1910, and joined the Allies in World War 1.
At the Paris peace talks in 1919, the Western governments rejected a Japanese proposal that the Covenant of the League affirm the principle of racial equality.
This decision mirrored the domestic political sentiment in the American Congress, which, in the 1920s, passed racist laws excluding Japanese immigrants.
Many Japanese thought the rules were changed just as they were about to enter the club of the great powers.
The 1911 revolution led to the fall of the Manchu or Qing dynasty that had ruled China since 1644 and established a republic.
But the nation quickly fell into chaos as regional civil wars broke out among contending warlords.
Manchuria, though part of China, was under the sway of one of these warlords and maintained a quasi-independent status.
With Chiang Kai-shek as chief military adviser to the republic, the Chinese Nationalist movement tried to unify the country, and bitterly criticized the unequal treaties that had humiliated and exploited China ever since the end of the imperialist Opium Wars of the nineteenth century.
As the Nationalists gained strength in the 1920s, friction with Japan increased and China declared a boycott against Japanese goods.
Meanwhile in Japan, military and civilian factions contended for dominance.
The global economic crisis that began in the late 1920s left Japan, an island nation, extremely vulnerable.
In September 1931, the Japanese army staged an incident along the Manchurian Railway, where they had had a right to station troops since the Russo-Japanese War of 1904—1905.
This act of sabotage on the Manchurian Railway provided Japan with a pretext to take over all of Manchuria.
Although Japan said its actions were intended to protect the Manchurian Railway, it went further and set up a Japanese-controlled puppet state that was called Manchukuo, installing China’s last Manchu emperor, Pu Yi, as its ruler.
China appealed to the League of Nations to condemn Japan’s aggression, but Japan prevented passage of a resolution asking it to withdraw its troops.
In December 1931, the League agreed to send a committee under the British Lord Lytton to investigate the events in Manchuria.
His report identified Japan as the aggressor, and rejected Japan’s pretext as an unjustified intervention.
Although his report recommended that the members of the League of Nations not recognize the state of Manchukuo, it did not call for applying Article 16 sanctions against Japan.
In February 1933, the Assembly of the League of Nations voted 42 to 1 to accept Lytton’s report on the Japanese invasion of Manchuria.
The one opposing vote was Japan, which then announced its intention to withdraw from the League of Nations.
Overall, the The Rise and Fall of Collective Security 95 Manchurian case showed the procedures of the League of Nations to be slow, cautious, and totally ineffective.
The Ethiopian Debacle The last great test of the League of Nations’ collective-security system came in Ethiopia in 1935.
Italy had long planned to annex Ethiopia; not only was it near Italy’s colonies in Eritrea on the Red Sea, but the fascists felt affronted that the Ethiopians had defeated an Italian effort to colonize them during the imperialist era in the nineteenth century.
Fascist ideologists argued that this historic “wrong” should be rectified.
Between 1934 and 1935, Italy provoked incidents on the border between Ethiopia and Eritrea.
It did so despite the existence of a peace treaty between Ethiopia and Italy, and despite the fact that Italy had signed the Kellogg-Briand Pact outlawing war, and that as a member of the League of Nations, it was committed to arbitrate for three months before doing anything.
The invasion was a clear-cut case of aggression, and the Council of the League avoided an Italian veto by the procedural device of calling for a special conference to decide what sanctions to impose against Italy.
Italy was still allowed to buy steel, coal, and oil; diplomatic relations were not broken; and Britain did not close the Suez Canal to Italy, allowing it to continue shipment of materials to Eritrea.
There was general optimism that the recommended sanctions would force Italy to withdraw from Ethiopia.
Italian exports declined by about one-third during the following year, the value of the Italian lira declined, and there were estimates that Italy’s gold reserves would be exhausted in nine months.
But aside from inflicting economic damage, sanctions did not cause Mussolini to change his policies toward Ethiopia.
The anger of Britain and France over Ethiopia was more than offset by their concern for the European balance of power.
Britain and France wanted to avoid alienating Italy because Germany, now under Hitler’s leadership, was regaining its strength, and Britain and France thought it would be useful to have Italy in a coalition to balance Germany.
In 1934, when it looked as though Hitler would annex Austria, Mussolini moved Italian troops to the Austrian border and Hitler backed down.
The British and French therefore hoped Mussolini could be persuaded to join a coalition against Germany.
Traditional diplomats did not fight the League of Nations’ collective-security system; they reinterpreted it according to the old balance-of-power approach.
From a balance-of-power perspective, the last thing they wanted was to become involved in a distant conflict in Africa when there were pressing problems in the heart of Europe.
Conciliation and negotiation were needed to bring the Italians back into the coalition to balance Germany.
Not surprisingly, the British and French began to get cold feet about sanctions.
Sir Samuel Hoare and Pierre Laval, the British and French foreign ministers, met in December 1935 and drew up a plan that divided Ethiopia into two parts, one Italian and the other a League of Nations zone.
When someone leaked this plan to the press, there was outrage in Britain.
Accused of having sold out the League of Nations and collective security, Hoare was forced to resign.
In March 1936, Hitler denounced the Locarno treaties and marched German troops into the demilitarized Rhineland.
They met with Italy to consult about how to restore the balance of power in Europe.
Consequently, the balance of power in Europe prevailed over the application of the collective-security doctrine in Africa.
In May 1936, the Italians completed their military victory, and by July the sanctions were removed.
The world’s first efforts at collective security were a dismal failure.
THE ORIGINS OF WORLD WAR II World War II overshadows all other wars in terms of its human costs, estimated to be between 35 and 50 million people.
Radar played a significant role, for example, in the Battle of Britain, one of the turning points in World War 11.
And at the end of the war, of course, the atomic bomb ushered in the dawn of the nuclear age.
Unlike World War I, the Western Allies occupied Germany and Japan and transformed their societies during the occupation.
The “German problem” was solved for half a century by dividing Germany.
World War II also created a bipolar world in which the United States and the Soviet Union emerged from the conflict much stronger than the world’s former great powers.
The war represented the end of Europe as the arbiter of the balance of power.
Now Europe became an arena where outsiders contended, somewhat like Germany before 1870.
The end of World War II in 1945 created the framework for world order until 1989.
Act II of the Great War that ended Europe’s hegemony in 1918; the interwar period was only an The Origins of World War II 97 intermission.
Another reason it was not simply Hitler’s war was the war in the Pacific.
Hitler had continually, but unsuccessfully, urged the Japanese to attack the British colony of Singapore or to attack Siberia to divert Soviet troops away from Europe.
Japan did neither; it surprised Hitler by attacking the American naval base at Pearl Harbor instead.
The war in the Pacific, while part of World War II, had different origins and was more a traditional imperial effort at regional hegemony.
P Taylor argues that while Hitler was a terrible person and a very unpleasant adventurer, he was merely an opportunist stepping into the power vacuums created by the appeasement policies of the Western democracies.
I He did not so much aim at war as expect it to happen, unless he could evade it by some ingenious trick, as he had evaded civil war at home.
Those who have evil motives easily I attribute them to others; and Hitler expected others to do what he would have done in I their place.
Taylor, The Origins of the Second War^ I i1 I plan that Taylor dismisses as Hitler’s ranting in resentment of the French invasion of the Ruhr.
But Hitler wrote another, secret book in 1928 that repeated many of the arguments in Mein Kampf.
Even if it was not a detailed plan, it was a clear indication of where he wanted to go.
Colonel Hossbach, an aide to Hitler, took notes at a meeting at Berchtesgaden in 1937 that detailed Hitler’s plan to seize foreign territory by 1943, before Germany’s preeminence became obsolete.
Hitler knew it was important to take opportunities when they arose in the east, and that Austria and Czechoslovakia would be his first targets.
Taylor dismisses the importance of this memo by saying it was not an official memorandum.
Hitler’s Strategy Hitler had four options after he came to power in 1933, and he rejected three of them.
He could have chosen passivity, accepting Germany’s weakened international position.
He could have tried expansion through economic growth (like Japan after World War II) and led Germany to international influence through industrial expansion.
He could have limited his goals to revision of the Treaty of Versailles and regained some of Germany’s 1918 losses.
This option seemed likely even if some other leader had come to power in Germany.
By the 1930s, the Western democracies were sensitive to the injustice of blaming Germany for all of World War I But these three strategies were rejected by Hitler, who chose instead an expansionist strategy to break out from what he saw as Germany’s containment.
In his view, Germany, stuck in the middle of Europe, could not live forever encircled.
He would go east for living space, expand his base, and at a later stage go for a larger world role.
First, he set out to destroy the Versailles framework through a very clever set of diplomatic maneuvers.
In October 1933, he withdrew from the League of Nations and from the disarmament conference the League had convened.
He blamed the withdrawal on the French, who he said were not willing to cut their forces in the disarmament The Origins of World War II 99 conference, thereby making it impossible for Germany to continue in the League or the conference.
In March 1935, Hitler denounced the military clauses of the Versailles treaty, saying Germany would no longer be restricted to an army of 100,000.
The British, French, and Italians met at Stresa to respond to Hitler’s activities, but before they could reach a consensus.
Britain leapt at the opportunity, thereby disrupting any coordinated response from the Stresa meeting.
In March 1936, when events in Ethiopia diverted attention from central Europe, Hitler moved his troops into the Rhineland, which had been demilitarized by the Locarno Pact.
He blamed France for forcing him to do this, claiming France had destroyed the Locarno treaty by developing an arrangement with the Soviet Union.
He dropped hints that he might return to the League of Nations after the other states in Europe accepted his views about the revisions of the Versailles treaty, a clever maneuver that played on guilt and uncertainty in many Western capitals.
The second phase was Hitler’s expansion into the small countries neighboring Germany.
In 1936, Hitler outlined a four-year economic plan for a military buildup in order to be ready for war by 1940.
He signed the Axis Pact with Italy and an Anti-Comintern Pact with Japan.
Hitler also intervened on the side of the fascists in their war against a left-wing democratically elected popular-front government in Spain.
Hitler justified sending troops and bombers to support the fascist general Francisco Franco in the Spanish Civil War as part of the protection of the West against the threat of bolshevism.
In 1937, Spain became a testing ground for Germany’s military muscle when Hitler’s pilots bombed defenseless civilian populations and annihilated the Basque city of Guernica.
Despite widespread international outcry, France, Great Britain, and the United States did little or nothing to defend the loyalists of the Spanish Republic.
The following year, Chancellor Schuschnigg of Austria called for a plebiscite on whether Austria should reunite with Germany, hoping that the Austrian people would vote against it before Hitler forced it upon them.
In 1938, German troops marched into Vienna, ending Austrian independence.
Hitler pressured Czechoslovakia by pushing the issue of national self-determination for the 3 million Germans in the Sudetenland section of Czechoslovakia.
This area where Czechoslovakia borders Germany was militarily important because it included the Bohemian mountains, the natural line of defense for Czechoslovakia and the logical place for Czechs to mount their defense against potential German attack.
He demanded that the German-speaking territory be permitted to leave Czechoslovakia to join the German fatherland.
These events also alarmed Britain, which did not want war to break out in Europe.
Neville Chamberlain, the British prime minister from 1937 to 1940, made three trips to Germany to try to stave off the war.
Chamberlain believed it was not possible for Britain to defend Czechoslovakia because of the distance and because Britain had no troops on the Continent.
More important, he did not think Czechoslovakia was worth war and he knew Britain was not ready for war.
As the bombing of Guernica had shown, air power was becoming more significant, fear of bombing campaigns was growing, and Chamberlain realized the British air defense and radar systems were not ready for an air war.
For this combination.of reasons, Chamberlain met with Hitler at Munich in September 1938 and agreed to the partition of Czechoslovakia, giving the Sudetenland to Germany if Hitler would promise to leave the rest of Czechoslovakia alone.
Only six months later, in March 1939, German troops rolled into the rest of Czechoslovakia and took the capital city, Prague.
A shocked Britain realized Hitler might seek further conquests and that his next target might be Poland.
Divided in the eighteenth century, Poland was re-created as a state after World War I and given a corridor to the port of Danzig on the Baltic Sea, though the area included German-speaking people.
He claimed that having German^speaking people inside Polish territory was a violation of selfdetermination, another example of the perfidy of the Versailles treaty.-This time, Bfitain and France tried to deter Hitler by issuing a guarantee to defend Poland.
Despite having said he would protect the West against bolshevism, Hitler suddenly signed a treaty with Stalin in August 1939.
Hitler seized his part by starting a war against Poland on September 1, 1939.
This time, he was not looking for another Munich agreement in which the British would step in and give him part of Poland in return for promises of moderation.
I am only afraid that at the last moment some swine or other will submit to me a plan for mediation. —Adolf Hitler, August 27, 1939^ Phase three of Hitler’s strategy was short.
In the spring of 1940, however, Hitler feared Britain would move troops to Norway.
He preempted a British landing in Norway by sending his troops there first.
Sending his tanks through the supposedly impenetrable Ardennes Forest in May 1940, Hitler took the French and British by surprise.
He had skirted the Maginot Line of French fortifications that guarded most of the French border with Germany.
German forces drove the British troops back to the port of Dunkirk, where they had to leave their equipment and evacuate what was left of the men across the English Channel.
Thus Hitler became master of the European continent west of the Soviet Union through a brilliant set of moves in 1940.
The fourth phase of Hitler’s plans, “the phase of overreaching” , unleashed the fulLscale war.
But he wanted to dispose of Britain first to avoid the possibility of a war on two fronts.
If he could gain air supremacy, he could then cross the channel and invade Britain.
Hitler decided to attack the Soviet Union even though he had been unable to defeat Britain, thinking he could beat Stalin quickly and then go at Britain once again.
Furthermore, he believed that attacking the Soviet Union would deprive the British of any potential alliance with the Soviet Union.
Hitler probably did this to keep Japan locked into the war, since he had been urging Japan to join him, and he took the occasion to unleash his UToat campaign against American shipping.
In doing so, he also unleashed the global war that ended his Third Reich.
The Western democracies were so guilt ridden, weak, and internally divided that any clever German nationalist probably would have been able to revise the Versailles systems But the second and third phases that brought mastery over Europe depended on Hitler’s skill, audacity, and bellicose ideology.
The fourth phase, which brought on global war and failure, is also attributable to two aspects of Hitler’s personality.
For example, when Germany first invaded the Soviet Union, many Ukrainians and others revolted against Stalin’s brutality.
But Hitler regarded the Slavs as an inferior people, unworthy of an alliance with him against Stalin.
He also thought the United States was weak because of its population of blacks and Jews.
He failed to understand that American pluralism could be a source of strength.
Moreover, his anti-Semitism led him to expel some of the scientists crucial to developing the atomic bomb.
The kind of war it was and its outcome depended very much on Hitler’s monomaniacal personality.
The Versailles treaty was both too harsh because it stirred up German nationalism and too lenient because it left the Germans the capability to do something about it.
Furthermore, the absence of the United States and the Soviet Union from the balance of power until very late in the game meant that Germany was undeterred from pursuing its expansionist policies.
Germany was a revisionist state bound on destroying the Versailles treaty system.
In addition, the growth of ideologies, the great “isms” of fascism and communism, engendered hatred and hindered communication in the 1930s.
First, the Western democracies were torn apart by class cleavages and ideological disputes.
In 1939, the British conservative government sent a mission to Moscow to see whether they could sign a treaty with Stalin, but both the mission and the government were internally divided.
Before the British could make up their minds, Hitler had beat them to it.
One reason for the delay was the British upper-class reluctance to deal with communists.
The Great Depression was systemic in the sense that it affected all countries and grew out of the inability of the major capitalist states to establish effective international economic coordination to deal with imbalances in transnational trade and financial flows.
But the Depression had powerful effects on domestic politics and class conflict.
Visionary goals | 5 of national redemption through European domination and racial purification were at the | I heart of the regime.
These meant constant dynamism and self-perpetuating, intensifying | { radicalism.
The longer the regime lasted, the more megalomaniac were its aims, the more | [i boundless its destructiveness.
Its gamble for world supremacy meant an alliance against j |; extremely powerful allies.
It was a gamble against the odds, in which the regime asked its | i; own destruction and that of Germany itself.
This was Nazism’s essential irrationality. | j' Hitler’s charismatic leadership implied, therefore, not just an unprecedented capacity for | E destruction, but also an inbuilt tendency for self-destruction.
In this sense the suicide of | I the German dictator on 30 April 1945 was not merely a welcome but also a logical end to | s the Third Reich.
I i —Ian Kersha<w, ""Hitler and the Nazi Dictatorship”^ | fully accept the responsibilities of that position.
In the 1930s, the Great Depression increased internal preoccupation and significantly deepened isolationism.
In his first term, President Franklin Roosevelt, along with other Americans, paid little attention to Europe.
After his reelection in 1936, Roosevelt began to realize that if Hitler became too strong, he might dominate Europe and eventually threaten the United States.
In 1937, Roosevelt began to speak about events in Europe, but the American public did not want to get involved.
In 1940, Roosevelt traded destroyers to the British in return for military basing rights in British territories in the Western Hemisphere.
In 1941, he persuaded Congress to approve “lend-lease” war supplies to Britain to prevent it from being defeated by Hitler.
However, Roosevelt was limited by domestic opinion on how far he could go in resisting Hitler.
Only Japan’s attack on Pearl Harbor and Hitler’s subsequent declaration of war ended America’s isolationism.
We could say that the deep causes of World War II were systemic—the unfinished business of World War I The intermediate causes were largely domestic—the social and ideological disruptions that produced Hitler in Germany and the political and economic weaknesses in the democracies.
Courses of World War II The failure of World War I to solve “the German problem” meant there was already some probability of a second war in 1918.
If the Western democracies had chosen to appease Germany in the 1920s and treat it less punitively, the democratic government of the Weimar Republic might have been preserved.
Or if the United States had ratified the Treaty of Versailles and stayed in Europe to preserve the balance of power , Hitler might not have risen to power.
In the 1930s, the shock of the economic depression fueled the rise of ideologies that glorified aggression, making war more likely.
He might not have had such dramatic early successes and might have been overthrown by his own generals, who several times had contemplated such a coup.
By the late 1930s, once Hitler began to plan war, it became almost inevitable.
Even so, some historians believe that if France and Britain had launched an offensive in September 1939, they might have defeated Germany.
Japan’s attention was focused on East Asia, and it was not deeply involved in European events.
In the 1920s, Japan was far from being a perfect democracy, but it did have a parliamentary system.
However, in the 1930s, the military and extreme nationalists gained control of the government.
Japan had always worried about maintaining access to the raw materials it had to import to sustain its economy.
When the Depression cut Japan’s trade, the Japanese feared that if they did not change their situation, they would face a bleak future.
Japan believed the sphere would allow it to resist threats from Britain and the United States, who were still major naval powers in the Pacific.
Japan’s brutal war in China brought Japan into diplomatic conflict with the United States, which supported the Chinese Nationalists.
After France fell to Hitler in 1940, the Japanese took advantage of the opportunity to seize France’s colonies in Southeast Asia, Vietnam, and Cambodia.
Since clashes had already occurred between Japanese and Soviet forces along the border in Manchuria, some people thought a Japanese-Soviet war along the Manchurian border was most likely.
The second option for the Japanese was to strike south, for although they had already taken the French colonies in Southeast Asia, the biggest prize was the Dutch East Indies , which had the oil Japan needed.
Option three was to strike east against the United States, by far the riskiest of the three options.
On December 7, 1941, they struck east against the United States and south toward Indonesia and the Philippines.
While the move south was for raw materials, the attack on the United States is more difficult to explain.
Given the disparity in power resources, the Japanese knew they could not ultimately win a war against the United States, but they hoped the surprise attack on Pearl Harbor would so demoralize the United States that full-scale war would never erupt.
By the fall of 1941, Japanese expansionists no longer considered the Soviet Union a viable target.
Hitler’s attack on the Soviet Union had removed the Soviet threat to Japan.
At the same time, the Americans tried to deter the Japanese from striking south by putting an embargo on oil shipments to Japan.
With 90 percent of their oil imported, they calculated that their navy could not last for even a year if that supply were cut off; therefore they concluded it was better to go to war than to be slowly strangled.
In addition to restricting Japan’s oil supplies, the United States demanded that Japan withdraw from China.
The Japanese believed this would cut them off from the area they viewed as their economic hinterland.
If Germany defeated Britain and American opinion was discouraged by the suddenness of the attack, a negotiated peace might result.
There is no one who is willing to say, “Don’t worry, even if the war is prolonged, I will assume all responsibility.
The role of the individual is certainly less pronounced than it was with Hitler in Europe, but individual policy makers nonetheless influenced the trajectory of events.
In Japan, expansionist generals and admirals wanted to increase Japan’s regional dominance and actively sought an expanded war; west to China; south to Singapore, Indonesia, and the Philippines; and east to United States possessions in the Pacific.
Military leaders such as Hideki Tojo played a leading role in determining government policy.
However, Tojo supported policies identical to those of many other high-ranking military and political leaders.
While Hitler had military and industrial support in Germany, he made decisions largely on his own.
In Japan, there was a greater diffusion of power at the top and decisions were more the result of consensus among the political and military elite.
The role of the individual was also important for determining United States policy.
Franklin Roosevelt was willing to impose punitive sanctions in response to Japanese aggression in Southeast Asia, but many in Congress and throughout America were uneasy with Roosevelt’s activist and confrontational foreign policy.
There was still strong isolationist sentiment in the United States in 1940 and 1941, and many people still rejected United States involvement in international politics.
If an isolationist like Senators Burton Wheeler of Montana, Gerald Nye of North Dakota, or Hiram Johnson of California had been president, the United States might have tried to appease Japanese aggression rather than confront it, and consequently, Japan may never have felt the need to attack the United States.
Of course, Japanese aggression would then have been unchecked, and Japan would have established itself as the regional power in the western Pacific.
In terms of domestic and systemic causes, we have seen how at a domestic level the increased militarism of Japan’s government made war more likely.
And as with Europe in the 1930s, the economic collapse in both Japan and the United States affected the foreign policies of both countries.
Japan became more expansionist, while until 1940 the United States became even more isolated.
That, in turn, increased the influence of the militarists within Japanese domestic politics.
At the system level, the Treaty of Versailles had left the ambitions of Japan in China unsated, while the economic problems of the 1930s made it more difficult for Japan to obtain its needed raw materials by trade alone.
And the breakdown between 1931 and 1933 of the already weak League of Nations’ collective-security system in Asia removed any institutional constraints on Japan’s imperial ambitions.
Unlike the war in Europe, both the deep and intermediate causes of the war in the Pacific were largely domestic—the shift toward expansion in Japan and toward greater isolationism in the United States, and the chaos of 1930s China.
The precipitating causes were Roosevelt’s decision to implement a full embargo in July 1941 and the resulting decision of the Japanese military to attack the United States on December 7.
It is a policy choice to allow for changes in the balance of power that benefit a rival state.
Rather than attempting to deter or contain the aggression of adversaries, a state might prefer to allow its adversaries modest gains.
On the eve of the Peloponnesian War, Corinth argued to the Athenians that it should be allowed to absorb Corcyra.
The Athenians, however, refused to appease Corinth and chose instead to fight.
Given subsequent events, it is possible that Athens would have done better to appease Corinthian ambitions than to challenge them over Corcyra.
Appeasement was used successfully in 1815 when the victorious powers appeased the defeated but still strong France.
We could even argue that appeasement might have been the right policy for the Western Allies to have taken toward Germany in the 1920s.
One of the great ironies of the interwar period is that the West confronted Germany in the 1920s when it should have been appeased and appeased Germany in the 1930s when it should have been confronted.
Appeasement was the wrong approach to Hitler, but British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain was not such a coward as the Munich experience makes him out to be.
When I think of those four terrible years and I think of the 7 million young men who were cut off in their prime and 13 million who were maimed and mutilated.
It is those thoughts which make me feel that it is my prime duty to strain every nerve to avoid repetition of the Great War in Europe, Chamberlain’s sins were not his intentions, but rather his ignorance and arrogance in failing to appraise the situation properly.
World War II was not an unwanted spiral of hostility—it was a failure to deter Hitler’s planned aggression.
In that sense, the policies appropriate for preventing World Wars I and II were almost opposite.
Accommodation of Germany might have helped forestall World War I and deterrence of Germany might have prevented World War II, but the policies were reversed.
At the same time, the efforts of United States leaders to deter Japan helped bring on war in the Pacific.
Deterrence failed because the Japanese felt cornered in a situation in which the alternative of peace looked worse than risking a war.
World War 1 was not purely accidental, and World War II, in the Pacific at least, was not merely Hitler’s planned aggression.
Always ask whether a model is true to the facts of history and whether it really fits the current reality.
As Twain pointed out, a cat that sits on a hot stove will not sit on a hot stove again, but neither will it sit on a cold one.
Ian Kershaw, “Hitler and the Nazi Dictatorship,” in Mary Fulbrook, ed., German History Since 1800 , 336.
Dean Acheson, quoted in Scott Sagan, “The Origins of the Pacific War,” in Robert 1.
Instead, there was a cold war, a period of intense hostility without actual war.
The hostility was so intense that many expected armed conflict between the superpowers.
Fighting occurred, but it was on the peripheries and not directly between the United States and the Soviet Union.
The height of the Cold War was from 1947 to 1963, when there were few serious negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union.
In 1952, George Kennan, the United States ambassador in Moscow, compared his isolation in the American embassy to his experience of being interned during World War II in Berlin.
The later phases of the Cold War in the 1970s and 1980s were very different.
The Americans and Soviets had many contacts, and they constantly negotiated on arms control treaties.
The end of the Cold War occurred quite quickly with the change in Soviet policies after Mikhail Gorbachev came to power in 1985.
Soviet hegemony over Eastern Europe collapsed in 1989, and the Soviet Union itself disintegrated in 1991.
DETERRENCE AND CONTAINMENT What makes the Cold War exceptional is that it was a period of protracted tension that did not end in a war between the two rival superpowers.
To deter is to discourage through fear, and although frequently associated with the Cold War, deterrence was not a new concept in international politics.
Throughout history, countries built armies, formed alliances, and issued threats to deter other countries from attacking.
During the Cold War and with the advent of nuclear weapons, the superpowers depended more on discouraging by threat than on denying by defense after an attack occurred.
Cold War deterrence was closely tied to the maintenance of large American and Soviet nuclear arsenals, but it was also an extension of balance-of-power logic.
Deterrence by nuclear threat was one way each superpower tried to prevent the other from gaining advantage and hence upsetting the balance of power between them.
As we shall see, deterrence often aggravated the tension between the United States and the Soviet Union, and it is not necessarily easy to demonstrate that deterrence worked.
If a professor said her lectures kept elephants out of the classroom, it would be difficult to disprove her claim if no elephants ever came to class.
During the Cold War, containment referred to a specific American policy of containing Soviet communism so as to promote a liberal economic and political world order.
But like deterrence, containment did not originate with the Cold War, even if the term did.
It can use military power in the form of war or alliances; it can use economic power in the form of trading blocs or sanctions; and it can use soft power in the form of promoting ideas and values.
During the Cold War, the United States wavered between an expansive policy of containing communism and a more limited policy of containing the Soviet Union.
Almost since it began, those questions have been the subject of fierce debate among scholars and policy makers.
There are three main schools of opinion; traditionalists, revisionists, and postrevisionists.
The traditiormksts. argue that the answer to the question of who started the Cold War is quite simple; Stalin and the Soviet Union.
At the end of World War II, American diplomacy was defensive, while the Soviets were aggressive and expansive.
Immediately after the war, the United States was proposing a universal world order and collective security through the United Nations.
The Soviet Union did not take the United Nations very seriously because it wanted to expand and dominate its own sphere of influence in Eastern Europe.
After the war, the United States demobilized its troops, whereas the Soviet Union left large armies in Eastern Europe.
The United States recognized Soviet interests; for example, when Roosevelt, Stalin, and Churchill met in February 1945 at Yalta, the Americans went out of their way to accommodate Soviet interests.
Stalin, however, did not live up to his agreements, particularly by not allowing free elections in Poland.
Soviet expansionism was further confirmed when the Soviet Union was slow to remove its troops from northern Iran after the war.
The Soviet Union blockaded Berlin in 1948 and 1949, trying to squeeze the Western governments out.
And in 1950, communist North Korea’s armies crossed the border into South Korea.
According to the traditionalists, these events gradually awakened the United States to the threat of Soviet expansionism and launched the Cold War.
The revisionists, who wrote primarily in the 1960s and early 1970s, believe the Cold War was caused by American rather than Soviet expansionism.
Their evidence is that at the end of World War II, the world was not really bipolar—the Soviets were much weaker than the United States, which was strengthened by the war and had nuclear weapons while the Soviets did not.
The Soviet Union lost up to 30 million people, and industrial production was only half its 1939 level.
Stalin told American Ambassador Averell Harriman in October 1945 that the Soviets would turn inward to repair their domestic damage.
Revisionists come in two varieties that stress the first and second levels of explanation.
Level one revisionists stress the importance of individuals and claim that Roosevelt’s death in April 1945 was a critical event because American policy toward the Soviet Union became harsher after President Harry S Truman took office.
In May 1945, the United States so precipitously cut off the lend-lease program of wartime aid that some ships bound for Soviet ports had to turn around in midocean.
At the Potsdam Conference near Berlin in July 1945, Truman tried to intimidate Stalin by mentioning the atomic bomb.
In 1948, Truman fired Henry Wallace, his secretary of agriculture, who urged better relations with the Soviets.
At the same time, James Forrestal, Truman’s new secretary of defense, was a strong anticommunist.
They see the problem not in individuals, but in the nature of United States capitalism.
Gabriel and Joyce Kolko and William A Williams, for example, argue that the American economy required expansionism and that the United States planned to make the world safe, not for democracy, but for capitalism.
American economic hegemony could not tolerate any country that might try to organize an autonomous economic area.
American leaders feared a repeat of the 1930s because without external trade, there would be another Great Depression.
According to level two revisionists, the Marshall Plan of aid to Europe was simply a way to expand the American economy.
The Soviets were correct to reject it as a threat to their sphere of influence in Eastern Europe.
In Williams’s words, Americans always favored an open-door policy in the international economy because they expected to walk through it.
The postrevisionists of the late 1970s and 1980s, as exemplified by Yale historian John Lewis Gaddis, have yet another explanation that focuses on the structural level.
They argue that the traditionalists and revisionists are both wrong because nobody was to blame for starting the Cold War.
It was inevitable, or nearly so, because of the bipolar structure of the postwar balance of power.
Bipolarity plus the postwar weakness of the European states created a power vacuum into which the United States and the Soviet Union were drawn.
They were bound to come into conflict and, therefore, say the postrevisionists, it is pointless to look for blame.
The Soviets and the Americans had different goals at the end of the war.
Americans had intangible or milieu goals—they were interested in the general context of world politics.
Milieu goals clashed with possession goals when the United States promoted the global UN system while the Soviets sought to consolidate their sphere of influence in Eastern Europe.
The Soviets may have had a sphere of influence in Eastern Europe, but the United States also had a sphere of influence in the Western Hemisphere and Western Europe.
The United States and the Soviet Union were both bound to expand, say the postrevisionists, not because of the economic determinism that the revisionists stress, but because of the age-old security dilemma of states in an anarchic system.
Neither the Americans nor the Soviets could allow the other to dominate Europe any more than Athens could afford to let the Corinthians gain control of Corcyra’s navy.
As evidence, postrevisionists cite Stalin’s comment to a Yugoslav leader, Milovan Djilas, in 1945; “This war is not as in the past; whoever occupies a territory also imposes on it his own social system.
Since the end of the Cold War, a modest flow of documents from formerly inaccessible Soviet archives has given new vigor to the debate over which side started the confrontation.
Gaddis, for example, has become increasingly convinced that the USSR was primarily responsible for the onset and the nature of the superpower conflict.
He cites the ideological rigidity of Stalin and other Soviet leaders, as well as the Kremlin’s equally rigid commitment to maintaining a formal empire in its sphere of influence.
Gaddis’s move back toward a traditionalist viewpoint has garnered a skeptical reception in some scholarly quarters, guaranteeing that the debate will continue into the foreseeable future.
Franklin Roosevelt wanted to avoid the mistakes of World War 1, so instead of a Versailles-like peace, he demanded Germany’s unconditional surrender.
He wanted a liberal trade system to avoid the protectionism that had damaged the world economy in the 1930s and contributed to the onset of war.
The United States would avoid its tendency toward isolationism that had been so damaging in the 1930s.
It would join a new and stronger League of Nations in the form of a United Nations with a powerful Security Gouncil.
Cordell Hull, United States secretary of state during most of the war, was a committed Wilsonian, and public opinion in the United States was strongly in favor of the United Nations.
To promote his great design, Roosevelt needed to maintain bipartisan domestic support for his international position.
Externally, he needed to reassure Stalin that his security needs would be met by joining the United Nations.
He placed too much faith in the United Nations, overestimated the likelihood of American isolationism, and, most important, underestimated Stalin.
Roosevelt thought he could treat Stalin the way he would treat a fellow American politician, throwing his arm around him, bonding politician to politician.
He tried to tie economic aid to political concessions by the Soviets, and refused to share the secrets of the atomic bomb with them.
He was simply realistic about who would have troops in Eastern Europe at the end of the war, and, therefore, who would have leverage in that region.
Roosevelt’s mistakes were in thinking that Stalin saw the world his way, that he understood domestic politics in the United States, and that the same American political skills in which a leader blurred differences and appealed to friendship would work in dealing with Stalin.
The President acted as if genuine cooperation as the Americans understood the term were ^ possible both during and after the war.
Roosevelt apparently had forgotten, if indeed he | ever knew, that in Stalin’s eyes, he was not all that different from Hitler, both of them 3 being heads of powerful capitalist states whose longterm ambitions clashed with those of | the Kremlin.
I —William Taubman, Stalin’s American Policy^ STALIN’S POLICIES Stalin’s immediate postwar plans were to tighten domestic control.
World War II inflicted tremendous damage on the Soviet Union, not just the terrible losses of life and industry already described, but also to the ideology of communism.
Many in the Soviet Union collaborated with the Germans because of their deep resentment over the harshness of communist rule.
Indeed, Stalin had to increase his appeals to Russian nationalism during the war because the weakened communist ideology was insufficient to motivate his people.
Stalin’s isolationist policy at the end of the war was designed to cut off external influences from Europe and the United States.
Stalin used the United States as an objective enemy, urging the Soviet people to tighten down, to pull in.
But it does not follow that Stalin wanted the Cold War that actually developed.
Stalin preferred some cooperation, especially if it helped him pursue his goals in Eastern Europe and brought him some economic assistance from the United States.
As a good communist, he believed the United States would have to give him economic assistance because the capitalist system had to export capital due to insufficient demand at home.
Stalin also believed that in 10 or 15 years, the next crisis of the capitalist system would come along, and at that time the Soviet Union would have recovered and be ready to benefit in the inevitable conflict with the capitalists.
In foreign policy terms, Stalin wanted to protect himself at home, as well as maintain the gains the Soviet Union had made in Eastern Europe from the 1939 pact with Hitler.
Stalin also wanted to probe soft spots, something better done when there is no crisis.
In 1941, Stalin told the British foreign minister Anthony Eden that he preferred arithmetic to algebra; in other words, he wanted a practical rather than a theoretical approach.
Some of Stalin’s early caution in supporting communist governments right away in China, Czechoslovakia, and Hungary fit quite well with this arithmetic rather than algebraic approach to achieving his objectives.
Stalin was a committed communist who, although he saw the world within the framework of communism, often used pragmatic tactics.
At the end of World War II, Truman sent Roosevelt’s former aide, Harry Hopkins, to Moscow to see if some, arrangements could be worked out.
Even after the Potsdam Conference, Truman continued to see Stalin as a moderate.
Indeed, as late as 1949, he compared Stalin to his old friend Boss Pendergast in Kansas-City.
In 1946, George Kennan, writing from Moscow as the United States embassy’s charge d’affaires, was trying to warn American decision makers about Stalin’s tme nature and intentions, and.Winston Churchill gave a famous speech in Fulton, Missouri, warning that an “iron curtain” was falling across Europe.
While Secretary of State James Byrnes was still trying to negotiate a postwar treaty with the Soviets, Truman asked his aide Clark Clifford to prepare a report on what the Soviets were really planning.
When Truman received the report in December 1946, however, he told Clifford he did not want its results widely known, for he was still trying to follow Roosevelt’s great design and had not yet developed a new strategy.
Polarid, of course, had been one of the precipitating causes of World War II, and Americans believed that Stalin broke a clear commitment to hold free elections in Poland after the war.
When Stalin and Roosevelt met at Tehran in 1943, Roosevelt raised the Polish issue, but he appealed to Stalin in the context of the 1944 American election; He had an election coming up, there were many Polish-American voters, and he needed to tell them there would be elections in Poland after the war.
Stalin, who never worried about elections in the Soviet Union, did not take Roosevelt’s concerns seriously.
The February 1945 Yalta agreement was also somewhat ambiguous, and Stalin stretched the meaning as far as he could by setting up a puppet government in Warsaw after Soviet troops had driven out the Germans.
The Americans felt cheated, but Stalin felt the Americans would adjust to the reality that Soviet troops had liberated Poland.
In May 1945, the lend-lease aid program was abruptly stopped, and the economic relationship between the United States and the Soviet Union became strained.
The precipitous termination of lend-lease was to some extent a bureaucratic mistake, but the overall situation was not improved when in February 1946 the United States refused Soviet requests for loans.
The Soviets interpreted those acts as economic leverage for hostile purposes.
At the Yalta meeting, the Americans and the Soviets agreed that Germany should pay $20 billion in reparations, with half going to the Soviet Union.
The details of how and when the payments would be made were not worked out at Yalta, although both sides agreed they would be negotiated later.
At the Potsdam meeting in July 1945, the Soviets demanded their $10 billion; furthermore, they wanted it from the western zones of Germany that the Americans, British, and French had occupied.
Harry Truman, worried about how Germany would be reconstructed, said that if the Soviets wanted to take $10 billion out of Germany, they should take it out of the eastern zone they occupied; if there was anything left over after the reconstruction of the western side of Germany, he would let the Soviets know.
Thus began a series of divisions between the Americans and the Soviets about how to reconstruct Germany.
The Americans, along with the British and French, created a single currency in the western zones, starting the process of West German integration, which in turn caused the Soviets to tighten control of the eastern zone of Germany.
The Soviets were neutral in the Pacific until the last week of the war.
Then the Soviets declared war on Japan, seizing Manchuria and four islands from the north of Japan.
At Potsdam, the Soviets asked for an occupation zone in Japan, like the American occupation zone in Germany.
Truman’s response was, in effect, that the Soviets arrived at the party late, so no zone.
From an American point of view, this seemed perfectly reasonable, but the situation reminded the Soviets of Eastern Europe, where the Americans wanted free elections and influence, but the Soviet armies had arrived there first.
So the Soviets saw the Far Eastern situation as analogous to Eastern Europe, while the Americans saw it as one more example of the Soviets pressing for their own expansion.
Roosevelt had decided not to share the secret of the atomic bomb with the Soviet Union.
Most historians now agree that Truman dropped the bomb at Hiroshima and Nagasaki primarily to bring a quick end to the war with Japan, not to intimidate the Soviet Union, as some revisionists have claimed.
At the Potsdam meeting when Truman told Stalin that America had an atomic bomb, Stalin remained poker faced and seemingly unimpressed.
Of course, Stalin already knew about it from his own spies, but his equanimity was a bit of a jolt to the Americans.
In 1946, when the United States set forth the Baruch Plan for UN control of nuclear weapons, Stalin rejected it because he wanted to build his own bomb.
As he saw it, a bomb under international control would still be an American bomb, for only the Americans knew how to build it.
First, the Soviets refused to remove their troops from northern Iran in March 1946.
The United States supported Iran in a debate within the United Nations.
The Soviets eventually moved, but not without a good deal of bitterness over the event.
The Soviet Union also began to put pressure on Turkey, its neighbor to the south, at the same time that the communists seemed to be winning the civil war in Greece.
These six issues were real, though some misperceptions were involved in almost all of them.
Appeasement would have been interpreted as a soft spot and invited more probing.
A tactical appeal to Stalin’s pragmatism from a firmer American position, plus a willingness to negotiate, might have worked out better in that early period from 1945-1947.
Britain, severely weakened by World War II, felt it could no longer provide security in the eastern Mediterranean.
The United States had to decide whether to let a vacuum develop or to replace British power by providing assistance to Greece and Turkey.
This involved a considerable break from traditional American foreign policy.
Truman was not sure that American public opinion would support such a move.
There was still fear that isolationism would be the mainstay of America’s postwar foreign policy.
Truman asked Senator Arthur Vandenberg, the Republican leader from Michigan, whether the Senate would go along with aiding Greece and Turkey.
Thus when Truman explained the policy change, he did not talk about the need to maintain a balance of power in the eastern Mediterranean by providing aid to Greece and Turkey.
This moralistic, ideological explanation for American assistance became known as the Truman Doctrine.
George Kennan, by then back in the State Department, objected to this ideological approach to formulating foreign policy, arguing that it was too open-ended and would get the United States into trouble.
Indeed, there were enormous ambiguities in the policy of containment that flowed from the Truman Doctrine.
At the beginning, containing Soviet power and containing communist ideology seemed to be the same, but later in the Cold War when the communist movement split, the ambiguities became important.
Some observers feel it is harder to change public opinion in democracies than it is to change policies in totalitarian countries.
They argue that exaggeration speeds up the process of change in democracies.
It is necessary to tug harder on the reins when trying to turn an unruly team of horses.
Regardless of whether the exaggeration was necessary, it helped change the nature of the Cold War.
In June 1947, Secretary of State George Marshall announced a plan for economic aid to Europe.
The initial proposal of the Marshall Plan invited the Soviet Union and the Eastern Europeans to join if they wished, but Stalin put strong pressure on the Eastern Europeans not to do so.
Stalin saw the Marshall Plan not as American generosity, but as an economic battering ram to destroy his security barrier in Eastern Europe.
When Czechoslovakia indicated it would like United States aid, Stalin tightened the screws in Eastern Europe, and the communists took full power in Czechoslovakia in February 1948.
The United States advanced plans for West German currency reform; Stalin replied with the Berlin blockade.
The alarm in Washington was illustrated by a secret government document.
NSC-68 called for a vast increase in the United States defense expenditure.
President Truman resisted NSC-68 until June 1950, when North Korea’s troops crossed the border into South Korea.
The effect of the Korean War was like pouring gasoline onto a modest fire.
Even , I so, it is doubtful whether anything like what happened in the next few years could have ^ p been done had not the Russians been stupid enough to have instigated the attack against | I South Korea and opened the “hate America” campaign.
Kim II Sung, the North Korean leader, pressed Stalin for the opportunity to unify the peninsula.
The United States had said Korea was outside its defense perimeter; Secretary of State Dean Acheson had articulated this position and the Joint Chiefs of Staff had planned accordingly.
Truman remembered Hitler moving into the Rhineland and recalled the axiom that aggression must be resisted everywhere.
Calculated plans about defense perimeters were overshadowed by the historical analogies triggered by North Korea’s invasion.
The United States was able to mobilize the UN Security Council to endorse collective security (which was possible because the Soviet Union was then boycotting the Security Council) and sent troops to Korea under the UN flag to push the communists back above the thirty-eighth parallel that bisected the Korean peninsula.
In September 1950, however, an American amphibious landing at Inchon, halfway up the peninsula, routed the North Koreans.
Had the United States stopped there, it could have claimed victory by restoring the preinvasion status quo, but Truman succumbed to domestic pressures to pursue the retreating communist troops north of the thirty-eighth parallel.
As the Americans approached the Yalu River, which divides Korea from China, the Chinese communists intervened, pushing the UN troops back to the middle of the peninsula.
There the battle stalemated bloodily for three years until a truce was signed in 1953.
The United States had become embroiled with China, and communism appeared to be monolithic.
At home, the frustrating war led to domestic division and the rise of McCarthyism, named after the harsh and poorly founded accusations of domestic communist subversion made by Senator Joseph McCarthy of Wisconsin.
The intense ideological climate hampered the working of the United Nations, restricted clear communication, and contributed to the immoderate process of the international system.
Under such systemic conditions, conflicts would have arisen over the six issues just identified, or some others, and proven difficult to resolve.
After all, there were different phases of the hostility, and since the bipolarity of the system did not change until 1989, structural explanations cannot explain the different phases or depth of the hostility.
That is where individuals and domestic politics matter Roosevelt and Truman, Stalin and Khrushchev.
Domestic politics have to be considered to fldly understand the extent of the Cold War.
The revisionists are right to focus on domestic questions, but they are wrong to focus so strongly on economic determinism.
More important was the role of ideology and exaggeration in domestic politics.
Stalin used ideology because of Soviet domestic problems after the war, and Truman exaggerated the nature of the communist threat in order to rally support for changing American foreign policy.
Ironically, alternative strategies at different times might have alleviated the depths of hostility.
For example, if the United States had followed Kennan s advice and responded more firmly in 1945—1947, and had tried more pragmatic negotiation and communication from 1947—1950, Cold War tensions might not have mounted to the extent they did in the early 1950s.
In the nineteenth century, Alexis de Tocqueville predicted that Russia and the United States were bound to become two great continental-scale giants in the world.
Realists might thus predict that these two would become locked in some form of conflict.
And of course, in 1917, the Bolshevik Revolution added an ideological layer to the conflict.
When Woodrow Wilson first heard of the Russian Revolution, he congratulated the Russian people for their democratic spirit.
But it did not take long before the Americans were accusing the Bolsheviks of regicide, expropriation, and cooperation with Germany in World War I The United States added a small contingent of troops to an Allied intervention, allegedly to keep the Russians in the war against Germany, but the Soviets saw it as an attempt to strangle communism in its cradle.
Despite these differences, the United States and the Soviet Union avoided serious conflict in the interwar period and became allies in the early 1940s.
The bipolarity that followed the collapse of all the other great powers in World War II and the resulting power vacuum changed the relationship.
Earlier there had been distrust between the two countries, but they distrusted each other at a distance.
Before World War II they could avoid each other, but after 1945 they were face to face, Europe was divided, and deep conflict began after 1947.
Some people wonder whether the bipolar structure had to have this effect.
Causes of the Cold War The answer is that the key stakes in world politics, the countries that could tip the balance of power, were located on the peripheries of the Soviet Union, particularly Europe and Japan.
As George Kennan described the situation after the war, there were four great areas of technological and industrial creativity, which, if they were allied one way or the other, could tip the global balance of power.
The fact that Europe and Japan became allied with the United States against the Soviet Union was of profound importance.
For that we need to go beyond systems explanations to look at the societal and individual levels of analysis and constructivist explanations.
At the societal level, the two countries were very different from each other.
In addition, the communist system treated class rather than individual rights as the basis for justice.
The ideological overlay gave an additional outward thrust to traditional Russian imperialism and resulted in a secret and tightly held foreign policy process.
It is interesting to note the strengths and weaknesses of that process.
The strengths were evident in 1939 when Stalin was able to quickly sign the nonaggression pact with Hitler.
Public opinion did not constrain him, and he did not have to worry about a bureaucracy holding him back.
He was free to rush into the pact with Hitler while the British and French were still dithering about whether or not to deal with him.
The opposite side of the same coin became evident in 1941, however, when Hitler attacked the Soviet Union.
Stalin was unable to believe Hitler would do such a thing and went into a deep depression for more than a week.
The result was disastrous for Soviet defenses in the early phases of the war.
In contrast, the American political culture emphasized liberal democracy, pluralism, and fragmentation of power.
Instead of shame of backwardness, the United States took pride in its technology and expanding economy.
Instead of a fear of invasion, for much of its history, the United States had been able to isolate itself between two oceans while it invaded its weaker neighbors.
In terms of secrecy, the United States was so open that governmental documents often reached the press within a matter of days and weeks.
Instead of a class basis for conceptions of justice, there was a strong emphasis on individual justice.
The foreign policy that resulted from this political culture was moralistic, public, and tended to oscillate between inward and outward orientation.
The result was that the American foreign policy process was often inconsistent and incoherent in many of its surface aspects.
The strengths of openness and pluralism often protected the United States from deeper mistakes.
Thus it is not surprising that these two societies, so differently organized and with such different foreign policy processes, would confuse each other.
We saw examples of that in the way both Roosevelt and Truman dealt with Stalin in the 1940s.
The Americans were like a white noise machine that produced so much background noise that it was difficult to hear the true signals clearly.
Thus the Soviets were often confused about what the Americans really wanted.
United States AND SOVIET GOALS IN THE COLD WAR The Soviets were often accused of being expansionist, of being a revolutionary power rather than a status quo power.
We can see this in the demands that Stalin, Churchill, and Roosevelt brought to the bargaining table at Yalta.
Churchill wanted the restoration of France to help balance Soviet power in case the Americans went home.
Roosevelt wanted the United Nations and an open international economic system.
In some ways, Stalin’s postwar goals were classic Russian imperialist goals; he wanted to keep the gains he had made in the treaty with Hitler.
Some Americans thought the Soviets were as expansionist as Hitler in desiring world domination.
Others said the Soviets were basically security oriented; their expansion was defensive.
There were at least two ways in which Soviet expansionism was not like Hitler’s.
When Hitler invaded Poland, he worried he would be offered another Munich instead of the war he wanted for the glory of fascism.
Another difference was that the Soviet Union was cautiously opportunistic, not recklessly adventuresome.
Adventurism was seen as a sin against communism because it might disrupt the predicted course of history.
During the Cold War, the Soviet Union was never as bellicist or as reckless as Hitler was.
Nonetheless, there are problems in portraying Soviet behavior as purely defensive.
As we know from the Peloponnesian War, it is very hard in a bipolar world to distinguish offense from defense.
Certain actions may have defensive motives but may look very threatening to the other side.
Moreover, there is a long tradition of defensive expansion, or imperialism.
For example, in the nineteenth century, Britain originally went into Egypt to protect the sea routes to India.
After it took Egypt, it thought it had to take the Sudan to protect Egypt, and then it had to take Uganda to protect the Sudan.
After it took Uganda, Britain had to take Kenya to build a railway to protect Uganda.
The appetite grows with the eating as the security dilemma is used to justify further and further expansion.
Soviet communism added an ideological motive of freeing working classes in all areas of the world, which further legitimized expansion.
In short, the Soviet Union was expansionist during the Cold War, but cautiously and opportunistically so.
During the Cold War, the United States government wanted to contain the Soviet Union.
Those two ambiguities in the ends and means of containment were hotly debated in the period before the Korean War.
George Kennan dissented from the rather expansive version of containment that Truman proclaimed.
But the United States has it in its power to mcrease | j| enormously the strains under which Soviet policy must operate, to force upon the Kremlin | I a far greater degree of moderation and circumspection than it has had to observe in recent | g years, and in this way to promote tendencies which must eventually find their outlet in | }| either the break-up or the gradual mellowing of Soviet power.
In 1948, Tito split with Stalin over Soviet efforts to control Yugoslavia’s foreign policy, including its support for the Greek communists.
According to an ideologically driven containment policy, the United States should not help Yugoslavia because it was communist.
But in a containment policy driven by balance-of-power considerations, the United States should help Yugoslavia as a means of weakening Soviet power.
It provided military aid to a totalitarian communist government despite the fact that the Truman Doctrine proclaimed the goal of defending free peoples everywhere.
The United States did this for balance-of-power reasons, and the policy put a big dent in Soviet power in Europe.
After the Korean War, however, Kennan’s approach to containment lost ground.
Then it looked as though the NSC-68 predictions of Soviet expansionism had been justified.
Communism seemed monolithic after the Chinese entered the Korean War, and the rhetoric of containment emphasized the ideological goal of preventing the spread of communism.
In this context, the United States made the costly mistake of becoming involved in Vietnam’s civil war.
For nearly two decades , the United States tried to prevent communist control of Vietnam, at a cost of 58,000 American lives, more than a million Vietnamese lives, $600 billion, and domestic turmoil that undercut support for the policy of containment itself.
In addition to containing communism in South Vietnam, the United States feared that a defeat might weaken the credibility of its global military commitments, and thus containment in other parts of the world.
Ironically, after the United States defeat and withdrawal from Vietnam in 1975, nationalist rivalries among the communist countries in Asia proved to be an effective force for maintaining the balance of power in the region.
THE REST OF THE COLD WAR In 1952, Dwight Eisenhower was elected president on a campaign pledge to end the Korean War and to roll back communism.
Within six months, however, it became clear that rolling back communism was too risky in terms of precipitating nuclear war.
After Stalin died in 1953, the frozen relations of the Cold War thawed slightly.
Soviet summit in Geneva and both sides agreed to the establishment of Austria as a neutral state.
The secret leaked out and contributed to a period of disarray in the Soviet sphere in Eastern Europe.
Hungary attempted to revolt, but the Soviets intervened militarily to keep it within the communist camp.
Khrushchev decided he needed to get the Americans out of Berlin and reach a final settlement of World War II so he could consolidate the Soviet hold on Eastern Europe and begin to take advantage of the decolonization occurring in the Third World.
But Khrushchev’s style and efforts to negotiate with the United States were reminiscent of the Kaiser’s style in trying to force the British to bargain before 1914, full of bluster and deception.
Efforts to make the United States come to terms had the opposite effect.
From 1963 to 1978, there was a gradual detente, or relaxation of tensions.
The Vietnam War diverted United States attention more to the threat from Chinese communism.
From 1969 to 1974, the Nixon administration used detente as a means to, pursue the goals of containment.
The Vietnam War led to the American public’s disillusionment with Cold War interventions.
Nixon’s strategy was to negotiate a strategic arms control treaty with the Soviet Union to cap each nation’s nuclear arsenal at relative parity; to open diplomatic relations with China and thus create a three-way balance of power in Asia (rather than pushing the Soviets and the Chinese together); to increase trade so there would be carrots as well as sticks in the U.S.-Soviet relationship; and to use “linkage” to tie the various parts of policy together.
The high point of detente occurred in 1972 and 1973, but it did not last very long.
The Middle East War of 1973 and Soviet assistance to anti-Western movements in Africa led to bad feelings about who misled whom.
American domestic politics contributed to the decline of detente when American legislators such as Senator Henry Jackson tried to link trade with the Soviet Union to human rights issues, such as the treatment of Soviet Jews, rather than to behavior in balance of power terms.
In 1975, when Portugal decolonized Angola and Mozambique, the Soviet Union transported Cuban troops to help keep communist-oriented governments in power there.
One argument is that detente was always oversold, that too much was expected of it.
More to the point is that there were three trends in the 1970s that undercut it.
One was the Soviet military buildup, in which the Soviets increased their defense spending by nearly 4 percent annually and introduced new heavy missiles that particularly worried American defense planners.
Second was the Soviet interventions in Angola, Ethiopia, and Afghanistan.
The Soviets thought that these military actions were justified by what they called the changing “correlation of forces in history, their belief that history was moving in the directions that Marxism-Leninism predicted.
The result of the interaction of Soviet acts and United States political trends confirmed the view that the Cold War persisted, that detente could not last.
However, the renewed hostility in the 1980s was not a return to the Cold War of the 1950s.
There was a return to the rhetoric of the 1950s, but actions were quite different.
Even though President Ronald Reagan talked about the Soviet Union as an “evil empire,” he pursued arms control agreements.
There was increased trade, particularly in grain, and there were constant contacts between Americans and Soviets.
Because the origins of the Cold War were very heavily related to the division of Europe by the United States and the Soviet Union, the end of the Cold War might be dated by when the division ended in 1989.
When the Soviet Union did not use force to support the communist government in East Germany and the Berlin Wall was pierced by jubilant crowds in November 1989, the Cold War could be said to be over.
George Kennan argued right after World War II that if the United States could prevent the Soviet Union from expanding, there would be no successes to feed the ideology, and gradually Soviet communism would mellow.
New ideas would arise, people would realize that communism was not the wave of the future, that history was not on its side.
American military power helped deter Soviet expansion while the soft power of American culture, values, and ideas eroded communist ideology.
The Yale historian Paul Kennedy has argued that empires overexpand until that overexpansion saps the empire’s internal strength.
With more than a quarter of its economy devoted to defense and foreign affairs (compared to 6 percent for the United States in the 1980s), the Soviet Union was overstretched.
But Kennedy went on to say that none of the overexpanded multinational empires in history ever retreated to their own ethnic base until they had been defeated or weakened in a great power war.
The Soviet Union, however, was not defeated or weakened in a great power war.
A third explanation is that the United States military buildup in the 1980s forced the Soviets to surrender in the Cold War.
There is some truth to that insofar as President Ronald Reagan’s policies dramatized the extent to which the Soviets were imperially overstretched, but it does not really answer the basic question.
After all, earlier periods of American military buildup did not have that effect.
We must look for deeper causes, because to think that American rhetoric and policy in the 1980s were the prime cause of the Soviet Union’s decline may be similar to the rooster who thought that his crowing before dawn caused the sun to come up—another example of the fallacy of spurious causation.
The most important precipitating cause of the end of the Cold War was an individual, Mikhail Gorbachev.
However, the reform snowballed into a revolution driven from below rather than controlled from above.
In both his domestic and foreign policy, Gorbachev launched a number of actions that accelerated both the existing Soviet decline and the end of the Cold War.
When he first came to power in 1985, Gorbachev tried to discipline the Soviet people as a way to overcome the existing economic stagnation.
When discipline was not enough to solve the problem, he launched the idea of perestroika, or “restructuring,” but he was unable to restructure from the top because the Soviet bureaucrats kept thwarting his orders.
To light a fire under the bureaucrats, he used a strategy of glasnost, or open discussion and democratization.
Gorbachev believed that airing people’s discontent with the way the system was working would put pressure on the bureaucrats and help perestroika work.
But once glasnost and democratization let people say what they were thinking, and vote on it, many people said, “We want out.
Gorbachev unleashed the disintegration of the Soviet Union, which became increasingly evident after the failed coup by hard-liners in August 1991.
Gorbachev’s foreign policy, which he called “new thinking,” also contributed to the end of the Cold War.
One was changing ideas that constructivists emphasize, such as the concept of common security in which the classical security dilemma is escaped by joining together to provide security.
Gorbachev and the people around him said that in a world of increasing interdependence, security was a non-zero-sum game, and all could benefit through cooperation.
The existence of the nuclear threat meant all could perish together if the competition got out of hand.
The other dimension of Gorbachev s foreign policy change was his view that expansionism is usually more costly than beneficial.
The Soviet control over an empire in Eastern Europe was costing too much and providing too little benefit, and the invasion of Afghanistan had been a costly disaster.
It was no longer necessary to impose a communist social system as a way to ensure security on Soviet borders.
Thus by the summer of 1989, the Eastern Europeans were given more degrees of freedom.
Hungary allowed East Germans to escape through its territory into Austria.
This exodus of East Germans put enormous pressure on the East German government.
Additionally, Eastern European governments no longer had the nerve (or Soviet backing) to put down demonstrations.
In November, the Berlin Wall was pierced a dramatic conclusion to a crescendo of events occurring over a very short period.
We can argue that these events stemmed from Gorbachev’s miscalculations.
He thought communism could be repaired, but in fact, in trying to repair it, he punched a hole in it.
And like a hole in a dam, the pent-up pressures began to escape, rapidly increasing the opening and causing the entire system to collapse.
In the early 1980s, three old Soviet leaders died, one soon after the other.
It was not until 1985 that the younger generation, the people who had come up under Khrushchev, the so-called generation of 1956, had their chance.
Two important intermediate causes were soft povyer of liberal ideas, emphasized in con' structivist explanations, and imperial overstretch, emphasized by realists.
The ideas of openness and democracy and new thinking that Gorbachev used were Western. ideas that had been adopted by the generation of 1956.
One of the key architects of perestroika and glasnost, Aleksandr Yakovlev, had been an exchange student in the United States and was attracted to American theories of pluralism.
The growth of transnational communications and contacts pierced the Iron Curtain and helped spread Western popular culture and liberal ideas.
The demonstrated effect of Western economic success gave them additional appeal.
While hard military power deterred Soviet expansionism, soft power ate away the belief in communism behind the Iron Curtain.
When the Berlin Wall finally fell in 1989, it did not succumb to an artillery barrage, but to an onslaught of civilian hammers and bulldozers.
As for imperial overstretch, the enormous Soviet defense budget began to affect other aspects of Soviet society.
EventU' ally even the military became aware of the tremendous burden caused by imperial overstretch.
In 1984, Marshall Ogarkov, the Soviet chief of staff, realized the Soviet Union needed a better civilian economic base and more access to Western trade and technology.
But during the period of stagnation, the old leaders were unwilling to listen and Ogarkov was removed from his post.
Communism’s loss of legitimacy over the postwar period was quite dramatic.
In the early period, immediately after 1945, communism was widely attractive.
Many communists had led the resistance against fascism in Europe, and many people believed that communism was the wave of the future.
The Soviet Union gained a great deal of soft power from their communist ideology but they squandered it.
Soviet soft power was progressively undercut by the de'Stalinization in 1956 that exposed his crimes; by the repressions in Hungary in 1956, in Czechoslovakia in 1968, and in Poland in 1981; and by the growing transnational communication of liberal ideas.
Although in theory communism aimed to instill a system of class justice, Lenin’s heirs maintained domestic power through a brutal state security system involving reform camps, gulags, broad censorship, and the use of informants.
The net effect of these repressive measures on the Russian people was a general loss of faith in the system as voiced in the underground protest literature and the rising tide of dissent advanced by human rights activists.
Behind this, there was also decline in the Soviet economy, reflecting the diminished ability of the Soviet central planning system to respond to change in the world economy.
Stalin had created a system of centralized economic direction that emphasized heavy metal and smokestack industries.
HisI torians can no more reconstruct what actually happened than maps can replicate what is I really there.
But we can represent the past, just as cartographers approximate terrain.
And I the end of the Cold War and at least the partial opening of documents from the former ^ I Soviet Union, Eastern Europe, and China, the fit between our representations and the j; i reality they describe has become a lot closer than it once was. i —John L Gaddis, “The NeuJ Cold War History”^ thumbs and no fingers—and tended to stockpile labor rather than transfer it to growing service industries.
As the economist Joseph Schumpeter pointed out, capitalism is creative destruction, a way of responding flexibly to major waves of technological change.
At the. end of the twentieth century, the major technological change of the third industrial revolution was the. growing role of information as the scarcest resource in an economy.
The deep secrecy of its political system meant that the flow of information was slow and cumbersome.
There was a great deal of turmoil in the world economy at the end of the twentieth century, but the Western economies using market systems were able to transfer labor to services, to reorganize their heavy industries, and to switch to computers.
For instance, when Gorbachev came to power in 1985, there were 50,000 personal computers in the Soviet Union; in the United States there were 30 million.
Four years later, there were about 400,000 personal computers in the Soviet Union, and 40 million in the United States.
Market-oriented economies and democracies proved more flexible in responding to technological change than the centralized Soviet system that Stalin created for the smokestack era of the 1930s.
According to one Soviet economist, by the late 1980s, only 8 percent of Soviet industry was competitive at world standards.
It is difficult to remain a superpower when 92 percent of industry is subpar.
The end of the Cold War was one of the great transforming events of the twentieth century.
It was equivalent to World War II in its effects on the structure of the international system, but it occurred without war.
In the next chapters, we turn to what this may mean for international politics in the future.
Following the breakup of the Soviet Union, Russia has undergone a significant transformation.
Renouncing the planned economy of the Soviet state, post—Cold War Russia tentatively embarked on a path of democratization and economic liberalization.
Yet shock therapy so disrupted Russian society that it was quickly shelved in favor of a more gradualist approach.
As the economic situation deteriorated, Russian nationalism was rejuvenated.
Theorists such as Michael Doyle, hypothesizing that liberal democracies do not fight wars with one another, have concluded that if Russia makes a successful transition to democracy, it will bode well for international peace.
It remains to be seen whether Russian foreign policy will fit the model of the democratic peace, or whether a resurgence of Russian authoritarianism and nationalism will challenge the United States and Western Europe.
Just as important as the question of why the Cold War ended is the question of why it did not turn hot.
Why did the Cold War last so long without a “hot war” erupting between the two superpowers.
THE ROLE OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS Some analysts believe that advanced developed societies learned from the lessons of World War I and World War II and simply outgrew war.
Others believe that the “long peace” in the second half of the twentieth century stemmed from the limited expansionist goals of the superpowers.
Still others credit what they consider the inherent stability of pure bipolarity in which two states are dominant.
But for most analysts, the largest part of the answer lies in the special nature of nuclear weapons and nuclear deterrence.
Physics and Politics The enormous destructive power of nuclear weapons is almost beyond comprehension.
In fact, all the explosive power used in World War II could fit in one 3-megaton bomb, and that one bomb could fit in the nose cone of one large intercontinental missile.
By the 1980s, the United States and the Soviet Union together had more than 50,000 nuclear weapons.
For example, the theory of nuclear winter holds that a nuclear war would create so much carbon and dust in the atmosphere that it would block sunlight, preventing plants from conducting photosynthesis and leading to the end of life as we know it.
A National Academy of Sciences study reported that nuclear winter is possible, but highly uncertain.
Much would depend on whether the weapons were aimed at cities rather than at other weapons.
Burning cities would cause smoke with a high carbon content that would block sunlight, but it is uncertain how long the smoke would stay aloft.
Some skeptics argued the worst result would not be nuclear winter, but nuclear autumn—a faint consolation.
The certainty is that a large-scale nuclear war would destroy civilization as we know it, at least in the Northern Hemisphere.
The world of anarchic states with no higher government above them continued in the nuclear age.
In 1946, when the United States proposed the Baruch Plan to establish international control of nuclear weapons, the Soviet Union viewed it as just another American plot.
After this failure, Albert Einstein lamented that everything changed except our thinking.
Perhaps apocryphally, he is supposed to have said that “physics is easier than politics.
There are both military and political reasons why nuclear weapons did not have a more dramatic effect right after 1945.
For one thing, the early atomic weapon did not do significantly more damage than the most deadly uses of mass conventional weapons.
The firebombing of the German city of Dresden in 1945 killed more people than the nuclear bombing of Hiroshima.
Though one atomic weapon did the work of a entire air attack using conventional bombs, at first there were not that many nuclear weapons in the United States arsenal.
Many military planners thought atomic bombs were not totally different, just extensions of conventional warfare.
The emerging U.S.-Soviet rivalry also slowed change in political thinking.
The Soviet Union mistrusted the United Nations and saw it as too reliant on the United States.
The United States could not coerce the Soviets into cooperation because Europe was a hostage between the Soviets and the Americans.If the United States threatened nuclear attack, the Soviets could threaten to invade Europe with conventional forces.
The revolutionary physical effects of nuclear technology were initially not enough to change the ways states behaved in an anarchic system.
The second stage of the nuclear revolution occurred in 1952 when the hydrogen bomb was first tested.
Hydrogen bombs rely on the fusion energy released when atoms are fused into one, instead of split apart as in the early fission bombs.
The H-bomb vastly increased the amount of destruction possible with a single weapon.
Ironically, the more important change that accompanied the development of the H-bomb was miniaturization.
Fusion made it possible to deliver enormous amounts of destructive power in very small packages.
The systems built to deliver the early atomic bombs got bigger and bigger as the bombs increased in size and required more space as the bombs increased in size.
The B-36 bomber was a huge eight-engine airplane with one big cavity to hold one bomb.
A hydrogen bomb, on the other hand, could put the same potential destruction in a much smaller package.
The increased destructiveness of hydrogen bombs also dramatized the consequences of nuclear war.
No longer could warfare be considered merely an extension of politics by other means.
Karl von Clausewitz , a nineteenth-century Prussian general and military strategist, said war is a political act, and therefore absolute war is an absurdity.
The enormous destructive power of nuclear weapons meant there was now a disproportion between the military means and virtually all the political ends a country might seek.
This disjunction between ends and means caused a paralysis in the use of the ultimate force in most situations.
Nuclear weapons have not been used since 1945, thus the view that nuclear weaponry is muscle-bound.
The H-bomb had five significant political effects, even though it did not reorganize the anarchic way in which the world goes about its business.
The first half of the twentieth century saw a change from the limited wars of the nineteenth century to the two world wars, which took tens of millions of lives.
But war in the second half of the century was more like the old wars of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries; for instance, though the Korean and Vietnam wars each cost more than 55,000 American deaths, they remained limited in scope and scale.
In Vietnam and Afghanistan, the United States and the Soviet Union each accepted defeat rather than use their ultimate weapon.
In the past, war was the time when all the cards were face up on the table.
But in the nuclear age, war is too devastating and the old moments of truth are too dangerous.
Third, nuclear weapons made deterrence (discouragement by fear) the key strategy.
It was now critical to organize military might to produce fear in advance so attack would be deterred.
In World War II, the United States relied on its ability to mobilize and gradually build a war machine after the war started, but that mobilization approach no longer worked when a nuclear war could be over in a matter of hours.
A fourth political effect was the development of a de facto regime of superpower prudence.
During the Cold War, the United States and the Soviet Union engaged in proxy or indirect peripheral wars, but in no case did the two nations go head to head.
While the Americans talked about rolling back communism in Eastern Europe in the 1950s, in practice, when the Hungarians revolted against their Soviet rulers in 1956, the United States did not rush in to help them for fear of nuclear war.
Similarly, with the exception of Cuba, the Soviets were relatively careful about incursions into the Western Hemisphere.
Technology made it easier to cooperate in times of crisis by making comrnunication between leaders in the bipolar system more flexible and personal.
Simultaneously, the codification of a number of arms control treaties, starting with the Limited Test Ban Treaty in 1963, and frequent arms control negotiations became a way to discuss stability in the nuclear system.
Fifth, nuclear weapons in general and the Fl-bomb in particular were seen by most officials as unusable in time of war.
There was a stigma attached to the use of nuclear weaponry that simply did not apply to conventional weaponry.
By the late 1960s, in fact, engineers and scientists had managed to shrink the payload of nuclear weapons so that some nuclear weapons could have been used by the United States in Vietnam and the Gulf War or by the Soviet Union in Afghanistan without causing the type of unjustifiable damage of an H-bomb.
Yet both Americans and Russians refrained from using smaller-pay load nuclear weapons and opted instead for destructive tools such as napalm, incendiary bombs, and assorted conventional weapons.
In part, it was feared that using any nuclear weapon, no matter how similar to conventional weapons, would open the window to using all nuclear weapons, and that risk was unacceptable.
Ever since the first bomb was dropped by the United States on Hiroshima, there was a lingering sense that nuclear weapons were immoral, that they went beyond the realm of what was acceptable in war.
Though that normative restraint is hard to measure, it clearly suffused the debates over nuclear weapons and was one reason for the unwillingness of states to use them.
Both sides followed a policy of preventing preponderance by the other, but the result was different from previous systems.
Unlike the nineteenth-century balance-of-power system in which five great powers shifted,alliances, the Cold War balance was very clearly organized around two very large states, each capable of destroying the other in an instant.
The problems raised by the classical security dilemma were not ended by the terror of nuclear weapons, but the superpowers acted prudently despite their ideological differences.
Their prudence was similar to the effects of the constant communications that occurred in managing the multipolar nineteenth-century balance of power.
At the same time, the superpowers tried to calculate balances of force, just as in the days when statesmen compared provinces, infantry, and artillery.
Some neorealists such as Kenneth Waltz define bipolarity as situations in which two large states have nearly all the power, but that type of pure bipolarity is rare.
Even though they were independent states, the alliances . around Athens and around Sparta coalesced tightly into a bipolar situation.
Similarly, on the eve of World War I the alliance systems became tightly bound into bipolarity.
Waltz argues that bipolarity is a particularly stable type of system because it simplifies communication and calculations.
On the other hand, bipolar systems lack flexibility and magnify the importance of marginal conflicts such as the Vietnam War.
The conventional wisdom in the past was that bipolarity either erodes or explodes.
Perhaps the prudence produced by nuclear weapons provided the answer, and the stability that Waltz attributed to pure bipolarity was really the result of the bomb.
Imagine that in August 1914 the Kaiser, the Czar, and the Emperor of Austria-Hungary looked into a crystal ball and saw a picture of 1918.
They would have seen that they had lost their thrones, their empires had been dismembered, and millions of their people had been killed.
Knowledge of the physical effects of nuclear weapons may be similar to the effect of giving leaders in the post-1945 period a crystal ball.
Because few political goals would be proportionate to such destruction, they would not want to take great risks.
Of course, crystal balls can be shattered by accidents and by miscalculations, but the analogy suggests why the combination of bipolarity and nuclear weapons produced the longest period of peace between the central powers since the beginning of the modem state system.
Problems of Nuclear Deterrence Nuclear deterrence is a subset of general deterrence, but the peculiar qualities of nuclear weapons changed how the superpowers approached international relations during the Cold War.
The political scientist John Mueller argues that nuclear weapons were irrelevant, that they were no more than the rooster crowing.
He argues that the peoples of Europe had been turning away from war as a policy instrument ever since the horrors of World War 1.
The cause of peace was the increased recognition of the horror of war, at least in the developed world.
According to Mueller, Hitler was an aberration, a rare person who had not learned the lessons of World War 1 and was still willing to go to war.
After World War II, the general revulsion toward war returned more strongly than before.
Crises over Berlin, Cuba, and perhaps the Middle East might have spiraled out of control without the prudence instilled by the crystal ball effect of nuclear weapons.
Effective deterrence requires both the capability to do damage and a credible threat that the weapons will be used.
For example, an American threat to bomb Moscow in retaliation for a nuclear attack was probably credible.
But suppose the United States had threatened to bomb Moscow in 1980 if the Soviets did not withdraw their troops from Afghanistan.
The United States certainly had the capability, but the threat would not have been credible because the stakes were too low, and the Soviets could easily have threatened in return to bomb Washington.
So deterrence is related not just to capability, but also to credibility.
That problem of credibility leads to a distinction between deterring threats against one’s homeland and extending deterrence to cover an ally.
For example, the United States could not stop the Soviet Union from invading Afghanistan by nuclear deterrence, but for the four decades of the Cold War it threatened to use nuclear weapons if the Soviet Union invaded the NATC countries of Western Europe.
Thus to look for the effects of nuclear weapons in extending deterrence and averting war, we must look at major crises in which the stakes are high.
From 1945 to 1949, the United States alone had nuclear weapons, but did not use them.
So there was some self-restraint even before mutual nuclear deterrence.
By the 1950s, both the United States and the Soviet Union had nuclear weapons, and American leaders considered their use in several crises.
Nuclear weapons were not used in the Korean War, or in 1954 and 1958 when the Chinese communists mobilized forces to invade the Nationalist-held island of Taiwan.
Presidents Truman and Eisenhower vetoed the use of nuclear weapons for several reasons.
In the Korean War, it was not clear that dropping a nuclear weapon would stop the Chinese, and the United States was concerned about the Soviet response.
There was always the danger that the threats might escalate and the Soviets might use a nuclear weapon to help their Chinese ally.
So even though the Americans had superiority in the number of nuclear weapons, there was the danger of heading to a larger war involving more than Korea and China.
The Role of Nuclear Weapons In addition, ethics and public opinion played a role.
In the 1950s, United States government estimates of the number of citizens who would be killed by a nuclear attack were so high that the idea was put aside.
President Eisenhower, when asked about using nuclear weapons, said, “We can’t use those awful things against Asians for the second time in less than ten years.
This 13'day period was probably the closest call in the nuclear age to a set of events that could have led to nuclear war.
If a total outsider, a “man from Mars,” had looked at the situation, he would have seen that the United States had a lY-to-l superiority in nuclear weaponry.
We now know the Soviets had only about 20 nuclear weapons on intercontinental missiles that could have reached the United States, but President Kennedy did not know it at the time.
The answer was that if even one or two of the Soviet missiles had escaped and been fired at an American city, that risk was enough to deter a United States first strike.
Cuba, which had || I long been a virtual colony of the United States, had recently moved into the Soviet orbit.
President John F Kennedy told the American public that, to the best of his underS I standing, these weapons were defensive, not offensive.
Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev 1 I had given him absolute assurances that this was the case.
Taken from very high altitude by a U-2 reconnaissance | ■j plane, these photographs showed the Soviets in Cuba setting up nuclear-armed ballistic | I missiles targeted on cities in the continental United States.
For the next 13 days, Kennedy and a circle of advisers I I debated how to cope with the challenge.
They knew that one possible outcome was I K nuclear war, and during their discussions Kennedy’s civil defense expert offered the chilli ing information that the United States population was frighteningly vulnerable.
One of the most striking differences among the participants was how much each indivi ual had been willing to take risks.
That in turn depended on how likely each thought were the prospects of nuclear war.
Robert McNamara, Kennedy s secretary of defense, became more cautious as the crisis unfolded.
Douglas Dillon, who was the secretary of the treasury, said he thought the risks of nuclear war were about zero.
He did not see how the situation could possib y progress to nuclear war and as a result was willing to push the Soviets harder and to take more risks than McNamara was.
General Maxwell Taylor, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, also thought the risk of nuclear war was low, and he complained that the United States let the Soviet Union off too easily in the Cubari Missile Crisis.
He argued that Kennedy could have pushed much harder and should have demanded the removal of Cuba’s president, Fidel Castro.
The moral of the story is that a little nuclear deterrence goes a long way.
But the question of how much the United States won and why it won is overdetermined.
One view is that because the United States had more nuclear weapons than the Soviet Union, the Soviets gave in.
A second explanation adds the importance of the relative stakes of the two superpowers in the crisis.
An American naval blockade and the possibility of an American invasion of Cuba also played a role.
The psychological burden was on the Soviets because higher stakes and readily available conventional forces gave the Americans more credibility in their deterrent position.
We can conclude that nuclear deterrence mattered in the crisis and that the nuclear dimension certainly figured in Kennedy’s thinking.
It was not the ratio of nuclear weapons that mattered so much as the fear that even a few nuclear weapons could wreak such devastation.
In 1963, a hotline allowing direct communication between Washington and Moscow was installed, an arms control treaty limiting atmospheric nuclear tests was signed, Kennedy announced the United States would be willing to trade mote with the Soviet Union, and there was some relaxation of tension.
Through the late 1960s, the United States was preoccupied with the Vietnam War, yet there were still arms control efforts.
Intense fear of nuclear war returned after the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan in 1979.
During “the little cold war” from 1980 to 1985, strategic arms limitation talks stalled, rhetoric became particularly harsh, and military budgets and the number of nuclear weapons increased on both sides.
President Ronald Reagan talked about nuclear war fighting, and peace groups pressed for a freeze and ultimate abolition of nuclear weapons.
As we saw earlier, just war theory argues that certain conditions must be met in making moral judgments.
Self-defense is usually regarded as a just cause, but the means and consequences by which a war is fought are equally important.
In terms of the means, civilians must be distinguished from combatants; in terms of consequences, there has to be some proportionality, some relationship of the ends and the means.
Lowyield nuclear weapons such as artillery shells and depth charges might be used against radar systems, submarines, ships at sea, or deep underground command bunkers.
In that case, we could discriminate between combatants and noncombatants and keep the effects relatively limited.
If the fighting stopped there, we could fit nuclear weapons within just war theory.
But would fighting stop there or would it i In 1962 President Kennedy insisted that each member of the National Security Council | read Barbara Tuchman’s The Guns of August.
The book is the story of how the nations of | i Europe inadvertently blundered into World War 1.
The author begins by quoting Bismarck’s | I comment that “some damned foolish thing in the Balkans” would ignite the next war.
She | i then related the series of steps—following the assassination on June 28, 1914, of the | I Austrian heir apparent, Archduke Franz Ferdinand, by Serbian nationalists—each small and g I insignificant in itself, that led to the most appalling military conflict in the history of the a i world.
Time and again, at the brink of hostilities, the chiefs of state tried to pull back, but | i the momentum of events dragged them forward. ^ is President Kennedy reminded us of the 1914 conversation between two German i chancellors on the origins of that war.
Nuclear weapons probably played a significant role in preventing the Cold War from turning hot.
During the 1980s, the American Association of Catholic Bishops said that nuclear deterrence could be justified on a conditional basis as a tolerable interim measure until something better was developed.
So long as nuclear knowledge exists, some degree of nuclear deterrence will exist.
Although the weapons produced prudence during the Cold War, complacency is a danger.
It took the United States and the Soviet Union some time to learn how to control nuclear weapons, and it is far from clear that such control systems will exist among new aspirants to nuclear status such as North Korea and Iran.
After the Gulf War in 1991, UN inspectors uncovered and destroyed major Iraqi nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons programs.
The fear that such programs could be reconstituted was one of the causes of the Iraq War in 2003.
Newspaper accounts of nuclear material making its way out of the former Soviet Union and into the international black market demonstrate that these weapons can still cause tension and bring nations to the brink of war.
Khan, had sold nuclear secrets to a number of countries, including Libya, Iran, and North Korea.
Moreover, the reports that terrorist groups such as the Japanese Aum Shinrikyo cult and Osama bin Laden’s A1 Qaeda network were investigating the production of nuclear and biological weapons indicate that they may someday become available to nonstate actors as well.
The continued international worry about weapons of mass destruction has both a moral and a realist dimension.
The moral opprobrium against nuclear weapons is shared not just by states that do not have the capacity or desire to make such weapons, but even by states that continue to have them, such as the United States, Prance, and Russia.
Weapons of mass destruction carry great risk of escalation and enormous potential for devastation.
Weak states with nuclear or unconventional weapons are better able to threaten strong states, while strong states with these weapons can more effectively threaten and deter adversaries.
At the same time, the risk that these devices will be used if a crisis spins out of control raises the level of tension, whether it is between the United States and North Korea or between India and Pakistan.
And the threat of use by terrorists adds a chilling dimension in which deterrence is not a sufficient response.
The Cold War may be over, but the era of nuclear and unconventional weapons is not.
Some historians argue that the real question is not why the Cold War occurred, but why it did not escalate into a “hot” war.
George Kennan, “The Sources of Soviet Conduct,” Foreign Affairs 25:4 , 581.
Gaddis, John L., Russia, the Soviet Union, and the United States , chaps. and 7.
Chapter Major war became less likely after the end of the Cold War, but regional and domestic conflicts persist and there will always be pressures for outside states and international institutions to intervene.
Most ethnic wars occur where established mechanisms for mediating conflicts break down.
The inability of governments to mediate conflict frequently occurs in the aftermath of collapsed empires, such as the European colonial empires in Africa or the Soviet Empire in the Caucasus and Central Asia.
Such failed states either never had a strong government or their governments were undermined by economic conditions, loss of legitimacy, or outside intervention.
Thus even though the end of the bipolar conflict of the Cold War led to the withdrawal of foreign troops from Afghanistan, Cambodia, Angola, and Somalia, communal war continued.
And in the former Yugoslavia, which held together to preserve its independence in a bipolar world, the death of President Tito and the end of the Cold War weakened the ability of the central government to mediate ethnic conflicts.
Constructivists point out that ethnicity is not an immutable fact that inevitably leads to war.
It is socially constructed in the sense that symbols, myths, and memories can be altered over time.
For example, in Rwanda, which suffered a genocide in 1994, people spoke the same language and had the same skin color, but there were economic class differences between the Tutsi people who had migrated into the area with a cattle-based culture centuries earlier and the larger number of agricultural Hutu people.
Over time, intermarriage and social change had blurred some of the distinctions, but they were reinforced during colonial rule.
In the 1994 genocide in which 750,000 Tutsis were killed, many Hutus who urged moderation or who appeared to be Tutsi were also murdered.
The breakup of the former federation of Yugoslavia in 1991 also led to ethnic conflicts.
Some of the worst fighting occurred between Serbs, Croats, and Muslims in Bosnia, the most heterogeneous of the Yugoslav republics.
But one can also regard the conflict as one between rural areas where old identities and myths were strongest, and urban communities where many people had intermarried and come to identify themselves as “Yugoslavs” rather than as Croats, Serbs, or Muslims.
Once Yugoslavia collapsed and fighting broke out, some of these people had new identities thrust upon them.
As one man told me in 1993, “All my life I considered myself a Yugoslav, not a Muslim.
Or when I asked a Bosnia Croat military commander during a battle in Mostar how he knew whom to shoot because people on the street looked so similar, his reply was that before the war, you would have to know their name, but now uniforms made it easy.
UN imposes arms embargo on all members of the former I Yugoslav Republic.
I Summer 1992 i Reports of “ethnic cleansing”—a policy of killing or driving away inhabitants to create 1 I ethnically “pure” areas—against Muslims in Bosnia.
I j Winter 1992-1993 , J UN humanitarian convoys to Muslim enclaves in Bosnia are blocked by Serb forces.
Vance-Owen Peace Plan, proposing to divide | 0 Bosnia along ethnic lines, is rejected by Bosnian Serb Parliament.
I Summer 1994 [j Bosnian government army makes advances against separatist Serbs, recapturing some of I the territory around Bihac, in Bosnia’s northeast corner. l| Fall 1994 i -■ Serb forces recapture the region around Bihac.
In retaliation, NATO bombs runways of Si Serb'controlled airport in Krajina.
August-September 1995 Sj Croatian forces capture Krajina area from Serbs and force local Serbs to flee in massive }} ethnic'cleansing operation.
I March 1999 I Kosovo Albanians and Yugoslavia fail to reach an agreement in Paris.
Thousands of Kosovo Albanians flee to Albania, creating a I massive refugee crisis.
I June 1999 s NATO suspends bombing after 78 days when Serbia begins to withdraw troops from I Kosovo.
September 2000 Vojislav Kostunica wins more votes than Milosevic, but the federal elections commission says Kostunica did not receive a majority.
Kostunica supporters reject the I findings, and begin a campaign of strikes and civil disobedience to force Milosevic to I step down, if October 2000 I A huge rally in front of the Parliament ends with protestors storming the building and I setting it on fire.
A day later Milosevic concedes defeat, and Kostunica is sworn in as president.
Commandos raid his compound and a gun battle I ensues with Milosevic’s bodyguards.
UN chief prosecutor Carla Del Ponte announces a second arrest warrant for Milosevic for crimes committed in Bosnia.
November 2005 10 years after the Dayton Accord was signed, international peacekeepers remain deployed to the Balkans and final status issues remain unresolved.
March 2006 Milosevic found dead in his prison cell; medical experts say he died of natural causes.
Humans always differentiate themselves into groups, and sometimes the differences are accompanied by prejudice and hatred.
While no two conflicts are exactly the same, a common dynamic is that ethnic symbols and myths create divisions; economic rivalries or the weakening of state authority create fears for group survival.
Elites or leaders then mobilize support by appealing to ethnic symbols, and any number of events, (such as Bosnia’s declaration of independence in 1992 or the death of Rwanda’s president in an April 1992 plane crash,) can spark the fighting.
Political scientist John Mueller stresses the role of violent groups who achieve their ends by manipulating ethnic myths and fears.
Political entrepreneurs and extremist groups use the emotional power of ethnic symbols to reconstruct the larger group’s preferences.
The classic security dilemma that we described in Chapter 1 arises among rational actors when lack of trust and inability to enforce agreements under anarchic conditions causes serious conflicts to erupt.
In addition to the problem that rational actors face in the structural conditions of anarchy, the security dilemmas involved in the early stages of ethnic conflict often grow out of the manipulation of emotional symbols by those who prefer violence.
INTERVENTION AND SOVEREIGNTY Where failed states exist or genocide is threatened, some analysts believe outsiders should ignore sovereignty.
Intervention is a confusing concept, partly because the word is both descriptive and normative.
It not only describes what is happening, but it also casts value judgments.
Nonintervention in the internal affairs of sovereign states is a basic norm of international law.
International anarchy—the absence of a higher government is not the same as chaos if basic principles are observed.
Sovereignty and nonintervention are two principles that provide order in an anarchic world system.
Nation-states are communities of people who deserve the right to develop a common life within their own state boundaries.
Sovereignty is a concept that has been applied to many states where it fits poorly.
For example, group and clan fighting meant that no government was effectively in control in Sierra Leone, Liberia, and Somalia at the beginning of the twenty-first century.
Thus there is often a tension between justice and order that leads to inconsistencies about whether to intervene.
Some analysts use the term more narrowly to refer to forcible interference in the domestic affairs of another state.
At the low end of the scale, intervention may be simply a speech designed to influence domestic politics in another state.
Bush appealed to the Iraqi people to overthrow Saddam Hussein, and in 1999, Saddam appealed to the peoples of several Arab states to overthrow their leaders.
Such speeches are designed to interfere in the domestic politics of another state—often without much effect.
In the 1980s, the United States government established Radio Marti to broadcast its messages against Fidel Castro in Cuba, but Castro was still in power at the turn of the new century.
Economic assistance can also influence the domestic affairs of another country.
For example, during the Cold War United States economic aid to El Salvador and Soviet aid to Cuba were designed to influence domestic affairs in those states.
During the Cold War, American and Soviet intelligence agencies often poured resources into foreign elections in an attempt to engineer a favorable outcome.
Similarly, in the 1970s, the government of South Korea spent a great deal of money to help elect United States politicians who were more favorable to its interests.
A little further along the spectrum of coercion is the provision of military advisers.
In the late 1950s, during the early days of the Vietnam War, the United States began its intervention first with economic and later with military assistance.
Similarly, the Soviet Union and Cuba provided military aid and advisers to Nicaragua and other “client” states.
For example, in the early 1970s, the United States channeled money to the opponents of Salvador Allende, the democratically elected president of Chile, and at various times the Soviet Union channeled money to peace groups in Western European countries.
More recently, the United States has provided financial assistance to nascent democratic movements to several former Soviet bloc countries, including Ukraine.
For example, in the 1980s the United States bombed Libya in response to its support of terrorism, and the Soviet Union helped one faction fighting a civil war in South Yemen.
In 1998, the United States launched cruise missile attacks into Sudan and Afghanistan in reprisal for terrorist attacks against American embassies in East Africa.
And it used air and ground support for local forces to overthrow the Taliban government in Afghanistan after the September 2001 terrorist attacks on American soil.
Full-scale military invasion or occupation is the upper end of the spectrum of coerciveness.
Examples include United States actions in the Dominican Republic iri 1965, Grenada in 1983, Panama in 1989, and Iraq in 2003; and the Soviet Union’s actions in Flungary in 1956, Czechoslovakia in 1968, and Afghanistan in 1979.
For example, in 1979 Tanzania sent troops into Uganda, and Vietnam invaded Cambodia.
In 1997, tiny Rwanda intervened militarily in the affairs of its troubled large neighbor, Congo.
Some interventions are multilateral, but often one state takes the lead.
For example, the United States led the 1995 UN intervention in Haiti and NATO’s 1999 intervention in Kosovo, and Nigeria led a group of West African states that intervened in Liberia and Sierra Leone in the 1990s.
The broad definition of intervention therefore includes the whole range of behavior, from not very coercive to highly coercive.
The degree of coercion involved in intervention is important because it relates to the degree of choice that the local people have, and thus the degree of outside curtailment of local autonomy.
Sovereignty Sovereignty was a vital concept of the Westphalian system and was reinforced by the Covenant of the League of Nations and the Charter of the United Nations.
It is also at the heart of debates about the legitimacy of intervention.
For several reasons, even popular and effective governments rarely have full control over everything that happens within their borders.
But the Socialists found that the French economy was so interdependent with the other European economies that when they tried to make changes unilaterally, capital fled abroad and the value of the French franc dropped.
Ultimately, France’s Socialists returned to a common economic policy with the other European states.
Interdependence did not limit French legal sovereignty, but it certainly limited de facto control.
France was too economically interdependent to pursue a fully autonomous economic policy.
Similarly, in 1998, the Asian financial crisis created uncertainties in world markets that forced sovereign governments as physically distant as Russia and Brazil to devalue their currencies and change economic policy.
We shall look further at the challenges that economic globalization poses for sovereignty in the next chapter.
Economic interdependence is only one of several factors impinging on sovereignty.
Refugees from Haiti and Cuba who fled to the United States led to political debates in Washington in 1993 and 1994, while Rwandan refugees poured into neighboring Burundi and Congo, exacerbating ethnic conflict there.
The influx of arms into northern Pakistan from Afghanistan throughout the 1980s and 1990s limited the ability of the Pakistani government to control its northern territory, while the illegal influx of drugs into the United States from abroad has created problems of law and order domestically.
States may be sovereign in the legal sense, but outside actors affect internal affairs.
Some poor states may have low de facto autonomy because they have very low capabilities.
Some kinds of intervention may actually increase capabilities and thus real autonomy in the future.
Economic or military assistance may help a state become more independent in the long term—for example, the UN intervened in Cambodia in the 1990s to help it develop institutional capabilities after two decades of civil strife.
These are some of the complications in the relationship of sovereignty, autonomy, and intervention.
Judging Intervention For skeptics, moral judgments do not matter, but realists, cosmopolitans, and state moralists have different views of intervention.
For realists, the key values in international politics are order and peace, and the key institution is the balance of power; they believe that intervention can be justified when it is necessary to maintain the balance of power and to maintain order.
The Soviets articulated a right to inter' vention in 1968 with the Brezhnev Doctrine, which claimed that they had a right to intervene to preserve socialism in their sphere of influence.
Realists might justify such interventions on the grounds that they preserved order and prevented the possibility of misunderstandings and miscalculations that might escalate to war, particularly nuclear war.
For them, the key international institU' tion is a society of individuals.
During the Cold War, liberal coS' mopolitans argued that intervention was justified against right'wing regimes such as the Marcos dictatorship in the Philippines or the apartheid regime in South Africa , while conservative cosmopolitans said that inter' vention was justified against left'wing governments.
In the 1980s, some Americans proclaimed a Reagan Doctrine when defending the United States’ right to inter' vene against the Sandinista government in Nicaragua and against the communist governments in Angola and Mozambique because of their violation of democratic rights.
In the 1990s, with the end of the Cold War, cosmopolitans urged humani' tarian intervention in Somalia to halt widespread starvation, in Haiti to restore a democratically elected leader to power, in Bosnia to stop a civil war, and in Kosovo to stop “ethnic cleansing” triggered by the government of Slobodan Milosevic in Serbia.
What cosmopolitans, left and right, shared is the view that intervention is justified if it promotes individual justice and human rights.
For state moralists, the key value in international politics is the autonomy of the state and its people.
The key institution is a society of states with certain rules and international law.
Of these precepts, the most important is nonintervention in the sovereign territory of another state.
Consequently, state moralists believe that inter' vention is justified only to defend a state’s territorial integrity or to defend its sovet' eignty against external aggression.
For example, in June 1967, Israel preemptively attacked Egypt in response to its decision to deny Israel access to vital shipping lanes and mass troops along its border.
In Just and Unjust Wars, Michael Walzer, a political scientist who presents the state moralist position, discusses four situations that could morally justify war or military intervention in the absence of overt aggression.
If there is a clear and sufficient threat to a state’s territorial integrity and political sovereignty, it must act right away or it will have no chance to act later.
Such an argument would not justify, for example, the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan.
A preventive war occurs when leaders believe merely that war is better now than later.
As we have seen, views regarding preventive war influenced the German general staff in 1914, which feared that if Germany waited until 1916 to launch a war, Russia would be too strong for the Schlieffen Plan to work.
Walzer’s first exception to nonintervention would not have allowed a preventive war because there was no clear and present danger to Germany.
And as we saw earlier with our counterfactual examples, many other things might have changed the situation between 1914 and 1916.
During the buildup to the 2003 Iraq War, United States officials blurred this classic distinction by claiming that a preventive strike against Iraq was preemptive even though the threat of an Iraqi attack against the United States or its allies was not imminent.
The second exception to the strict rule against intervention occurs when intervention is needed to balance a prior intervention.
This rule goes back to John Stuart Mill and the nineteenth-century liberal view that a people has the right to determine its own fate.
If an intervention prevents local people from determining their own fate, a counterintervention nullifying the first intervention can be justified because it restores the local people’s right to decide.
Mill’s argument permits intervention only as far as it counterbalances a prior intervention; more than that is not justifiable.
The overriding principle is to allow the local people to solve their own problems.
The United States sometimes used this as a justification for its involvement in Vietnam.
In 1979, China intervened in Vietnam by crossing the border, but China pulled its troops back within a few weeks.
China argued that it was countering Vietnam’s intervention in Cambodia.
The third exception to the rule against intervention is when it is necessary to rescue people who are threatened with massacre.
If such people are not saved from total destruction, there is no point to nonintervention as a sign of respect for their autonomy or rights.
In 1979, Tanzania invaded Uganda when a dictatorial leader was slaughtering large numbers of people, and it justified its intervention as rescuing people threatened by massacre.
Still, massacres or genocide do not necessarily lead states or the international community to intervene.
Note the reluctance of the United States to send troops to Rwanda in 1994, to Bosnia between 1992 and 1995, to Liberia in 1996, to Sierra Leone in 1999, and to Congo in 2003.
In 2005, in the troubled Darfur region of Sudan, support for a military intervention to stop the killing of various ethnic groups was limited to a modest, regional peacekeeping operation led by the African Union.
The fourth exception to nonintervention is the right to assist secessionist movements when they have demonstrated their representative character.
Such a view is consistent, at least, with the principle of nonintervention and a society of states, but it is deficient as a moral principle because it suggests that might makes right.
Self-determination is generally defined as the right of a people to form its own state.
This is an important principle, but there is always the question of who determines.
Consider Somalia, whose people, unlike many other African states, had roughly the same linguistic and ethnic background.
Neighboring Kenya was formed by colonial rule from dozens of different peoples or tribes, with different linguistic backgrounds and customs.
Somalia said the principle of national self-determination should allow the Somalis in the northeastern part of Kenya and the Somalis in the southern part of Ethiopia to secede because they were one Somali nation.
Kenya and Ethiopia refused, saying they were still in the process of building a nation.The result was a number of wars in northeast Africa over the Somali nationalist question.
The ironic sequel was that Somalia itself later fragmented in a civil war among its clans and warlord leaders.
Catholics objected that if a vote were held within the political area of Northern Ireland, the two-thirds Protestant majority would rule.
Protestants replied that if a vote were held within the geographical area of the entire island, the two-thirds Catholic majority would rule.
In the 1960s, the Somalis wanted to vote right away; Kenya wanted to wait 40 or 50 years while it went about its nation-building, or reshaping tribal identities into a Kenyan identity.
For example, after the dismantlement of the Austrian Empire in 1918, the Sudetenland was incorporated into Czechoslovakia even though the people spoke German.
After the Munich Agreement in 1938, the Sudeten Germans seceded from Czechoslovakia and joined Germany, but that meant the mountainous frontier went under German control, which was a terrible loss for Czech defenses.
They argued that the oil belonged to all the people of Nigeria, not just the eastern area.
Indonesia has made the same argument about secessionist demands in its oil-rich province of Aceh.
After 1989, the issue of self-determination became acute in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union.
Throughout the former Soviet Union, different ethnic groups claimed the right of self-determination, just as many of them had done between 1917 and 1920.
In the Caucasus, Azerbeijanis, Armenians, Georgians, Abkhazians, and Chechens all demanded states on the basis of self-determination.
As we have seen, in the former state of Yugoslavia, different ethnic and religious groups seceded and claimed self-determination.
The Slovenes, Serbs, and Croats managed to carve out independent republics in the early 1990s, but the Muslims in Bosnia-Herzegovina were less successful.
While both Serbia and Croatia had small ethnic minorities, Bosnia was more ethnically diverse and its population included large minorities of Serbs and Croats.
After 1992, Bosnian Muslims were subjected to a campaign of ethnic cleansing by both Croatian and Serb forces.
The war in Bosnia was devastating for the civilian population, and war-crimes tribunals were convened in The Hague, starting in 1996, to convict those responsible for the massacres.
Yet for much of the conflict, the United Nations, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization , and the European Union were divided over how to respond.
If it was not simple aggression by Serbia, then the only grounds for intervention would be to prevent a massacre.
As with Rwanda, the international community was united in its condemnation of the Balkan violence, but was unable to agree on effective joint action until late in the conflict, in 1995, when a NATO peacekeeping force was sent to the troubled area.
Questions of self-determination continue to plague the Balkans even though the Dayton Accords stopped the Bosnian civil war between Muslims and Serbs in 1995.
In Kosovo, a province of Serbia with a large ethnic Albanian Muslim population, an independence movement had been gaining momentum since the death of Yugoslav communist leader Josip Tito in 1980.
In 1997 an armed insurgent group known as the Kosovo Liberation Army began attacks on Serbian security forces within Kosovo, prompting a retaliatory crackdown by Serbian President Milosevic.
American and European diplomats monitored the situation carefully as human rights conditions deteriorated in the province, and it became clear that the Clinton administration was unwilling to let Kosovo become another Bosnia, where thousands of Muslims had been massacred.
After negotiations and sanctions against Serbia failed to make a difference, the United States and NATO bombed Serbia for 78 days in the spring of 1999.
Milosevic pulled Serb troops out of Kosovo in June, and NATO deployed an international stability force to the troubled province.
Though the killing has stopped, an agreement regarding the “final status” of Kosovo remains elusive.
Adolf Hitler used the principle to undermine fragile states in the 1930s.
With less than 10 percent of the world’s states being homogeneous, it is clear that treating self-determination as a primary rather than secondary moral principle could have disastrous consequences for many parts of the world.
The best hope for the future is to ask what is being determined as well as who determines it.
In situations where groups have difficulties living together, it may be possible to allow a degree of autonomy in the determination of internal affairs.
Internal self-determination could allow degrees of cultural, economic, and political autonomy similar to that which exists in countries like Switzerland or Belgium.
Where such loosening of the bonds is still not enough, it may be possible in some cases to arrange an amicable divorce as happened when Czechoslovakia peacefully divided into two sovereign countries on January 1, 1993.
But absolute demands for self-determination are more likely to become a source of violence unless handled extremely carefully.
THE VIETNAM WAR A good example of misunderstanding self-determination was the Vietnam War, which cost more than 58,000 American and some three million Vietnamese lives over two decades between 1957 and 1975.
With the support of the United States, the South successfully blocked a referendum on reunification that had been agreed to at Genevea.
American Intervention in ViETNy\M || The United States sent its troops into Vietnam to reverse the verdict of a local struggle, which | I meant, in turn, imposing a ghastly cost in death and suffering upon the Vietnamese.
I I As it turned out, the United States could not reverse that verdict finally; it could only delay its | I culmination.
And we were in the difficult I position of urging a relatively complex argument at a moment when most Americans, proI S and antiwar, wanted blinding simplicities.
It feared that if South Vietnam fell, other noncommunist governments in Southeast Asia would topple like a row of dominoes.
The North Vietnamese government and its southern allies viewed the war as a continuation of the struggle against the French for independence and self-determination.
After fifteen years of fighting, direct United States involvement ended with the signing of a peace treaty in Paris in 1973.
The war between the North and South continued until Hanoi succeeded in uniting the country in 1975.
But rather than a toppling of dominoes, a unified Vietnam wound up fighting with its communist neighbors, Cambodia and China.
If the United States had correctly interpreted the conflict as being more about nationalism and self-determination than communism, it might have seen the conflict in terms of the balance of power and used a metaphor of checkers rather than dominoes to guide its policy.
Ironically, the communist government of Vietnam and the United States today enjoy good relations.
All three are important because judging interventions by one dimension alone may yield an incomplete understanding of the conflict.
On the other hand, good intentions alone do not justify an intervention.
For example, the writer Norman Podhoretz argued that the United States was right to intervene in Vietnam because the Americans were trying to save the South Vietnamese from totalitarian rule.
It is a rainy night; your friend drives too fast and skids off the road and your daughter is killed.
I wanted to get her home early for a good night’s rest before the SATs.
You, however, are no doubt more concerned with the consequences of her actions.
Likewise, Podhoretz’s argument that the American action in Vietnam was what he called “imprudent but moral” fails to account for consequences.
In evaluating inter' ventions, we have to consider more than the motivation; appropriate means and good consequences must be considered as well.
In the Vietnam War, it was not enough that the United States tried to save South Vietnam from the horrors perpetrated by North Vietnamese communists.
Even if the cause was just, the means used are a different proposition.
As obvious as it seems, we must still emphasize the need to be careful about situations where there is enormous complexity and very long causal chains.
Motives, means, and consequences must all be considered before judgments can be made.
As we have seen, in the early stages just after World War II, the issue was whether the United States should step into Britain’s place in the eastern Mediterranean to defend Turkey and Greece against possible Soviet encroachment.
United States policymakers struggled with how to frame this intervention to the American people.
Others, such as Undersecretary Dean Acheson and Senator Arthur Vandenberg, pushed for a moral argument to appeal to the American people’s belief in a universal right to freedom.
Consequently, when President Truman explained his actions in the Truman Doctrine, he talked of protecting free people everywhere.
The diplomat George Kerman, who had warned against Stalin’s aggressive plans, became disillusioned as containment became highly ideological.
He argued that the United States was trying to contain Soviet power; therefore, anything that balanced Soviet power without intervening directly with American troops was for the good.
But those who took the more ideological view said the United States should contain communism directly, through more aggressive means.
Over time, the argument for balancing Soviet power gave way to a broader view of containment as keeping the world free from communism.
In Vietnam, this view caused leaders to underestimate national differences among communist states.
The United States began to think it had to contain Chinese and Soviet power and the spread of communist ideology.
By the time the doctrine of containment moved from the eastern Mediterranean in 1947 to Southeast Asia in the 1950s, it had become a justification for an overly ambitious and ill-fated intervention.
In conclusion, although the simple absolute principle of nonintervention is frequently breached in practice, the norm of nonintervention remains important.
The same principles can be applied to the Iraq War, as we will see shortly.
INTERNATIONAL LAW AND ORGANIZATION Sovereignty and nonintervention are enshrined in international law and organization.
People sometimes have problems understanding international law and organization because they use a domestic analogy.
But international organization is not like domestic government, and international law is not like domestic law.
International organizations do not act as an incipient world government for two reasons.
First, the sovereignty of member states is protected in the charters of most international organizations.
In other words, the organization is not an effort to replace the nation'States.
Domestic Analogies The other reason that international organization is not incipient world government is because of its weakness.
There is an international judiciary in the form of the International Court of Justice, which consists of 15 judges elected for nine-year terms by the United Nations, but the International Court of Justice is not a world supreme court.
States may refuse its jurisdiction, and a state may refuse to accept its judgments, even if the state has accepted the court’s jurisdiction.
In the 1980s, for example, the Reagan administration refused to accept an International Court of Justice ruling that the United States had acted illegally in mining the harbors of Nicaragua.
If we imagine the UN General Assembly as the equivalent of Congress, it is a very strange kind of legislature.
It is based on the principle of one state, one vote, but that principle does not reflect either democracy or power relations in the world.
In the UN General Assembly, the Maidive Islands with 100,000 people in the southern Indian Ocean has one vote and China, a country with more than a billion people, has one vote.
That means a Maidive Islander has 10,000 times the voting power of a Chinese in the UN General Assembly, which does not fit well with the democratic criteria for legislatures.
Nor is it a very good reflection of power, because the Maidive Islands has the same vote in the General Assembly as the United States or India or China.
So there is an oddity about the General Assembly that makes states unwilling to have it pass binding legislation.
Finally, we might imagine that the secretary-general of the United Nations is the incipient new president of the world.
If the secretary-general has power, it is more like the soft power of a Pope than the combination of hard and soft power a president possesses.
Trying to understand international organizations by analogy to domestic government is a sure way to get the wrong set of answers.
Domestic law is the product of legislatures and customs, sometimes called common law.
Domestic law involves provisions for enforcement, adjudication by individuals (you can go to a court yourself and bring suit), and orderly revision by legislation.
Public international law is similar in the sense that it consists of treaties, which are agreements among states, and customs, which are the generally accepted practices of states.
On enforcement, there is no executive to make a state accept a court decision.
In the classic ways of international law, enforcement was sometimes provided by the great powers.
For example, in the Law of the Sea, a custom developed that a state could claim a 3'mile jurisdiction out into the oceans.
In the nineteenth century when Umguay claimed broader territorial seas to protect the fisheries off its coasts, Britain, the great naval power of the day, sent gun' boats within 3 miles of the coast.
The answer is that enforcement in selffhelp systems is a one'way street.
Instead of any of the world’s biL lions of citizens bringing cases to the international court, only the states can bring cases, and they are unlikely to bring cases unless they want to get them off their docket or think they have a reasonable chance of winning.
In the 1990s, special tribunals were established to try war criminals from the Bosnian and Rwandan conflicts, and in 2002 a large number of states established an International Criminal Court to try war and genocide criminals if their national governments failed to try them.
However, a number of significant states, including the United States and China, refused to ratify the treaty because they felt it infringed on their sovereignty.
In addition, there are problems about how customary rules should be interpreted even when a principle is agreed on.
It is accepted that a state can nationalize a corporation from another country that opet' ates on its territory, but it must pay compensation for what the corporation is worth.
Many of the less developed countries have argued that low compensation is adequate; rich countries usually want higher levels.
Finally, even when the UN General Assembly has passed resolutions, there is a good deal of ambiguity about what they mean.
The only area in the UN Charter in which a state must legally accept a decision is Chapter VII, which deals with threats to peace, breaches of the peace, and acts of aggres' sion.
If the Security Council finds that there has been an act of aggression or threats to peace warranting sanctions, then member states are bound to apply the sanctions.
That is what happened in 1990 when Iraq invaded Kuwait, and in 2001 after the United States was the target of transnational terrorist attacks.
The other way in which new law is sometimes created is through large intergov' emmental conferences that negotiate draft treaties for governments to sign.
Nonetheless, in 1995, when the United States wanted to resist possible Chinese claims to the seas around the Spratly Islands, it appealed to the international Law of the Sea.
International law basically reflects the fragmented nature of international politics.
The weak sense of community means there is less willingness to obey or restrain oneself out of a sense of obligation or acceptance of authority.
The absence of a common executive with a monopoly on the legitimate use of force means that sovereign states are in the realms of self-help, and force, and survival.
Predictability and Legitimacy Nonetheless, international law and organization are an important part of political reality because they affect the way states behave.
The vast range of international transactions, both public and private, includes trade, tourism, diplomatic missions, and contacts among peoples across national boundaries.
As interdependence grows, those contacts grow and there are increasing opportunities for friction.
International law allows governments to avoid conflict at a high level when such friction arises.
For example, if an American tourist is arrested for smuggling drugs in Mexico, a British ship collides with a Norwegian ship in the North Sea, or a Japanese firm claims that an Indian company has infringed its patents, the governments may not want to spoil their other relations over these private collisions.
Handling such issues by international law and agreed principles depoliticizes them and makes them predictable.
Predictability is necessary for transactions to flourish and for the orderly handling of the conflicts that inevitably accompany them.
Legitimacy is a second reason why governments have an interest in international law.
Politics is not merely a struggle for physical power, but also a contest over legitimacy.
It is a political fact that the belief in right and wrong helps move people to act, and therefore legitimacy is a source of power.
If a state’s acts are perceived as illegitimate, the costs of a policy will be higher.
States appeal to international law and organization to legitimize their own policies or delegitimize others, and that often shapes their tactics and outcomes.
In major conflicts of interest, international law may not restrain states, but it often helps shape the flow of policy.
Cynics may say these are just games that lawyers play; but the fact that governments find it important to make legal arguments or to take the resolutions of international organizations into account shows they are not completely insignificant.
Passed at the end of the 1967 Middle East War, it called for a return to prewar boundaries.
The Arab states lost the war, but were nonetheless able to put pressure on Israel.
In 1976, when the Arab coalition tried to expel Israel from the United Nations, the United States spent a good deal of political capital lobbying before the General Assembly to prevent Israel’s expulsion, another indication that symbols of legiti' macy in international organizations are part of a power struggle.
When vital issues of survival are at stake, a state will use its most effective form of power, which is military force.
And that may explain the limited success of efforts of international law and organization to deal with the use of force.
It is one thing to handle drug smuggling, collision of ships at sea, or patent infringement by international law; it is another to put the survival of one’s country at risk by obeying international law.
That was the problem with collective security in the 1930s, but a modified form of collective security was re-created in the UN charter.
Collective Security and Peacekeeping The classical balance of power did not make war illegal.
The use of military force was accepted, and it often ensured the stability of the system.
During the nineteenth century, with changes in technology making war more destructive, and with the rise of democracy and peace movements, there were several efforts to organize states against war.
The conferees tried to persuade all states to sign treaties of arbitration so disputes would be handled by arbitration rather than force.
They also tried to codify rules of war in case arbitration did not work.
As we have seen, ^ter World War I the League of Nations was an attempt to develop a coalition of states that would deter and punish aggressors.
World War I had been largely an accidental and unnecessary war caused by the balance of power, and such wars could be prevented by an alliance of all states for collective security.
If the League of Nations was designed to prevent ^^orld W^ar I after the fact, the United Nations was designed in 1943-1945 to prevent World War 11.
Forty-nine states met in San Francisco in 1945 to sign a charter that included innovations to repair the deficiencies of the League.
The UN designers also created a Security Council composed of five permanent members and a rotating pool of nonpermanent members.
The Security Council can pass binding resolutions under Chapter VII of the charter.
Better a veto that makes the lights go out than the house bum down in the form of a war against a great power, argued the UN founders.
In 1956 Israel suh fered from covert attacks by Egyptian-backed guerrillas, yet Israeli conventional forces crossed the border into Egypt first.
Depending on your side in the Cold War, you took different views regarding who was the initial aggressor.
For two decades during the Cold War, UN committees tried to define aggression.
A list of acts of aggression was followed by the proviso that the Security Council could determine that other acts also constituted aggression.
Even when armed force had been used, the council could choose not to declare that tdiere had been any aggression.
So as far as the United Nations was concerned, aggression was committed when the Security Council said so.
Everything depended on a consensus in the Security Council, and that was rare during the Cold War.
The impasse over collective security gave rise to the concept of UN preventive diplomacy and peacekeeping forces.
Rather than identifying and punishing the aggressor, which is the basic concept of collective security, the United Nations would assemble independent forces and interpose them between the warring powers.
Sir Anthony Eden, the British prime minister, saw this as a major threat to Britain.
Fie regarded Nasser as a new Hitler, and he drew analogies to the 1930s.
He worried about the fact that Nasser had accepted Soviet arms—this, of course, being at the height of the Cold War.
They wanted the intervention to continue until they could eliminate Nasser.
A Letter to President D\¥ight Eisenhower I In the nineteen-thirties Hitler established his position by a series of carefully planned I movements.
These began with occupation of the Rhineland and were followed by succes| I sive acts of aggression against Austria, Czechoslovakia, Poland and the West.
He believes that if he can get away with this, and if he can successfully | i defy eighteen nations, his prestige in Arabia will be so great that he will be able to mount | i revolutions of young officers in Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Syria and Iraq.
These new | i Governments will in effect be Egyptian satellites if not Russian ones.
They will have to h I place their united oil resources under the control of a United Arabia led by Egypt and il I under Russian influence.
When that moment comes Nasser can deny oil to Western | I Europe and we here shall be at his mercy.
Egypt 1948-1956 jFrom Cyprus-British Base UN Emergency Forces (Yugoslavs, Indians, and Canadians) take over, Nov.56.
The United Nations Peacekeeping and Collective Security Dag Hammarskjold, the UN secretary-general, working with Canadian foreign minister Lester Pearson, devised a plan to separate the Israelis and the Egyptians by inserting a UN peacekeeping force.
A resolution in the General Assembly, where there was no veto, authorized a UN force in the Sinai region.
On November 15, the first UN expeditionary force was inserted into the Sinai between the opposing forces, and later in December, the United Nations took on the task of clearing the ships that had been sunk in the canal.
This peacekeeping model has become an important role for the United Nations.
At the beginning of 2006, 17 UN peacekeeping operations were in the field.
Thus even though the Cold War prevented the United Nations from implementing the formal doctrine of collective security, it did not prevent the innovation of using international forces to keep two sides apart.
In collective .security, if a state crosses a line, all the others are to unite against it and push it back.
In preventive diplomacy and peacekeeping, if a state crosses a line, the United Nations steps in and holds the parties apart without judging who is right or wrong.
During the Cold War, one of the basic principles of UN peacekeeping was that the forces always came from small states, not from the Soviet Union or the United States, so that the great powers would be kept out of direct conflict.
Preventive diplomacy and peacekeeping was an important innovation that still plays a significant role in regulating international conflicts.
Since the Soviet Union and China did not exercise their vetoes, UN collective security was used for the first time in 40 years.
First, Iraq committed an extraordinarily clear-cut aggression, very much like the 1930s, which reminded leaders of that failure of collective security.
The second reason was the feeling that if UN collective security failed in such a clear case, it would not be a principle for order in a post-Cold War world.
Third, the small states in the United Nations supported the action because most of them were fragile and had disputable postcolonial boundaries.
The arguments Saddam Hussein used to justify his invasion of Kuwait threatened most of the other small states as well.
To paraphrase the Haitian delegate to the League of Nations quoted earlier, they did not want to become someone else’s Kuwait.
The permanent members of the Security Council, for example, were not able to agree on resolutions to authorize either the Kosovo or Iraq wars in 1999 and 2003.
First, the UN system works best when there is clear-cut aggression; it is much more difficult to apply in civil wars.
Second, collective security will work if there is no veto, but if the United States, Russia, China, Britain, or France cannot reach agreement, collective security will be hamstrung once more.
Moreover, in 1945, UN collective security was not designed to be applicable against the five great powers with vetoes in the Security Council.
Third, collective security works when UN member states provide the necessary financial and military resources, but it is difficult to imagine collective security working if the states with large military forces do not contribute.
Solid lines from a Principal Organ indicate a direct reporting relationship; dashes indicate a non-subsidiary relationship.
Information 1 DM Department of , Management OHRLLS Office of the High Representitive for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States UNSECOORD Office of the United -Nations security.
But it was only a minor miracle, for, as we see in Chapter 9, collective security is only part of what will be needed for world order in the future.
The United Nations has political effects, even when collective security cannot be applied, because the presumption against force written into the UN charter places the burden of proof on those who want to use force.
It affects states’ soft power, as the United States discovered in 2003.
The failure to obtain a second UN resolution did not prevent the United States from going to war with Iraq, but it limited the amount of help received and made the war and its aftermath more costly.
In addition, the Security Council provides an important forum for the discussion of international violence, dramatizing the practice of collective concern and directing attention to important matters in times of crisis.
It sometimes crystallizes viewpoints, raising the costs of aggressive uses of force, and acts as a safety valve for diplomacy.
These trip wires and buffer zones are devices that states have found in their interests again and again.
With the end of the Cold War came more opportunities for the United Nations.
The United Nations played a role in the decolonization of Namibia, in monitoring human rights in El Salvador, in the elections in Nicaragua, in the administration in Cambodia, and in overseeing peacekeeping forces.
UN peacekeepers helped in Haiti and Cambodia in the 1990s, but failed to prevent genocide in Rwanda or to stop civil war in Angola.
They played a crucial role in Cyprus for three decades, but in Bosnia they had to be replaced by a stronger NATO force.
Neutral interposition of troops does not always work well in ethnic conflicts.
Indeed, some political scientists argue that neutral interventions may lengthen the duration of civil wars, causing greater bloodshed and loss of life.
On the other hand, the UN still plays an important legitimizing role while countries like Australia take the lead in providing forces to stabilize a chaotic situation like East Timor.
And the failure of the United States and Britain to obtain a second Security Council resolution explicitly authorizing their use of force in 2003 greatly increased the cost of their occupation of Iraq.
It is a mistake to be too cynical or too naive about international organization and law.
States do not live by law alone, but they do not live completely without it.
At the beginning of the twenty-first century, the UN is clearly not the “parliament of man” that some of its founders hoped for when it was created in 1945.
With an annual regular budget of less than $2 billion a year and a central staff of 9,000 members, the organization has fewer resources than many colleges and universities.
The budget for human rights activities is smaller than that of the Zurich Opera House, and the budget of the UN’s World Health Organization is similar to that of one medium^ sized hospital.
The 15 members of the Security Council have the legal power to authorize the use of force, 5 permanent members have had veto power since 1945.
In 2005, a High Level Panel appointed by Secretary-General Kofi Annan suggested enlarging the Council to 24 members, and adding India, Brazil, Japan, and Germany as permanent members.
The plan failed, however, when China objected to Japan’s inclusion, regional rivals raised objections, and African states demanded more seats.
The panel made a number of other useful suggestions for reform, including a Peacebuilding Commission to oversee the reconstruction of failed states, revision of the Human Rights Commission to exclude states that violate human rights, clearer criteria for preemptive use of force and humanitarian intervention, and an agreed definition of terrorism.
Yet it also represents a central point for focusing on issues of security, international development, humanitarian assistance, environmental degradation, drugs, transnational crime, health and diseases, and global common spaces that require international collaboration.
Despite its flaws, it remains the only universal organization that creates a focal point for international diplomacy.
It is sometimes said that if the UN did not exist, it would have to be reinvented.
Given the diversity of cultures and national interests in the world today, it is not clear that it could be.
CONFLICTS IN THE MIDDLE EAST Torn by strife for the last half century, the Middle East has been the stage for, perhaps, the world’s most notorious regional conflicts.
It best fits the realist view of international politics, but despite this, it is also an area where international law and organization have played significant roles.
Nationalism, religion, and balance-of-power politics each provide part of the answer.
Under the Shah, Iran had claimed the whole waterway between Iran and Iraq.
Iraqi Muslims were divided between Sunnis and Shi’ites, and Saddam Hussein was a secular head of state.
The Shi’ite fundamentalists in Iran urged the Iraqi Shi’ites to rise up against Saddam Hussein.
This transnational religious appeal failed when Saddam Hussein killed many Iraqi Shi’ite leaders.
Iranians are not Arabs, and there was a large Arabic-speaking minority in the part of Iran adjacent to Iraq.
Iraqis thought they would be welcomed as liberators in the Arabicspeaking part of Iran, but that was not the case.
After this pair of miscalculations, the war bogged down into a long drawn-out affair, instead of the short profitable war Saddam Hussein had intended.
Having been attacked, it was not going to let Iraq decide when to quit.
The Ayatollah Khomeini, spiritual leader of Iran, said Iran would not end the war until the downfall of Saddam Hussein.
Conservative Arab countries like Saudi Arabia and Jordan supported Iraq against Iran because they were more afraid of Iranian revolutionary power.
But, as we have seen, Arab Syria, a secular and radical regime in many ways similar to Iraq, supported Iran for balance-of-power reasons.
Damascus was worried about the rising strength of its neighbor Iraq, rather than more distant Iran.
The United States, worried about the growth of Iranian power, provided covert assistance to Iraq.
Israel secretly shipped U.S.-built weapons to Iran, even though fundamentalists in Iran were calling for the abolition of Israel.
Israel’s covert weapons assistance can be explained by balance-of-power considerations.
Israel feared both Iraq and Iran, but Iraq was a closer threat, and on the principle of “the enemy of the enemy is my friend,” Israel provided assistance to Iran.
So a war that started from miscalculations rooted in religion, nationalism, and ambition was expanded by balance-of-power concerns into an intractable, nearly decade-long conflict.
The dictionary defines a nation as a group claiming common identity and the right to be a state.
One claim is ethnic similarity, but the United States is ethnically diverse and yet one nation.
Another claim is linguistic similarity, but Switzerland is linguistically diverse and yet one nation.
Others say religion can be the basis of a nation, and some states, such as Israel and Pakistan, are largely based on religious identity.
The point is that when a group of people with a common identity calls itself a nation, there can be various sources of that identity.
Nationalism is tricky because it is not merely a descriptive term, it is also prescriptive.
When words are both descriptive and prescriptive, they become politi' cal words used in struggles for power.
Nationalism has become a crucial source of state legitimacy in the modern world.
If a people can get others to accept its claim to be a nation, it can claim national rights and use such claims as a weapon against its enemies.
For example, in the 1970s the Arab states successfully lobbied in the UN General Assembly to pass a resolution that labeled Zionism as racism.
Their intent was to deprive Israel of the legitimacy of calling itself a nation.
To be labeled as racist is bad; to be labeled as nationalist is generally good.
To argue that Israel was not a nation was to use words as weapons that would deprive Israel of legitimacy and weaken its soft power.
The analytic problem with the argument was that religion can be a basis of national identity.
It is also true that a religious basis can make it more difficult for minorities outside the religion to share the national identity.
Life can be more difficult for Muslims in Israel than for Jews, just as daily life can be more trying for Hindus in Pakistan than for Muslims.
But it does not follow that because a people uses religion to call itself a nation that the state is racist.
The UN General Assembly finally annulled the resolution by a second vote in 1991.
After all, as constructivists showed, humans are capable of multiple crosscutting loyalties—above and below the state level—and these loyalties can change.
Loyalties tend to change when the usual patterns of life are disrupted.
The idea of the nation often starts among the most disrupted, with people who are marginal figures in their own cultures and less certain about their identity.
These are often people who are jolted out of normal patterns, who start to ask questions.
National claims often start with intellectuals or with deviant religious groups.
For example, the early Arab nationalists in the nineteenth century were often Ghristians rather than Muslims.
Gradually their con' cern about a new identity developed broader support as industry and urbanization disrupted the traditional patterns and loyalties of rural societies.
The disruptions that mobilize people for new identities can come from inter' nal or external forces.
The rise of the middle class disrupted traditional political and social patterns.
Rising political groups no longer wanted the state of France to be defined by the king but to be defined in terms of the nation, all the people.
And externally, as Napoleon’s armies marched across Europe, they disrupted society and mobilized nationalist feelings among Germamspeaking peoples and other groups.
By the middle of the century, there was widening support for the idea that each nation should have a state.
Nonetheless, he harnessed nationalism for his purposes, and the unification of Germany and Italy became a model of success.
World War II weakened the European colonial empires, and decolonization was one of the major movements in Asia and Africa over the next three decades.
The metropolitan societies had been weakened by the war itself, and elites in the colonized areas began to use the idea of nationalism against the crumbling European empires.
But if the nineteenth-century model of states based on language and ethnicity had been used to organize the postcolonial world, it would have led to thousands of mini-states in Africa and many parts of Asia.
Instead, the postcolonial elites asserted the right of the state to make a nation, just the opposite of the nineteenth-century pattern.
The local leaders argued that they needed to use the state machinery the colonists had established—the budget, the police, the civil service—to shape a nation out of smaller tribal groups.
The same ideology of nationalism came to be used to justify two things that are almost the opposite of each other—nation makes state or state makes nation—because nationalism is a political word with an instrumental use.
In the early romantic days of colonial liberation movements, there was often a successful blurring of these differences in “pan” movements.
Europe in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries saw the rise of pan-Slavism, claiming a common identity of all Slavic-speaking peoples.
Early opponents of alien rule argued that since colonized people all suffered alike from the external colonizers, they should form pan-African or pan-Arab nations.
But when it came to the actual business of governing, as opposed to liberating or resisting colonialism, the business of government required the instruments of state such as budgets, police, and civil service.
And those instruments existed not on a “pan” basis, but on the basis of the artificial boundaries created by colonial rule.
So, as the romanticism gradually wore away, identity based on the state began to replace that of the pan movements.
Nonetheless, the romanticism of the pan movements often lingered on as a disruptive force.
The Middle East has often seen appeals to pan-Arabism and odd situations in which countries suddenly announce that they are forming a union, as Egypt and Syria did in forming the United Arab Republic in 1958, or countries as disparate as Libya and Morocco did in 1989.
Over time, however, the forces of the state have prevailed over these pan-nationalist movements.
For example, Egyptian nationalism focused on the state gradually became stronger in public opinion than pan-Arabism.
Much of the postcolonial world saw enormous disruption of the normal patterns of life because of economic change and modem communications.
Some used national appeals, some used pan-Arab appeals, and others used fundamentalist religious appeals, all contributing to the complexity of the forces that create conflict in regions like the Middle East.
The Arab-Israeli Conflicts The Arab-Israeli conflict has produced six wars between two groups of people asserting different national identities, but claiming the same postage-stamp-size piece of land.
In modern historical times, Israelis have pointed to several events tied to World Wars 1 and II to justify the existence of Israel.
During World War I, the British issued the Balfour Declaration, a letter written by the British government to Lord Rothschild of the British Zionist Federation promising that the British government would work for a Jewish homeland in Palestine.
After World War II, Israelis argue, the horrors of Hitler’s Holocaust proved the need for a Jewish state.
In 1948, Jewish settlers were willing to accept a partition of Palestine, but the Arab people in the area were not.
The United Nations recognized the new Jewish state, but the Israelis had to fight to preserve it from concerted Arab attack.
This, the Israelis say, is the historical origin and justification of the state of Israel.
His Majesty’s Government views with favour the establishment in Palestine of'a national home for the Jewish people, and will use their best endeavours to facilitate the achievement of this object, it being clearly understood that nothing shall be done which may prejudice the civil and religious rights of existing, non-Jewish communities in Palestine, or the rights and political status enjoyed by Jews in any other country. —The Balfour Declaration, November 2, 1917 The Palestinian Arabs respond that they also have lived in the area for many centuries.
At the time of World War I, when the Balfour Declaration was issued, 90 percent of the people living in the area of Palestine were Arabs.
They argue that Britain had no right to make a promise to the Jews at the Arabs’ expense.
What is more, the Arabs continue, the Holocaust may have been one of history’s greatest sins, but it was committed by Europeans.
In World War I, the area that is now Palestine was ruled by the Turks, and the Ottoman Empire was allied with Germany.
Turkey’s defeat, its empire was dismembered, and its Arab territories became mandates under the League of Nations.
By 1936, nearly 40 percent of Palestine was Jewish, and the influx led the Arab residents to riot.
The British established a royal commission, which recommended partition into two states.
In May 1939, with World War II looming, Britain needed Arab support against Hitler’s Germany, so Britain promised the Arabs it would restrict Jewish immigration.
Because of the Holocaust, many in Europe were sympathetic to the idea of a Jewish homeland, and there was a good deal of smuggling Jewish refugees.
In addi' tion, some of the Jewish settlers in Palestine engaged in terrorist acts against their British rulers.
Britain, meanwhile, was so financially and politically exhausted from World War II and the decolonization of India that it announced in the fall of 1947 that come May 1948, it would turn Palestine over to the United Nations.
Ironically, it would have been better for the Arabs if they had accepted the UN partition plan, but instead they rejected it.
In May 1948 Israel declared itself independent, and Israel’s Arab neighbors attacked to try to reverse the partition.
Even though the Arabs outnumbered the Israelis 40 to 1, they were poorly organized and hampered by disunity.
After a cease-fire and UN mediation, Jordan controlled the area called the West Bank and Egypt controlled Gaza, but most of the rest of the Palestinian mandate was controlled by the Israelis; in fact, more than they would have had if the Arabs had accepted the UN plan of 1947.
The war produced a flood of Palestinian refugees, a sense of humiliation among many Arabs, and a broad resistance to any idea of permanent peace.
The Arabs did not want to accept the outcome of the war because they did not want to legitimize Israel.
Arab leaders fostered pan-Arab feelings and the belief that they could destroy Israel in another war.
King Abdullah of Jordan was assassinated when he tried to sign a separate peace treaty with Israel in 1951, further decreasing the likelihood of a peaceful settlement between the Arab states and the new Israeli government.
In 1952, Gamal Abdel Nasser and other young nationalist officers overthrew King Farouk of Egypt and seized power.
They soon received arms from the Soviet Union and maneuvered to gain control of the Suez Canal, a vital commercial shipping channel linking Europe and Asia.
As we saw earlier, Britain and France, angry about the canal and worried about Nasser dominating the Middle East, colluded with Israel to attack Egypt.
However, the United States refused to help Britain, and the war was stopped by a UN resolution and peacekeeping force that was inserted to keep the sides apart.
The third war, the Six-Day War of June 1967, was the most important because it shaped the subsequent territorial problems at the heart of today’s Middle East peace problem.
Nasser and the Palestinians continued to harass the Israelis with guerrilla attacks, and Egypt closed the Straits of Tiran, which cut off Israeli shipping from the Red Sea.
Nasser was not quite ready for war, but he saw the prospect of a Syrian-Israeli war looming and thought he would do well to join.
Nasser asked the United Nations to remove its peacekeeping forces from his border.
The Israelis caught the Egyptian air force on the ground and went on to capture not only the whole Sinai Peninsula, but also the Golan Heights from Syria and the West Bank from Jordan.
At that point the superpowers stepped in to press the two sides to accept a cease-fire.
In November 1967, the UN Security Council passed Resolution 242, which said Israel should withdraw from occupied lands in exchange for peace and recognition.
Depending on which of the several language versions of the resolution one read, it did not say all territories, just “territories,” implying that some might not have to be returned.
It was also ambiguous about the status of the Palestinians, who were not recognized as' a nation but were described as refugees.
In 1969-1970, Nasser, with support from the Soviet Union, organized crossings of the Suez Canal and other harassments.
These provoked an air war in which Israeli and Egyptian pilots fought a number of air battles.
After Nasser died, he was succeeded by Anwar Sadat, who realized that Egypt could not destroy Israel.
He decided that some psychological victory was necessary before he could make any conciliatory moves toward peace.
Sadat decided to attack across the Suez Canal, but not to try to recapture all of the Sinai Peninsula.
In the first stages, the war went well for the Egyptians, but the Israelis vigorously counterattacked.
Secretary of State Henry Kissinger flew to Moscow, but while he was there the Israelis surrounded the Egyptian armies.
They mobilized their forces in the southern part of the Soviet Union and sent the United States-a letter suggesting that the superpowers introduce their own forces directly.
The United States responded by raising the nuclear alert level in the United States, and the Soviets dropped their demand.
The Israelis also backed down under American pressure and released the noose around the Egyptian army.
The war was followed by a series of diplomatic maneuvers in which the United States negotiated a partial drawback by Israel.
In 1977, Sadat went to Israel and announced that Egypt was ready to negotiate a separate peace.
In 1978 and 1979, with President Jimmy Carter’s mediation, Israel and Egypt negotiated the Camp David Accords, which returned the Sinai to Egypt and provided for talks about local autonomy in the West Bank.
The Camp David Accords meant that the largest Arab state had quit the coalition confronting Israel, and Egyptian nationalism had prevailed over pan-Arabism.
Sadat broke the pan-Arab coalition, but a few years later he was assassinated by religious extremists who objected to his policy.
Initially, Lebanon had been delicately balanced between Christian and Muslim Arabs.
Syria began to impose order in the north, and in 1978 Israel went into southern Lebanon as far as the Litani River.
In June 1982, Israeli Defense Minister Ariel Sharon decided to go further.
First he said Israel would go only 25 miles into Lebanon to protect the northern parts of Israel, but in fact Israeli troops marched farther north and besieged Beirut for ten weeks.
The siege led to the evacuation of the PLO from Beirut, and a Lebanese Christian leader, Bashir Gemayel, signed a peace treaty with Israel.
However, Gemayel was soon assassinated, the treaty collapsed, and Lebanon fell further into chaos.
In 1985, the Israelis withdrew from most of Lebanon except a buffer zone in the south, which they finally evacuated in 2000.
The violent recent history of the Middle East shows how regional conflicts based on ethnicity, religion, and nationalism can become embittered and difficult to resolve.
Arab governments were slow to make peace because they did not want to legitimize Israel, and in their rejection they reinforced the domestic position of those Israelis who did not want to make peace with the Arabs.
The extremists formed a de facto transnational coalition that made it very difficult for moderates who wanted to find a compromise.
In 1973 and 1977 Sadat took risks, but eventually paid for them with his life.
A decade later, Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin also took risks for peace and was assassinated by a Jewish religious extremist.
In such a world of extremes, trust and cooperation are difficult, and the Prisoner’s Dilemma provides an accurate model of regional politics.
During the bipolar Gold War era, wars in the Middle East tended to be short, in part because the superpower role was so prominent.
On the one hand, each superpower supported its clients, but when it looked like the clients might pull the superpowers toward the nuclear brink, they pulled their clients back.
In 1956, it was the United States via the United Nations; in 1967, the United States and the Soviet Union used their hotline to arrange a cease-fire; in 1973, the United States and the Soviet Union stepped in; and in 1982, the United States pressed Israel to draw back from Lebanon.
While in many instances the Gold War exacerbated regional conflicts, it also placed a safety net underneath them.
With the end of the Gold War, the smaller states have increasingly looked to the United Nations to provide that safety net, but it was unclear to be seen how effective the UN safety net could be.
In 1990-1991, responding to Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait, the United Nations passed its first post-Gold War test.
The 1991 Persian Gulf War and Its Aftermath The Persian Gulf crisis started on August 2, 1990, when Saddam Hussein invaded Kuwait.
Iraq had always claimed that Kuwait was an artificial creation of the colonial era and should not be a separate state.
It had an $80 billion debt, which was increasing at the rate of $10 billion every year.
At the same time, Iraq sat next to a gold mine—Kuwait—with enormous oil surpluses and a small population.
Iraq argued that Kuwait ignored OPEC guidelines for oil production and that every dollar reduction in the price of a barrel of oil cost Iraq $1 billion per year.
Capturing Kuwait, therefore, looked like a solution to Iraq’s economic problems.
After all, in 1981 the Israelis had bombed his nuclear research reactor, and with the decline of the Soviet Union, it looked as though the United States and Israel were becoming ever more powerful.
In a speech in Amman, Jordan, in February 1990, Saddam said the Soviet Union was in decline and could no longer counter the Americans and the Israelis.
Ironically, the United States was trying to appease Saddam Hussein, to bring him back into the community of responsible nations, and to use Iraq as an effective balance to Iranian power in the region.
The inconsistency of American policy misled Saddam Hussein, and he believed he could get away with the invasion of Kuwait without suffering serious reprisals.
A series of UN resolutions applied the doctrine of collective security against Iraq.
Oil exports to the United States and other leading Western industrialized nations made the Persian Gulf an abnormally important region, but there was more to the 1990 crisis than oil.
For example, Britain was deeply involved in the war, but Britain did not import any gulf oil.
There was also concern about collective security and echoes of the failure to stand up to German aggression in the 1930s.
He had a nuclear weapons program with covertly imported materials; he had chemical weapons and was developing biological weapons.
If he were to have, in addition to this, the revenues that came from Kuwait’s oil, the world would face a larger, stronger, more devastating Iraq later in the decade.
But others argued that the war was unnecessary because economic sanctions could force Iraq to evacuate its troops from Kuwait.
The counterfactual is hard to prove, but historically sanctions have rarely achieved their intended effect in a short time frame.
In November, the United States doubled the size of its troop deployment in Saudi Arabia in the prelude to war.
And partly, Saddam may have been driven by pride and an inability to back down after being at the center of the world stage.
It briefly revived the doctrine of UN collective security, but as we have seen, questions exist about how typical this regional conflict was.
The cease-fire set a precedent whereby UN inspectors visited Iraq and destroyed its nuclear and chemical facilities.
President Bush decided not to occupy Baghdad because he thought Saddam Hussein might be removed by his own people, and he was concerned that neither the American public nor the UN coalition would tolerate a costly occupation.
In the aftermath of the Gulf War, the Israeli government and the PLO made significant progress toward peace and normalized relations.
Using the political leverage it accrued from the war, the Bush administration pressured the PLO and the government of Yitzhak Shamir to meet along with other Arab governments in Madrid in late 1991 and in Washington in 1992.
While these talks stalled, backchannel negotiations between Israeli officials and PLO officials outside Oslo, Norway, led to the Declaration of Principles signed in Washington, D.G., in September 1993 between the PLO and the government of Yitzhak Rabin.
The declaration was followed by a series of agreements for the withdrawal of Israeli troops from the Gaza Strip and from Palestinian towns and villages in the West Bank.
During the Gulf War, Jordan had equivocated in its support for the U-S.-led coalition, and King Hussein calculated that normalizing relations with Israel would put him back into the good graces of the United States and the oihproducing states in the Middle East.
The PLO had backed Saddam Hussein and Iraq during the Gulf War and, as a result, had seen its once generous donations from Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, and the other oil states diminish.
With its financial situation desperate, the PLO relaxed its opposi' tion to a negotiated settlement.
In spite of the peace negotiations, many Israelis remained skeptical about the policy of ceding occupied territory to a Palestinian state.
Ultraconservative Israelis considered Rabin a traitor, and in November 1995 he was assassinated by one of them.
The PLO government and Arafat were perceived by some Palestinians as corrupt and authoritarian, thereby giving strength to opposition groups such as the fundamentalist Hamas, which sought to disrupt the peace process.
Terrorist bombings by Arab extremists opposed to the peace process affected the 1996 Israeli elections, and the new Likud government, led by Benjamin Netanyahu slowed the peace process.
Nonetheless, Netanyahu signed the Wye River Accords with the PLO in 1998, and a subsequent Labor government under Prime Minister Ehud Barak offered significant concessions in negotiations with Yasir Arafat at Camp David in the summer of 2000.
After the Camp David negotiations failed, and despite efforts to revive talks, violence broke out again in September 2000.
President Clinton told both Arafat and Barak that there was some danger that if they reached agreement, they would be killed by their own extremists, but that if they failed to reach agreement, many people, all younger than they, would be killed on both sides.
During the last days of his presidency, Clinton made a last-ditch attempt to broker a settlement between Barak and Arafat, which culminated in the failed Taba Talks in late January 2001.
The context of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict changed greatly over the next year.
Ariel Sharon, a decorated war hero with a reputation for tough military tactics, replaced Barak as Israel’s prime minister in February 2001.
By electing Sharon, the Israeli public signaled its fatigue with negotiations and preference for a more aggressive response to the wave of Palestinian suicide bombings that had taken place inside Israel since September 2000.
Sharon made it immediately clear that he considered Arafat a terrorist, and that a peace settlement was not possible with Arafat.
When George W Bush took office in January, he promoted a realist foreign policy agenda that emphasized the importance of Great Power relations with China and Russia.
Bush criticized Clinton’s involvement in the peace process and made it clear that he would take a hands-off approach to the conflict.
Bush’s foreign policy dramatically shifted after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001.
In Afghanistan, in October through December 2001, American air power and Special Forces helped turn the tide in the civil war.
The American action was widely supported by NATO allies and legitimized by a UN resalution.
In 2002, however, as the Bush administration prepared to go to war against Iraq, international support began to fade.
In terms of the distinction drawn earlier in this chapter, the United States called its actions against Iraq “preemptive,” but many countries saw the United States’ proposed invasion as a “preventive” war of choice because the threat posed by Iraq was not imminent.
In September 2002, following a speech in which Bush called on the UN to enforce previous Security Council resolutions against Iraq, the United States obtained a UN Security Council resolution demanding that Saddam Hussein cooperate fully with international inspectors to prove that he was complying with resolutions passed a decade earlier assuring that he had given up his nuclear, biological and chemical weapons programs.
Saddam allowed inspectors to return to Iraq for the first time in four years; simultaneously, the United States moved forward with a large buildup of troops in neighboring Kuwait and Qatar, and Congress passed a resolution authorizing the use of force against Saddam Hussein.
In December 2002 and again in February 2003, the inspectors reported partial but not complete compliance and 'asked for more time to com-plete their task.
Concerned about the approach of hot weather and the readiness of its forces, the United States felt that another delay would cause its efforts to lose momentum.
After failing to obtain a second Security Council resolution authorizing an attack against Iraq, the United States, Great Britain, and a small coalition argued that the earlier resolutions provided a legal basis, and invaded Iraq in March 2003.
Within three and a half weeks, Baghdad was occupied and Saddam had fled.
While the occupation was initially welcomed in some of the Shia and Kurdish areas of the country, many of the former Sunni ruling groups and some Shia formed an insurgency against the occupation.
They were aided by foreign terrorists, such as the Jordanian-born Al Qaeda operative Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, who crossed into Iraq and sought to continue their radical jihad against the United States.
The Bush administration had not planned for enough troops to manage the looting that followed the collapse of Saddam’s regime, or the insurgency that followed the invasion.
The ensuing violence slowed reconstruction efforts that could have helped generate popular support and soft power.
Additionally, the failure to obtain a second UN resolution meant that many countries believed that the invasion lacked legitimacy, as a result, their participation in the reconstruction effort was limited.
The costs of the war for American soft power were compounded when inspectors failed to find any weapons of mass destruction after the war.
Two of the three reasons given for the war before the invasion—Saddam’s weapons of mass destruction and an alleged connection between Saddam and the 9/11 events—turned out to be based on false intelligence and political exaggeration.
While it may take a decade or more to judge the final effects of the Iraq war, in 2006 polls showed that many Americans were beginning to believe that the costs had outweighed the benefits.
Whatever the original intentions, the failure to plan carefully for appropriate means contributed to negative consequences.
In the spring of 2002, as the United States began making an international case for war with Iraq, Saudi Arabia and other United States allies insisted that President Bush first turn his attention to the Israeli-Palestinian situation, which had reached crisis proportions.
In retaliation for a spate of terrorist attacks during the winter of 2001-2002, Israeli troops reoccupied towns and cities in the West Bank and held Arafat’s compound in Ramallah under siege for months in the spring of 2002.
As the violence continued throughout the spring, the United States announced that in conjunction with a “Quartet”—the European Union, Russia, and the UN— it had developed a “Road map” for peace with cooperative, reciprocal measures to be implemented by both sides.
Israel, however, said it would proceed with unilateral plans to construct a security fence to separate the West Bank from Israel to prevent suicide bombers from entering.
The United States articulated its support for the Road map most clearly in June, when Bush stated that the United States sought a permanent two-state solution to the conflict by 2005.
The removal of Saddam Hussein from power in Iraq in the spring of 2003 significantly improved Israel’s security among its neighbors.
The absence of a strong external military threat to Israel in the region led to a renewed push for progress on the Israeli-Palestinian issue.
In a move that was acceptable to both the United States and Israel, Arafat appointed Mahmoud Abbas, also known as Abu Mazen, prime minister of the Palestinian Authority.
At the same time, Hamas, a party that rejected recognition of the legitimacy of Israel, began to increase its strength among Palestinians.
The Quartet Road map was released, calling for a two-state solution and outlining a three-phase process for achieving this goal.
Abbas negotiated a three-month cease-fire among the Palestinian militant groups, and Sharon, Abbas, and Bush met in Aqaba, Jordan, in June 2003 for peace talks.
These were the first face-to-face talks between an Israeli and Palestinian leader since Bush and Sharon had come to power.
The cease-fire failed to hold, however, and plans for a second round of talks were cancelled.
In the fall of 2003 unofficial Israeli and Palestinian negotiators met in Geneva to work out a model comprehensive peace deal.
Known as the Geneva Accord, this agreement followed the outlines of the Glinton proposals from Gamp David and Taba, but it went even further by resolving the difficult questions of the status of Jerusalem, Israeli settlements, and the limited Palestinian “right of return” for the families of refugees who had fled in 1948.
United States Secretary of State Colin Powell met with the accord negotiators despite strong protests from the Israeli government.
As more than one observer noted, the episode showed that it was easier to identify a solution to the IsraehPalestine conflict than to identify a way to get there.
The death of PLO leader Yasir Arafat in November 2004 was followed by the election of Abbas to the presidency of the Palestinian Authority.
While this represented progress, it did not lead to implementation of the road map or resolution of the longer-standing issues in the conflict.
In January 2006, Sharon was incapacitated by a major stroke, and Hamas won the Palestinian elections further adding to the political uncertainty and slowing agreement on peace.
The Middle East illustrates the same dynamics of the individual, the state, and the international system we have seen in other conflicts.
At one level, individuals such as Arafat, Rabin, Sharon, Sadat, and King Hussein determined whether there would be peace accords.
The states of the region frequently act in a manner consonant with the realist model—seeking power and security in competition with other states—but international law and organizations have helped shape the political struggles, as have individual and nonstate actors.
Throughout the region, autocratic governments are faced with fundamentalist challenges to their authority, and many of these threaten to explode into civil war, as they have in Algeria and the Sudan.
The 1967 war yielded the present configuration of the Arab-Israeli dispute.
Sadat claimed that he had to go to war in 1973 to go to peace with Israel afterward.
John Mueller, “The Banality of Ethnic War,” International Security 25 , 42.
Chapter, ^ With the end of the Cold War in 1989, a number of observers argued that economic issues would become more central in world politics.
Networks of economic interdependence that span the globe have increased as costs of communication and transportation have declined and shrunk the effects of distance.
The role of markets has also increased as a result of new information and transportation technologies, as well as changed attitudes about the role of governments and states.
Nearly half of all industrial production today is produced by multinational enterprises whose decisions about where to locate production have a powerful effect on domestic economies and politics.
Security can be taken for granted in peaceful times, but all markets operate within a political framework.
Similarly, economic sanctions have been popular instruments because they avoid the use of force, but their effectiveness is mixed.
Studies suggest they have achieved their intended effects in fewer than half of the cases in which they have been tried.
Multilateral sanctions were one factor in ending apartheid in South Africa and putting pressure on Serbia and Libya in the 1990s, but they failed to oust Iraqi troops from Kuwait or return an elected president to power even in a poor country such as Haiti.
Moreover, globalization and economic interdependence were already growing rapidly when states followed relatively liberal policies toward trade, investment, and migration in the nineteenth century.
This did not stop two world wars and an economic depression in the first half of the twentieth century from occurring and inteiTupting elements of these long-term trends.
THE DIMENSIONS OF GLOBALIZATION Globalization—defined as worldwide networks of interdependence—does not imply universality.
For example, at the beginning of the twenty-first century half of the American population used the World Wide Web, compared to one-hundredth of one percent of the population of South Asia.
Even in an era of cheap cell phones, hundreds of millions of people live as peasants in remote villages with only slight connections to world markets or the global flow of ideas.
Indeed, globalization is accompanied by increasing gaps, in many respects, between the rich and the poor.
Even among rich countries, there is a lot less globalization than meets the eye.
A truly globalized world market would mean free flows of goods, people, and capital, and similar interest rates.
For example, even in North America, Toronto trades ten times as much with Vancouver as with Seattle, though the distance is the same and tariffs are minimal.
Globalization has made national boundaries more porous, but not irrelevant.
Clearly, in social as well as economic terms, homogenization does not follow necessarily from globalization.
But other forms of globalization also have significant effects on our daily lives.
The plague or Black Death originated in Asia, but its spread killed a quarter to a third of the population of Europe in the fourteenth century.
Europeans carried diseases to the Americas in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries that destroyed up to 95 percent of the indigenous population.
In 1918, a flu pandemic caused by a bird virus killed some 40 million people around the world, far more than the recently concluded world war.
Since 1973, 30 previously unknown infectious diseases have emerged, and other familiar diseases have spread geographically in new drugresistant forms.
In the 20 years after HIV/AIDS was identified in the 1980s, it killed 20 million people and infected another 40 million around the world.
The spread of foreign species of flora and fauna to new areas has wiped out native species, and may result in economic losses of several hundred billion dollars a year.
On the other hand, not all effects of environmental globalization are adverse.
For instance, both Europe and Asia benefited from the importation of such new world crops as the potato, com, and the tomato, and the “green revolution” agricultural technology of the past few decades has helped poor farmers throughout the world.
The result could be more severe variations in climate, with too much water in some regions and not enough in others.
The effects in North America will include stronger storms, hurricanes, floods, droughts, and landslides.
In Europe, warming sea temperatures could alter the flow of the Gulf Stream and result in severe local cooling trends.
Rising temperatures have lengthened the freeze-free season in many regions and led to a 10 percent decrease in global snow cover since the 1960s.
The rate at which the sea level rose in the last century was ten times faster than the average rate over the last three millennia.
It does not matter whether carbon dioxide is placed in the atmosphere from China or the United States; it still affects global warming.
Military globalization consists of networks of interdependence in which force, or the threat of force, is employed.
During the Cold War, the global strategic interdependence between the United States and the Soviet Union was acute and well recognized.
It was distinctive not because it was totally new, but because the scale and speed of the potential conflict arising from military interdependence ..were so enormous.
Today, A1 Qaeda and other transnational actors have formed global networks of operatives, challenging conventional approaches to national defense.
Social globalization is the spread of peoples, cultures, images, and ideas.
In the nineteenth century, some 80 million people crossed oceans to new homes—far more than in thetwentieth century.
At the beginning of the twenty-first century, 32 million residents of the United States were foreign-born.
Four great religions of the world— Buddhism, Judaism, Christianity, and Islam—have spread across great distances over the last two millennia, as has the scientific method and the Enlightenment worldview over the past few centuries.
Political globalization (a part of social globalization) is manifest in the spread of constitutional arrangements, the increase in the number of countries that have become democratic, and the development of international rules and institutions.
Those who think it is meaningless to speak of an international community ignore the importance of the global spread of political ideas such as the antislavery movement in the nineteenth century, anticolonialism after World War II, and the environmental and feminist movements today.
Of course, the world is a long way from a global community replacing citizens’ loyalties to clans, tribes, and states, but such transnational political ideas affect how nations construct their national goals and how they use their soft power.
Globalization today is different from the nineteenth century, when European imperialism provided much of its political structure, and higher transport and communications costs meant fewer people were involved directly with people and ideas from other cultures.
But many of the most important differences are closely related to the information revolution.
One telephone is useless, but its value increases as the network grows.
As government officials fashion foreign policies, they encounter the increasing thickness of globalism—the density of the networks of interdependence—^which means that the effects of events in one geographical area, or the economic or ecological dimension, can have profound effects in other geographical areas, on the military or social dimensions.
These international networks are increasingly complex and their effects are therefore increasingly unpredictable.
Moreover, in human systems, people are often hard at work trying to outwit each other, to gain an economic, social, or military advantage precisely by acting in an unpredictable way.
There will be continual competition between increased complexity and uncertainty, on the one hand; and efforts by governments, corporations, and others to comprehend and manipulate to their benefit these increasingly complex interconnected systems.
Frequent financial crises or sharp increases in unemployment could lead to popular movements to limit interdependence.
Quickness also adds to uncertainty and the difficulties of shaping policy responses.
As mentioned, modern globalization operates at a much more rapid pace than its earlier forms.
Smallpox took nearly three millennia to spread to all inhabited continents, finally reaching Australia in 1775.
AIDS took less than three decades to spread from Africa all around the world.
And to switch to a metaphorical virus, in 2000 the “love bug” computer virus, invented by hackers in the Philippines, needed only three days to straddle the globe.
Direct public participation in global affairs has also increased in rich countries.
Ordinary people invest in foreign mutual funds, gamble on offshore Internet sites, and travel and sample exotic cuisine that used to be the preserve of the rich.
Friedman termed this change the democratization of technology, finance, and information because diminished costs have made what were previous luxuries available to a much broader range of society.
Democratization is not quite the right word, however, because in markets, money votes, and people start out with unequal stakes.
There is no equality, for example, in capital markets, despite the new financial instruments that permit more people to participate.
A million dollars or more is often the entry price for large hedge fund investors.
Pluralization might be a more accurate description of this trend, suggesting the vast increase in the number and variety of participants in global networks.
In 1914, according to the English economist John Maynard Keynes, “The inhabitant of London could order by telephone, sipping his morning tea in bed, the various products of the whole earth, in such quantity as he might see fit, and reasonably expect their early delivery upon his doorstep.But Keynes’s Englishman had to be wealthy to be a global consumer.
Today, supermarkets and Internet retailers extend that capacity to the vast majority of people in postindustrial societies.
What the information revolution has added to contemporary globalization is a quickness and thickness in the network of interconnections that make them more complex.
Political Reactions to Globalization Domestic politics channel responses to change.
Some countries imitate success, as exemplified by democratizing capitalist societies from South Korea to Eastern Europe.
For instance, small European states such as the Netherlands and Scandinavia have maintained relatively large governments and emphasized compensation for disadvantaged sectors, while the Anglo-American industrialized countries have, in general, emphasized markets, competition, and deregulation.
Capitalism is far from monolithic, with significant differences between Europe, Japan, and the United States.
There is more than one way to respond to global markets and to run a capitalist economy.
In other societies like Iran, Afghanistan, and Sudan, conservative groups have resisted globalization strongly, even violently.
Domestic institutions and divisions—economic or ethnic— can lead to domestic conflict, which can reformulate ethnic and political identities in profound and often unanticipated ways.
As we saw in the last chapter, in Bosnia, political elites appealed to traditional identities of people in rural areas to overwhelm and dissolve the cosmopolitan identities that had begun to develop in the cities, with devastating results.
And Iran has seen struggles between Islamic fundamentalists and their more liberal opponents—who are also Islamic but more sympathetic to Western ideas.
As mentioned earlier, rising inequality was a major cause of the political reactions that halted a previous wave of economic globalization early in the twentieth century.
The recent period of globalization, like the half century before World War 1, has also been associated with increasing inequality among and within some countries.
The ratio of incomes of the 20 percent of people in the world living in the richest countries, compared to the 20 percent living in the poorest countries, increased from 30 to 1 in 1960 to 74 to 1 in 1997.
By comparison, it increased between 1870 and 1913 from 7 to 1 to 11 to 1.
In any case, inequality can have political effects even if it is not increasing.
The political consequences of these shifts in inequality are complex, but the economic historian Karl Polanyi argued powerfully in his classic study The Great Transformation that the market forces unleashed by the Industrial Revolution and globalization in the nineteenth century produced not only great economic gains.
Globalization and Interdependence but also great social disruptions and political reactions.
There is no automatic relationship between inequality and political reaction, but the former can give rise to the latter.
Protests against globalization are, in part, a reaction to the changes produced by economic interdependence.
From an economist’s view, imperfect markets are inefficient, but from a political view, some imperfections in international markets can be considered “useful inefficiencies” because they slow down and buffer political change.
As globalization removes such inefficiencies, it becomes the political prisoner of its economic successes.
In addition, as global networks become more complex there are more linkages among issues that can create friction.
Power and Interdependence Liberals sometimes argue that interdependence means peace and cooperation, but unfortunately it is not that simple.
Because the coalitions are more complex and different forms of power are used, the conflicts are often like playing chess on several boards at the same time.
The Chinese leader Mao Zedong once said that power grows out of the barrel of a gun.
After the oil crisis of 1973, the world was reminded that power can also grow out of a barrel of oil—as we shall see shortly.
THE CONCEPT OF INTERDEPENDENCE Interdependence is often a fuzzy term used in a variety of conflicting ways, like other political words such as nationalism, imperialism, and globalization.
Leaders and analysts have different motives when they use political words.
The leader wants as many people marching behind his or her banner as possible.
The analyst, on the other hand, makes distinctions to understand the world better.
The analyst may note that the boat we are all in may be heading for one person’s port but not another’s, or that one person is doing all the rowing while another steers or has a free ride.
As an analytical word, interdependence refers to situations in which actors or events in different parts of a system affect each other.
Such a situation is neither good nor bad in itself, and there can be more or less of it.
In the eighteenth century, Jean-Jacques Rousseau pointed out that along with interdependence comes friction and conflict.
When countries try isolation, as with the cases of North Korea and Myanmar , it comes at enot' mous economic cost.
Interdependence can originate in physical (natural) or social phenomena.
The distinction helps clarify the degree of choice in situations of reciprocal or mutual dependence.
Military interdependence is the mutual dependence that arises from military competition.
There is a physical aspect in the weaponry, especially dramatic since the development of nuclear weapons and the resulting possibility of mutually assured destruction.
However, an important element of perception is also involved in interdependence, and a change in perception or policy can reduce the intensity of the military interdependence.
As we saw in Chapter 5, Americans lost little sleep over the existence of British and French nuclear weapons during the Cold War because there was no perception that those weapons would ever land on American soil.
Similarly, Westerners slept a bit easier in the late 1980s after Gorbachev announced his “new thinking” in Soviet foreign policy.
It was not so much the number of Soviet weapons that made the difference, but the change in the perception of Soviet hostility or intent.
Indeed, American public anxiety about the Soviet nuclear arsenal virtually evaporated after the final collapse of the USSR, despite the fact that at the twentieth century’s close thousands of poorly guarded Soviet warheads were at risk of falling into the hands of terrorists or states such as Iran and North Korea.
Generally speaking, economic interdependence is similar to military interdependence in that it is the stuff of traditional international politics and has a high degree of social, especially perceptual, origin.
Economic interdependence involves Ecological AND Egonomic Interdependence ' i “For the first time in more than a decade, the developing countries have an issue where ■; they have some real leverage,” said an official from a Caribbean nation.
It’s their negotiating strategy.” j Poor nations, he said, see leverage because the north, the main polluter, wants them to ' cut emissions, stop deforesting and make other changes.
For example, in the early 1970s there was concern that the world’s population was outstripping global food supplies.
Many countries were buying American grain, which in turn drove up the price of food in American supermarkets.
A loaf of bread cost more in the United States because the Indian monsoons failed and because the Soviet Union had mishandled its harvest.
In 1973, the United States, in an effort to prevent price rises at home, decided to stop exporting soybeans to Japan.
A few years later, when supply and demand were better equilibrated, United States farmers greatly regretted that embargo because the Japanese were buying their soybeans from a cheaper source in Brazil.
Social choices as well as physical shortages affect economic interdependence in the long run.
It is always worth considering the long-term perspective when making short-term choices.
Benefits of Interdependence The benefits of interdependence are sometimes expressed as zero-sum and nonzero-sum.
In a positwe-sum situation, we both gain; in a negative-sum situation, we both lose.
Dividing a pie is zero-sum, baking a larger pie is positive-sum, and dropping it on the floor is negative-sum.
Both zero-sum and nonzero-sum aspects are present in mutual dependence.
Some liberal economists tend to think of interdependence only in terms of joint gain, that is, positive-sum situations in which everyone benefits and everyone is better off.
Failure to pay attention to the inequality of benefits and the conflicts that arise over the distribution of relative gains causes such analysts to miss the political aspects of interdependence.
The distribution of benefits— who gets how much of the joint gain—is a zero-sum situation in which one side’s gain is the other’s loss.
The result is that there is almost always some political conflict in economic interdependence.
Even when there is a larger pie, people can fight over who gets the biggest slices.
Even if interdependent countries enjoy a joint gain, there may be conflict over who gets more or less of the joint gain.
Some liberal analysts mistakenly think that as globalization makes the world more interdependent, cooperation will replace competition.
Their reason is that interdependence creates joint benefits, and those joint benefits encourage cooperation.
That is true, but economic interdependence can also be used as a weapon— witness the use of trade sanctions against Serbia, Iraq, and Libya.
Indeed, economic interdependence can be more usable than force in some cases because it may have more subtle gradations.
And in some circumstances, states are less interested in their absolute gain from interdependence than in how the relatively greater gains of their rivals might be used to hurt them.
Some analysts believe that traditional world politics was always zero-sum.
It made a difference, for example, whether Bismarck or Hitler was in charge of Germany.
If one party sought aggrandizement, as Hitler did, then indeed politics was zero-sum—one side’s gain was another’s loss.
But if all parties wanted stability, there could be joint gain in the balance of power.
Conversely, the politics of economic globalization has competitive zero-sum aspects as well as cooperative positive-sum aspects.
In the politics of interdependence, the distinction about what is domestic and what is foreign becomes blurred.
For example, the soybean situation mentioned earlier involved the domestic issue of controlling inflation at home, as well as American relations with Japan and Brazil.
In the late 1990s, on the other hand, an Asian financial crisis depressed world commodity prices, which helped the American economy continue to grow without encountering inflationary pressures.
Or, to take another example, after Iran’s 1979 revolution curtailed oil production, the American government urged citizens to cut their energy consumption by driving 55 miles per hour and turning down thermostats.
Interdependence thoroughly mixes domestic and foreign issues, which gives rise to much more complex coalitions, more intricate patterns of conflict, and a different distribution of benefits than in the past.
In 1890, a French politician concerned with relative economic gains pursued a policy of holding Germany back.
Today a policy of slowing economic growth in Germany is not good for France.
Economic interdependence between France and Germany means that the best predictor of whether France is better off economically is when Germany is growing economically.
Now with the two countries sharing a common currency, it is in the self-interest of the French politicians that Germany do well economically and vice versa.
The classical balance-of-power theory, which predicts that one country will act only to keep the other down lest the other gain preponderance, is not valid.
In economic interdependence, states are interested in absolute gains as well as gains relative to other states.
Costs of Interdependence The costs of interdependence can involve short-run sensitivity or long-term vulnerability.
It all happened very quickly; the market was extremely sensitive to the withdrawal of foreign funds.
In 1998, weakness in emerging markets in Asia had a contagious effect that undercut geographically distant emerging markets in Russia and Brazil.
A high level of sensitivity, however, is not the same as a high level of vulnerability.
Vulnerability refers to the relative costs of changing the structure of a system of interdependence.
It is the cost of escaping from the system or of changing the rules of the game.
The less vulnerable of two countries is not necessarily the less sensitive, but rather the one that would incur lower costs from altering the situation.
During the 1973 oil crisis, the United States depended on imported energy for only about 16 percent of its total energy uses.
On the other hand, in 1973 Japan depended about 95 percent on imported energy.
The United States was sensitive to the Arab oil boycott insofar as prices shot up in 1973, but it was not as vulnerable as Japan was.
In 1998, the United States was sensitive but not vulnerable to East Asian economic conditions.
The financial crisis there cut half a percent off the United States growth rate, but with a booming economy the United States could afford it.
Indonesia, on the other hand, was both sensitive and vulnerable to changes in global trade and investment patterns.
Its economy suffered severely and that in turn led to internal political conflict.
When the shah of Iran was overthrown in 1979, Iranian oil production was disrupted at a time when demand was high and markets were already tight.
The loss of Iran’s oil caused the total amount of oil on the world markets to drop by about 5 percent.
Markets were sensitive, and shortages of supply caused a rapid increase in oil prices.
But Americans could reduce 5 percent of their energy consumption simply by turning down their thermostats and driving 55 miles per hour.
It appears that the United States was sensitive but not very vulnerable if it could avoid damage by such simple actions.
The Bank of Japan is under pressure to raise interest rates—for the fourth time since last fi I May—to bolster the sagging yen.
Fear of inflation are also lingering, due to a severe i ij shortage of labor, soaring land prices and rapid growth in the nation’s money supply.
It also depends on whether a society is capable of responding quickly to change.
For example, the United States was less adept at responding to changes in the oil markets than Japan.
Furthermore, private actors, large corporations, and speculators in the market may each look at a market situation and decide to hoard supplies because they think shortages are going to grow worse.
Their actions will drive the price even higher because it will make the shortages greater and put more demand on the market.
Thus degrees of vulnerability are not quite as simple as they first look.
Vulnerability also depends on whether substitutes are available and whether there are diverse sources of supply.
In 1970, Lester Brown of the World Watch Institute expressed alarm about the increasing dependence of the United States, on imported raw materials, and therefore its vulnerability.
Of 13 basic industrial raw materials, the United States was dependent on imports for nearly 90 percent of aluminum, chromium, manganese, and nickel.
He predicted that by 1985 the United States would be dependent on imports in 10 of the basic 13.
Brown failed to consider the alternative sources of raw materials and the diversity of sources of supply that prevented producers from jacking up prices artificially.
Companies now mine discarded tailings because new technology has made it possible to extract copper from ore that was considered depleted waste years ago.
Today’s reduced use of copper is also due to the introduction of fiber-optic cables made from silicon, whose basic origin is sand.
Thus projections of United States vulnerability to shortages of raw materials were inaccurate because technology and alternatives were not adequately considered.
Some analysts refer to advanced economies today as information-based in the sense that computers, communications, and the Internet are becoming dominant factors in economic growth.
Such economies are sometimes called “lightweight” economies because the value of information embedded in products is often far greater than the value of the raw materials involved.
Such changes further depreciate the value of raw materials in world politics.
One of the few exceptions is oil, which still plays a significant role in most advanced economies, particularly for transportation.
This in turn contributes to the strategic significance of the Persian Gulf, where a large portion of the world’s currently known oil reserves are located.
Symmetry of Interdependence Symmetry refers to situations of relatively balanced versus unbalanced dependence.
If two parties are interdependent but one is less dependent than the other, the less dependent party has a source of power as long as both value the interdependent relationship.
Manipulating the asymmetries of interdependence can be a source of power in international politics.
Chart demonstrating the asymmetric nature of interdependence away the most interesting political behavior.
Such perfect symmetry is quite rare; so are cases of complete imbalance in which one side is totally dependent and the other is not dependent at all.
In the 1980s, when President Reagan cut taxes and raised expenditures, the United States became dependent on imported Japanese capital to balance its federal government budget.
Some argued that this gave Japan tremendous power over the United States.
But the other side of the coin was that Japan would hurt itself as well as the United States if it stopped lending to the United States.
In addition, Japanese investors who already had large stakes in the United States would have found their investments devalued by the damage done to the American economy if Japan suddenly stopped lending to the United States.
Japan’s economy was a little more than half the size of the American economy, and that meant the Japanese needed the American market for their exports more than vice versa, although both needed each other and both benefited from the interdependence.
A similar relationship has developed today between the United States and China.
America accepts Chinese imports, and China holds American dollars and bonds, in effect making a loan to the United States.
Moreover, security was often linked to other issues in the U.S.-Japanese relationship.
After World War II, Japan followed the policy of a trading state and did not develop a large military capability or gain nuclear weapons.
It relied on the American security guarantee to balance the power of the Soviet Union and China in the East Asian region.
Thus when a dispute seemed to be developing between the United States and Japan over trade in 1990, the Japanese made concessions to prevent weakening the overall security relationship.
When there is asymmetry of interdependence in different issue areas, a state may try to link or unlink issues.
If each issue could be thought of as a separate poker game, and all poker games were played simultaneously, one state might have most of the chips at one table and another state might have most of the chips at another table.
Depending on a state’s interests and position, it might want to keep the games separate or create linkages between the tables.
Therefore, much of the political conflict over interdependence involves the creation or prevention of linkage.
For example, in 1996 the United States threatened sanctions against foreign companies that invested in Iran, but when faced with European threats of retaliation through other linkages, the United States backed down.
By setting agendas and defining issue areas, international institutions often set the rules for the trade-offs in interdependent relationships.
States try to use international institutions to set the rules that affect the transfer of chips among tables.
Ironically, international institutions can benefit the weaker players by keeping some of the conflicts in which the poorer states are relatively better endowed separated from the military table, where strong states dominate.
The danger remains, however, that some players will be strong enough to overturn one or more of the tables.
With separate institutions for money, shipping, pollution, and trade, if the militarily strong players are beaten too badly there is a danger they may try to kick over the other tables.
Yet when the United States and Europe were beaten at the oil table in 1973, they did not use their preponderant military force to kick over the oil table because, as we see later, a complex web of linkages held them back.
The largest state does not always win in the manipulation of economic interdependence.
If a smaller or weaker state has a greater concern about an issue, it may do quite well.
For instance, because the United States accounts for nearly threequarters of Canada’s foreign trade while Canada accounts for about one-quarter of the United States foreign trade, Canada is more dependent on the United States than vice versa.
Nonetheless, Canada often prevailed in a number of disputes with the United States because Canada was willing to threaten retaliatory actions, such as tariffs and restrictions that deterred the United States.
The Canadians would have suffered much more than the United States if their actions had led to a full dispute, but Canada felt it was better to risk occasional retaliation than to agree to rules that would always make it lose.
Deterrence via manipulation of economic interdependence is somewhat like nuclear deterrence in that it rests on a capability for effective damage and credible intentions.
Small states can often use their greater intensity and greater credibility to overcome their relative vulnerability in asymmetrical interdependence.
A natural outgrowth of rising interdependence is the proliferation of trade pacts.
The European Union is the most sophisticated of these agreements and requires its member states to forfeit not just some economic sovereignty, but political sovereignty as well.
For Mexico and Canada, NAFTA was appealing because it bound their economies more tightly to the larger United States economy and, in so doing, increased their access to United States markets and their ability to export their products to the United States.
For the United States, NAFTA expanded the realm of United States exports and made it easier for United States companies to do business in Canada and Mexico.
Regional pacts such as NAFTA may increase interdependence and lessen the asymmetry in a relationship.
When the value of the Mexican peso plummeted in 1994, the Clinton administration rushed in early 1995 to shore up the flagging currency and assembled a multibillion-dollar aid package.
At a time when the United States Congress was deadlocked over increased domestic spending for services such as health care, the administration saw little choice but to rescue the peso.
With greater interdependence, even strong countries can find themselves sensitive to economic developmentsheyond their borders.
In 1997, when Southeast Asia'suffered its financial crisis, the United States was less vulnerable than in the Mexican case and responded primarily through multilateral institutions.
Nevertheless, fears of an economic domino effect in which collapse of some developing economies would undermine confidence in others meant that the United States and other advanced economies could not continue to stand idly by.
In the nineteenth century, Great Britain was the strongest of the major world economies.
In the monetary area, the Bank of England adhered to the gold standard, which set a stable framework for world money.
Britain also enforced freedom of the seas for navigation and commerce, and provided a large open market for world trade until 1932.
After World War I, Britain was severely weakened by its fight against the Kaiser’s Germany.
The United States became the world’s largest economy, but it turned away from international affairs in the 1930s.
The largest player in the world economy behaved as if it could still take a free ride rather than provide the leadership its size implied.
Some economists believe that the Great Depression of the 1930s was aggravated by bad monetary policy and lack of American leadership.
Britain was too weak to maintain an open international economy, and the United States was not living up to its new responsibilities.
After World War II, the lessons of the 1930s were on the minds of American leaders, and in 1944 an international conference at Bretton Woods, New Flampshire, established institutions to maintain an open, international economy.
The International Monetary Fund lends money, usually to developing countries and new market economies, to help when they have difficulties with their balance of payments or with paying interest on their debts.
The IMF generally conditions its loans on the recipient country reforming its economic policies, for example reducing budget deficits and price subsidies.
While its policies are sometimes controversial and not always effective, the IMF played a role in helping the Russian economy in the early 1990s as well as in the Asian financial crisis later in the decade.
The International Bank for Reconstruction a*d Development lends money to poorer countries and new market economies for development projects.
The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development serves as a forum for thirty of the most developed countries to coordinate their interna' tional economic policies.
Since the mid'1970s, the leaders of the seven largest economies, which account for two-thirds of world production, have met at annual summit conferences to discuss conditions of the world economy.
These institutions helped reinforce government policies that allow rapid growth of private transnational interactions.
In most of the period after 1945, trade grew between 3 and 9 percent per year, faster even than the growth of the world product.
International trade, which represented 10 percent of the United States GDP in 1960, more than doubled to 22 percent of the United States GDP by the 1990s and was roughly 25 percent of GDP in 2004.
Large multinational corporations with global strategies became more significant as international investments increased by nearly 10 percent per year.
Gritics have argued that the major international economic institutions are biased in favor of rich rather than poor countries.
The IMF and World Bank, for example, have weighted voting that gives a preponderant influence to the United States, Europe, and Japan.
The Fund has always been directed by a European and the Bank by an American.
The United States is able to run fiscal and trade deficits with only the mildest of criticism, but when poor countries incur similar debts, IMF bureaucrats insist on a return to market discipline as a condition for help.
In other words, the institutions reflect the underlying power of the asymmetrical interdependence of financial markets.
Abolishing the IMF would not change that underlying power reality in financial markets.
If anything, leaving matters to private bankers and fund managers might make it even more difficult for poor countries to borrow.
Critics argue that the agreements countries negotiate within its framework (such as the current Doha “development round” of multilateral trade talks) have allowed rich countries to protect areas such as agriculture and textiles from developing'country competition and thus are unfair to the poor.
The critics descriptions are correct, and the protectionist policies hurt poor countries.
But the causes of such protection' ism lie in the domestic politics of the rich countries, and might be even greater if the WTO did not play a role.
Again, international institutions can alleviate but not remove the underlying power realities.
If anything, the fact that the United States and Europe have abided by costly decisions made against them by WTO panels sug' gests that institutions can make a difference, even if at the margin.
Even among the rich and powerful countries, there are problems in managing a transnational economy in a world of separate states.
In the 1980s and again after 2001, the United States became a net debtor when it refused to tax itself to pay its bills at home and instead borrowed money from abroad.
But the United States did not decline and turn inward, and other countries continued to be willing to lend it money because they had confidence in its economy and it suited their interests.
China, for example, continues to hold large reserves in dollars as a means to facilitate its exports to the United States.
In 1999 most members of the European Union created a European monetary unit with a single currency, the euro, which some think may come to rival the dollar as another world reserve currency.
In addition, global financial markets have grown dramatically in recent years, and their volatility poses risks to stability.
Much will depend on the willingness of their governments to pursue policies that maintain stability in the international economic system.
In any case, the global political and economic system is more complicated and complex than before.
More sectors, more states, more issues, and more private actors are involved in the complexity of interdependent relationships.
It is increasingly unrealistic to analyze world politics as occurring solely among a group of large states, solid as billiard balls, bouncing off each other in a balance of power.
These assumptions are that states are the only significant actors, military force is the dominant instrument, and security is the dominant goal.
States are not the only significant actors— transnational actors working across state boundaries are also major players; force is not the only significant instrument—economic manipulation and the use of international institutions are the dominant instruments; and security is not the dominant goal—welfare is the dominant goal.
It is an imaginary concept that does not exist in the real world, but as we have seen, neither does realism perfectly fit the real world.
Complex interdependence is a thought experiment that allows us to imagine a different type of world politics.
Both realism and complex interdependence are simple models or ideal types.
We can ask where certain country relationships fit on a spectrum between realism and complex interdependence.
The Middle East is closer to the realist end of the spectrum, but relations between the United States and Canada and relations between France and Germany today come much closer to the complex interdependence end of the spectrum.
Different polities and different forms of the power struggle occur depending on where on the spectrum a particular relationship between a set of countries is located.
Chart showing spectrum from realism to complex interdependence Japan, United States imports from China far outstrip United States exports.
While the bilateral trade relationship between the United States and China is asymmetrical in China’s favor, the United States is not particularly vulnerable to potential Chinese trade embargoes because it could compensate for the potential loss of Chinese goods by purchasing them elsewhere, and China has strong domestic incentives to export to the United States.
On the other hand, the potential size of the Chinese market for American goods and the domestic demand for Chinese goods in the United States mean that the ability of the United States government to act against China is somewhat constrained by transnational actors, including United States multinational corporations that have pressured the United States government not to implement sanctions against China for unfair trade practices and human rights violations.
At the same time, the rapid growth of China’s economic and military strength had a strong effect on the perceptions of the balance of power in East Asia, and contributed to the reinvigoration of the U.S.-Japan security alliance starting in 1995.
Before the 2003 Iraq War, columnist Robert Kagan argued that many European countries were less willing to confront dangerous dictators like Saddam Hussein because they had become accustomed to the peaceful conditions of complex interdependence that prevailed inside Europe and tended to generalize them to the realist world outside Europe, where they were less appropriate.
Of course this clever phrase was too simple , but it captured different perceptions across the Atlantic.
In their relations with each other, all advanced democracies form Kantian islands of peace in the sea of Hobbesian realism.
In its relations with Canada, Europe, and Japan,.even the United States is from Venus.
It is equally mistaken to pretend that the whole world is typified by Hobbesian realism or by Kantian complex interdependence.
THE POLITICS OF OIL As mentioned earlier, oil is the most important raw material in the world, in both economic and political terms, and it is likely to remain the key source of energy well into this century.
Even with high Chinese growth, the world is not running out of oil anytime soon.
More than a trillion barrels of reserves have been proven, and more is likely to be found.
But two-thirds of the proven reserves are in the Persian Gulf and are therefore vulnerable to political disruption, which could have devastating effects on the world economy.
As one wag put it, if the gulf produced broccoli instead of oil, the wars might not have occurred.
Thus oil not only is important in itself, but is also an issue that illustrates aspects of both realism and complex interdependence.
Interdependence in a given area often occurs within a framework of rules, norms, and institutions that are called a regime.
The international oil regime has changed dramatically over the decades.
In 1960, the oil regime was a private oligopoly with close ties to the governments of the major consuming countries.
Oil at that time sold for about $2 a barrel, and seven large transnational oil companies, sometimes called the “seven sisters,” determined the amount of oil that would be produced.
The price of oil depended on how much the large companies produced and on the demand in the rich countries where most of the oil was sold.
Transnational companies set the rate of production, and prices were determined by conditions in rich countries.
The strongest powers in the international system in traditional military terms occasionally intervened to keep the system going.
For example, in 1953, when a nationalist movement tried to overthrow the Shah of Iran, Britain and the United States covertly intervened to return the Shah to his throne.
As mentioned earlier, after 1973 there was a major change in the international regime governing oil.
The producing countries set the rate of production and therefore had a strong effect on price, rather than price being determined solely by the market in the rich countries.
There was an enormous shift of power and wealth from rich to relatively poor countries.
Confidential documents released in 2004 showed that in response to the Arab oil embargo of 1973, the United States had considered the use of force to seize Persian Gulf oil fields, as realist theory might have predicted.
But it did not do so, and the regime changed in favor of the weaker countries.
The trouble with this explanation is that OPEC was formed in 1960 and the dramatic change did not occur until 1973.
Realists look at changes in the balance of power resting primarily on military force, particularly with regard to the Persian Gulf, the major oil-exporting region of the world.
In 1960, half the OPEC countries were colonies of Europe; by 1973, they were all independent.
Accompanying the rise in nationalism was a rise in the costs of military intervention.
It is much more expensive to use force against a nationalistically awakened and decolonized people.
When the British and Americans intervened in Iran in 1953, it was not very costly, but if the Americans had tried to keep the Shah on his throne in 1979, the costs would have been prohibitive.
Relative changes in United States and British power also affected the balance of power in the Persian Gulf.
But by 1971 Britain was economically weakened, and the British government was trying to cut back on its international defense commitments.
That may sound a bit like 1947, when Britain was unable to maintain its role as a power in the eastern Mediterranean.
At that time, the United States stepped in to help Greece and Turkey, and formulated the Truman Doctrine.
But in 1971, the United States was not well placed to step in to replace Britain as it did in 1947.
The United States was deeply embroiled in Vietnam and unwilling to accept an additional major military commitment in the Persian Gulf.
President Nixon and then National Security Adviser Kissinger designed an American strategy that relied heavily on regional powers.
By using Iran as the regional hegemon, they thought they could replace the departing British policeman cheaply.
A realist would point to these changes in the overall structure of power, particularly the balance of power in the Persian Gulf region, to explain the change in the oil regime.
A second way of explaining the change is a modified form of realism that focuses on the relative market power of various nations.
Between 1950 and 1973 serious changes occurred in global oil consumption that altered United States dependence on foreign oil.
Specifically, the United States, until 1971, was the largest oil producer in the world.
But American production peaked in 1971; American imports began to grow thereafter and the United States no longer had any surplus oil.
During the two Middle East wars of 1956 and 1967, the Arab countries tried an oil embargo, but their efforts were easily defeated because the United States was producing enough oil to supply Europe when it was cut off by the Arab countries.
Once American production peaked in 1971 and the United States began to import oil, the power to balance the oil market switched to countries like Saudi Arabia and Iran.
No longer was the United States the supplier of last resort that could make up any missing oil.
When a multinational corporation goes into a resource-rich country with a new investment, it can strike a bargain in which the multinational gets a large part of the joint gains.
From the point of view of the poor country, having a multinational come in to develop its resources will make it better off.
Even if it gets only 20 percent of the revenues and the multinational gets 80 percent, the poor country has more than it had before.
So at the early stages when multinationals have a monopoly on capital, technology, and access to international markets, they strike a bargain with the poor countries in which the multinationals get the lion’s share.
But over time, the multinationals inadvertently transfer resources to the poor countries, not out of charity but in the normal course of business.
The Saudis, Kuwaitis, and others learn how to run oil fields, pumping stations, and loading docks.
The multinational could threaten to pull out, but now the poor country can threaten to run the operation by itself.
So over time, the power of the multinational company, particularly in raw materials, diminishes in terms of its bargaining with the host country.
From the 1960s to 1973, the multinationals inadvertently transferred technology and skills that developed the poor countries’ capacity to run oil operations themselves.
The seven sisters were joined by “little cousins” when new transnational corporations entered the oil market.
Although they were not as large as the seven sisters, they were still big, and they began to strike their own deals with the oil-producing countries.
Thus when an oil-producing country wanted to get out of the hands of the seven sisters, it could strike a deal with smaller independent multinationals.
Institutionally, there was a modest increase in the effectiveness of OPEC as a cartel.
Cartels restricting supply had long been typical in the oil industry, but in the past they had been private arrangements of the seven sisters.
Cartels generally have a problem because there is a tendency to cheat on production quotas when markets are soft and the price drops.
Cartels work best when there is a shortage of oil, but when there is a surplus, people want to sell their oil and tend to cut the price in order to get a bigger share of the market.
OPEC represented an effort to shift from a private to a governrfiental cartel of the oil-producing countries.
In its early years, OPEC had trouble exercising power because there was plenty of oil.
As long as oil was in surplus, the OPEC countries had incentives to cheat to get a larger share of the market.
OPEC was unable to enforce price discipline from the year it was founded, 1960, until the early 1970s.
But after oil supplies tightened, OPEC’s role in coordinating the bargaining power of the producers increased.
The Middle East War of 1973 gave OPEC a boost, a signal that now it could use its power.
The Arab countries cut off access to oil during the 1973 war for political reasons, but that created a situation in which OPEC could become effective.
Iran, which is not an Arab country, was allegedly the American instrument for policing the Persian Gulf, but the Shah of Iran moved to quadruple oil prices and the other OPEC countries followed suit.
Over the long term, OPEC could not maintain permanently high prices because of market forces, but there was a stickiness on the downside that was an effect of the OPEC coalition.
A more important institutional factor was the role the oil companies played in “smoothing the pain” in the crisis itself.
At one point in the crisis, Henry Kissinger, by now secretary of state, said that if the United States faced “strangulation,” force might have to be used.
Fifteen percent of traded oil was cut, and the Arab embargo reduced oil exports to the United States by 25 percent.
However, oil companies made sure that no one country suffered much more than any other.
When the United States lost 25 percent of its Arab oil imports, the companies shipped it more Venezuelan or Indonesian oil.
They helped prevent the economic conflict from becoming a military conflict.
Transnational companies are long'run profit maximizers; that is, they want to maximize their profit in the long term.
The multinational companies feared situations in which they would be nationalized in a country if they refused to sell to that country.
For example, Prime Minister Edward Heath of Britain demanded that the head of British Petroleum sell only to Britain and not to other countries.
The head of British Petroleum replied that if he followed such an order, the company would be nationalized by those other countries, which would destroy British Petroleum.
Essentially, because the oil companies were long-run profit maximizers, they tried to stabilize the market rather than have the pain strike any one country strongly.
By reducing the threat of strangulation, they reduced the probability that force would be used.
In short, oil is an illustration of an issue that falls between the ideal types of realism and complex interdependence.
Changes in three dimensions—the overall balance of power, the issue structure of power, and the institutions within the oil issue area—help explain the dramatic difference between the oil regime of 1960 and the oil regime after 1973.
By cutting production and embargoing sales to countries friendly to Israel, Arab states were able to bring their issues to the forefront of the United States agenda.
They also created temporary disarray in the alliances between Japan, Europe, and the United States.
In order to protect their oil supplies, France and Japan took independent positions.
The oil weapon encouraged the United States to play a more conciliatory role in arranging the settlement of the Arab-Israeli dispute in the aftermath of the Yom Kippur War.
On the other hand, the oil weapon did not change the basic policy of the United States.in the Middle East.
The Americans did not suddenly switch from their alliance with Israel to support of the Arab cause.
Oil was a power resource that had an effect, but not a strong enough effect to reverse American policy.
Saudi Arabia, which became the key country in oil markets, had large investments in the United States.
If the Saudis damaged the United States economy too much, they would also hurt their own economic interests.
In addition, Saudi Arabia depended on the United States in the security area.
In the long run, the United States was the only country able to keep a stable balance of power in the Persian Gulf region.
The Saudis knew this and they were careful about how far they pushed the oil weapon.
There was no military intervention because strangulation never occurred.
Moreover, the Saudis were benefiting from the long-run security guarantee provided by the United States.
Force was too costly to use overtly, but it played a role as a power resource in the background.
Oil remains an exception among raw materials, and this contributed in part to the two Gulf Wars and to the continuing strong United States naval presence in the Persian Gulf.
But oil prices are sensitive to global market forces and multinationals’ exploration for new supplies in Central Asia and other regions has increased supply.
Prices at the end of the century had returned to historical lows before the 1973 crisis.
The nightmare oil scenarios predicted during the 1970s failed to materialize.
The United States Department of Energy, for instance, forecast that oil would cost more than $100 a barrel by 2000.
On the demand side, policy measures and price increases led to more efficient use of energy.
For example, the Corporate Average Fuel Efficiency law in the United States mandated that automakers manufacture cars that achieved minimum standards for gas mileage.
This is an example of a domestic policy that had a clear intended effect on foreign policy.
On the supply side, the emergence of non-OPEC oil sources that were unavailable during the Cold War meant that OPEC faced more competition on the world market.
The Caspian Sea reserves also offered another promising outlet outside OPEC’s control.
Advances in technology led geologists to gain access to oil that had previously been impossible to reach, exposing the limitations of the projections that were made in the 1970s about global reserves.
Two growing giants will influence the future of energy markets; China and India.
As the two most populous nations on earth, both are experiencing rapid increases in demand for energy as they modernize and industrialize.
Both countries are making mercantilist efforts to buy and control foreign oil supplies, though the lessons of the 1970s crisis should teach them that oil markets tend to spread supplies and even out the pain no matter who owns the oil.
China also has vast coal reserves as well as natural gas in its western Xinjiang province, but it will increasingly rely on imports to meet its •growing needs.
Both countries also face serious environmental challenges from their use of fossil fuels that may have global implications in terms of air pollution, and climate change.
In any event, their rapid economic growth will contribute significantly to the global demand for oil.
The United States will also likely continue to rely on imported oil to meet its energy needs, and this means that the biggest global oil-producing regions, such as the Persian Gulf, will still play a key role in geopolitics.
Despite new sources such as Russia, experts anticipate that Saudi Arabia and its neighbors will meet two-thirds of the increased global oil demand that takes place between now and 2030.
While raw materials are less crucial in information age economies than in the industrial age, oil still matters.
And while growing global networks of economic interdependence produce joint gains, they can also create political problems.
Power politics just becomes more complex in an era of economic globalization.
Liberal theory was optimistic that increasing international commerce would seriously decrease the attractiveness of military force as a tool in international politics.
Under classical realist assumptions, we would not expect to see cooperation among states under conditions of anarchy.
James J McCarthy, “The Scope of the IPCC Third Assessment Report,” Climate Report , 3.
Joseph Stiglitz, “Weightless Concerns,” Financial Times , February 3, 1999, 14.
Keohane, Robert O., and Joseph S Nye, Jr., Power and Interdependence, 2nd ed.
Chapter POWER AND THE INFORMATION REVOLUTION An information revolution is currently transforming world politics.
Four centuries ago, the English statesman-philosopher Francis Bacon wrote that knowledge is power.
Governments have always worried about the flow and control of information, and the current period is not the first to be strongly affected by changes in information technology.
In the fifteenth century, Johann Gutenberg’s invention of movable type, which allowed printing of the Bible and its accessibility to large portions of the European population, is often credited with playing a major role in the onset of the Reformation.
Pamphlets and committees of correspondence paved the way for the American Revolution.
As constructivists point out, rapid changes in information flows can lead to important changes in identities and interests.
The current information revolution is based on rapid technological advances in computers, communications, and software that in turn have led to dramatic decreases in the cost of processing and transmitting information.
Computing power doubled every 18 months for 30 years, and by the beginning of the twentyfirst century it cost one-thousandth of what it did in the early 1970s.
If the price of automobiles had fallen as quickly as the price of semiconductors, a car today would cost five dollars.
Communications bandwidths are expanding rapidly, and communications costs continue to fall even more rapidly than computing power.
As late as 1980, phone calls over copper wire could carry only one page of information per second; today a thin strand of optical fiber can transmit 90,000 volumes in a second.
In terms of current dollars, the cost of a brief transatlantic phone call had fallen from $250 in 1930 to considerably less than a dollar at the beginning of the new century.
Webcams allow people to have personal videoconferences from the comfort of their home office.
In 1980, a gigabyte of storage occupied a room; now an Apple iPod that fits in your pocket comes with 60 gigabytes of storage.
The crucial change is the enormous reduction in the cost of transmitting information.
For all practical purposes, the actual transmission costs have become negligible; hence the amount of information that can be transmitted worldwide is effectively infinite.
The result is an explosion of information, of which documents are a tiny fraction.
By one estimate, there are 1. billion gigabytes of digital magnetically stored information , and shipments of such information are doubling each year.
This dramatic change in the linked technologies of computing and communications, sometimes called the “third industrial revolution,” is changing the nature of governments and sovereignty and creating a diffusion of power.
In the first industrial revolution around the turn of the nineteenth century, the application of steam to mills and transportation had a powerful effect on the economy, society, and government.
Patterns of production, work, living conditions, social class, and political power were transformed.
Public education arose as literate trained workers were needed for increasingly complex and potentially dangerous factories.
Police forces such as London’s “bobbies” were created to deal with urbanization.
Subsidies were provided for the necessary infrastructure of canals and railroads.
The “second industrial revolution,” around the turn of the twentieth century— electricity, synthetics, and the internal combustion engine—brought similar economic and social changes.
The United States went from a predominantly agrarian to a primarily industrial and urban nation.
A few decades later, the majority lived in cities and worked in factories.
Social class and political cleavages were altered as urban labor and trade unions became more important.
The bipartisan progressive movement ushered in antitrust legislation, early consumer protection regulation by the forerunner of the Food and Drug Administration, and economic stabilization by the Federal Reserve Board.
The United States rose to the status of a great power in world politics.
Some expect the third industrial revolution to produce analogous transformations in the economy, society, government, and world politics.
These historical analogies help us understand some of the forces that will shape world politics in the twenty-first century.
Economies and information networks have changed more rapidly than governments have.
The political scales of sovereignty and authority have not yet grown to a similar scale.
If we focus solely on the hard power of nation-states, we will miss the new reality.
We are still at an early stage of the current information revolution, and its effects on economics and politics are uneven.
As with steam in the late eighteenth century and electricity in the late nineteenth century, productivity growth lagged as society had to learn to fully utilize the new technologies.
For example, the electric motor was invented in 1881, but it was nearly four decades before Henry Ford pioneered the reorganization of factory assembly lines to take full advantage of electric power.
The increase in productivity of the American economy began to register only as recently as the mid-1990s.
The advent of truly mass communications and broadcasting a century ago, which was facilitated by newly cheap electricity, provides some lessons about possible social and political effects today.
While information was more widespread, it was more centrally influenced even in democratic countries than in the age of the local press.
President Roosevelt’s use of radio in the 1930s worked a dramatic shift in American politics.
These effects were particularly pronounced in countries where they were combined with the rise of totalitarian governments that were able to suppress competing sources of information.
Indeed, some scholars believe totalitarianism could not have been possible without the mass communications that accompanied the second industrial revolution.
In the middle of the twentieth century, people feared that the computers and communications of the current information revolution would create the central governmental control dramatized in George Orwell’s novel 1984.
Mainframe computers seemed set to enhance central planning and increase the surveillance powers of those at the top of a pyramid of control.
Through central databases, computers can make government identification and surveillance easier, and commercialization has already altered the early libertarian culture and code of the Internet.
Nonetheless, the technology of encryption is evolving, and programs like Gnutella and Freenet enable users to trade digital information anonymously.
They promise greater space for individuals than the early pessimists envisioned, and the Internet is more difficult for governments to control than was the technology of the second information revolution.
As computing power has decreased in cost and computers have shrunk in size and become more widely distributed, their decentralizing effects have outweighed their centralizing effects.
The Internet creates a system in which power over information is much more widely distributed.
Rather than reinforcing centralization and bureaucracy, the new information technologies have tended to foster network organizations, new types of commimity, and demands for different roles for government.
What this means is that world politics will not be the sole province of governments.
Both individuals and private organizations, ranging from corporations to NGOs to terrorists, will be empowered to play direct roles in world politics.
The spread of information means that power will be more widely distributed and informal networks will undercut the monopoly of traditional bureaucracy.
The speed of Internet time means all governments, both here and overseas, will have less control of their agendas.
Political leaders will enjoy fewer degrees of freedom before they must respond to events, and then will have to share the stage with more actors.
Realist images of sovereign states balancing and bouncing off each other like billiard balls will blind us to the new complexity of world politics.
The effects of the third information revolution on central governments are still in their early stages.
Peter Drucker and Heidi and Alvin Toffler argue that the information rev' olution is bringing an end to the hierarchical bureaucratic organizations that typified the age of the industrial revolution.
If these prophets are right, the result would be a new cyberfeudalism, with overlapping communities and jurisdictions laying claim to multiple layers of citizens’ identities and loyalties.
A medieval European might have owed equal loyalty to a local lord, a duke, a king, and the Pope.
A ffiture European might owe loyalty to Brittany, Paris, Brussels, as well as to several cybercommunities concerned with religion, work, and various interests.
While the system of sovereign states is still the dominant pattern in interna' tional relations, we can begin to discern a pattern of crosscutting communities and governance that resembles the situation before the Peace of Westphalia formalized the state system in 1648.
Transnational contacts across political borders were typical in the feudal era, but were gradually constrained by the rise of centralized nationstates.
Three decades ago, transnational contacts were already growing, but they involved relatively small numbers of elites involved in multinational corporations, scientific groups, and academic institutions.
Now the Internet is creating low costs that open transnational communications to millions of people.
Sovereignty and Control The issue of sovereignty is hotly contested in world politics today.
Many political leaders resist anything that seems to diminish national autonomy.
They worry about the political role of the United Nations in limiting the use of force, the economic decisions handed down by the World Trade Organization, and efforts to develop environmental institutions and treaties.
In their eyes, the notion of an international community of opinion is illusory.
But the debate over the fate of the sovereign state has been poorly framed.
Medieval trade fairs were not substitutes for the institutions of feudal authority.
Medieval merchants developed the Lex Mercatoria that governed their relations largely as a private set of rules for conducting business.
Similarly, today, everyone from hackers to large corporations is developing the code and norms of the Internet partly outside the control of formal political institutions.
The development of transnational corporate intranets behind firewalls and encryption “represent private appropriations of a public space.These private systems, such as corporate intranets or worldwide newsgroups devoted to specific issues such as the environment, do not frontally challenge the governments of sovereign states; they simply add a layer of relations that sovereign states do not effectively control.
People will participate in transnational Internet communities without ceasing to be loyal citizens, but their perspectives will be different from those of typical loyal citizens before the Internet.
Even in the age of the Internet, the roles of political institutions are likely to change gradually.
After the rise of the territorial state, other successors to medieval rule such as the Italian city-states and the Hanseatic League in northern Europe persisted as viable alternatives, able to tax and fight for nearly two centuries.
The real issue today is not the continued existence of the sovereign state, but how its centrality and functions are being altered.
Complicating the task of national governance is not the same as undermining sovereignty.
However, in the process of adaptation they change the meaning of sovereign jurisdiction, control, and the role of private actors.
It takes five hours to inspect a fully loaded 40-foot shipping container, and more than 5 million enter each year.
In addition, millions of undocumented immigrants have simply walked or ridden across the Mexican and Canadian borders.
As September 11, 2001, illustrated, terrorists can easily slip across borders, and it is easier to bring in a few pounds of a deadly biological or chemical agent than to smuggle in the tons of illegal heroin and cocaine that arrive annually.
The only way for the Department of Homeland Security to cope with such flows is to expand intelligence sharing with and cooperation inside the jurisdiction of other states, and to rely on private corporations to develop transparent systems for tracking international commercial flows so enforcement officials can conduct “virtual” audits of inbound shipments before they arrive.
The sovereign state adapts, but in doing so it transforms the meaning and exclusivity of governmental jurisdiction.
National security—the absence of threat to major values—is another example.
Damage done by climate change or imported viruses can be larger in terms of money or lives lost than the effects of some wars.
But even if one restricts the definition of national security more narrowly to organized violence, the nature of military security is changing.
As the United States Commission on National Security in the Twenty-First Century pointed out, the country has not been invaded by foreign armies since 1814, and the military is designed to project force and fight wars far from our shores.
But the United States military was not well equipped to protect us against an attack on the homeland by terrorists using civilian aircrafts as weapons of great destruction.
The United States suffered more casualties from the transnational terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, than from the Japanese government’s attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941.
Today, attackers may be governments, groups, individuals, or some combination.
But some aggressors may be anonymous and not even come near the targeted country.
In 1998, when Washington complained about seven Moscow Internet addresses involved in the theft of Pentagon and NASA secrets, the Russian government replied that phone numbers from which the attacks originated were inoperative.
The United States had no way of knowing whether the Russian government had been involved.
More than 30 nations have developed aggressive cyberwarfare programs, but as anyone with a computer knows, any individual can also enter the game.
With a few keystrokes, an anonymous source anywhere in the world might break into and disrupt power grids of major cities or emergency response systems.
A hacker in Malaysia who turns off the electricity in Chicago can do great damage from halfway around the world.
Every night, American software companies send work electronically to India and other countries where software engineers can work while Americans sleep and send it back the next morning.
Someone outside America’s borders could also embed trapdoors deep in computer code for use at a later date.
Nuclear deterrence, border patrols, and stationing troops overseas to shape regional power balances will continue to matter in the information age, but they will not be sufficient to ensure national security.
Competing interpretations of sovereignty arise even in the domain of law.
Since 1945, human rights provisions have coexisted in the Charter of the United Nations alongside provisions that protect the sovereignty of states.
As we saw in Chapter 6, Article 2. says nothing shall authorize the United Nations to intervene in matters within domestic jurisdiction.
Yet the development of a global norm of antiracism and repugnance at the South African practice of apartheid led a large majority at the UN to abridge this principle.
Another example of this complexity was the 1998 detention of General Augusto Pinochet in Britain in response to a Spanish request for extradition based on human rights violations and crimes committed while he was president of Chile.
Information technology, particularly the Internet, has eased the tasks of coordination and strengthened the hands of human rights activists, but political leaders, particularly in formerly colonized countries, cling to the protections legal sovereignty provides against outside interventions.
The world is likely to see these two partly contradictory bodies of international law continue to coexist for years to come.
For many people, the national state provides an important source of the political identity that is important to them.
As we saw in Chapter 6, people are capable of multiple crosscutting identities—family, village, ethnic group, religion, nationality, cosmopolitan—and which one predominates often depends on the context.
In many preindustrial countries, subnational identities at the tribe or clan level prevail.
In some postindustrial countries, including the United States and European countries, cosmopolitan identities such as “global citizen” or “custodian of planet Earth” are beginning to emerge.
It is still too early to understand the full effects of the Internet, but the shaping of identities can move in contradictory directions at the same time—up to Brussels, down to Brittany, or fixed on Paris—as circumstances dictate.
A fascinating use of the Internet to wield soft power can be found in the politics of diaspora communities.
Internet connections between foreign nationals and local citizens helped spark protests in Beijing against anti-Chinese riots taking place in Indonesia in 1998.
The frustration of ethnic Chinese living in Indonesia was transferred to Beijing with remarkable speed.
Similarly, in Zimbabwe, the Internet was crucial in spreading news about government actions during disputed elections.
One example of a diaspora group that has effectively used the Internet and other media sources to affect political outcomes In its home country is the Ghanaian expatriate community.
In the elections of 2000, the first opportunity for Ghanaians to change their government through democratic means, the diaspora network was crucial in mobilizing support and money for the opposition candidate.
The GCG is in the process of establishing a network among 2. million Ghanaian expatriates to increase the flow of capital to their home country.
In the Vietnam era, planning a protest required weeks and months of pamphlets, posters, and phone calls, and it took four years before the size of the first rallies of 25,000 reached half a million in 1969.
The result may be greater volatility rather than consistent movement in any one direction.
One effect is “flash movements”—sudden surges of protest— triggered by particular issues or events, such as antiglobalization protests or the sud' den rise of the anti-fuel tax coalition that captured European politics in the autumn of 2000 or the protests around the world during the 2003 Iraq War.
The Zapatista rebels in Mexico’s Chiapas province relied less on bullets than on transnational publicity, much of it coordinated on the Internet, to pressure the Mexican government for reforms.
In 2004, activists used cell phones to organize peaceful revolutions in the former Soviet states of Georgia and Ukraine.
Political scientist James Rosenau has tried to summarize such trends by inventing a new word, fragmegration, to express the idea that both integration toward larger identities and fragmentation into smaller communities can occur at the same time.
But one need not alter the English language to realize that apparently contradictory movements can occur simultane' ously.
They do not spell the end of the sovereign state, but they do make its politics more volatile and less self-contained within national shells.
That shorthand is a useful simplification, especially in the classical period of international politics.
If Frederick the Great wanted something for Prussia, Frederick was Pnissia.
In the nineteenth century, a broader elite class controlled foreign policy decisions, but even on the eve of World War I, European diplomacy was a relatively narrowly held cabinet-level affair.
In addition, in the classical period of international politics the agenda was more limited.
Military security issues dominated the agenda, and they were handled primarily by the foreign office.
Qualitatively, transnational actors have played a role for centuries, but the quantitative shift in the last half of the twentieth century marks a significant change in the international system.
In a world of global interdependence, the agenda of international politics is broader, and everyone seems to want to get into the act.
In the United States, for example, almost every domestic agency has some international role.
Every bureau of the United States government has its own little foreign ministry.
In fact, if we look at the representation of the United States abroad, only a minority of the Americans in most embassies are from the State Department.
There is too much traffic for one intersection or for one cop at one intersection.
These interactions across state borders outside the central control of the foreign policy organs are called transnational relations.
They include but are not limited to migration of populations, the rapid transfer of capital from one country to another that occur$,daily in the world stock and money markets, illicit trafficking in weapons and drugs, and certain forms of terrorism.
Governments can try to control these activities, and in the case of terrorism or smuggling they need to, but control often comes at a very high price.
For example, the Soviet Union closely controlled transnational relations, and the Soviet economy suffered gravely for it.
In circumstances with high degrees of interdependence and a great number of transnational actors, we can be led astray by the shorthand that was so useful in the classical period.
We say things like “Japan agreed to import more” or “America opposed broad claims to the continental shelf under the ocean,” but looking more carefully, we notice that Japanese firms acted transnationally to export more or that some United States citizens lobbied internationally to promote a broad definition of the continental shelf.
This complexity of interests has always existed, but it is greater in economic and social issues than in the traditional military security issues.
Social and economic issues are often less broadly shared; there are more differences of interest.
Thus, with the rise of economic interdependence and the rise of economic issues on the agenda of international politics, we find that our traditional shorthand less adequately describes the political process.
I said the consumer nations wanted low prices and the producer nations wanted high prices in 1973.
Producing interests inside the . consumer countries wanted high oil prices.
Small Texas oil producers were not at all unhappy that OPEC raised oil prices, for they had the same economic interests as the Arabs, not the same as the consumers freezing in New England.
Producers of nuclear energy were not unhappy to see oil prices rise because that might help nuclear energy become a more competitive energy source.
The declining coal industry in Europe and unemployed coal miners were not unhappy about the rise of oil prices either.
Neither were ecologists who believed higher prices would curtail consumption and pollution.
So inside the consumer countries there were enormous differences in the interests over oil prices.
In a situation of interdependence, politics looks different if we lift the veil of national interest and national security.
Traditional versus transnational world politics interdependence that led to high energy prices was regarded as good by important political actors inside the consumer countries.
There was a de facto transnational coalition that was not unhappy with higher oil prices.
Of course, the existence of contradictory interests inside nations is not new.
In the nineteenth-century United States, politics was marked by differences between Southern farmers and Northern industrialists over tariffs.
When President George W Bush raised tariffs on steel in 2002, he pleased companies and unions that produce steel, but hurt those companies, such as car manufacturers, who use it.
As we saw in Chapter 2, domestic politics has always been important to foreign policy, but with the expansion of participation in domestic politics it becomes more so.
Moreover, as some of those domestic interests develop the capability to communicate and interact directly with other interests in other countries, they develop a different type of world politics.
The traditional fonn of international politics is the outside shell in the left-hand diagram of the figure.
If people in Society 1 want to put pressure on Government 2, they ask Government 1 to talk to Government 2.
But in transnational relations, people in Society 1 put pressure on Government 2 directly, or people in Society 1 may put pressure on people in Society 2 directly.
The additional lines in the right-hand diagram are individuals or nongovernmental organizations going across national boundaries.
When we talk about the politics of interdependence, we must not assume that everything is captured by the traditional model of govemment-to-govemment relations.
One of the distinguishing characteristics of complex interdependence is the significance of other actors in addition to the states.
It remains the best first approximation even for the politics of interdependence.
But if you restrict your attention to states alone, you may be misled about the politics of interdependence.
States may look invulnerable in the aggregate, but a more careful look shows that some parts of states are highly vulnerable while other parts are not.
And those vulnerable parts may act transnationally to remedy their situation.
In short, states remain the most important actors in international politics, but as constructivists remind us, when you have said that, you have not said everything that is important to know about the politics and conflicts of interdependence.
Continued peace movements, women’s suffrage organizations, and the International Law Association, among others.
More recently, there has been an explosion in the number of NGOs, increasing from 6,000 to approximately 26,000 during the 1990s alone.
And the numbers do not tell the full story, because they represent only formally constituted organizations.
Many NGOs claim to act as a “global conscience” representing broad public interests beyond the purview of individual states, or that states are wont to ignore.
Though they are not democratically elected, they sometimes help develop new norms by directly pressing governments and business leaders to change policies, and indirectly by altering public perceptions of what governments and firms should be doing.
In terms of power resources, these new groups rarely possess much hard power, but the information revolution has greatly enhanced their soft power.
Governments now have to share the stage with actors who can use information to enhance their soft power and press governments directly, or indirectly by mobilizing their publics.
Given the power of credible editors and cue givers who can cut through the avalanche of available information in the Internet age, a rough way to gauge the increasing importance of transnational organizations is to look at the number of mentions these organizations receive in mainstream media publications.
By this measure, the biggest NGOs have become established players in the battle for the attention of influential editors.
In addition to Human Rights Watch, other NGOs such as Amnesty International, the International Red Gross, Greenpeace, Doctors Without Borders , and Transparency International have undergone exponential growth in terms of mainstream media mentions.
Not only is there a great increase in the number of transnational and governmental contacts, but there has also been a change in type.
Such organizations remain important, but the lower costs of communication in the Internet era have opened the field to loosely structured network organizations with little headquarters staff, and even to individuals.
These nongovernmental organizations and networks are particularly effective in penetrating states without regard to borders.
Because they often involve citizens who are well placed in the domestic politics of several countries, they are able to focus the attention of the media and governments on their preferred issues.
The treaty banning landmines, as mentioned earlier, was the result of an interesting mixed coalition of Internet-based organizations working with middle-power governments such as Canada and some individual politicians and celebrities such as the late Princess Diana.
In 2005, rock stars, NGOs, and political leaders worked together to press for debt relief for heavily indebted poor countries.
The role of NGOs was important as a channel of communication across delegations in the global warming discussions at Kyoto in 1997.
Industry, unions, and NGOs competed in Kyoto for the attention of media from major countries in a transnational struggle over the agenda of world politics.
Geographical communities and sovereign states will continue to play the major role in world politics for a long time to come, but they will be less self-contained and more porous.
They will have to share the stage with actors who can use infoimation to enhance their soft power and press governments directly or indirectly by mobilhing their publics.
Governments that want to see rapid development will find that they have to give up some of the barriers to information flow that historically protected officials from outside scrutiny.
Even large countries with hard power, such as the United States, find themselves sharing the stage with new actors and having more trouble controlling their borders.
Cyberspace will not replace geographical space and will not abolish state sovereignty, but like the town markets in feudal times, it will coexist and greatly complicate what it means to be a sovereign state or a powerful country.
Transnational Terrorism Another type of nonstate actor that has attracted the attention of governments is the transnational terrorist.
Terror means great fear, and governments as varied as the French First Republic and Stalin’s Soviet Union have used it to control their populations.
Terrorism was also used by anarchists and other transnational revolutionaries in the nineteenth century, as we saw in Chapter 3.
They killed half a dozen heads of state, and World War I was triggered in part by such a terrorist turned assassin.
In the twentieth century, heads of government such as Stalin and Hitler could kill large numbers of people.
If terrorists are able to obtain weapons of mass destruction in the twenty-first century, they will develop similar capabilities.
That is why some observers refer to terrorism as the privatization of war.
Moreover, technology has made the complex systems of modem societies more vulnerable to large-scale attack.
That means there is nothing to smuggle across borders and less chance of getting caught.
One of the hardest things for terrorists to do is to organize trustworthy cells across borders that cannot be taken down by intelligence and police agencies.
By moving from the physical sanctuaries of the 1990s to virtual sanctuaries on the Internet, the terrorists reduce their risk.
No longer does recruiting occur only in physical locations like mosques and jails.
Instead, alienated individuals in isolated national niches can make contact with a new virtual community of fellow believers around the world.
They include detailed instructions on how to make bombs from fertilizer, how to cross the border into Iraq, how to plant and explode devices to kill American soldiers.
And experts use chat rooms and message boards to answer trainees’ questions.
But the cat and mouse game between police agencies and terrorists is a close one.
Terrorism in the 1970s and 1980s was driven largely by ideology or nationalism, but by the 1990s, extreme religious beliefs increasingly provided its context.
Traditional terrorists, whether left-wing, right-wing, or nationalist-separatists, often had some scruples about indiscriminately killing innocent people, but such differentiations between the “enemy” and innocent civilians seem less prevalent today.
When such attitudes are combined with a willingness to sacrifice their own lives, the new terrorists can wreak enormous destruction.
Under American law it is premeditated, politically motivated violence against noncombatant targets by subnational groups.
The UN has passed conventions to suppress terrorist bombings, assassinations, hostage taking, and the financing of terrorism.
Nonetheless, the General Assembly found it difficult to agree on a resolution defining terrorism.
Arab governments led by Egypt and Syria blocked any text that did not exempt groups such as the Palestinians from being defined as terrorists.
In their eyes, the Palestinian resistance to Israeli occupation of the West Bank was legitimate national resistance, and the responses used by the Israeli government were killing innocent Palestinian civilians.
When President George W Bush addressed the UN General Assembly in 2001, he said the world must unite in “opposing all terrorists, not just some of them.
His statement was consistent with the just war doctrine discussed in Ghapter 6, and with international law.
Some acts of nonstate political resistance perhaps should not be considered terrorism—for example, much of the antiapartheid struggle in South Africa did not kill civilians.
But even if a political group can argue that the absence of democratic procedures for change make violence necessary in a “war of national liberation,” the taking of innocent life is not morally or legally acceptable under just war doctrine.
Similarly, if states deliberately kill noncombatants to terrorize a population, it is a war crime.
If terrorism is defined as the substate use of violence for political purposes, states are excluded , but they are not thereby exculpated if they engage in similar immoral and illegal behavior.
For all the difficulties at the margins of defining terrorism, the core evil of deliberately killing innocent people for political purposes is broadly condemned by the moral codes of all major religions as well as by international law.
In 2004, a High-Level'Panel appointed by the UN Secretary-General agreed unanimously that terrorism is any action intended to cause death or serious bodily harm to civilians or noncombatants for the purpose of intimidation.
Transnational terrorism is to the twenty-first century somewhat like piracy was to an earlier era.
Some governments gave pirates and privateers safe harbor to earn revenues or to harass their enemies.
Today some states harbor terrorists in order to attack their enemies or because they are too weak to control such groups.
The American campaign against the Taliban government of Afghanistan, and the various UN resolutions, may make state-sponsored terrorism less likely in the future.
At the same time, the technology of miniaturization of explosives, the vulnerability of modern systems such as air travel, and the increasing ease of communication via the Internet provide opportunities for nonstate actors to do great harm across borders even without state support.
The anarchy of the interstate system is usually more bearable than the chaotic anarchy of a nonstate actor’s war of all against all.
INFORMATION AND POWER AMONG STATES The information revolution is making world politics more complex by empowering nonstate actors, for better and worse, and reducing control by central governments.
While some poor countries such as China, India, and Malaysia have made significant progress in entering the information economy, more than half of all Internet users in 2005 lived in either Europe or North America.
In the information age the world remains a mixture of agricultural, industrial, and service-dominated economies.
The postindustrial societies and governments most heavily affected by the information age coexist and interact with countries thus far less affected by the information revolution.
Decreasing costs may allow poor countries to leapfrog or skip over certain stages of development.
For instance, wireless communications are already replacing costly landlines, and voice recognition technologies can give illiterate populations access to computer communications.
The Internet may help poor farmers better understand weather and market conditions before they plant crops, and more information may diminish the role of predatory intermediaries.
Distance learning and Internet connections may help isolated doctors and scientists in poor countries.
But what poor countries need most is basic education and infrastructure.
Technology spreads over time, and many countries are keen to develop their own Silicon Valleys.
But it is easier to identify the virtual keys to the high-tech kingdom than to open the actual gates.
Well-developed communications infrastructure, secure property rights, sound government policies, an environment that encourages new business formation, deep capital markets, and a skilled workforce, many of whom understand English , will come to some poor countries in time, but not quickly.
Even in India, which meets some of the criteria, software companies employ hundreds of thousands, but half of India’s 1 billion people remain illiterate.
As it reduces costs and barriers of entry into markets, it should reduce the power of large states and enhance the power of small states and nonstate actors.
But in practice, international relations are more complex than such technological determinism implies.
Some aspects of the information revolution help the small; but some help the already large and powerful.
What economists call barriers to entry and economies of scale remain in some of the aspects of power that are related to information.
Large established entertainment industries often enjoy considerable economies of scale in content production and distribution.
The dominant American market share in films and television programs in world markets is a case in point.
Moreover, in the information economy, there are “network effects” with increasing returns to scale.
Second, even though it is now cheap to disseminate existing information, the collection and production of new information often requires major investment.
But in a competitive situation, it may make a big difference if I have the light first and see things before you do.
America, Russia, Britain, and France have capabilities for collection and production that dwarf those of other nations.
Published accounts suggest the United States spends some $44 billion a year on intelligence.
In some commercial situations, a fast follower can do better than a first mover, but in terms of power among states, it is usually better to be a first mover than a fast follower.
What makes for success is informal access to new information before it becomes public.
Third, first movers are often the creators of the standards and architecture of information systems.
As in Robert Frost’s famous poem, once the paths diverge in the wood and one is taken, it is difficult to get back to the other.
Sometimes, crude low-cost technologies open shortcuts that make it possible to overtake the first mover, but in many instances, the path-dependent development of information systems reflects the advantage of the first mover.
The use of the English language and the pattern of top-level domain names on the Internet is a case in point.
Fourth, as we have seen, military power remains important in critical domains of international relations.
Information technology has some effects on the use of force that benefit the small and some that favor the already powerful.
For example, today anyone can order 1-meter-resolution satellite images of what goes on in other countries inexpensively from commercial companies.
Commercial firms and individuals can go to the Internet and get access to satellite photographs that were top secret and cost governments billions of dollars just a few years ago.
When a nongovernmental group felt that American policy toward North Korea was too alarmist a few years ago, it published private satellite pictures of North Korean rocket launch pads.
Obviously, other countries can purchase similar pictures of American bases.
Global positioning devices that provide precise locations, once the property of the military alone, are readily available at stores such as Wal-Mart.
What’s more, information systems create vulnerabilities for rich states by adding lucrative targets for terrorist groups.
It’s conceivable in the next 25 years that a sophisticated adversary will decide it can blackmail the United States.
Space-based sensors, direct broadcasting, high-speed computers, and complex software provide the ability to gather, sort, process, transfer, and disseminate information about complex events that occur over a wide geographic area.
This dominant-battle-space awareness combined with precision targeting and networking of military systems produces a powerful advantage.
As the two Gulf Wars showed, traditional assessments of balances of weapons platforms such as tanks or planes become irrelevant unless they include the ability to integrate information with those weapons.
Many of the relevant technologies are available in commercial markets, and weaker states can be expected to purchase many of them.
The key, however, will not be possession of fancy hardware or advanced systems, but the ability to integrate a system of systems.
The Information Revolution and Complex Interdependence The information revolution has not equalized power among states.
Thus far it has had the opposite effect, and realists might feel vindicated.
Here the changes are more along the lines predicted by liberals and constructivists.
Complex interdependence is certainly much greater in the dimension of multiple channels of contact between societies.
When people are overwhelmed with the volume of information confronting them, they have difficulty discerning what to focus on.
Editors and cue givers are in increasingly higher demand, and this is a source of power for those who can tell us where to focus our attention.
Brand names and the ability to bestow an international “Good Housekeeping” seal of approval will become increasingly more important.
In addition, publics have become more wary and sensitized about propaganda.
Milosevic’s control of television was crucial to his power in Serbia in the 1990s.
Now credibility is the crucial resource, and an important source of soft power.
Reputation becomes even more important than in the past, and political struggles occur over the creation and destruction of credibility.
Governments compete for credibility not only with other governments, but with a broad range of alternatives including news media, corporations, nongovernmental organizations, intergovernmental organizations, and networks of scientific communities.
The world of traditional power politics is typically about whose military or economy wins.
Witness the struggle between Serbia and NATO to frame the interpretation of events in Kosovo in 1999 and the events in Serbia a year later.
Prior to the demonstrations that led to the overthrow of Slobodan Milosevic in October 2000, 45 percent of Serb adults were tuned to Radio Free Europe and the Voice of America.
In contrast, only 31 percent listened to the statecontrolled radio station.
Radio Belgrade.Moreover, the domestic alternative radio station, B92, provided access to Western news, and when the government tried to shut it down, it continued to provide such news on the Internet.
Information that appears to be propaganda may not only be scorned, but it may also turn out to be counterproductive if it undermines a country’s reputation for credibility.
In 2003, exaggerated claims about Saddam Hussein’s weapons of mass destruction and ties to A1 Qaeda may have helped mobilize domestic support for the Iraq War, but polls showed that the subsequent disclosure of the exaggeration dealt a costly blow to British and American credibility.
Under the new conditions more than ever, a soft sell may prove more effective than a hard sell.
The Iraq example illustrates that power does not necessarily flow to those who can withhold information.
Under some circumstances, private information can cripple the credibility of those who have it.
As the Nobel Prize winner George Ackerloff has pointed out, sellers of used cars have more knowledge about their defects than potential buyers.
Moreover, owners of bad cars are more likely to sell than owners of good ones.
These facts lead potential buyers to discount the price they are willing to pay in order to adjust for unknown defects.
Hence the result of the superior information of sellers is not to improve the average price they receive, but instead to make them unable to sell good used cars for their real value.
Unlike asymmetrical interdependence in trade, in which power goes to those who can afford to hold back or break trade ties, information power flows to those who can edit and credibly validate information to sort out what is both correct and important.
Just as the leaders of the Knights Templars or the Franciscan order outranked all but the most powerful of princes, so too the secretary general of Amnesty International and the chief executive officer of Royal Dutch Shell cast far longer shadows on the international stage than do leaders of Moldavia, Namibia, or Nauru.
Spiro^® One implication of the abundance of free information sources, and the role of credibility, is that soft power is likely to become less a function simply of material resources than in the past.
When the ability to produce and disseminate information is the scarce resource, limiting factors include the control of printing presses, radio stations, and newsprint.
Hard power—^for instance, using force to take over the radio station—can generate soft power.
In the case of worldwide television, wealth can also lead to soft power.
For instance, CNN was based in Atlanta rather than Amman or Cairo because of America’s leading position in the industry and in technology.
But by 2003, the rise of cable networks in the region, such as al jazeera and al Arabiya, undercut the American monopoly and provided a local framing of the issues involved in the Iraq War.
In an information age, the occupation of Iraq and its coverage were very costly for American soft power.
The close connection between hard and soft power is likely to be somewhat weakened under conditions of complex interdependence in an information age.
The power of broadcasting persists, but it will be increasingly supplemented by the Internet with its multiple channels of communication, controlled by multiple actors who cannot use force to control one another.
Broadcasting is a type of information dissemination that has long had an impact on public opinion.
By focusing on some conflicts and human rights problems, broadcasters have pressed politicians to respond to some foreign conflicts rather than others—for example, Somalia rather than southern Sudan in the 1990s.
Not surprisingly, governments have sought to influence, manipulate, or control television and radio stations, and have been able to do so with considerable success since a relatively small number of physically located broadcasting sites were used to reach many people with the same message.
However, the shift from broadcasting to “narrowcasting” has major political implications.
Even more important for politics is the interactive role of the Internet; it not only focuses attention, but also facilitates coordination of action across borders.
The Information Revolution and Democratization As far as countries are concerned, most information shapers are democracies.
Their societies are familiar with free exchange of information and their institutions of governance are not threatened by it.
Authoritarian states, typically among the laggards, have considerably more trouble.
Governments such as China’s can control their citizens’ access to the Internet by controlling Internet service and content providers, such as Yahoo and Google, and by monitoring the relatively small percentage of users.
It is possible, but costly, to route around such restrictions, and control does not have to be complete to be effective for political purposes.
Singapore, a state that combines political control with economic liberalism, has thus far combined its political controls with an increasing role for the Internet.
But as societies like Singapore reach levels of development in which a broader range of knowledge workers want fewer restrictions on access to the Net, Singapore runs the risk of losing its creative knowledge workers, its scarcest resource for competing in the information economy.
Another reason closed systems become more costly is that it is risky for foreigners to invest funds in an authoritarian country where the key decisions are made in an opaque fashion.
Transparency is becoming a key asset for countries seeking investments.
The ability to keep information from leaving, which once seemed so valuable to authoritarian states, undermines the credibility and transparency necessary to attract investment on globally competitive terms.
Governments that are not transparent are not credible, because the information they offer is seen as biased and selective.
Moreover, as economic development progresses and middle-class societies develop, repressive measures become more expensive not only at home, but also in terms of international reputation.
Both Taiwan and South Korea discovered in the late 1980s that repressing rising demands for democracy and free expression would be expensive in terms of their reputation and soft power.
By beginning to democratize then, they strengthened their capacity—as compared, for instance, with Indonesia—to cope with economic crisis.
Whatever the future effects of interactivity and virtual communities, one political effect of increased flows of free information through multiple channels is already clear; States have lost much of their control over information about their own societies.
States that seek to develop need foreign capital and the technology and organization that go with it.
Geographical communities still matter most, but governments that want to see rapid development will have to give up some of the barriers to information flows that protected officials from outside scrutiny.
We are at such an early stage of the information revolution that any conclusions must be tentative.
First, some liberals are wrong in their predictions of an equalizing effect of the information and communications revolutions on the distribution of power among states.
In part this is because economies of scale and barriers to entry persist with regard to commercial and strategic information; and in part because with respect to free information, larger states are often well placed in the competition for credibility.
Second, cheap flows of information have created an enormous change in channels of contact across state borders.
Nongovernmental actors operating transnationally have much greater opportunities to organize and propagate their views.
Political leaders will find it more difficult to maintain a coherent ordering of foreign policy issues.
Third, the information revolution is changing political processes in a way in which open democratic societies and transnational actors will compete more successfully than authoritarian states for the key power resource of credibility.
Finally, soft power is becoming more important in relation to hard power than it was in the past as credibility becomes a key power resource for both governments and NGOs.
In short, geographically based states that realists emphasize will, continue to structure politics in an information age, but the constructivists are correct that the processes of world politics within that structure are undergoing profound change.
Civic Engagement, Information Poverty, and the Internet Worldwide , 232.
Saskia Sassen, “On the Internet and Sovereignty,” Indiana Journal of Global Legal Studies , 551.
Africa’s Expat Politics,” Foreign Policy , 51. am indebted to Alexandra Scacco for calling my attention to this case.
Edward Kaufman, “A Broadcasting Strategy to Win Media Wars,” The Battle for Hearts and Minds , 303.
Chapter ALTERNATIVE DESIGNS FOR THE FUTURE International politics remains a realm of self-help where states face security dilemmas and force plays a considerable role.
There are mitigating devices such as the balance of power and international norms, law, and organization, but they have not prevented all wars.
The logic of international conflict as described by Thucydides still applies in some parts of the world today.
There was a new world order in the sense that the bipolar system established after World War II had broken down.
But that was order within the anarchic state system, and it was not necessarily a just order.
British historian Arnold Toynbee wrote at the beginning of the Cold War that the nation-state and the split atom could not coexist on the same planet.
In a world of sovereign states, where war is the ultimate form of defense and nuclear bombs are the ultimate weapon, he believed that something had to go, preferably the state.
And as we saw in the last two chapters, globalization and the information revolution present new challenges to state sovereignty, for better and for worse.
The territorial state has not always existed in the past, so it need not necessarily exist in the future.
Fragmented units and state systems have existed since the days of Thucydides, but the large territorial state as the prime basis of international politics developed only after the Renaissance of the fourteenth and fifteenth century.
The Thirty Years’ War still had some features of a feudal war and was thus both the last of the wars of feudalism and the first of the wars of the territorial state.
The large territorial state as we know it today has been the dominant institution of modem world politics for only three or four centuries.
A number of futurists have predicted the decline of the territorial state.
Their new world order involves structures that overcome the anarchic dilemma.
Since World War II, there have been five major efforts to develop alternatives that go beyond the nation-state as the model for world politics.
States would agree to give up their national armaments and accept some degree of central government.
Federalists often draw analogies to the way the 13 American colonies came together in the eighteenth century.
But federalism has not proven to be a very successful design at the global level.
People also want justice, welfare, and autonomy, and they do not trust world government to protect them.
In addition, few people are convinced that the federal remedy would work, that it would be a cure for the problem of war.
Even if the anarchic system of states is part of the cause of war, getting rid of independent states would not necessarily be the end of war.
As we have seen, most wars in recent years have been internal to states.
Because of the inadequacies of federalism, the idea of international functionalism was developed.
Popular in the 1940s, functionalism suggested that economic and social cooperation could create communities that cut across national boundaries and thus eliminate war.
Sovereignty would then become less relevant, and though the formal shell of the state would still exist, its hostile content would be drained away.
At the end of World War II, functionalist thinking gave rise to some of the specialized UN agencies such as the Food and Agricultural Organization and the World Health Organization.
Functionalism exists to some extent today, with a world full of transnational interests, nongovernmental organizations, multinational corporations, and so on.
But functionalism has not proven a sufficient design for world order, and most states are reluctant to allow themselves to become so interdependent that they become highly vulnerable to others.
In 1950, Europe started the process with the Schumann Plan, integrating Western European coal and steel industries.
After 1957, the Treaty of Rome established the European Common Market, which provided a stepTy'Step reduction of trade barriers and har' monization of a whole range of agricultural and economic policies that culminated in the creation of the European Union in 1992.
As we have seen, other regions have tried to emulate European regionalism, with NAFTA as the most significant example in the Western Flemisphere.
Yet, in 1965 General de Gaulle, then president of France, and later, in the 1980s Margaret Thatcher, then prime minister of Great Britain, set limits on how far regional integration could go.
By the mid'1990s there was widespread ambivalence in the countries of the European Union over just how much sovereignty to cede to a regional government.
The coins of the new common currency, the euro, began to circulate in 2002, but not in all countries.
Efforts to create a new constitution for the European Union faltered when voters in Erance and the Netherlands rejected a proposed draft in referendums held in 2005.
But despite these speed bumps in the road toward greater integration and organizational hurdles resulting from the admission of several Eastern European nations, Europe has changed for the better compared with the earlier periods we have studied.
The EU represents an ongoing and dynamic experiment in international relations.
As its members continue to painstakingly negotiate a thick web of multilateral institutions that deal with issues from agricuh ture to a common defense force, a distinctly European identity has emerged.
While national differences certainly remain at the policy-making level, public opinion polls show that many EU citizens regard themselves as European as well as French, German, or Spanish.
This fits with constructivist theory, which emphasizes the role ideas and culture play in the construction of political identities and beliefs.
EU members have chosen to increase their complex interdependence in the belief that the cost/benefit ratio favors cooperation over full national independence.
In today’s Europe, everybody may not be in the same boat, but the boats are lashed together in a variety of ways that are very different from earlier periods.
The European Union represents a new type of international polity but is only a regional one.
Falk argued there would be a gradual evolution of grassroots, populist values that would transcend the nation-state.
Anticolonialism, antiracialism, greater equality, and ecological preservation would lead not only to strengthening of majorities in the United Nations, but to the creation of new regimes for handling the world’s dwindling resources.
The result would be international norms of peace, justice, and ecological balance and a new form of world order.
Technological change and economic growth have accentuated ecological prob' lems.
Global resource supplies have become further stretched, and as biological diversity decreases, further harm has occurred to the oceans and atmosphere that are part of the global commons.
Two-thirds have been signed since the first UN Environmental Conference in Stockholm in 1972.
Major UN conferences on the environment and global warming were held in Brazil in 1992 and in Japan in 1997.
Environmental issues have also spawned numerous nongovernmental organizations with transnational lobbying efforts.
Citizens and politicians in developed countries are expressing increased awareness and concern regarding matters of environmental degradation and protection.
However, Falk overestimated how scarce resources would become and underestimated how much new technologies can compensate for the scarcity there is, and in many countries, ecological concerns take second place to a desire for rapid economic development.
As we saw in the last chapter, some theorists of organization in the information age—Peter Drucker and Alvin and Heidi Toffler—argued that the information revolution is flattening hierarchies and replacing them with network organizations.
They predict that the centralized bureaucratic governments of the twentieth century will become decentralized organizations in the twenty-first century, and more governmental functions will be handled by private markets as well as by nonprofit organizations.
Moreover, Internet expert Esther Dyson argues that as decentralized organizations and virtual communities develop on the Internet, they will cut across territorial jurisdictions and develop their own patterns of governance.
While nation-states will continue to exist, they will become much less important and less central to people’s lives.
People will live by multiple voluntary contracts and drop in and out of communities at the click of a mouse.
The new pattern of crosscutting communities and governance will become a modem and more civilized analogue to the feudal world that existed before the Westphalian system of states became dominant.
Although we can discern trends in this direction, this vision of how to get beyond the nation-state leaves open questions about how the claims of virtual and geographical communities will conflict, and how issues of violence and security will be handled.
Moreover, as we saw in the last chapter, new information technologies can be used for evil as well as good.
Today’s terrorists use computers and the Internet to recruit members, obtain instructions for building weapons, transfer funds, and expand their networks.
And remote hackers can create damage in other countries without ever crossing borders.
In such situations, citizens may want stronger, not weaker, states whose governments can provide protection.
As Thomas Hobbes pointed out centuries ago, the anarchy of states has its dangers, but they are less than a different type of anarchy in which there is no government to provide protection against nonstate actors.
Contrary to the predictions of these five models, the natioii-state has not yet become obsolete.
Just as gunpowder and infantry penetrated and destroyed the medieval castle, so have nuclear missiles and the Internet made the nation-state obsolete.
But people want three things from their political institutions; physical security, economic well-being, and communal identity.
Changes in international processes are shifting the locus of these values slowly, but thus far the nation-state has provided more of all three than any other institution.
Multinational corporations, NGOs, and international organizations lack the force to provide for security and the legitimacy to provide a focus for communal identity.
Moreover, at this stage of human history, democracy has flourished only within the context of nation-states.
So, despite the long tradition of efforts to design alternatives, the territorial state and its challenges remain central to world politics.
Revolutionary changes in technology make the world seem smaller and more close-knit.
Yet at the same time, many people are reacting to rapid change with divisive ethnic, religious, and nationalistic responses.
As we saw in Chapter 7, globalization can create economic integration and political fragmentation at the same time.
In the Gulf War, both Saddam Hussein and George Bush were watching CNN for the latest news.
During the fighting in Afghanistan, both Osama bin Laden and George W Bush watched CNN and the Arabic station al Jazeera.
During the Iraq War, television reporters were embedded with frontline troops and broadcast battles in real time to a global audience.
Human rights problems and mass suffering in distant parts of the globe are brought into our living rooms on television.
People living on a dollar a day in poor countries are becoming more aware of the lifestyles of people earning, millions of dollars a year.
According to Kenneth Rogoff, former chief economist of the International Monetary Fund, a high correlation between business and consumer sentiment across the world may sway global economic activity toward a common recession more than in the past.
Similarly, the World Wide Web makes more information available to more people, but people do not always seek the same types and sources of information.
The Internet, cable, and satellite television encourage “narrowcasting” of information to specific groups rather than the common denominator that typified television network broadcasting.
But the metaphor of a global village can be misleading because global political identity remains weak.
In much of the world, national, religious, and ethnic identities seem to be getting stronger, not weaker.
Instead of a global village, we have villages around the globe that are more aware of each other.
This simultaneous process of integration and disintegration has given rise to two popular oversimplified visions of the future of world politics after the end of the Cold War.
Deep ideological cleavages drove international conflict over the twentieth century, and movements such as fascism and communism were responses to the disruption of traditional life by modernization.
Industrialization tore people from their villages or small communities and made them available for mobilization by the large ideological movements.
Over time, however, liberal capitalism proved more successful in producing a higher level of welfare and citizen participation.
The end of the Cold War suggested that liberal capitalism had prevailed.
There is no longer one single competitor to liberal capitalism as an overarching ideology.
Neither Germany and France nor the United States and Japan expect or plan for war with each other.
Their complex interdependence forms large islands of democratic peace in the world today, along the lines of Kant’s liberal predictions.
But in another sense, rather than the “end of history,” the post—Cold War world could be described as the return of history.
The return of history means more normal circumstances in which a single ideological cleavage does not drive the larger conflicts in international politics.
China and Russia use capitalism and global markets, yet neither is liberal nor fully capitalist.
In other areas, religious fundamentalism challenges the norms and practices of liberal capitalism.
We sometimes lump all religious fundamentalisms together, but there are many fundamentalisms.
What many have in common is a reaction against and a resistance to secular liberal capitalism.
The major response and competitor to liberal capitalism after the Cold War is ethnic, religious, and national communalism.
In 1993, Samuel P Huntington published an article titled “The Clash of Civilizations” that became a well-known counter to Fukuyama’s vision.
Huntington argued that rather than the fundamental sources of conflict in the new world being primarily ideological or economic, the great divisions that would dominate conflict would be cultural.
In contrast to realists who used balance-of-power theory to predict that interstate conflicts would reemerge between Germany and its neighbors, or some liberals who expected the democratic peace to spread around the globe, Huntington proved astute in focusing on culture as a source of conflict.
As we saw in Chapter 7, cultures are not homogeneous or static, but overlapping and fluid.
More conflicts have occurred within the large “civilizations” in Huntington’s map of the world (e.g., within Africa or Islam) than between them.
Some observers argue that Osama bin Laden’s terrorist attacks and his call for an Islamic jihad against the West prove that Huntington was correct, but one can just as plausibly see the events following September 2001 as a civil war within Islam between extreme fundamentalists and moderates.
Many faithful Muslims have more in common with moderate Christians and Jews than with Osama bin Laden.
Both Fukuyama’s and Huntington’s visions suffer from trying to fit the post—Cold War world into one or the other pattern.
As we saw earlier, not only are there multiple cultures, but there are very different types of states in terms of levels of economic modernization.
Fukuyama’s triumph of liberal capitalism and democratic peace fits well with much of the postindustrial world.
Realism has much to tell us about relations among preindustrial and industrializing countries.
Huntington’s focus on cultural conflict fits better with the preindustrial world and its relations with the rest of the world.
As we saw earlier, ethnic and cultural conflict tends to rise when identities are challenged by major social changes that accompany modernization and globalization.
People with similar ethnic characteristics asserting their common identity is a very powerful idea, and when they seek to control a state we call it nationalism.
Realists criticize Huntington by pointing out that such nation-states are in tension with the transnational civilizations and religious cultures he focuses on.
As we saw in the Middle East, nation-states such as Egypt and Syria proved stronger than panArabism, and are currently struggling against Islamic fundamentalism.
It is instructive to look at the difference between Eastern and Western Europe.
Under communist rule nationalistic and ethnic conflicts in the East were frozen for a half century.
The end of the Cold War and the removal of Soviet hegemony thawed many of these tensions.
For example, with the end of the Cold War and the demise of its communist government, competition between Serbs, Croats, Muslims, and Kosovar Albanians came to the fore with terrible consequences in Yugoslavia.
Throughout the former Soviet Union, many ethnic groups spill across borders, stirring up more potential for further ethnic conflict and revivals of nationalism.
Contrast this with post-Cold War Western Europe, where intrastate conflict is negligible and countries that previously held strong national rivalries have formed a larger European Union.
Some Western animosities were exorcised through democratic processes—witness the debate that went on in West Germany at the end of World War II that led to changes in the textbooks and the new understanding of German history.
Fortunately, the desire of many Eastern European countries to join the European Union had an important moderating effect on their leaders and peoples.
Indeed, the soft power of the European Union has helped spur significant economic and political reforms in Eastern Europe, at a pace once considered unachievable.
Many Europeans do not want their national identity submerged completely in a European identity.
One reason why the French support European integration is to tie the Germans down.
In addition, many Western Europeans are concerned about the impact of immigration on their national cultures.
They fear migration from the north of Africa as well as from Eastern Europe.
Experts point to the September 11 terrorist attacks, and subsequent attacks in Madrid and London, as evidence that European citizens and leaders have failed to adequately address the political and economic grievances of Europe’s sizable Muslim immigrant community.
And riots throughout France in late 2005 demonstrated that many North African immigrants had not been successfully assimilated into the French economy and society.
Simultanesouly, right-wing parties in Western Europe increasingly appeal to xenophobia and provide a warning signal that the problems of nationalism and ethnic tensions are not totally banished from Western Europe.
But with declining birth rates and porous borders, Europe cannot cut off all immigration from its poorer neighbors across the Mediterranean Sea.
Resolving the tensions between a desire to preserve a European identity and the need to better integrate immigrants into society will therefore be Europe’s next challenge.
The Diffusion of Governance in the Twenty-first Century Private Public Third Sector Supranational Transnational Corporations Intergovernmental Organizations N ongo vernmental Organizations (e.g.
Oxfam, Greenpeace) National National Corporations \ t / ^ Twentieth-Century ^ Central Government National Nonprofits (e.g.
As we saw in Chapter 8, information is power, and governments of all kinds will find their control eroding during the twenty-first century as information technology gradually spreads and costs continue to decrease.
In the middle of the twentieth century, people worried that computers might produce the centralized, authoritarian world of George Orwell’s novel 1984, but the decentralizing effects have proven to be more powerful.
How far and how fast the information revolution causes decentralization will vary across countries, and countervailing forces may arise.
But the general proposition that governments are losing their monopoly over foreign policy and that they will have to share the stage in world politics with the nonstate actors described in Chapter 8 seems highly likely.
This diffusion of power can have both positive and negative consequences.
A benign vision paints a picture in which technology will encourage economic development and make authoritarian regimes less tenable.
The result will be to speed the spread of the islands of democratic peace.
A malign vision sees a new feudalism in which destructive individuals, terrorist groups, and otherwise weak states gain access to weapons of mass destruction, creating true anarchy, rather than the anarchy of the interstate system.
In such an insecure world, a negative reaction may slow down or reverse economic globalization; citizens may sacrifice democratic liberties in favor of Hobbesian autocratic governments that provide basic personal security.
The benign vision points out that because of transnational communications, there is much more awareness of what is going on in other parts of the globe and groups are better able to organize on a global basis.
As we have seen, NGOs are able to mount transnational campaigns for environmental and human rights causes.
The Internet provides information to citizens that undercuts the controls of authoritarian regimes.
The most impressive transnational actor, of course, is the multinational corporation.
By spreading investments around the world and making profits in different parts of the global market, the transnational corporation is producing a different type of world economy.
A large part of international trade is trade within multinational corporations.
Honda now produces more automobiles in the United States than it does in Japan, and it transports American-made automobiles back to Japan.
The United States government has even pressed the European Union to accept Honda vehicles made in the United States.
In other words, the United States defined the export of Japanese cars made in the United States to Europe as an American national interest.
Similarly, IBM was the largest producer of mainframe computers in Japan; IBM/Japan does its research in Japan and hires Japanese employees.
In 2004, IBM sold its personal computer division to the Chinese computer manufacturer Lenovo, furthering the globalized nature of the computer industry.
He argues that in terms of what is good for the people living within the borders of the United States, a foreign company working inside the United States may be more important than an American company working in Japan.
Critics have responded to Reich by saying that he is looking further into the future than is currently justified.
Most multinational corporations have a predominant national identity, and three'quarters of American production is done by companies with headquarters in the United States.
Transnational investment is helping to confuse identities, to confuse the question of “who is us,” and along with ecological interdependence, might affect long-run views of global problems.
If the United States responded by excluding foreign firms from American markets, it would simply create inefficient firms that can no longer compete on a global basis.
The trouble with protectionist responses is that they may hurt the protector as much as they hurt the other side.
So in the 1990s, the Americans and the Japanese negotiated over domestic impediments to trade.
The United States pressed Japan over something strictly within Japanese domestic jurisdiction.
Japan had laws restricting supermarket size and other practices restricting access of foreign firms to the distribution system.
A number of Japanese politicians and consumers were delighted to have this American pressure because it benefited the Japanese consumer.
In a sense, there was a transnational coalition between United States producers and Japanese consumers.
The Japanese government in turn pressed the United States to reduce its budget deficit, arguing correctly that the United States trade deficit was related to the government budget deficit.
In other words, Americans and the Japanese officials were dealing with each other not at water’s edge, but on matters that were deep within the sovereign jurisdiction of each country.
Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction The malign vision of the effects of technology on world order focuses on a different dimension of the transnational spread of technology.
Technology can also be spread through trade, migration, education, and the flow of ideas.
Already 40 countries have the potential to make nuclear, chemical, or biological weapons of mass destruction.
The technology of chemical weaponry is nearly a century old; nuclear weaponry and ballistic missiles are half-century-old technologies.
To some extent, policies of nonproliferation have slowed the rate of spread of nuclear weapons.
But the problem of proliferation was exacerbated when the Soviet Union collapsed and its successor states have been less able to control the outflow of technology.
Three other countries— Iraq, Iran, and North Korea—signed the NPT but were widely viewed as trying to develop weapons anyway.
Five other countries—South Africa, South Korea, Argentina, Brazil, and Libya—started down that path but changed their minds.
Interestingly, more than 30 countries could have produced nuclear weapons but did not; that is, three or four times more states were able to have nuclear weapons than actually had them.
That is quite a contrast to President Kennedy’s fear when signing the Limited Test Ban Treaty in 1963, that 25 countries would have nuclear weapons by the 1970s.
After all, in an anarchic world of sovereign states, nuclear weapons are the ultimate form of self-help.
One was the alliances that arose during the Cold War in which each superpower gave security guarantees to its allies.
For example, Germany and Japan did not develop nuclear weapons because they had American security guarantees.
American promises to prevent any country from using nuclear blackmail against these allies reassured the Japanese and the Germans that they did not have to develop nuclear weapons.
South Korea and Taiwan each began to develop nuclear weapons when it looked as if the United States might withdraw from Asia in the 1970s in the aftermath of Vietnam, but they stopped when the United States protested and promised continued protection.
Similarly, the Soviet Union constrained its Eastern European allies and Third World client states from developing nuclear weapons.
In the early stages of the nuclear era, the superpower attitude on nuclear weaponry was highly competitive.
The superpowers tried to use nuclear technology to earn points in the ideological competition.
In 1953, President Eisenhower announced with great fanfare the Atoms for Peace program to help other countries develop nuclear technology for peaceful purposes, emphasizing the benign face of the atom to win more points for the United States.
But by 1968, the United States and the Soviet Union were able to cooperate to the point that they could agree on a nonproliferation treaty.
In 1977, the United States, the Soviet Union, and 13 other countries that supplied nuclear technology set up the Nuclear Suppliers Group to set guidelines on what sorts of nuclear technology could be exported.
A third reason why nuclear proliferation was curbed was the existence of treaties and institutions.
Nonnuclear states have agreed to have inspectors from the UN’s International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna visit their peaceful nuclear facilities to ensure that they are not being misused.
Finally, after Iraq lost the Gulf War, American forces and UN inspectors dismantled its nuclear programs.
Two open questions for the post—Cold War world were the future of alliances, institutions, and security guarantees, and whether nuclear technology would flow from the former Soviet Union to would'be proliferators.
Neorealists, such as Kenneth Waltz, have argued that the spread of nuclear weapons may be stabilizing because deterrence will work.
The trouble with this view is that it rests almost entirely on a rational model of deterrence among coherent unitary actors.
But if the real danger of nuclear weapons in the post—Cold War period is likely to be loss of control, then these rational models that provide the basis for confident predictions may be largely irrelevant.
Many of the countries that will next develop nuclear weapons have an unstable record caused by coups and by armies splitting.
Transnational Threats and the Concept of Security Nuclear weapons in the United States and the Soviet Union were equipped with elaborate technological devices—^permissive action links—that required a code from a higher authority in order to get access to the weapon.
But many of the countries developing new nuclear weapons will not have these elaborate technological devices.
The end of the Cold War and the transnational spread of technology may produce a larger prospect of nuclear weapons being used in some of the new countries trying to enter the nuclear race than was true in the last half century.
And one of the greatest threats in the future will be transnational terrorists obtaining weapons of mass destruction.
We know that bin Laden and the A1 Qaeda network were making efforts to obtain such weapons and had made contact with scientists working in Pakistan’s nuclear program.
Fissile material is difficult and costly to produce, but terrorists might get access to material stolen from former Soviet states and smuggled abroad.
Even though they are unreliable on the battlefield , biological weapons are easier to make than nuclear weapons—recipes are available on the Internet—and can be used to create terror among defenseless civilian populations.
In 2001, terrorists turned hijacked civilian airliners into gigantic cruise missiles to accomplish that purpose.
In contrast, however, if the 9/11 terrorists had had access to a nuclear weapon, they could have killed hundreds of thousands of people.
In 1995, a religious cult in Japan, Aum Shinrikyo, killed a dozen people with sarin in the Tokyo subway system.
The cult had already begun to expand transnationally, had been carrying out experiments in developing biological weapons, and was investigating nuclear weapons.
Terrorist groups could also wreak havoc by attacking the information systems that control electricity for hospitals, air traffic radar, or banking transactions.
Such attacks could be perpetrated with high explosives at the sites of key server computers, but they could also be carried out transnationally by computer hackers tens of thousands of miles away.
Deterrence does not provide adequate protection against terrorist threats because there is sometimes no return address against which to retaliate unless a fot' eign state can be proven to have assisted the terrorists, as Afghanistan’s Taliban regime did.
And the worst case of terrorism in the United States before 2001, the bombing of the federal building in Oklahoma City in 1995, was purely homegrown.
In other cases, criminal groups may take control of the government of -a state but ostensibly behave according to international law and claim the rights of sovereign protection against interference in their internal affairs.
In 2002, President George W Bush issued a new national security strategy that argued in favor of preemption in the face of terrorist threats, and pledged to attack both terrorist regimes and governments that harbor or support them.
As transnational threats grow, states will not only begin to question the Westphalian norms that make clear distinctions between what is domestic and international, but they will also find themselves broadening their concepts of security and defense.
Many new threats will not be susceptible to solution by armies firing high explosives.
Close cooperation of intelligence, customs, and police agencies will play a major role, as will private-sector measures of protection and prevention of facilities critical to the global economy.
If democracies fail in these tasks, and terrorists using weapons of mass destruction create an anarchy of individuals rather than states, Fukuyama’s vision of the future becomes less relevant.
If governments rise to the challenge and contain terrorism, more traditional problems of interstate order still remain.
The end of the Cold War certainly altered the international system, but claims of the dawning of “a new world order” were undermined by the profoundly different ways people interpret the word order.
In this view, order refers primarily to the structure or distribution of power among states.
Liberals and constructivists argue that conflicts and their prevention are determined not only by the balance of power, but by the domestic structure of states; their values, identities, and cultures; and international institutions for conflict resolution.
In contrast to realists, liberals argue that institutions such as the United Nations can help prevent conflict and establish order by stabilizing expectations, thereby creating a sense of continuity and a feeling that current cooperation will be reciprocated in the future.
Order for liberals, then, is tied to values such as democracy and human rights, as well as to institutions.
Finally, constructivists remind us that any order is contested by various parties and thus is never a value-neutral term.
In the view of nativist or nationalist groups such as that led by Pat Robertson in the United States, or by Jean-Marie Le Pen in France, “new world order” suggests a conspiracy among financial and political elites to dominate the world.
In this view, multinational corporations, in league with the financial markets of Wall Street, London, and Tokyo, enrich themselves at the expense of the rest.
In the view of certain Islamic fundamentalists, order is a purely Western concept designed to dominate the non-Western world.
These differing conceptions of order mean that a “new world order” is tricky to define.
None of these schools of thought is adequate by itself in understanding the causes of conflict in the current world.
The realist emphasis on the balance of power is necessary but not sufficient when long-term societal changes are eroding the norms of state sovereignty.
The view that peace has broken out among the major liberal democracies is accurate, but it is not a panacea when many states, including some rising great powers, are not liberal democracies.
The Cold War exacerbated a number of Third World conflicts, but economic conflicts among the United States, Europe, and Japan were dampened by common concerns about the Soviet military threat, and bitter ethnic divisions were kept under the tight lid of the Soviet presence in Eastern Europe.
Future Configurations of Power As historians and political observers since Thucydides have noted, rapid power transitions are one of the leading causes of great power conflict.
Such power transitions were a deep structural cause of recent great power conflicts, including Germany’s rise before each world war and the relative rise and resulting rivalry of the United States and the Soviet Union after World War 11.
There is a strong consensus that the period after the Cold War was one of rapid power transitions with the rise of the United States and China and the decline of Russia.
Considerable debate remains over the description and magnitude of the transitions, however, and these debates indicate the unpredictability that makes such transitions a potential source of conflict.
French President Jacques Chirac, for example, called for a return to a multipolar world.
If the term multipolarity implies a historical analogy with the nineteenth century, it is highly misleading.
That order rested on a balance of power between roughly five equal powers, whereas the great powers after the Cold War are far from equal.
Russia has declined faster and further since 1991 than almost anyone expected, though it retains an immense nuclear arsenal.
China has risen faster than most anticipated, with a long period of double-digit economic growth, but remains a developing country.
Japan and Germany have not become the full-fledged superpowers that some incorrectly predicted in 1990.
And India, despite its great economic progress of the past decade, must overcome several hurdles before achieving its full potential as a major world power.
The United States is the only military superpower, though the European Union is similar in economic scale.
Some realists warn that the rapid rise of China will present a hegemonic challenge to the United States in the twenty-first century analogous to what the Kaiser’s Germany posed to Britain on the eve of World War I But the historical analogy is flawed.
Even if China continues to grow at a rapid rate of 9 percent and the United States at 3 percent, China will still be less than half the economic size of the United States in 2025.
While conflict between the two countries is possible if the governments mismanage their relations, a hegemonic conflict is far from inevitable.
Some analysts predict the world will be organized around three economic blocs — Europe, Asia, and North America.
And we have already discussed the problem with describing the world order as one of civilizations.
In the aftermath of the 2003 Iraq War, other analysts described the international order as an American world empire.
The American military has a global reach with bases around the world and its regional commanders sometimes act like proconsuls.
The American economy is the largest in the world, and American culture serves as a magnet.
But it is a mistake to confuse the politics of primacy with the politics of empire.
The United States is certainly not an empire in the way we think of the European overseas empires of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries because the core feature of such imperialism was political control.
Though unequal relationships certainly exist between the United States and weaker powers and can be conducive to exploitation, absent formal political control, the term imperial not only is inaccurate but can be misleading.
The United States has more power resources than Britain had atits imperial peak, but the United States has less power in the sense of direct control over the behavior that occurs inside other countries than Britain did when it ruled a quarter of the globe.
For example, Kenya’s schools, taxes, laws, and elections—not to Iraq War, 2003 mention external relations—were controlled by British officials.
In 2003, the United States could not even get Mexico and Chile to vote for a second UN Security Council resolution authorizing the invasion of Iraq.
But the problem with the metaphor is that it implies a control from Washington that fits poorly with the complex ways in which power is distributed today.
As we saw in Chapter 6, the United States found it far easier to win the battle in Iraq than to manage the occupation.
In the global information age, power is distributed among countries in a pattern that resembles a complex three-dimensional chess game in which you play vertically as well as horizontally.
On the top chessboard of political-military issues, military power is largely unipolar with the United States as the sole superpower, but on the middle board of economic issues, the United States is not a hegemon or an empire, and it must bargain as an equal when Europe acts in a unified way.
For example, on antitrust or trade issues, it must meet Europe halfway to reach agreements.
And on the bottom chessboard of transnational relations that cross borders outside the control of governments and include actors as diverse as bankers and terrorists, power is chaotically dispersed.
It makes no sense to use traditional terms such as unipolarity, hegemony, or American empire to describe such issues.
Those who portray an empire based on traditional military power are relying on one-dimensional analysis.
But in a threc'dimensional game, you lose if you focus only on one board and fail to notice the other boards and the vertical connections among them—witness the connections in the war on terrorism between military actions on the top board where the United States removed a tyrant in Iraq, but simultaneously increased the ability of the A1 Qaeda network to gain new recruits on the bottom transnational board.
Representing the dark side of globalization, these issues are inherently multilateral and require cooperation for their solution.
To describe such a world as an American empire fails to capture the real nature of the world the United States faces.
Another issue, often ignored by proponents of the empire model, is whether the American public will tolerate a classical imperial role.
America was briefly tempted into real imperialism when it emerged as a world power in 1898, but the interlude of formal empire did not last.
Unlike in Britain, imperialism was not a comfortable experience for Americans.
The current distribution of power is one of multilevel interdependence.
No single hierarchy adequately describes a world politics that is like a three-dimensional chess game.
None of this complexity would matter if military power were as fungible as money and could determine the outcomes in all areas.
But military prowess is a poor predictor of the outcomes on the economic and transnational playing boards of current world politics.
The United States has a more diversified portfolio of power resources than other countries, but the current world order is not an era of American empire in any traditional sense of the word.
Globalization is elevating issues on the international agenda that not even the most powerful country can address on its own—witness international financial stability, global climate change, the spread of infectious diseases, and transnational drug, crime, and terrorist networks.
The paradox of American power in the twenty-first century is that the strongest military power the world has seen since the days of Rome is unable to provide security to its citizens by acting alone.
Constructivist theorists are right that we should not overly constrain our understanding by trying to force it into the procrustean bed of traditional metaphors with their mechanical polarities.
This added complexity means world order must rest on more than the traditional military balance of power alone.
The realist view of world order is necessary but not sufficient to explain today’s geopolitical order because it does not take into account the lorig-term societal changes that have been slowly moving the world away from the Westphalian systern.
In 1648, after 30 years of tearing each other apart over religion, the European states agreed in the Peace of Westphalia that the ruler, in effect, would determine the religion of a state regardless of popular preferences.
Order was based on the sovereignty of states, not the sovereignty of peoples.
The mechanical balancing of states treated as empty billiard balls was slowly eroded over the ensuing centuries by the growth of nationalism and democratic participation, but the norms of state sovereignty persisted.
Now the rapid growth in transnational communications, migration, and economic interdependence is accelerating the erosion of the classical conception of order and state control, and increasing the gap between norm and reality.
This evolution makes more relevant the liberal conception of a world society of peoples as well as of states, and of order resting on values and institutions as well as military power.
Liberal views that were once regarded as hopelessly utopian, such as Immanuel Kant’s plea for a peaceful league of democracies, seem less far-fetched now that political scientists report virtually no cases of liberal democracies going to war with each other.
In the debates over the effects of German reunification, for example, the predictions of realists who saw Europe going back to the future have fared less well than those of liberals who stressed that the new Germany is democratic and deeply enmeshed with its Western neighbors through the institutions of the European Union.
However, as political scientists Edward Mansfield and Jack Snyder point out, young democracies can be more prone to war, and so increased democratization in tumultuous regions, such as the Middle East, should not be expected to yield instant security dividends.
Indeed, liberal conceptions of order are not entirely new and they do not apply to all countries.
The Cold War order had norms and institutions, but they played a limited role.
During World War II, Roosevelt, Stalin, and Churchill had agreed to a United Nations that assumed a multipolar distribution of power.
The UN Security Council would enforce the doctrine of collective security and nonaggression against smaller states while the five great powers were protected by their vetoes.
Even this abbreviated version of Woodrow Wilson’s institutional approach to order was hobbled, however, by the unforeseen rise of bipolarity.
The superpowers vetoed each other’s initiatives, and the organization was reduced to the more modest role of stationing peacekeepers to observe cease-fires rather than repelling aggressors.
When the decline of Soviet power led to a new Kremlin policy of cooperation with the United States in applying the UN doctrine of collective security against Iraq in 1990-1991, it was less the arrival of a new world order than the reappearance of an aspect of the liberal institutional order that was supposed to have come into effect in 1945.
The doctrine of collective security enshrined in the UN Charter is state'centric, applicable when borders are crossed, but not when force is used among peoples within a state.
Let peoples within states vote on whether they want to be protected behind borders of their own.
But, as we have seen, self-determination is not as simple as it sounds.
Less than 10 percent of the states in today’s world are ethnically homogeneous.
Only half have one ethnic group that accounts for as much as 75 percent of their population.
Most of the states of the former Soviet Union have significant minorities, and many have disputed borders.
Africa might be considered a continent of roughly a thousand peoples squeezed within and across fifty-some states.
In Canada, the French-speaking majority of Quebec demands special status, and some agitate for independence from the rest of Canada.
Once such multiethnic, multilingual states are called into question, it is difficult to see where the process ends.
In such a world, local autonomy and international surveillance of minority rights hold some promise, but a policy of unqualified support for national self-determination could turn into a principle of enormous world disorder.
International institutions are gradually evolving in such a post-Westphalian direction.
International humanitarian law, and within it the notion of states having a duty to protect individual rights against massive depredations by dictatorial rulers, is gaining increased influence.
Already in 1945, Articles 55 and 56 of the UN Charter pledged states to collective responsibility for observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Even before the 1991 Security Council resolutions authorizing postwar interventions in Iraq, UN recommendations of sanctions against apartheid in South Africa set a precedent of not being strictly limited by the Charter’s statements about sovereignty.
In Europe, the 1975 Helsinki Accords codified minority rights, and violations could be referred to the European Conference on Security and Cooperation and the Council of Europe.
Individual and minority rights are increasingly treated as more than just national concerns.
In many, perhaps most, parts of the world, human rights are flouted and violations go unpunished.
To mount an armed multilateral intervention to right all such wrongs would be another enormous principle of disorder.
But, as we have seen, intervention is a matter of degree, with actions ranging from statements and limited economic measures at the low end of the spectrum to full-fledged invasions at the high end.
Limited interventions and multilateral infringements of sovereignty may gradually increase without suddenly disrupting the distribution of power among states.
On a larger scale, the Security Council may act under Chapter VII of the UN Charter if it determines that internal violence or development of weapons of mass destruction are likely to spill over into a more general threat to the peace in a region.
Such definitions are somewhat elastic and may gradually expand over time.
In other instances, groups of states may act on a regional basis as Nigeria and others did in the 1990s by sending troops to Liberia and Sierra Leone under the framework of the Economic Community of West African States, or as NATC did in Kosovo in 1999.
Such imperfect principles and institutions will leave much room for domestic violence and injustice among peoples.
But the moral horrors will be less than would be the case if policy makers were to try either to right all wrongs by force or, alternatively, to return to the unmodified Westphalian system.
Liberals must realize that the evolution of a new world order beyond the Westphalian system is a matter of decades and centuries; realists must recognize that the traditional definitions of power and structure in purely military terms ignore the changes that are occurring in a world of global communications and growing transnational relations.
Cne thing that is clear is that world government is not just around the comer.
There is too much social and political diversity in the world and not a sufficient sense of community to support world government.
Reform of the United Nations or the development of new institutions offers new ways for states to work with each other as well as for nonstate actors to facilitate cooperation.
In some instances, transnational networks of government officials will foster such cooperation; in other instances mixed coalitions of governments and private actors will do the job.
Democracy is government by officials who are accountable and removable by the majority of people in a jurisdiction, albeit with provisions for protections of individuals and minorities.
Using that formula, as we saw in Chapter 6, a citizen of the Maidive Islands would have a thousand times more voting power than a citizen of China.
Minorities acquiesce to a majority when they feel they participate in a larger community.
In the absence of such community, the extension of domestic voting procedures to the global level' makes little practical or normative sense.
A stronger European Parliament may reduce a sense of “democratic deficit” as a European community evolves, but it is doubtful that the analogy makes sense under the conditions that prevail on the global scale.
Thus far in world history, democracy has flourished in the context of nation-states.
Accountability, however, is not assured only through voting even in wellfunctioning democracies.
In the United States, for example, the Supreme Court and the Federal Reserve System are responsive to elections only indirectly through a long chain of delegation.
In addition to voting, publics communicate and agitate over issues through a variety of means ranging from letters and polls to protests.
Interest groups and a free press can play an important role in increasing transparency at the local, national, and transnational levels.
Private associations and codes, such as those established by the international chemical industry in the aftermath of the 1984 explosion of a plant in Bhopal, India, can create common standards.
The NGO practice of naming and shaming companies that exploit child labor has helped consumers hold accountable transnational firms in the toy and apparel industries.
And while people have unequal votes in markets, in the aftermath of the 1997 Asian financial crisis, accountability to markets may have led to more increases in transparency by corrupt governments than any formal agreements did.
Open markets can help diminish the undemocratic power of local monopolies and can reduce the power of entrenched and unresponsive government bureaucracies, particularly in countries where parliaments are weak.
Moreover, efforts by investors to increase transparency and legal predictability can have beneficial spillover effects on political institutions.
Hybrid networks that combine governmental, intergovernmental, and nongovernmental representatives are likely to play a larger role in the future.
We need to think harder about norms and procedures for the governance of globalization.
Denial of the problem, misleading domestic analogies, and platitudes about democratic deficits will not do.
We need changes in processes that take advantage of the multiple forms of accountability that exist in modem democracies.
International institutions are not international government, but they are crucial for international governance in a global information age.
You will live in a world that will be anarchic in the terms stated at the beginning of the book, and we must hope not in the Hobbesian sense of a chaotic war of all against all.
Order will be provided both by the realists’ balance of power among states and by the liberals’ evolving international norms and institutions.
Justice and order are often at odds with each other, even in issues of self-determination.
Robert Gilpin argues that international politics has not changed over two millennia, and that Thucydides would have little trouble understanding our world today.
If Thucydides were plopped down in the Middle East or East Asia, he would probably recognize the situation quite quickly.
Globally, there has been a technological revolution in the development of nuclear weaponry, an information revolution that reduces the role of geography and territory, an enormous growth in economic inter' dependence, and an emerging global society in which there is increased consciousness of certain values and human rights that cross national frontiers.
Interestingly, similar changes were anticipated by Immanuel Kant in his eighteenth'Century liberal view of international politics.
To understand the current world, we must understand both the realist and lib' eral views of world politics and be alert to social and cultural changes constructivists emphasize.
We need to be able to think about different ideal types at the same time.
Reversing that produces complex interdependence, in which nonstate actors, economic instruments, and welfare goals are more important than security.
Those two views are at the opposite ends of a conceptual continuum on which we can locate different reahworld relationships.
All three approaches—realism, liberalism, constructivism—are helpful and neceS' sary to understand international politics in a changing world.
The bipolar world is over, but it is not going to be replaced by a unipolar world empire that the United States controls alone.
The world is already economically multipolar, and there will be a diffusion of power as the information revolution progresses, interdependence increases, and transnational actors become more important.
Alliances Formal or informal arrangements made between sovereign states, usually to ensure mutual security.
Appeasement The act of accommodating the demands of an assertive power in an attempt to prevent conflict.
Western Europe’s appeasement of Hitler in the late 1930s is the classic example of the dangers of appeasement.
Asymmetry Situations in which states or agents with unbalanced power capabilities are in opposition to one another.
The United States war against A1 Qaeda is widely regarded as an asymmetrical conflict.
Balance of power A term commonly used to describe the distribution of power in the international system, a policy of balancing foreign powers to prevent one state from gaining a preponderance of power, or the balances of military power that existed in the multipolar system of Europe in the nineteenth century.
Bipolar The structure of an international system in which two states or alliances of states dominate world politics.
The Cold War division between the United States and the Soviet Union is often referred to as a bipolar system.
Bretton Woods New Hampshire resort where a 1944 conference established the IMF and World Bank.
Cold War The standoff between the United States and the Soviet Union that lasted from roughly the end of World War II until the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989.
Though proxy wars were fought on behalf of both sides around the globe, United States and Soviet troops did not engage in direct combat, making this a “cold” war rather than a “hot” shooting war.
Collective security A means of maintaining peace in which a collection of states agree on an institutional framework and legal mechanisms to prevent or suppress aggression.
Two examples of collective security actions under the auspices of the United Nations were the Korean War and the Persian Gulf War.
Congress of Vienna An 1815 agreement that marked the end of the Napoleonic Wars and established the general framework for the European international system in the nineteenth century.
Constructivism An analytical approach to international relations that emphasizes the importance of ideas, cultures, and social dimensions.
John Ruggie, Alexander Wendt, and Peter Katzenstein are considered constructivists.
Containment A foreign policy designed to contain a potential aggressor.
Containment was the cornerstone of American foreign policy toward Soviet communism during the Cold War.
Cosmopolitans Cosmopolitans value individuals over sovereign states and limit the moral importance of national borders.
These are often phrased as “what if’ questions and are employed in the analysis of scenarios in international relations to explore causal relationships.
The crisis was resolved when the Soviets removed their missiles partly in exchange for a secret agreement that the United States would remove missiles based in Turkey.
This theory lost credibility when countries like Singapore and South Korea developed rapidly in the 1980s and 1990s.
Deterrence A strategy of discouraging a potential aggressor through threat or fear.
Economic interdependence Situations characterized by reciprocal economic effects among countries or actors in different countries.
Fourteen Points Woodrow Wilson’s blueprint for a settlement at the end of World War I Among its most important features was a call for an international institution that would safeguard collective security.
Game Theory A theory of rational action that predicts how actors will react in' certain game situations to obtain favorable outcomes.
Geopolitics A theory of international politics that considers the location and proximity of a state a key cause of its behavior.
Globalization At its broadest, the term is used to describe worldwide networks of interdependence.
It has a number of dimensions, including economic, cultural, military, and political globalization.
It is not a new phenomenon—it dates back at least to the Silk Road—but due to the information revolution, its contemporary form is “thicker and quicker” than previous ones.
IMF An international institution set up after World War II to lend money, primarily to developing countries, to help stabilize currencies or cover balances of payments.
INGO (international nongovernmental organizations) A subset of NGOs that have an international focus.
Interdependence Situations characterized by reciprocal effects among countries or other actors.
International institutions Institutions created to facilitate international cooperation.
The United Nations, World Bank, and International Monetary Fund are all examples of international institutions.
International law A combination of treaties and customs that regulates the conduct of states.
International law can also apply to individuals who act in an international context.
Intervention External actions that influence the domestic affairs of a sovereign state.
Most often this term is used to refer to forcible interference in another state’s domestic affairs.
Jits Ad Bellem A moral code of justifications that must be satisfied for a war to be considered a just war.
The elements of this have traditionally included having just cause; being declared by a proper authority; possessing right intention; having a reasonable chance of success; and the ends being proportional to the means used.
From the Latin “justice to go to war.” his In Bello A moral code of conduct that holds states and individuals responsible for their actions during wartime.
Augustine and Thomas Aquinas are historical figures in this tradition; Michael Walzer is a well-known modem theorist.
League of Nations An international organization dedicated to collective security that was founded at the end of World War 1.
Woodrow Wilson, the league’s chief advocate, called for its creation in his Fourteen Points at the end of the war.
Liberalism An analytical approach to international relations in which states function as part of a global society that sets the context for their interactions.
Classical liberalism has intellectual roots in the writings of Immanuel Kant, Jeremy Bentham, and John Stuart Mill.
In the modern era, Woodrow Wilson and Richard Rosecrance are considered liberals.
Multipolar The structure of an international system in which three or more states or alliances dominate world politics.
NAFTA (North American Free Trade Agreement) A 1994 agreement among the United States, Canada, and Mexico that created a free-trade zone in North America.
National interest A state’s perceptions of its goals in the international system.
Realists, liberals, and constructivists all have different perceptions of how states formulate their national interests.
Nationalism A belief that people belonging to a certain group, whether through shared ethnicity, language, land, culture, or religion, should inhabit a given territory and control a state.
Neoliberalism An analytical approach to international relations in which the actions of states are constrained by economic interdependence and international institutions.
Neorealism An analytical approach to international relations in which the actions of states are constrained primarily by the structural balance of military power.
NGO In the broadest definition, any organization that represents interests other than those of a state or multinational corporation.
Examples of well-known NGOs include the Catholic Church, Greenpeace, and the International Red Cross.
Nuclear deterrence A strategy used by both the United States and Soviet Union during the Cold War, in which the possession of nuclear weapons acted as a deterrent to the other side.
OPEC (Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries) An organization of the world’s largest oil-producing states that tries to coordinate policy on oil production and pricing among its members.
Peacekeeping The deployment of armed troops to prevent conflict or maintain peace in a state.
Many peacekeeping operations are conducted under UN auspices, but peacekeeping can also be conducted by a regional organization or a group of countries acting outside the United Nations.
Peace of Westphalia The 1648 treaty that ended the Thirty Years’ War and became the framework for an international system in which the sovereign state was the highest form of authority.
Realism An analytical approach to international relations in which the primary actors are states and the central problems are war and the use of force.
Carr, Hans Morgenthau, and Henry Kissinger are all considered realists.
Describes how quickly a change in. one part of a system leads to a change in another part.
Skeptics Skeptics believe that moral categories have no place in discussions . of international relations because of the lack of an international community that can sanction rights and duties.
Social liberalism The belief that person-toperson contacts reduce conflict by promoting understanding.
Soft power The ability to obtain desired outcomes through attraction rather than coercion or payment.
Sovereignty The idea that a state has a government that exercises authority over its territory.
State moralists State moralists believe that international morality depends on a society of sovereign states playing by certain rules, even if those rules are not always obeyed.
Symmetry Situations in which states or agents with relatively balanced power capabilities are in opposition to one another.
The nuclear balance between the United States and the Soviet Union is widely regarded as a symmetrical conflict.
Thirty Years’ War A series of European wars fueled by international, religious, and dynastic conflicts that took place from 1618 to 1648.
Thucydides An Athenian commander whose book History of the Peloponnesian War, a chronicle of the Peloponnesian War between Athens and Sparta, is one the earliest known works of history and international relations.
Transnational actor Any nonstate actor or entity that acts across international borders.
Treaty of Rome The 1957 treaty that laid the groundwork for European integration, which led first to the creation of a European Comrnon Market and eventually to the European Union and the common euro currency.
Treaty of Utrecht The 1713 treaty that ended the Wars of Spanish Succession and established the legitimacy of both British and French holdings in North America.
Treaty of Westphalia The 1648 peace treaty that formally concluded the Thirty Years’ War and established state sovereignty as the highest principle in the international system.
Unipolar The structure of an international system in which one state exercises preponderant power.
Some analysts refer to the current military power structure as a unipolar system dominated by the United States.
Vulnerability The relative cost of changing the structure of a system of interdependence.
Can also be thought of as the cost of escaping or changing the rules of the game.
World Bank An institution set up after World War II to provide loans, technical assistance, and policy advice to developing countries.
WTO An international organization created in 1994 to regulate trade and tariffs among its member states.
The Unseen Vampire of War”: Excerpted from “From Our December 13 Pages, 75 Years Ago,” International Herald Tribune, December 13, 1985.
Excerpted from George Kennan, “The Sources of Soviet Conduct,” Foreign Affairs, 25: 4 , 581.
Reprinted with permission from Brian Catchpole, A Map History of the Modem World (Oxford Heinemann Publishers Ltd., 1982), 13.
Reprinted with permission from Brian Catchpole, ' A Map History of the Modem World , 15.
Reprinted with permission from Brian Catchpole, A Map History of the Modern World , 69.
