Others are now using it to benefit their promotions, and it is obviously helping them achieve recognition.
I think it's not asking too much to request that credit be given where it is due, to the authors of this work.
Saturday, October 20, 2007 Mike Huckabee is unacceptable Amidst the whirl and the rush of the Republican presidential campaign, one candidate has largely escaped my view former Arkansas Governor Mike Huckabee.
Huckabee has acquired some momentum as late, and has thus forced me to examine him on the issue that matter most in this space.On that issue Communist China Huckabee, frankly, stinks.Yes, he has been recently making comments about the Communist regime's trade practices, but this is what he told Time about the Communists just six months ago :The good news is that China is becoming much more a part of the mainstream.
In its economic development and even in giving greater liberties to its people.
I'm sorry, but that's the talk of a man who was swallowed the ""engagement"" Kool-aid, and he's been drinking it for quite some time.
Take a look at a letter he co-signed regarding PNTR:China's accession to the WTO is a vital step in its incorporation into the rules-based multilateral trading system.
This move will strengthen the rule of law and accelerate domestic reforms in China.
The long-term political and social impacts of China's accession may even exceed the commercial benefits.Naivete like this has no place in the White House.
Again, Duncan Hunter remains the best, followed in order by Tom Tancredo and Fred Thompson.
Stanley Kurtz's latest column on Stalinist North Korea is quite unique; in the column, he managed to be dazzlingly brilliant and shockingly ignorant at the same time and with the same words.
Kurtz is one of the very few pundits who has never really signed on to the six-party nuclear talks, and now that Stalinist North Korea's nuclear dalliance with Syria is an open secret, he aims squarely and correctly at the Bush Administration for its weakness:President Bush did in fact adopt the Democrats’ North Korea policy.
The problem is that a combination of carrots and sticks has not stopped Kim Jong Il from handing Syria extensive nuclear technology, and perhaps even fissile material.
Simple, in all of Kurtz's 2,200+ words on Stalinist North Korea, the number of times he mentioned Communist China was exactly zero.
As Kennedy warned Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev that any nuclear missile launched from Cuba would be regarded as an attack by the Soviet Union, President Bush needs to unambiguously promise retaliation for any nuclear explosion of North Korean origin on American soil.
According to Allison, America will only be safe if Kim feels “in his gut” that North Korea will be held directly responsible for nuclear terror — even if the blast results from material passed through a chain of rogue states and only eventually into terrorist hands.
On the other hand, if Kim feels as though he can escape detection as the ultimate source of a terrorist nuclear weapon, or if Kim believes that he will not be held directly responsible for his place in a long and complex chain of nuclear proliferation, the path is open to likely nuclear terror on American soil within the next decade.The ignorance is jaw-dropping.Contrary to Kurtz's assertion , Kim Jong-il has never been in the Krushchev role during this crisis; he's in the Castro role.
Kim is not acting on his own, he is acting in concert with his de facto colonial masters.
Any threat against him is utterly useless for this reason.It is not Kim Jong-il who must face the threat of annihilation by counter-strike, it's the Communist Chinese regime that props him up.
They are in the Krushchev role, not Kim; they are the source of America's proliferation worries.
In fact, it is Communist China, not its Stalinist puppet, that killed off non-proliferation.
So long as learned men like Stanley Kurtz continue to ignore this fundamental fact, they will miss the forest for the trees, and not only will nuclear proliferation not be stopped, it will likely be accelerated, due to the simple fact that the true culprit continues to act unnoticed, let alone unchecked.Stanley Kurtz is a brilliant writer and thinker, one of the very few outside of the anti-Communist community that I respect.
That said and remember, I say this as a Hunter guy I would have preferred he focus a little more on the national security threat of the Communist regime.
But if they wanted to buy something else that would have, in this case, certainly, more of an impact on our national security interests, I'd say, no, we'd have to think about that in a totally different way.
There are things that we should have thought of in the first place, when we passed the PNTR, which I voted against, along with Duncan Hunter.
But when you trade with people who are your potential enemy, and they have shown a willingness to use that economic opportunity to actually increase their threats to the United States, I'm not for trading with them at all.. . . and Fred Thompson:I was one of the strictest advocates of imposing restrictions on the Chinese for their behavior in terms of exporting dangerous materials to other countries and tying some of trade policies to what they did in that regard.
They have devalued their currency which puts them in a favored position as far as our manufacturers are concerned.FYI and for the record, Fred Thompson did indeed push hard for those curbs, but he still voted for PNTR with Communist China after the curbs were voted down.
This is utterly wrong on so many levels that I can't get into all of them, but I can remind everyone that ""China and India"" is just about the most ignorant geopolitical pairing imaginable.
No one who falls into that trap can be expected to steer the ship of state thoughtfully enough, in my humble opinion.As for the rest, John McCain was terrible trust me, Senator, if it were that much fun, we would have a lot more company over here while Messrs.
Labels: United States Tuesday, October 09, 2007 More on Burma and Capitalism CCP-Style BURMA:""...the Alliance of All Burma Buddhist Monks urged people around the world to boycott the Olympic and goods from China, in a statement released on Monday.
The statement also warned China that Buddhist monks in countries around the world would lead the boycott against the Olympics which are scheduled to be held in Beijing in August 2008.
Meanwhile, Burmese people across the globe have been demonstrating against the Chinese government, calling for a halt to its investment in Burma and its support for the Burmese regime.
China is currently the largest importer to Burma and the third largest market for Burmese exports.
Monday, October 08, 2007 A great one is lost Congresswoman Jo Ann Davis passed away over the weekend.
Although she had been battling breast cancer for a few years, she took a sudden turn for the worse last week.Jo Ann Davis was one of the best anti-Communists in Congress; I was honored to call her my member of Congress.
They are the main economic, military, and political supporters of the military junta.
For fifteen years China has refused to press its closest ally to allow its people human rights, and used its veto power to block the UN Security Council from acting.
As a result, the UN is making the same mistakes it made on Darfur and Rwanda.
The report states that the children were all eventually released.Hats off to those boys and girls from the Sunday school.
That's the kind of spunk we need when dealing with tyrants.If only we could get Western politicians to emulate them on any number of issues, when the Communists would like a certain policy or statement to be written....--Curry Kenworthy is Vice President of China e-Lobby, your source for important news and original opinion on China and the Communist threat.
Visit our site at china-e-lobby.blogspot.com or sign up for e-mail alerts here.
Labels: china, china e-lobby, curry kenworthy, house churches, persecution, police Fred Hiatt: Burma and Olympics Fred Hiatt suggests in Washington Post:""And here's something else I would do: Tell China that, as far as the United States is concerned, it can have its Olympic Games or it can have its regime in Burma.
