Romanian Communism Online Photo Collection, ID Resolution and 32866X16X17.
Yet that crisis was critical in reorienting Romanian foreign and security policies in a manner that caused significant shifts in the nature of the Cold War regionally and globally – for example, as attested by its subsequent campaign for nuclear disarmament and confidence-building measures within the Warsaw Pact, and its central role in the Sino-American rapprochement and in the mediation of Egyptian-Israeli relations.
Indeed, the Cuban missile crisis constituted one of the turning points that determined the character of Romanian independent policy for the rest of the Cold War.
Bucharest’s early independent initiatives were poorly understood in Washington during the first half of the 1950s and for almost a decade thereafter.
Initially, such initiatives were dismissed, ignored or assimilated into prevailing paradigms dominated by a cognitive bias dating from the 1940s that Romania was the “least able” or likely to challenge Soviet domination.
It was not until 1963 that the ostentatious nature of that defiance finally overrode US intelligence doubts.
Given the hesitation and delay with which Romanian policy reorientation was recognized in the US, a decade after its first manifestations, it is hardly surprising that the even more consequential transformation following the Cuban Missile, during 1963 especially, also escaped notice by the United States intelligence and academic communities.
Within a year of that crisis Romanian policy experienced a tectonic shift from the mere reassertion of national control over institutions and policies to the containment of Soviet military might regionally and globally.
Concurrently, he lobbied Moscow insistently for the closure of the Soviet-Romanian joint ventures , describing them as purely exploitive and “no better” than capitalist institutions, an opinion which had gotten him into serious trouble in 1947.
By the end of 1953, Gheorghiu Dej had approached the West offering to settle outstanding claims with the United States, having more success with Great Britain a year later.
The strength of the cognitive bias existing within the US intelligence community was such that, when not dismissed outright, these Romanian outreach efforts continued to be assimilated into current interpretational paradigms, making Washington very slow to respond.
These biases were intentionally exploited – and reinforced – by targeted Soviet disinformation.
Epishev, had been the deputy chairman of the Soviet security apparatus prior to his appointment to Bucharest.
Moreover, after a career having nothing to do with diplomacy, Yepishev had been hurriedly assigned to the top diplomatic post in Bucharest immediately followed Gheorghiu-Dej’s first request in August 1955 for the withdrawal of Soviet troops.
Evaluating the information on Romania’s role in the Soviet conspiracy to undermine the West as an intelligence “coup,” Thayer advised Washington not to respond to Bucharest’s outreach by concluding any economic arrangements with it during the rest of his tenure.
In consequence, Romanian actions were regularly discounted in United States intelligence assessments by questioning their motivation and intent.
Since the Hungarian revolt, the Romanian regime has in some ways gone farther than the other orthodox satellites in the general direction of post-Stalin reform.
It appears, for example, to be making sizeable efforts to improve living standards and to increase trade with the West.
These developments have prompted some optimistic Yugoslav and Polish observers to suggest that Rumania is gradually attempting on its own initiative to move toward autonomy.
Although a shift in perception regarding Romania was clearly evident in the US State Department at the end of the 1950s and start of the 1960s, it was not until the arrival of William Crawford as United States Minister at the beginning of 1962 that Washington began engaging closely with Bucharest.
This was an all-encompassing analytical body that was subsequently divvied up after Crawford’s departure, with most of it transferred to the CIA and the rest remaining with the State Department.
Crawford, as one of the US government’s top experts on the communist world at the time of his appointment to the United States Legation in Bucharest, was thus uniquely qualified to judge Romanian developments within the Bloc-wide context.
Describing the impact of cognitive biases formed at the end of World War II and during the Stalinist period, Crawford noted that the greatest obstacles to US-Romanian communication and cooperation arose from the United States side rather than from the Romanians.
It’s awfully easy back in the Department to recall the situation in a country as it was when you were there, and especially in the case of a Communist country where things usually move very slowly, and are unlikely to change much.
Romanian leaders were obliged to travel with Soviet planes and crews since World War II, when the USSR not only confiscated all Romanian aircraft but also prohibited vanquished Romania from acquiring or producing aircraft, except what Moscow had deemed necessary for its military.
Bucharest had been prompted to start preparing an independent air transport capability after July 1957, when the Soviet aircraft carrying Romanian leaders – minus Gheorghiu-Dej, who had withdrawn from the flight at the last moment – crashed on landing at Vnukovo Airport in Moscow, killing one member of the delegation and injuring several others, including Nicolae Ceau escu.
Although there was no overt political backlash following the crash, few in the RCP leadership believed it to be completely accidental.
As of October 1962, however, Soviet crews and equipment were still responsible for transporting Romanian leaders during international excursions.
This created a serious problem when Soviet authorities requested approval on 21 October 1962 for the party to overfly Chinese territory from India in order to briefly visit Moscow on their return a day later.
On the one hand, the request was made only 24 hours before the flight was to take place.
Romanian authorities immediately checked with the Chinese Embassy in Bucharest which, although willing to grant political approval specified that they could not give technical approval because of the military conflict and the presence of Indian military aircraft in the area.
Aboard the aircraft, the Soviet crew chief overrode Gheorghiu-Dej’s instruction to return to Delhi against spirited Romanian protest and proceeded with the flight.
Apparently, after a number of frantic, last-minute exchanges, Beijing did extend its approval along a specific route at a specific altitude.
Interestingly, Soviet authorities at the delegation’s first port of call in the USSR deliberately misled the Romanians into believing that the Chinese had never approved the over-flight.
Although possibly intended to drive a wedge between Bucharest and Beijing, and while it was believed by the delegation members, that bit of Soviet disinformation had the unintended consequence of fully persuading the Romanian leadership that the Kremlin had orchestrated the incident in order to achieve their physical elimination.
The passengers on what would prove to be the last flight that any Romanian Communist leader boarded with a Soviet crew thus arrived in Moscow deeply shaken by what they perceived as a purposeful attempt on their lives.
Their suspicions seemed to be partially confirmed because of Khrushchev’s completely out-of-character apologetic efforts to explain the scandal created by his placement of missiles in Cuba, without admitting that he had done so or that he had lied to the Romanians about it.
Along with the conviction with which the Romanian delegation left Moscow on 24 October 1962 – that Khrushchev was trying to kill them and that he was provoking a war into which Romania would be drawn unawares, and possibly a nuclear one at that – Bucharest had two very major problems.
First, Khrushchev had informed them that in the light of President Kennedy’s ultimatum and announcement of the blockade, Moscow felt it necessary to order the Soviet Army and those of the Warsaw Pact member states to undertake preparations to increase readiness for a possible United States military action.
This skirting of the national party leadership in order to directly command the national armies of its erstwhile allies had been the practice and evident intention of Moscow ever since it created the Warsaw Pact.
Moreover, Soviet authorities had committed virtually the same transgression during the Berlin Crisis in 1961, directly ordering the army on alert without consulting the Romanian leadership.
That action had prompted Bucharest to end the practice of sending its senior military officers to Soviet academies for “training” that same year.
There is an article 3 in the Warsaw Treaty text binding all signatory countries to mutual consultation regarding important international political issues.
In our subsequent discussions with high Romanian officials it became clearer than ever that they had not been taken into the confidence of the Russians nor been given any inkling of their plans to install missiles in Cuba.
They had soon recognized that they were merely pawns in a Soviet power play, if you will.
I think this rude awakening greatly strengthened the nationalist tendency they were already manifesting, and as they thought back upon it, they grew increasingly determined not to get themselves involved in this kind of a situation again if they possibly could. … hey had not been consulted and probably believed the Russian claims when first made about no missile emplacements in Cuba.
Henceforth, Romania would redouble its efforts to exclude any inappropriate contacts between its senior military leadership and Soviet officers.
That effort would include the creation of legal and constitutional barriers to any assertion of command over its armed forces by foreign or foreign-controlled domestic entities.
Subsequently, Bucharest allowed no Warsaw Pact troop exercises on its territory.
Bucharest was deeply offended that Moscow lied regarding its deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba, and seriously concerned about its possible implications, both of which confirmed their own biases regarding Soviet behavior locally and globally.
Romanian leaders were also extremely unhappy with this new demonstration of Soviet ability to command the Romanian military behind its back, especially after having so vigorously protested a similar demonstration the year before.
Given what had transpired first with the Soviet crew regarding the over-flight of Chinese territory and then with Khrushchev’s half-hearted admissions in Moscow, the discovery on their return to the Romanian capital that the very first ship that the Kremlin sent to challenge the United States blockade was named the “Bucharest” left many in the capital for which it was named believing that the USSR sought to make them the target of a United States nuclear strike.
In the absence of Soviet documentation regarding Kremlin motivations for choosing the “Bucharest” one can only speculate on the reasoning behind it.
It is apparent, however, that Moscow desired to place the United States “off-side” should it act forcefully by providing it with targets unconnected with the missile deployments, and which suggested broader multinational support for his actions in the Caribbean.
Confirmation of this came a few hours after the Bucharest was allowed to pass through the quarantine line, when it was followed by the East German passenger liner Völker Freundschaft , carrying East German students and Czechoslovak technicians.
That the top party and state leadership had been cut off from most of this drama during their travels only reinforced these suspicions.
Indeed, given their frosty relationship with Moscow since 1958 especially, Romanian leaders found it impossible to believe that the string of Soviet-inspired decisions and events that led to their being among the least informed of the crisis within the Bloc and yet the most publicly implicated in it could be purely coincidental.
As Khrushchev later admitted, he had informed Polish, Bulgarian, Czechoslovak and East German leaders of the deployments, and he had requested those party leaders to place their armies on alert – rather than issuing Soviet orders directly to their military commanders as he did in the Romanian case.
Romania was in fact the only Soviet ally with a blue water navy that had not been informed of the missile deployments before they became public.
While it does not appear that Washington was ever misled into associating Romania with the Soviet tanker despite its name, the Bucharest did indeed come close to becoming the first test of the blockade and the center of the first intentional US-Soviet shooting incident in the Cold War.
In the morning of 25 October, as the CIA reported that fourteen Soviet ships had reversed course, eight continued onwards but were still a distance from the quarantine line; one vessel, the Soviet tanker Bucharest, had reached that line and was being challenged by the United States aircraft carrier Essex.
Facing the possibility of provoking a violent reaction from Khrushchev or losing the stare-down with the USSR and thereby undermining United States credibility, as well as a potential public relations disaster, Kennedy and the members of his administration went round and round on what to do about the Soviet tanker.
Initially, the main debates were whether or not to board the Bucharest; on whether to board her right-away, just before she reached Havana, or on her return; and on how to immobilize her.
Taking “Deviance” in a Whole New Direction After recovering from their initial horror, the Romanian leadership set about developing approaches to encumber the USSR from capricious use of its military power in ways that might provoke war, especially of the nuclear variety, into which Romania might be drawn.
Over the next year, the authorities in Romania created a set of mutually complementary policies designed to constrain the exercise of Soviet military power – at least when directly implicating the other Warsaw Pact members.
Although Bucharest had been involved in mediations since the mid-1950s this was the first time it was announced as Romanian policy.
Repeated Soviet failure to consult with its allies on important policy issues now became a constant complaint of Bucharest – both within the alliance and outside of it – throughout the rest of the Cold War.
As partial remedy, the RCP leadership now sought to reform the Warsaw Pact into a genuinely egalitarian coalition.
Up to that point Bucharest had been battling Soviet efforts to give the Pact a supra-state character or to expand it from a purely defensive alliance against military aggression in Europe into an instrument of Soviet power projection.
Thus, Romania was responsible for blocking Mongolia’s admission into the alliance – sponsored by the USSR – in July 1963.
Although Bucharest circulated its objections to Mongolia’s admission in letters sent to all the other Pact members several days before, not one of them supported the Romanian position at the summit meeting.
Moscow quickly withdrew its support for Mongolian admission in the face of Romania’s singular opposition.
Although implied in the original treaty, Moscow began seeking to create a permanent organ that would grant it centralized control over the foreign contacts and policies of its lesser allies only at the beginning of the 1960s.
Romania saw this as a revivification of the Comintern and, in April 1964, expressed quite clearly that it would have nothing to do with such a project.
Despite supportive murmurings from second tier leaderships elsewhere, within Warsaw Pact councils all of the other Bloc leaders consistently lined up with the USSR against Romania on this point.
From 1962 until sometime in the second half of the 1960s Romanian advocacy of Warsaw Pact reform was accompanied by efforts to assert an Eastern European voice over Soviet nuclear policy in order to encumber Soviet capriciousness in the deployment of its missiles that might result in nuclear war.
Explicitly referring to the precedent set in the North Atlantic alliance, Bucharest advocated a “two-key arrangement” of the sort that NATO employed, whereby US nuclear weapons deployed on the territory of another NATO member could not be fired without their approval, as part of this reform.
Given the unlikelihood that Moscow would relinquish sole control over its weapons under any circumstances, much less a crisis or combat situation, Bucharest also developed policies to change the environment in which Soviet security policy was made.
First announced by Prime Minister Maurer in the journal of the socialist community in November 1963, it was reaffirmed in what has become known as Romania’s “declaration of independence” (actually a statement against Sino-Soviet polemics) in April 1964.
That policy was formally announced by Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej at the alliance’s January 1965 summit meeting.
In response to Soviet calls for a military build-up to answer escalation in the United States and NATO, and in particular to the Multilateral Nuclear Force initiative that would station nuclear missiles in West Germany for the first time, the Romanian leader counter-proposed a policy of disarmament, including unilateral reductions.
Bucharest did not do this because it was mindlessly obstructionist or anti-Soviet.
It did so because of a specific policy agenda against military build-up, escalation or competition with the United States and NATO; one that had been set in motion in significant part by the Cuban missile crisis and reflected Romania desire to avoid being drawn into a war of Soviet making.
The fundamental lack of trust between the two sides is well-reflected in the repeated Soviet expressions of concern that Romania might leave the Warsaw Pact; the constant battle over the creation of supra-state organs within the Warsaw Pact – repeatedly blocked by Bucharest; and Romania’s relentless campaign to remove Soviet espionage networks from Romania , whose existence was first admitted by Khrushchev and the Soviet leadership in 1962 and then denied by that same leadership in 1964.
In regard to this latter contest, senior officers of other bloc state security services confirm that the Romanian-Soviet and Romanian-Warsaw Pact intelligence cooperation began breaking down in 1962 and became essentially non-existent by the end of that decade.
Abnormal phenomena began appearing in Romania even from the end of 1962.
This has been manifest in the first place through the limitation of contacts with Soviet institutions in Romania, something that was certainly observed by us.
The Gheorghiu-Dej Letter to Kennedy and Ceau escu’s Postscript The formal launch of Romania’s new policy of military disengagement and disarmament was preceded by Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej’s now famous message to President John F Kennedy, actually presented by Romanian Foreign Minister M nescu to United States Secretary of State Dean Rusk, on 4 October 1963.
Romanian leaders raised point with several other foreign interlocutors as well, and the full set of issues may have been shared with Moscow in what Gheorghiu-Dej characterized as a “very harsh” letter sent to Kremlin authorities after Cuba.
In the autumn of 1983, almost twenty years to the day of the 1963 original, Nicolae Ceau escu may have tried to invoke the Gheorghiu-Dej – Kennedy message with one of his own to President Ronald Reagan during the Euromissile crisis.
Unfortunately, Ceau escu’s letter, which he handed to Vice President George Bush, Sr. during the latter’s visit to Bucharest in September 1983, has not yet been published.
However, the Romanians did brief the other Pact allies about it shortly thereafter; and then formally presented at least an approximation of its contents at the October 1983 alliance summit.
Ironically, even if Ceau escu had meant to invoke Gheorghiu-Dej’s earlier letter to President Kennedy – and to invoke the beginning of the “golden era” of Romania’s now increasingly troubled relationship with the United States along with it – the probability that officials in Washington could have made the connection was not very great.
As Raymond Garthoff pointed out, the 1963 letter was held so closely that news of its existence did not leak until he wrote of it thirty years later, and it may never have been filed, archived or even committed to paper.
If no hardcopy was consigned to a specific data base then it is doubtful that knowledge of the message would have survived the ensuing twenty years, four alternations of power, and six administration changes into Ronald Reagan’s presidency.
Having been unaware of the original tectonic shift in Romanian security policy sparked by the Cuban missile crisis, United States authorities were unlikely to perceive any echoes of it twenty years later, especially during a trend of collapsing US-Romanian relations.
He served as security sector reform advisor to Romania’s Presidential Counselor for National Security and to the Romanian Defense Ministry during 1991-2004.
The Soviet Bloc’s Clandestine War Against Romania , which was published in Romanian translation in 2011.
Romanian-Warsaw Pact Relations During 1978-1989 and the End of the Cold War, which will be published in Romanian in 2013, and followed by publication in English.
Gheorghiu-Dej adopted an apparently nationally-oriented stance defending Romania’s continued existence as an independent state already in 1945, a precursor to later conflicts over independence and subordination to the Soviet center.
Likewise, Soviet-loyal officers were being purged, and redundant nationally-oriented officers reactivated, by the first half of the 1950s.
In one very rare exception, the head of the CIA’s Bureau of National Estimates observed that Romanian “arguments” were “potentially explosive; they are ultimately concerned not with the degree of Soviet control and the degree of popular freedom, as in 1956.
Romanian Foreign Policy and the Crisis in Czechoslovakia, 1968, Ia i, Center for Romanian Studies, 2000, 18.
Rogovaia, editors, Vostochnaia Evropa v Dokumentakh Rossiiskikh Arkhivov, 1944-1953 gg.
Statesman, 1953-1964, Volume 3, Philadelphia, Penn State Press, 2007, 389.
Bucharest put out its first feeler to Washington in 1953 but received no response.
Academia România , Institutul de Istoria “Nicolae Iorga” , Studii i materiale de istorie contemporan , seria nou [new series], 257.
Thayer reported that the Romanian prime minister and foreign minister were also present at his discussion with Gheorghiu-Dej.
The prime minister had made a similar approach and offer the previous month.
The United States did not pursue relations with Romania before the end of the decade.
Epishev had been deputy chairman of the predecessor to the KGB during 1950-1953.
Thus, he “saw no reason why the United States should assist the Romanians in achieving their objective of presenting this false façade” by reaching any agreements with it.
Thayer’s assessment carried considerable weight in the United States intelligence community as Thayer was a career intelligence officer rather than a diplomat when Eisenhower appointed him to the legation.
The general tenor of Thayer’s reports and particularly his concern that Romania would gain in “prestige” by reaching an agreement with the United States seem to indicate that he was influenced by the “Trojan horse” active measures theme first reported under his watch in February 1956.
The State Department’s Office of Policy Coordination especially noted that Romania appeared the best candidate for furthering developing United States ties and influence in Eastern Europe at the end of the 1950s.
Given resistance elsewhere in the State Department and especially in the US intelligence community, this stance was neither universally shared nor uncontroversial.
Crawford went on to become the chief advisor on international relations to the Commander of the Supreme Allied Command in Europe , General Lyman Leminitz, during 1965-1971.
William A Crawford, recorded interview by William W Moss, 12 March 1971, 12, John F Kennedy Library Oral History.
The stipulation actually prohibited the production of German-designed aircraft, the only type the Romanian air industry was producing at the end of the war.
Romania’s entire civilian air fleet had been confiscated as “war booty”, as had its largely German-designed military air fleet.
Romania was reduced to the status of defeated enemy because its co-belligerency had been vetoed by the USSR despite its contribution of 548,000 troops to the Allied cause in the last eight months of the war.
This point of contention provoked run-ins between the “native” Communists and Soviet authorities ever since 1944.
It became an open issue in the bilateral relationship by 1955, when Bucharest began publicly addressing the topic.
The delegation member killed was Romania’s foreign minister, George Preoteasa.
Moscow’s bad graces for promising International Red Cross access to former Hungarian leader Imre Nagy while he was being held under Soviet guard in Romania after the 1956 revolt.
The Soviet Bloc’s Clandestine War Against Romania, Bucharest, Military Publishing House, 2010, chapters 7 “Dismantling the Mechanisms of Soviet Control 1953-1959” and 8 “Shutting Down Soviet Intelligence Networks 1956-1963”, especially.
Romanian diplomat – later Ambassador to the Peoples Republic of China – Romulus Budura was sent to the Chinese Embassy in Bucharest with this request.
Having returned to the Romanian Foreign Ministry with political approval the Chinese Embassy called him back in order to inform Romanian authorities that technical approval could not be granted.
The conference brought together members of Romania’s UN delegation at the time of the crisis (including their representative to the Security Council during 1962); diplomats working at the Romanian Foreign Ministry at the time; and members of the entourage that accompanied Gheorghiu-Dej to Indonesia, Burma, India, and then to Moscow, before returning to Romania.
Report on Talk between Nicolae Ceau escu and Nikita Khrushchev, Moscow, 8 June 1963 in Opris , 520.
Khrushchev stressed that he told Ulbricht “in his ear,” thus, personally.
United States intelligence erroneously believed that Soviet command of all Pact forces was an accomplished fact with the creation of the Warsaw Pact.
This was never true for Romania and was fully accomplished for the other Pact members only in 1980.
The Defence Policy of a Reluctant Ally, P6270, Santa Monica, RAND Corporation, 1979, 17.
Khrushchev himself referred to the deployment as his “adventure,” even claiming that he pressed the idea on Fidel Castro.
That the United States never mistook the “Bucharest” for anything other than a Soviet vessel was less meaningful to Romanian officials than Moscow’s peculiar linkage of Romania to the crisis.
Romania was the only sea-faring member of the Warsaw Pact that did not in fact have any of its ships in the area of, or heading to Cuba at the time.
Less than a year later Moscow was publicly reported by Western observers as engaged in efforts to rid itself of the Gheorghiu-Dej leadership by any means necessary, which Bucharest officials interpreted as yet another, post facto, confirmation of Soviet intentions in October 1962.
Pravda’s intentional emphasis on the fact that Khrushchev and the Romanian leadership were attending the opera together in Moscow at the time was likewise considered evidence that they were being “set up” by the Soviets.
Romanian mediation efforts in the Sino-Soviet conflict were well known by the early 1960s.
Israel contacted the Romanian embassy in Warsaw in 1956 to request mediation with Egypt one week after Bucharest had offered peacekeeping forces to the UN following the Suez crisis.
Romania also began a mediation effort with North Vietnam at United States request in 1965, first seeking to persuade the People’s Republic of China that US-North Vietnamese contacts were to be desired.
For an inside description of some of these efforts see Paul Niculescu-Mizil, România i R zboiul Americano-vietnamez [Romania and the American-Vietnamese War], Bucharest, Editura Roza Vânturilor, 2008.
Joachim Schröter, likewise credited Romania with blocking Mongolia’s admission.
Mastny’s assertion that it was not the Romanians, “but the Soviets themselves who killed the idea that they had originally supported,” while true enough, is mistaken in its implication that Romanian opposition was not primarily responsible for blocking Mongolia’s admission.
The existence of a written Polish position echoing Bucharest’s objections has led many analysts to believe that Warsaw played a role in blocking Mongolia’s admission However, the Polish delegation never raised any of the points in their written position at the meeting nor was that position circulated to other Pact members prior to it.
In contrast, Romania’s objections were circulated beforehand (and the Polish position paper seems to refer to them) and the Romanian delegation also raised its pointed questions during the discussion.
The Romanians minced no words when condemning the Comintern as, basically, an evil institution in its April 1964 declaration.
Some analysts maintain that Kádár’s 1963 proposal for a permanent Foreign Ministers Committee had the “clear objective” of increasing East European input into Pact decision-making.
This is certainly possible if Moscow was entertaining the prospect at the time.
However, within less than two years Kádár supported Moscow’s position favoring more centralized control wholeheartedly.
At the January 1965 summit, Gomułka repeatedly stressed that “All of the comrades present” – thus, including Kádár – “are in favor.
Gheorghiu-Dej replied, “We do not nor will we agree to the creation of new organs of the Warsaw Pact.
Hungarian foreign policy had been described by Ferenc Münnich, Kádár’s co-leader in 1956 and prime minister until 1961, as a “prerogative of the Soviet Union”; an attitude that rendered improbable any initiative from Budapest for democratizing the alliance without prior Soviet approval.
According to at least one analyst, Kádár “never intended” to oppose Moscow, and “always made sure to inform the Kremlin about policy changes,” even in domestic policy.
Bittman, Sejna and Frolik all defected from Czechoslovakia during the Prague Spring or immediately after the Soviet-led invasion in 1968.
Stasi records also note that Romania shut down cooperation with it by 1963.
Markus Wolf, Conversation with the Committee for State Security that took place between 3-6 April 1967 in Moscow, BStU, MfS, SdM 1432, S 2, 8; Herbstritt and Olaru , 94 Raymond L Garthoff, “When and Why Romania Distanced Itself from the Warsaw Pact” in Cold War International History Project Bulletin, no.
Garthoff was informed of the message at the time, while working in the United States State Department and the National Security Council, by Secretary Rusk.
The message was also confirmed by Corneliu M nescu in several interviews, although M nescu would not provide any further detail.
Garthoff suggested that no written record may ever have been deposited in administration archives given the extreme sensitivity of the matter.
M nescu first sought to meet with United States administration officials at the end of September 1963 but scheduling difficulties delayed the meeting until 4 October.
Vice President George Bush, Sr., was handed Ceau escu’s letter on 23 September 1983.
Some sources misplace the letter to August 1983, although it is quite possible that other, less formal, messages on the same topic were sent that month as well.
Ceau escu sent a number of letters regarding nuclear missiles in Europe to both Reagan and Andropov during 1981-1983,none of which has been published to date.
E., “Reagan envía al presidente rumano una carta sobre los euromisiles” , El Pais, 19 September 1983.
