Branches Visitors are cordially invited to every meeting. BASILDON 9 Thursdays 7.30 pm, Craylands County Secondary School, Basildon.
EALING Fridays 8 pm, Memorial Hall, Windsor Road, near Ealing Broadway.
F, Lea at above address, ; FULHAM & CHELSEA Ist and 3rd Thursdays in month 8 pm, ‘‘ Kings Head,""’ 4 Fulham High Street, Putney Bridge, SW6.
COVENTRY Alternate Mondays (2nd, I6th & 30th January) 7.30 pm, The Coffee Room, Craven Arms, High Street.
SPGB, 80 Farm Road, Esher, Surrey LEWISHAM Mondays 8 pm, Co-op Hall , Davenport Road, Rushey Green, Catford, SE6.
NOTTINGHAM Alternate Wednesdays (4th & 7.30 pm, Peoples Hall, Heathcoat Street.
SOUTHEND Ist and 3rd Tuesdays in month 7.30 pm, 3rd January at 19 Kingswood Chase, Leigh-on-Sea and I7th January at 17 Cotswold Road, Westcliff-on-Sea.
SWANSEA 2nd and 4th Fridays (13th & 27th January) in month8 pm, The Crypt, St.
Serine, 10 Beach Street, Swansea. — WEMBLEY Mondays 8 pm, Barham Old Court, Barham Park, near Sudbury Town Station, Wembley.
WEST HAM 2nd and 4th Thursdays (12th & 26th January) in month 8 pm, Salisbury Road Schools, Manor Park, E12.
WOOLWICH 2nd and 4th Fridays (13th and 27th January) in month 7.30 pm, Town Social Club, Mason’s Hill, SEI8.
MITCHAM & DISTRICT Thursday 17th January 8pm, ‘White Hart,’’ Mitcham Cricket Green.
ORDERS for literature should be sent to the Literature Department, span, at the above address.
CORRLSPONDENCE for the Executive Committee should be sent to the General Secretary, srs, 52, Clapham High Street.
LAKE, SPGB, itt the above address, Postal orders and cheques should be crossed and made payable to the spc, The “High Wage” Myth EVERY HALF-YEAR the newspapers publish Ministry of Labour figures of the average carnings of manual workers, and the figures always excite. angry letters from readers who don't believe that the average is now over £14 a week, The latest inquiry related to April, 1960. and it showed that the average weekly carnings were £14 2s.
Id. for girls under 18, For men the £14 2s, Id. was for a working week of 48 hours, that is to say, it included pay for six or more hours’ overtime; also for night work and Sunday work, and all kinds of honus additions to ordinary pay.
Being an average it included some industrial groups with carnings far above the average and some far below it.
The top section was the motor vehicle group with £17 10s, 3d. a week, and the lowest, central and local government. £10 15s.d. a week.
If the motor vehicle inquiry had been made in November, with something approaching 100,000 on short-time, the figure would have been far below £17 10s.
In any event it should not be thought that the £14 a week wage is an average for all the 14 million men cmployed in all industries.
London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 If all the industries were included the average would be brought down quite a lot.
Many workers, including craftsmen, carn only their standard weekly rates or not much more, and, as the Royal Commission on the Police showed in its recent Report. the general level of skilled rates is nothing like £14.
They obtained 34 craftsmen’s rates from the Ministry of Labour (as at November i, 1960) and found that the average for the 34 rates is only £10 8s.d. a week.
Reynolds News is the Cooperative Sunday newspaper and when it tells its readers “ Don’t Shop at Sweatshops’’ it means the worst payers among the private traders, but though the CoOperative societies often pay rather more, their wage agreements are not exactly princely.
The Cooperative Agreement made in July.59, fixed a rate for men shop assistants ranging from £8 15s. in Provincial areas up to £9 9s. in London, and in July.60, the Union applied for a national minimum of £10 a week in cooperative societies as well as a reduction of hours from 44 to 40.
Large numbers of orsilwavmen and — government workers get below £9 a week. along with the agricultural worker on his new minimum of £8 9s.
The 1900 workers were employees of the French nationalised Renault motor car manufacturing concern.
This is a familiar feature of capitalist enterprise everywhere but the point: to note is that Renault is a nationalised concern.
Nationalisation has Jost its appeal for most workers in Britain, but those who still think that it is a good thing should make a note that when the market becomes overstocked, even nationalised firms cannot continue to produce commodities for which there 1s no sale.
They have to lay off the workers who have become surplus to requirements.
In the present case many of the workers at first declined to take their final pay packet and went to their benches as usual, They yielded, however, to the foreman’s explanation that in view of the management's decision they could do nothing about it.
Workers don't seem to object to slaving away week after week producing something, no matter what it is, so long as they draw a pay packet at the end of the week.
They wouldn't mind if they kept on producing cars so that in the end there were so many of them that they had to run along on top of cach other on the roads.
Is it not time that workers started thinking about some other system—a system where goods could be produced to serve people's needs, where these needs could be assessed and production arranged accordingly.
Fact, Fact, Fact | THIRTEEN YEARS AGO, the Sunderland ‘Corporation erected a lot of prefabricated houses.
They were stipposed to last for a few years, until better accommodation could be found.
These houses are now overdue for demolition—many of them are STANDARD, JANUARY damp and cold.
Sunderland atréady has its hands too full with its present slum clearance programme to pay much attention to the plight of the people in its prefabricated slums.
Capitalist politicians have always promised to solve the housing problem.
Under these conditions, society never even starts to solve the problem.
Perhaps the salesmen forgot to make it clear when the contracts were signed.
Apparently a lot of people took on commitments which they could not fulfil and have piled up a great heap of bad debts.
Some hire purchase companies, caught in the fierce competition of the boom, are now seen to have fallen in with very uncertain clients.
As a result, there have been rumours in the City about the stability of two of the finance houses concerned and much talk of setting up a central record of creditworthiness, where the H.P. history of any buyer could be checked.
But the central problem—the thing which causes hire purchase and all the other makeshifts— remains.
Workers want the better things in life, sometimes for the convenience of using them, sometimes because their possession carries social standing.
But very few workers have the money to buy these things, unless the hire purchase salesman lends a hand.
So they accept a lifetime mortgage on a house, years of sometimes swingeing repayments on a car, washing machine and su on.
It needs only moderately bad times to come along to upset this precarious scheme of things entire.
The cut-throats in the hire purchase world have shown us that capitalism is just as unstablle as it was in 1929.
There is no lack of experts—many of them officials in the consumer goods industries whose products are widely sold on H.P.—to tell us that the way out of this is to relax government restrictions.
And there is no lack of prospective hire purchasers to support this view.
In fact, the only solution is to have a world where things are made solely for use, not for purchase of any kind. rl Footballers’ Strike To MANY of the schoolboys who. scuff out the tocs of their shoes kicking an old tennis ball around a council school playground, the life of a professional footballer is a glamourous dream.
In fact, there is of course room at the top for only a very few, very good, footballers.
The rest have a hard time of it, on unremarkable pay and often under conditions of employment which an industrial trade union would not tolerate.
Most footballers are looking for another job in their thirties, with little prospect of doing much better than a salesman or a shopkeeper.
No professional player may publish a statement about the game without first having it vetted by his club —his employer.
The Professional Footballers’ Association has asked to have the “slave” transfer system changed to abolish the ceiling on wages and to secure a share of a transfer fee for the player involved in the deal.
The bigger clubs can more easily afford to grant the players’ demands, and foresee that to do so would help to defend their high position at the expense of the dingier clubs, many of which are already in deficit.
It is, therefore, in the lower divisions that resistance to the P.F.A. is strongest.
Indignant fans, outraged players, angry club officials, have all had their say.
Nobody, so far. has regretted that capitalist society makes a business of football and that the game is played, not for amusement and entertainment, but for investment.
Like all the other superficially plausible criticisms. of ROIBEISE STANDARD, JANUARY 1{961 capitalism, the grumblings about the footballers’ lot are as wide of the mark as a fourth division centre forward. eee Bishops and Pawns THE CHURCH OF ROME takes gvery opportunity of informing the worfd at large that it is concerned with man’s spiritual life and not his political one.
Occasionally, however, its hypocrisy and cant blossom into the open,-as was the case recently in Puerto Rica.
This has aroused the ire of the Catholic Bishops of Puerto Rica, notably Bishop McMann, Bishop of Porce, the island’s. second largest city.
When recently the Governor stood for re-election, the antics of the Church were remarkable even for a country as backward as Puerto Rica.
Early in the election campaign, Bishop McMann opened fire with a pastoral letter to be read in every church.
Having failed to terrify the Puerto Rican peasants by words, they are now literally putting the “fear of Christ” into them.
For a fortnight, at all Sunday Masses in San Juan Cathedral, the Pastor told his parishioners that they would have to confess to the sin of voting for the Democrats before they could receive Holy Communion.
And what is more, before penitents could receive absolution, they had to promise not to vote for the Democrats again.
In this so-called enlightened age of ours it is important not to forget the power of the Church.
What Can I Do2 Cuban Background To ANYONE WHO FOLLOWS the Latin American scene, so many aspects of Cuban politics seem familiar that there is a danger of failing to_see just what distinguishes the Cuban question from the traditional turmoil in that part of the world.
When Spain's colonies in the New World fought for independence a hundred and fifty years ago, their main source of inspiration was revolutionary France and the young United States.
However, in one fundamentally important respect they fell short of the requirements of real social change; a unified and coherent class demanding the overthrow of the outmoded system on the strength of its mastery of the new productive and social forces.
As the present situation in the Congo shows, not all independence movements are the expression of a powerful embryo bourgeoise, ready to effectively take the place of the former Imperialists on the backs of the local working-class and peasantry.
The ousting of Spain from the Americas was due more to the weakness of Spain than to the strength of its colonies.
The social vacuum, the rapid collapse into anarchy could not, in those days, become the concern of a United Nations Organisation acting as a broker and a policeman of international capital.
The high-flown language of the constitutions drawn up by the South American disciples of Washington, Jefferson and even Tom Paine was not matched by the level of economic and class development in their respective regions.
Perhaps less spectacularly, and certainly without the formal annexation of territory as was the case in Africa, a similar process began in the Americas.
The outcome of this process has, to a remarkable degree, run parallel to Afro-Asian developments, Britain, France, the USA and then Italy, Germany and Japan have, over the years, poured capital in and drained profits out.
Soon hides and grain, meat and coffee, sugar and bananas, were flowing onto the world market.
The precious metals that had provided the funds for Spain’s “ siglo de oro,” its century of supreme power and culture, were no longer of prime importance.
Not silver from the mines of Potos{, but tin from neighbouring parts of Bolivia, was to become the source of immense wealth for the mighty foreign Corporations who were equally busy in their exploitation of copper and nitrates from Chile, petroleum from.
Countries, most of them larger than any in Europe, were to become utterly dependent upon a single crop; here coffee, there bananas or sugar.
Guatemala, which in its time played the rdle of David to the American Goliath, is known as a banana republic.
In view of Cuba’s increasingly intimate relationship with the Russian Capitalist bloc we. may yet witness the paradox of the Havana cigar as a status symbol of the Russian ruling class.
As a “ middle-class "" Robin Hood, Get Newsagents to sell the Socialist Standard Get Subscriptions for the Socialist Standard Get Libraries to display the Socialist Standard Persuade friends and workmates to buy the Socialist Standard Sell and Display the Socialist Standard everywhere London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 6 * SOCIALIST STANDARD, JANUARY 1961 Fidel readily appealed to an American public weaned on the exploits of Davy Crocket.
At the point where it became evident that in serving the needs of aspiring Cuban Capitalism the existing order of things would be upset, Castro fell from his pedestal.
He was unmasked as the harbinger of “ Communism” (read, Russian influence) in the Western Hemisphere.
Lord Esher gives expression to his anxious thoughts in the suggestion that “patriotism” is an attribute of the empty-headed.
Of all the former Spanish colonies it was the last to break from the grip of the.old country.
It did so Only to find itself a virtual colony of its erstwhile atly; to such an extent that there was an American governor at first, and United States troops were not withdrawn from the island until eleven years after the signing of the peace treaty with Spain in 1898.
The United States census of 1947 revealed that their industrial investments alonz were only slightly less in Cuba ‘than’ in Brazil; $64,000,000 as against $65,000,000* This figure later increased.
Trade Unions Through this century, Ciiban goveriment has been a succession of “ sirongmen,” as 7ime magazine likes to call them, who have depended upon American patronage.
Fractional alterations in United States sugar tariffs in Jine with the pro. tectionist demands of Hawaii or Porto Rico have had overnight repercussions on the Cuban economy.
Laws passed by the United States Senate actually reducing Cuba's sugar quota, as in 1951, when the guota was varied in favour of Trujillo's Dominican Republic, Peru and Porto Rico could mean and often did lead to gross economic instability.
Out of bitter-experience there grew in the 1930's a significant labour movement.
In a limited sphere, in the cigarette and cigar factories and .the Havana docks, Spanish immigrants of the AnarchoSyndicalist school had introduced the principles of trade-unionism at the turn of the century.
In more recent times 4 far wider range of trades has become involved although at the price of Stalinist influence out-weighing that of the old Anarcho-Syndicalists who, for all their faults, did not compromise their class interests with the state requirements of a world power as do the so-called Communists.
In fact, the Communists’ record in Cuba puts them in a rather curious position in relation to the current “togetherness “ of their home and “ mother ” countries.
Farouk to Castro’s Nasser, had been given Communist support in his early days of power.
December of that year the second congress of the Communist-slanted Workers Federation of Cuba, T.U.C. of sorts, drew up a statement with which a Socialist could scarcely disagree.
The supreme task of the labour movement at the present time is to concentrate all its efforts and to use all is might towards the defeat of the Axis, Workers organised under the C.T.C. are willing to collaborate with all those in favour of national unity, that is to say, willing to subordinate any grievances that may arise within the country in their over-riding interest in. destroying the foreign enemy.
For the duration of the war, Cuban workers wish to avoid strikes and disputes likely to interfere with production.
The congress called upon workingclass youth to volunteer for service at the war-front.
At this stage, however, it would be a mistake to regard Castro as a Caribbean Kadar, a mere puppet of the Eastern bloc.
Like many a Nationalist before him he is attempting to play off one great power against another in the hope that advantages will accrue to the would-be élite he represents.
It is ihe universal demand of the Latin American bourgeoisie to free their respective national economies from the preponderance of Anglo-American capital.
Nevertheless, he considered it would be a valuable Opportunity to take advantage of their rivalry.
SOCIALIST STANDARD, JANUARY 196{ the scene and, one by one, the Latin American rulers see how to-use their bargaining position to diversify their means' of production and to intensify or quite often to initiate industrial development.
Back in Havana from Prague just recently, a Castro man announced he had secured promises to establish thirty new industries by East European concerns, Of course, for small power to attempt playing off the great powers involves considerable risks.
It is sometimes swallowed up in the process, The overthrow of the Batista clique with its record of gangsterism in the Chicago tradition, has been followed by a vigorous and forward-looking régime under a new dictator; what in Spanish is wryly called a “ dictablanda ” rather than a“ dictadura,” a mild dictatorship whose authority is used towards social reorganisation rather than to feather the generalissimo’s private nest.
Be that as it may, the massive programme of nationalising most Western owned utilities, agrarian reform meaning the breakup and redistribution amongst the rural population of the great estates (a retrograde step from the loug term point of view), the attack upon widespread illiteracy add up to a really serious attempt on the part of Cuba tc enter the Capitalist arena on a more equal footing.
In Europe, Imperialism is the culmination of a series of developments within Capialism and is characterised by the export of capital and the capturing of markets and sources of raw materials in the economically backward countries.
However, what in Europe is (according to Haya de la Torre whom we are quoting) “the last phase of Capitalism,” is in Latin America the first.
For us IndoAmericans, imporied capital marks our first step in modern capitalist society.
OQ This Business of Antiques ANTIQUES are a fascinating subject, but also a vast one, beyond the scope of this brief article.
Here we can concern ourselves with such aspects as their collection by the élite of society, their haphazard donation or loaning to museums and, later, the production of “fake” antiques as a result of our commercial system.
Our story begins with the archeological efforts of Sir Arthur Evans at Cnossos on the Mediterranean island of Crete, who revealed an early Grecian civilisation of a high order, until then unknown, These excavations early in the 20th century prove that, nearly four thousand years ago and at least five hundred years before the pottery of Athens achieved its ceramic supremacy, the craftsmen of Crete were producing articles for ornament and use in gold, ivory and porcelain of excellent design and execution.
This Cretan civilisation, together with its contemporary cultures in other parts of the world, represents mankind’s first steps from tribal society.
Two thousand years afterwards, the eruption of Vesuvius in A.D. 79 created a primitive museum for many fine examples of Man's early works of art later to be unearthed by archeologists.
These excavations revealed floors of mosaic, mural paintings, gold and silver ornaments and bronze busts, all of great beauty—whilst similar Operations at Herculaneum were richer still in the artistic craftsmanship of the period.
During the period between the contemporary civilisation of Crefe, Babylon, and Egypt, and the unearthing of the Pompeian treasures, Man's cultural activity portrayed changes in his development as he reacted to his material environment—changing it and then changing himself.
From the 7th century B.C. up to the 4th century A.D. the pottery of Athens was symbolical of the Stage of ceramic achievement of this period, whilst Byzantine art, a combination of Greek, Persian and Roman culture, was influenced by the rise of Christianity, with the symbol of the cross embodied in many designs.
Indeed this motif is still with us, although religious items are not good sellers in the modern antique trade and probably the “cult of the cross” is on the wane.
Examples of Celtic art are provided by 8th century bronze shields of London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 Ireland and the famous Tara brooch of Dublin from the 10th century.
Craftsmen in Scandinavia also produced many beautiful designs in bronze and silver, their Viking ship incorporated a bronze dragon prow reflecting the early Icedandic sagas, recorded by William Morris in his epic poem-—Sigurd the Volsung.
It is also interesting to note that in the 12th century their pagan gods, Thor and Woden, overlapped in culture the rising Christian symbol, in a similar way that the Cretan culture influenced early Greek and Roman art.
The 16th century witnessed the introduction into Europe of Chines2 porcelain with its motif dragon patterns and the purity of the Ming dynasty productions.
Two hundred years later saw porcelain being produced in England at Bow, Bristol, Worcester, Derby and Longton Hall, while in 1775 Josiah Wedgwood introduced his famous Jasper ware at Etruria and of course this popular Wedgwood is still being produced to-day.
Much could be written of the beauties of Dresden Candelabra, Meissen Figurine, Sevres vases, Chelsea groups etc. but enough has been said in this context, we hope, to explain the origin of antiques.
We must now pass from the historical side of the subject to the economic for a continuation of our brief review.
Customs and Excise Department in that it must be at least a hundred years of age to escape customs import duty.
Unlike new commodities, antiques have no exact price ticket range, but the post-war demand, mostly from America, has produced a pretty keen market for certain items, such as old Ruby glass ware, Staffordshire pottery figurine, early Wedgwood, pewter plates and tankards, Sheffield plate, Georgian silver-ware and jewellery, flint lock and percussion pistols.
In such a transaction antiques represent the usual be-all and end-all of commerce—a profit to the British seller, whose patriotism melts, “like snow upon the desert’s dusty face” at every chance of a profitable deal.
In any event the denuding of Britain’s art stores is no more cause for shedding working-class tears, than the loss of a few colonies from the British Empire.
Art treasures may certainly change their geographical position, but, like the colonies, they remain in the ownership of the capitalist class of the world.
The collecting of antiques in England was largely initiated by the Earl of Arundel who in 1624 sent his agent, one William Petty, on an art-hunting expedition to Greece.
Apparently Mr Petty excelled himself in this task, sending to England, many consignments of Grecian statues, bronze busts etc., in a prodigious effort to denude Greece of its native art.
Apparently this question fell on deaf ears, but then—any reader visiting the British Museum will find the answer.
In addition to the ex‘stence of genuine antiques, there is the problem, GLASGOW LECTURES Sundays 7°30 details page 16 . * thrown up by the cesspool of commerce, of “faked” antiques which originally graced the drawing rooms and china cabinets of bourgeois mansions of the 18th and 19th centuries.
Some years ago, the writer purchased a three-piece set of china figurine that appeared to be Chelsea, complete with the well known “ gold anchor” mark.
This counterfeit Chelsea was being produced in Paris as early as 1850, and in Belgium there is a factory producing counterfeit Sevres and Dresden porcelains.
The difficulty of detecting these spurious wares by amateur buyers is spotlighted by the fact that experts themselves are at times deceived.
This same Museum also paid several hundred of pounds for a Sedan chair supposed to be a genuine antique which had genuine panels only let into a brand new chair! — To give an up-to-date example, the Manchester Evening Chronicle recently reported on Indian artisans who have resorted to faking ancient statuettes by buying new sculptures and tarnishing them.
All this merely goes to show that so long as antiques are part of a buying and selling world, it is a branch of commerce that bristles with pitfalls for the unwary, as it is only an expert who can detect real age, for instance, by the Patina which is a result of the chemical action of light and air over the years.
Private collections of antiques are a bugbear peculiar to a class-divided society, because instead of being freely available for social enjoyment and cultural education, they are confined within the mansions of the wealthy in an ostentatious and snobbish display of opulence.
Another very [arge beautiful painting by Stubbs of a grey mare and foals had been exhibited only once before.
This state of affairs is, of course, the result of our class-divided society and will only be abolished through the establishment of a class-less Socialist society ending the buying and selling of the commercial system, thus opening up new vistas of social enjoyment of the artistry of mankind.
To have one’s walls adorned with a Reynolds, a Rembrandt, or a Millais, tables in antique silver with Sevres porcelain, one must belong to the nonproducing class in our present social system.
Inevitably, as a result of this class division, the shoddy goods of multiple stores provide a tasteless and cheap facade for the Pre-fab, semi-detached and tenement homes of the mass of humanity.
We see, therefore, that it is the commodity nature of antiques that stands in the way of their social ownership and so long as they remain such they will be used as status symbols of false values in a snobbish world.
But make no mistake; appreciation of the arts is no biological peculiarity of the minority rulers of society, neither has it anything to do with the colour of one’s blood.
It is simply a matter of having time to devote, and access to artistic productions, in order to appreciate them.
This Socialism alone can provide and surely this is not an impossible task for modern man to achieve.
What they mean is that it would be very nice if the prices of the things they buy went down and the price of the thing they sell went up.
The worker would like to sell his mental ard physical energies to his employer at a higher price and at ths same time get more for each pound he spends, through lower prices in the shop.
And manufacturers who sell industrial products would like to see thos2 prices go up and all othe prices (in. cluding wages) go down.
One exception to this general attitude is the common practice of trade unions of associating themselves with their employers in approving higher prices.
Thus the railway unions approve higher fares and the coal miners higher prices for coal.
France a few months ago and Russia this month gave one kind of answer to the question, the answer being that it did not make any difference.
What happened was that France cut the face valu2 of her currency by 100, and the Russians cut their rouble by 10.
At the same time all prices, wages, fares, etc., were cut in the same proportion, so everyone was in just the same position as before.
But on some occasions prices have not been reduced by this kind of government action but have fallen under the influence of trading conditions.
So the worker who could buy articles at lower prices had fewer shillings in his wage packet to buy the articles with.
It was a time when unemployment was heavy and conditions were particularly unfavourable for trade union resistance to wage cuts.
New Russian Rouble THE DECLARATION of the Russian government that as from | January 1961 the official rate of exchange of the rouble will be 2.52 to the £ which will make it of higher value than the dollar and equal to about 8/-, will not mean much in practice since (unlike the dollar) it is not tied to gold and is not freely convertible into pounds or dollars.
Commentators in the newspapers mostly take the line that the aim of the Russian government is prestige, the satisfaction of having at least a nominal exchange rate greater than that of the dollar.
In addition however there is already the long term purpose of making the rouble eventually a gold backed world currency acceptable in_ international trade as the pound and dollar have been.
Rouble Millionairess THE Daily Telegraph tells of a Russian woman who got into the ranks of the rouble millionaires by a piece of private enterprise that landed her in jail for three years.
She ran an organisation. complete with a lawyer as secretary, a “ scientific consultant”, an accountant, and a network of agents selling cure-all herbs at 45/a packet.
When arrested London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 she had 700,000 roubles (worth about £60,000 at the old rate of exchange) and had just bought a country house for 300,000 roubles.
The Economic Horizon A YEAR AGO most of the political and economic forecasters were happy about the boom time ahead and still confident . that if anything went wrong the government could fairly easily take the steps that would put the economy back on expansion.
The fact that they are all asking the question is itself a-pointer to growing uneasiness, made greater by the foreseeable but generally not foreseen collapse of motor exports.
Now it is accepted that America and Canada are likely to have unemployment greater than in any year since the end of the war and there is the natural fear that British export trade may fall further and the jobless increase in number.
Gone is the post-war optimism based on the belief that they could always dip into the Keynesian remedies and keep everything under control.
But before anyone accepts that the export problems of British capitalism can readily be solved by pushing into other markets (and thereby crowding out some other would-be sellers) it has to be remembered that other sections of the capitalist class would have had the same idea.
Canada has appointed a “super salesman” to head its export drive, in the person of a new Minister of Trade and Commerce, and the American government is trying to boost their exports.
Sweden, too, is aiming to solve its problems by more exports, and their eyes are fixed on the market for their goods in Britain.
And to add to the troubles of all of them Russian exports are finding their way into many of the world’s competitive markets.
Paul Bareau, the new economic editor of the Daily Mail argues that the present troubles in this country are due to “ the excessive optimism and rashness of the years 1958 and 1959.
Restrictions on hire purchase should never have been completely removed.
So you take your choice between those who say that there is no need to worry because the government can always take action to put things right, and those who say, like Mr Bareau, that the government did take steps but they were the wrong ones and had the effect of making things worse.
SOCIALIST STANDARD 1961 @ Subscription form To SPGB Literature Dept 52 Clapham High Street, London, SW4 GE EE 6 issues 4/post free 12 issues 7/6 post free Send me the Socialist Standard for the next issues 1 enclose Name Address 10 SOCIALIST STANDARD, JANUARY The Rise of the Merchants Notes on Economic History THE EARLIER FEUDAL ECONOMY had to be curbed by the encouragement of manufacture trirough privileges and monopolies (thus breaking the power of the Guilds), through exemption from taxation, and through other forms of | support.
Skilled craftsmen were imported, industrial secrets were purchased or stolen.
On the other hand, by official supervision of the whole process of production, industry was to be kept up to the mark, and at the same time the consumer was to be protected by subjecting the process of sale to inspection.
Here the traditions and customs of the older urban economy showed their influence.
Another method adopted was the establishment of colonies and trading companies.
The East India Company. founded in 1660, vas given the right in 1661 to carry on war and make peace in non-Christian countries.
Attempts were made to provide cheap labour so as to promote and strengthen industry.
One method was to encour. age the increase of population (a special need in Germany in those days after the Thirty Years War); prohibitions on marriage were removed and payments made to fathers of large families.
Another was to cheapen the necessaries of life, so that wages could be kept down.
Foodstuffs were freed from import duty. while high levies were placed on exported grain, or its export totally forbidd2 These measures were opposed to the inlerests of the agriculturalists but, though not openly advocated, were often put into practice, for example in France by Colbert.
Finally, the output of gold and silver was to be increased where possible by mining in the home-land, assisted by state subsidies if needed.
The attraction of wealthy foreigners into the country. the prohibition of the export of precious metals, and similar measures, were to supplement and round off the expedients for increasing the national wealth.
A survey of mercantalist policy shows that its advocates placed great importance on money, but did not hold that money was an end in itself; they valued it for its productive effects.
Charles Davenent, of 1961 the same school, says “ Foreign trade brings in the stock.
It is necessary to remember that mercantilism differed greatly at different iimes and in different countries.
These variations notwithstanding, and allowing for differences in the detaiis of appiication, all the European rulers and statesmen from the sixteenth to the eighteenth century werc guided by the principles set out above.
In England, though agriculture and manufacture were not neglected, mercantilism had a strong commercial trend.
Cromweli’s Navigation Law of 1651 decreed that no seerchandise from Asia, Airica or America should be imported, except in ships built in England, owned by English subjects, navigated by English captains, with at least threefourths of the crew English.
Sea-borne commerce) from England to other European countries was to be carried either in English boats, or else in ships belonging to the country with which trade was being carried on.
These conditions meant a practical monopoly of the seas for the English, to the detriment of the Dutch carryingtrade.
By a treaty of £703, Portuguese ports were opened to British woollens in return for concessions to Portugal allowing the importation of wine into Great Britain.
In Germany and Ausiria, owing to the devastation of the Thirty Years War, the nzed to increase the population was of paramount importance.
The main concern was to hinder imports from countries whose manufactured goods were so cheap that the competition could not be met.
A demand for laws to limit expenditure on clothes, food, furniture, etc. was a feature of mercantilism here.
In ftaly. in conformity with the nature SOCIALIST STANDARD, JANUARY of the financial and commercial aristocracies of the republics of that period, the mercantilist school was especially interested in the balance of trade and monetary problems.
In France, Jean Baptiste Colbert was the most successful exponent of the mercantile system, especially after 1666 when he became controller general of the national finances.
French industry was a long way behind England. and even Germany. and the finances and administration were in a bad state. ft wes not long before internal customs dues had been largely abolished. canals had been made.
By such timulants a3 State subsidies. protective duties, and the establishment of technical schools.
Adam Smith considered the mercantilists as a school of united thinkers.
Mercantilism was essentially a vague principle of applied economics, stemming from the historical, economic, and political foundations of the period.
The economists of those days, in order to further the advance from the feudal and localised urban economy to a unified national economy. had to put forward the ideas of the balance of trade, attach great importance to money. study the effects of customs tariffs. examine the source of national wealth. and thus come to form a durable though somewhat loosely organised unity.
It was the economics of early capitalism—the period of history in which Capitalists and Workers make their appearance, showing a difference in the form of the class struggle from the feudal period before it.
Bernal in the fast issue of the Sunday Limpire News before it joined the ranks of those fallen in the newspaper war.
There could be an ~ abundant~ society, with working tim2 reduced to four hours a day, three days a weck.
If they wanted. the, could take monihs or even sears off work. in fact, people who didnt want to wouldn't necessarily have to work.
Five per cent of the population could produce all the food that was needed for the rest. and another 10 per cent could produce all the goods that were necessary.
They could explore all the fruits of lessure. the arts. the crafts. music and pamting.
In space exploration there would be all the adventure for the people who wanted adventure.
And equal supe iv grow roses or something for the people who did not want adventure.
Professor Bernal was simply giving facts which support our contention that the productivity powers developed within capitalism have now reached the stage when an abundant non-coercive society is possible—what we call Socialism.
Some of those supporting state capitalism may do so partly because they do not realise that a Socialist society is possible.
However, it would be unwisz to assume that those who claim to be Christians have got any great desire to follow this zdvice, as one old woman found oui recently.
A widow of 71. she “was sentenced to seven years preventive detention at London Sessions .. . for stealing two brass ornaments from St.
This unfortunate perhaps doesn't realise that whatever the Bible may say, in a capitalist. society the Christian churches hang on to their property as tightly as, if not more tightly than. anyone else.
I suppose you have no ambition except to go back to prison and indeed | am told you would prefer to go there as you have no home outside.
If this is true, it means that one of our fellow members of the working class prefers the inhumanities of jail to the joys of the ~ free” life outside it.
This will take some explaining away by the advocates of our supposed), “never had it so good ™ society, Substantial number Sig Roy WELENSsKy, the Rhodesian Federal Prime Minister. recently defended the present Rhodesian set-up in the Federal Parliament.
But Sir Roy was wide of the mark in giving this as a reason why the existing settlers’ government should be left in undisturbed control of Rhodesia.
The “ substantial number of African businessmen ™. the developing African capitalist class. is in fact the main reason why the days of the settlers’ government are numbered.
A government based on landed interests can hold on for a certain time ia certain conditions when capitalism is expanding in a country.
It may lean over backwards, as it thinks. in its efforts to be fair to the growing capitalist class.
JANUARY SS It I A IR, LUCRETIUS (about 100BC 50BC} THE NATURE OF THE UNIVERSE Nothing can ever be created by divine power out of nothing.
The ""reason why all mortals are so gripped by fear is that they see all sorts of things happening on the earth and in the sky with no discernible cause, and these they attribute to the will of a god.
Accordingly, when we have seen that nothing can be created out of nothing, we shall then have a clearer picture of the path ahead, the problem of how things are created and occasioned without the aid of the gods.
But clearly a thing cannot have a limit unless there is something outside to limit it, so that the eye can follow it up to a certain point but not beyond.
Since you must admit that there is nothing outside the universe, it can have no limit and is accordingly without end or measure.
Whether there is some obstacle lying on the boundary line that prevents the dart from going farther on its course or whether it flies on beyond, it cannot in fact have started from the boundary.
It would therefore be a barren exercise at this stage to debate whether Wilde was a Socialist in the exact meaning of that term.
What is beyond doubt is that there is in this essay much that the Socialist will agree with, and much more than could form the basis of rewarding discussion.
It is true that part of the essay has little to do with Socialism in any economic sense—nearly half of it is taken up by a diatribe against any attempt at dictation to the artist, whether by government or public opinion.
But when Wilde keeps to what is directly relevant, it is a joy to read his sparkling prose, and to see how he hammers his points home.
They try to solve the problem of poverty. for instance, by keeping the poor alive; or, in the case of a very advanced school, by amusing the poor.
It is immoral to use private property in order to alleviate the horrible evils that result. from the institution of private property.
If the Socialism is authoritarian; if there are Governments armed with economic power as they are now with political power ; if, in a word, we are to have Industrial tyrannies, then the last state of man will be worse than the first.
With the abolition of private property, then, we shall have true, beautiful, healthy individualism.
Nobody will waste his lifc in accumulating things, and the symbols for things.
Most people cxist, that Js all, This essay is a mine in which only half an hour's reading will reveal many Socialist gems.
But, as Mr Andrew Boyd points out in his recently published book, geography is really about them both.
Ii is another of those convenient compendiums so useful to anybody with an interest in keeping abreast of the many events and developments in the world but who find themselves with so little time to do it.
The book consists of 70 maps, clearly drawn and annotated in black and white. each with its accompanying page of background information.
The subjects they cover are many and varied and provide an impressive picture in themselves of the problems and complexities of the modern capitalist world.
Strategy, trade, production, race tensions, nationalism, disputes and troubles of every sort, are translated into graphic terms.
Of easy reference and readability. attractively produced and printed, it is in short an ideal repository of compressed information at a very reasonable price.
S.H. and history— about chaps”. f CINEMA The Sweet Life La Dolce Vita, the Italian film now showing at the Columbia and the Curzon, is worth attention.
The opening sequence sets the scene for this bitter, searing and uncompromising revelation of our diseased society.
A helicopter is carrying an effigy of Christ low over Rome followagl by another occupied by a newspaper reporter and photographer.
Subsequently we learn that these two are attached to a scandal-mongering tabloid but we surmise in the meanwhile that this is a stunt and that the occasion is one of the not infrequent religious, holidays.
We are left in no doubt of the relationship of the events—two stunts both \concerned only with a cynical exploitation of ignorance, fear and uncertainty.
Eventually he finds himself alone in the company of a rich young heiress who takes him. to her palace in her fabulous car.
The rich young lady. sensing a common bond with one of these (for as we are made well aware. they are two opposite sides of the same coin) offers to take her home.
The contrast between the affluence of the rich and the dismal quarters of the prostitute is driven home cruelly.
The more so since the rich young thing. wearv no doubt of the boredom of her parasitical existence decides to fornicate with the young man in the prostitutes’ own bed. suffusing herself. as she imagines with the sensuous pleasures of promiscuity.
Of the coarseness, the soliciting, the squalor. the pimps, the degredation. she knows—or wants to know—nothing.
The credulity and hysteria which follow lay bare the blind belief and ignorance which go with religion.
Others come out of curiosity, anxious not to miss any possible “modern” miracles.
The pent-up frenzy and the latent violence that is its accompaniment bursts forth _at the end into the immolation and despoilment by the crowd of the tree where the vision is said to have appeared.
Symbolic this of the brutality and violence underlying blind faith gnd belief so charactergstic of our time.
Another episode tak@s us into the palace of a rich aristocrat where a party is taking place{ The utter depravity and stupidity ofthése people are hammered home in scene after scene.
We are never ‘ allowed for an instant to forget that * these people are possessed of enotmous wealth and resources.
The great disparities of wealth ownership so characteristic of capitalist society are made clear for all to see.
These people are portrayed for what they are—useless, parasitic, diseased.
The final orgiastic episode may be said to crown this unsparing condemnation of hypocritical capitalist morality with one code for the poor and one for the rich.
Kutchuk, now President and Vice-President respectively of the newly born Republic made the speeches expected of them.
The crowd cheered and went away to await the arrival of the contingents of Greek and Turkish troops.
The troops were greeted at the port of Famagusia by their respeclive supporters with @ries of “ Long live the Turkish Army”, and “Long live the Greek Army.
They then entered Nicosia to banner greetings of “ Frzedom and peace-loving soldiers, we welcome you to Cyprus” from whence they proceeded to their camps to prepare for whatever “ peace-loving “ activities the future might call upon them to perform.
This Nicosia reception. though far from being wildly excited, was riotous compared with the departure of the late Governor of Cyprus. from Famagusta a few hours earlier.
To the accompaniment of a bagpipe lament Sir Hugh Foot and his family departed the island followed by the silent stares of the thousands of watchers assembled on the town walls to greet the incoming troops.
JANUARY of 23 Eoka men, exiled to Greece under the amnesty terms following the London Agreement.
Any doubts that Eoka had the sympathy and support of the majority of Cypriots must have been dis\pelled by the scenes.
Weeping, shouting, kissing, hugging, hand-shaking men and women slowed the six mile journey from the airport to a two-hour crawl, which ended at the Nicosia Stadium, packed to capacity, with the surrounding roofs crowded.
Very adroltly he proceeded to draw the stings of the exiles who must have been very conscious that their struggle had not borne the fruit expected.
The man who had so obviously benefited from what was regarded as a sell-out then said.
Significantly, the antiMakarios Ex-Eoka Fighters Association which had boycotted the celebration, had complained that eight of its members had been arrested and held for one night in jail for distributing leaflets attacking the London and Zurich Agreements—during these same celebrations.
Greck Cypriots must live not with the memory of what they suffered or how much they were wronged by the British. nor how much their differences are with the Turks. nor should the soul be filled with bitterness at the negation of national hopes.
The celebration must be the ~ expression of joy at independence and also the expression of the determination tv carsy on the new struggle. fe) 196) Mr John Clerides. leader of the Democratic Union, afier calling new Republic a fraud said.
An understandable remark, since his son, Mr Glafcos Clerides, had just accepted the position of Speaker in the new Parliament. i ’ The Akel* view was expressed by their paper Haravghi, which cal'ed for a policy of peace and friendship abroad in order to secure markets for “ our” products, Mr Papaioannou, General Secretary of Akel, stated from East Berlin, after opposing the presence of British troops, that the Cyprus people must form a broad anti-imperialist front to overcome the impediments of the Agreements.
During the many press conferences thai followed, the President continually stressed his “ friendsrip with all countries” policy.
Occasionally reporters would fire awkward questions, such as the Turkish woman who asked why, on national holiday, the Turks had cheered in the Turkish contingent and the Grecks had celebrated the return of Eoka.
Or a question on the possible trouble from Eoka, which was answered by the assertion that Eoka must work pzacefully for the common good.
President's training recived in manipulating the minds of the faithful in church was standing him in good stead.
Thus the domestic and foreign policy of the new Republic was as on2 would have expected.
All would be well, provided “the imprescribable rights. of the working people were safeguarded” and * friendship with all countries ” could be guaranteed.
Assuming that these statements were not intended to be tongue-incheek platitudes, one must suppose that the President’s Knowledge of the real world is as deficient as those of his many supporters who believed that, somehow or other, a change from colonial to selfgovernment would result in full employment, peace, and prosperity.
For nearly that long I have read your literature and listened to your speakers.
Your speakers repeat, parrot-fashion; “When the workers want socialism they will have it.
Fine, but this is dependent on the question, “ How?”, to which you have no answer.
Private capitalism has simply been succeeded by State Capitalism. [ certainly do not expect lo get the answers to my two simple questions but I suggest that the SPGB thinks about this problem.
Besides that, many workers, are at present employed on useless jobs (bark clerks, insurance men, bus conductors) or directly harmful — ones thus greatly reducing the number of workers available for the useful work of production and distribution.
And at present the workers do this much more difficult job —of running capitalism—when it is not even in their own interests.
The organisation is already here—the tool of the working class in the Socialist revolution, All that is lacking is a majority of classconscious workers, and we are doing our best to bring that about.
B.W. says “ Do you envisage a time when it will be impossible to recruit a single soldier, sailor or airman; when at a General Election not a single vote will he cast” —presumably B.W. means for capitalist parties, since our appeal to Socialist workers is to vote for Socialist candidates or write “ Socialism” etc. the ballot paper.
When“ nobody” is prepared to join the armed forces or vote for capitalist partics these institutions, because of that fact, will have ceased to exist.
As for Russia, the Soviet revolution overthrew the landed aristocracy, and brought in capitalism —-at first portly private and partly state, now wholly state.
Eorrorial, CoMMIT IEE ~ PARTY NEWS continued from page 16 COVENTRY GROUP It may interest readers to know that ca Socialist.
Mectings will be held Monday fortnightly thereafter, all proceedings commencing at approximately 7.30m.
Generally. discussions will be held on Socialism and anything pertaining to it, and it is hoped 1o organise some lectures also.
No one will he precluded from attending by virtue solely of views divergent from the SP.G.B.'s Obviously.
And all within tee inevitable and necessary limits of an organised discussion Group-will have complete freedom of expression, You are cordially invited to attend any of the meetings and the Group members will be pleased indeed to welcome you.
HEAD OFFICE Comrade Gilmac is regularly at Head Office from 2 to 7m. from Monday to Friday.
LEWISHAM LECTURE Room 1, Davenport Hall, Davenport Road, Rushey Green, S.E.6.
PADDINGTON LECTURES “The Olive Branch”, Crawford Street, WI Wednesdays, 9m.
The latter stated they were prepared to send a speaker to give an address on Nuclear Disarmament, or, if it was preferred, they could show a film which they considered would be of interest.
The Branch decided that a debate would he a good proposition and immediately the local CND Secretary was contacted by telephone.
He was advised that we accepted their proposition to debate and that the “Branch could and would make all the necessary arrangements.
White Hart, Mitcham Cricket Green **SOCIALISM—WHAT IT MEANS” LONDON OUTDOOR MEETINGS Sundays Hyde Park 3m.
East Street, Walworth January Ist and 15th January 8th and 22nd January 29th Thursdays Tower Hill, 12,30--2m.
London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 196] ¢ stated that he would have to put the matter before his committee, Islington Branch wrote confirming the telephone conversation, giving suggested dates and asked if the CND wished to hold the debate in Islington or elsewhere, also the motion suggested for debate.
The letter was acknowledged and it was stated that the Committee had agreed to the debate and that definite arrangements were awaited, All details were supplied.
Three weeks later a letter was received stating that they had appointed a new secretary and a new committee who had reconsidered the matter and had decided against taking part in the debate.
The reason given by them was that the policy of the new committce is not to argue for or against any particular philosophy.
These will alternate with lectures and discussions—altogether a fairly heavy programme which we hope members will make every attempt to support.
The Branch has recently ended a satisfactory outdoor Propaganda season at Beresford Square.
It is intended to pursue this method of propaganda next year and to continue to obtain the services of speakcrs and the support of members.
That in socicty, therefore, there is an antagonism of interests, marifesting itself as a class struggle. hetween those who possess but do not produce, and those who produce but do not possess.
SPGB, 80 Farm Road, Esher, Surrey LEWISHAM Mondays , Coop Hall pers ""Nee Darnpart Red hehe — Derma Red, SE6. a NOTTINGHAM Alternate Wednesdays (ist & {Sth February) 7.30 pm, eyo Hall, Street.
SOUTHEND a and 3rd Tuesdays in month 7. pm, 7th February at 19 Chase, Leigh-on-Sea and 21st February at 17 Cotswold Road, Westclifl-on-Sea.
D Deutz, 80 Bawdsey pices, Wed tone WOOD GREEN & yet pm. pater wacx Peed OLDHAM Wednesdays 7.30 pm, Street. : R Lees 2 sephetc address.
ORDERS for literature should be sent to the Literature Department, SPGB, at the above address.
CORRESPONDENCE for the Executive Committee should be sent to the Ger.eral Secretary, spGB, 52, Clapham High Street, London.
LETTERS containing postal orders, ctc., should be sent to E LAKE, SPGB, at the above address.
Postal orders and cheques should be crossed and made payable to the spas.
The Government, a coalition of Christian Democrats and Liberals, has precipitated this situation by its austerity measures.
The Belgian local authorities are also to be empowered to impose additional income taxes of their own.
The Belgian Opposition party which calls itself * Socialist” claims that workers will suffer a loss of £21 to £28 a year.
The popular reason given for these austerity measures is the nced to mect the trade and finance deficit caused by the loss of the Congo.
Even before the Congo crisis, plans prosperity is over, and that her induytrial production is growing very slowl, in comparison with that of her Common Market partners.
Eyskens’ austerity programme was designed to achieve a vast investment drive to modernise Belgian industrs and make Belgian products competitive in world markeis.
The most uneconomic of Belgian preducts is her coal, a chronic problem since the thirties.
In recent months Belgium has launched on a serious programme of reform of uneconomic mines including a number of closures.
Bur thes realise that their action is futile ws a means to achieve anything but tenporary respite from the encroachments of their masters on their standard of living, and that they are jeopardising their chances of achieving even that by using the strike weapon against the State, instead of using it to tack up wage demands with which to cffset the effect of the Government's policy.
The strike weapon has a very limiied usefulness and at its best can only deal with . elisels and not ‘were being made to face the unplea> ,causes.
To use this we ron against sant fact that Belgium's period of peak the might of the State is. invite d’sLondon School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 s | 20 SOCIALIST STANDARD, FEBRUARY 1961 , ‘NEWS IN REVIEW aster.
If at election times the workers ive their votes to the parties of capiiis, it ensures that the present type of situation will occur again.
It is these so-called “ Socialists” who foist such wage-pruning | schemes as National Health services, unemployment pay. family allowances, and so on. on to politically ignorant workers as bits of Socialism.
And it is the same political charlatans who seek to make capital from the present situation by using the strike as a means to achieve government office themselves.
Governments do not develop reforms or pruning schemes because their attitude to the working class is necessarily either sympathetic or antagonistic.
Governments administer the affairs of a capitalist economy in the interests of the national capitalist class.
The Belgian workers would be well advised to consider this fact in relation to the present situation, recognising that a change of government is merely a change of label.
Austerity, in a world of potential plenty, is always the lot of the working class under capitalism.
It is not enough to demonstrate against one type of capitalist government.
The workers must organise consciously to abolish the present economic system and establish in its place their own system of society—Socialism.
Average ' ) ACCORDING to a new Stationery Office publication—Britain, 1961 Edition— ‘Mr and Mrs.
Average” are described as having a TV set, vacuum cleaner and occasionally a washing machine and a ‘fridge.
The acquisition of these goods is equated by advertisements, films and magazines to true, lasting happiness.
We all know the phrases “ No more washday fatigue .with Blank's wonderful wasiing machine”, etc.
The mere fact of possessing these goods, however, does not produce happiness as soon as the gadget is installed.
On the contrary, they often produce problems, mainly financial, and occasionally their “happy” possessors are driven to desperation, as in the case of a young couple in Birmingham, who clearly were “Mr and Mrs.
He had bought a five-piece living room suite, washing machine, bedroom suite and TV set on hire purchase, and had redecorated his 15/a week house from top to bottom.
On 28th December 1960, with the Christmas decorations still hanging gaily, the husband, wife and their 2 year old daughter were found dead in their gleaming, gas-filled kitchen.
Airways Strike THE MAINTENANCE STAFF of BOAC and BEA staged a four-hour stoppage on Wednesday, January 2nd, in support of a wage claim that has beein going through the laborious negotiating machinery.
This undoubtedly caused a lot of hardship to some passengers, but the unfortunate fact is that for the aircraft workers one of the few ways in which the employers and their own union officials can be gingered up is by resort to a strike.
BEA immediately suspended them for a further 24 hours, causing six times as much inconvenience to the public.
But the only newspaper comment was typified by the Daily Mail of January 6th, which said that BEA was determined to push home the lesson to the strikers.
On the Brink BotH RussIA AND the United States waxed indignant about each other's interference in the Laos disturbances.
Sheer hypocrisy of course, because they had both been dabbling their fingers in that particular pie.
Since 1954, the United States has pumped between forty and fifty million dollars into Laos.
China is probably interested in the strategic potential of Laos, as a buffer between her and SEATO member Thailand.
The Americans, notoriously triggerneurotic in the Far East, seem to want the country more firmly under their control, and not simply neutralist.
The Laos dispute may be small in ‘ itself, but it is a miniature of the clashing interests of two giant power blocs.
This must be the fear which overhangs every minor upheaval in the world.
Yes to De Gaulle GENERAL DE GAULLE came to power to joyful motor horns tooting the rhythm of Algerie francaise in the streets of Paris.
This was an exuberant indication of the hopes of the general's supporters, that he , would ruthlessly crush the FLN and SOCIALIST STANDARD, FEBRUARY 1|96| 2 2 inaintain French tule over Algeria.
In the event de Gaulle, by resolving to come to terms with Algerian nationalism, has shown the more realistic assessment of the interests of French capitalism.
In this, like many other politicians, he has disappointed a lot of his former supporters.
Last month’s affirmative vote for the general’s proposals gave the go-ahead to the organisation of another referendum, to be held in Algeria alone.
The second referendum will be held . if security conditions in Algeria allow.
This could mean that there will soon be further talks between the French government and the FLN, and that the end of the present fighting in Algeria may be in sight.
The questions in the referendum were loaded, the government hogged most of the propaganda and left the French army in no doubt as to how it should vote.
If this is the beginning of the road to peace in Algeria, there is no cause for another joyful tooting of horns.
We all know that there will be other Algerias, with their own bloodshed and misery.
Canadian Illusion IT WAS NOT so very long ago that some of the air and sea lines in this country were working hectic overtime to accommodate all the people who were clamouring to emigrate to Canada.
These people must have gone with great expectations of a country full of good things, where everybody was happy.
It is now expected that this month, Canada’s unemployment will reach ten per cent. of its working population, which is the highest since the war, and Several times higher than in Great Britain.
The solutions which have been recommended for Canada’s slump are not new.
Some economists favour higher import tariffs and a strong effort to replace imported goods with home products.
But ‘there is little hope that they will lose the illusions which they took west with them.
But wherever they go capitalism, and its problems, will be waiting to greet them.
On Battle of the Roads DESPITE THE REDUCTION in road deaths over the recent Christmas period as compared with that of 1959, the Ministry of Transport and the various road safeiy organisations are still faced with the task of exhorting the restless tide of humanity. to walk and drive carefully.
One of the main difficulties is that of the separation of pedestrians and traffic, but since this cai Only be accomplished at enormous cost, it is not considered practical, and conse| quently palliatives and not remedies are preferred.
There is a mistaken belief among some people that these road problems are only a recent phenomenon, but as long ago as 1846'‘the daily newspapers were complaining of the inadequacies of the principal thoroughfares and of the fact that all that could be done was to patch up and mend.
In today’s battle of the roads one can see all the contradictory nature of capitalist society.
Whilst Mr Marples is making his appeal, we are being told about the super-petrols which are supposed to make cars go faster, not to mention the prestige value of the bigger and faster car.
The road problem is aggravated by the thousands of commercial and business vehicles which congest the h'ghways and bye-ways, taking back and forth goods which have covered the same ground several times before.
There are also thousands of small, medium, and large size shops selling identical goods to the people in the already overcrowded towns and cities.
We can only wonder that the accident rate is not higher than the statistics show.
The attention of the new representatives had been drawn to the plea, uttered against the dismissal of Public Works Department employees in the Paphos district, four days before Independence.
Promises “ to see what he could do about it” were given by the Minister of Labour in the transitional government.
Combined right wing and left wing unions then issued strike notices against wrongful dismissal.
At the same time, Mr Beeley, the British London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 representative at UNO, was placing the ~ application of Cyprus for membership before the Security Council, saying “ A democratic system of government and the necessary machinery for safeguarding the human rights and the interests of all sections of the community “ exists in Cyprus.
While the voice of organised labour was beginning to express itself, the body of employers had been reorganising.
Even as the daily press was relaying as front page news the visits of diplomats presenting credentials at the Presidential Palace, there appeared notices on their back pages.
Continued link-ups of employers’ associations throughout the island have resulted in the association covering leading employers and most individual employers associations, Still the sackings continued, amid strong press reaction, with T.U. delegations making reptesentations to the Minister of Labour.
On August 27th, while pickets were demonstrating on the streets of Famagusta against dismissals, President Makarios announced a scheme for the expenditure of £331,300 on new public works to seduce unemployment.
Then with cruel rony he said “ We are in sympathy with (hose dismissed from Public Works, and certainly we don't want them in the streets jobless.
But J want to make it clear that I am not going to give in to slogans of demagogues.
Workers will be protected in the new state, but they must also work ”, One can be quite safe in saying that the first pronouncement of a government after its election is to call on the workers to work harder.
In this case it came rather later than expected, but rarely has such a call been so cruelly worded.
The “unemployed worker ” who out of sheer desperation is forced to send deputations to beg for work from his newly-elected government, is roundly berated by the leader of that government for not working.
The grant was seen by the workers 4s a stop-gap measure which, apart from failing to secure the re-engagement of the dismissed workers, would do nothing to relieve unemployment in the future.
P Bryant, E Grant abolishing unemployment by means of foreign loans wore discussed continually.
Finally, a meeting of SEK, PEO, and the Turkish Federation of Labour decided on an island-wide strike for 8th September if the dismissed workers were not reinstated, We Want Bread 8 Thz workecs’ rep-eszntatives negotiated up to the last minute with Minister of Labour and the President, who assured them that it was government policy to help the workers and that they would do everything in their power.
But governmental concern was not sufficient for them to reverse thzir previous dismissal decisions, and a twenty-four hour protest strike was called. Shouts of “We want work—we want bread” went up outside the House of Representatives, while a union delegation went inside to present a solution.
The strikers returned to work the following day to await the next move by the government.
The naively unrealistic ~ friendship with all countries” policy was to bring immediate reaction from the United Arab Republic.
The friction was caused by the declaration that Mr Zev Levin would be installed as the first Israeli ambassador to Cyprus.
This came in the face of warnings by the Arab League to Cypriot merchants against trading with Israel.
The announcement of the appointment was like a slap in the face to Egypt.
Since the Suez invasion launched by the British in 1956, Egypt had given full support to the self-determination agitation wishing to remove the threat of an unfriendly Cyprus on its doorstep.
FEBRUARY 1961. imperialism in every country and to continue exploiting it.
The Cyprus Federation of Trade and Industry, in expressing great concern in the deterioration in diplomatic relations, revealed their real concern ina cable sent to the President.
This stated that the economic interests of Cyprus demanded the strengthening _ of ties between the Republic and Arab countries.
In reply to this a message was sent to the President by a committee Of businessmen trading with Israel, who expressed support for the “ bridge of friendship” policy, and requested a meeting with him to put forward their viewpoint.
Although a trade pact was signed with the UAR at the end of September, the Arab-Israeli dispute continued to be one of the main newspaper topics, and no solution seems likely to satisfy all parties permanently.
Opening the Seventh Cyprus International Trade Fair, President Makarios stressed the importance of the island as a trade link between East and West.
In doing so he was merely following the path mapped out for him by numerous government leaders in as many countries, engaging in the monotonous and dangerous pastime of market-grabbing.
The urgency of his appeal is underlined by the recently published Economic Review for 1959, which lays stress on the continued unfavourable trend in the terms of trade.
Storms Ahead In spite of continued expressions of optimism in the future of the new sta‘e, from the point of view of economic and political stability, and trade and foreign relations everything points to . more storms ahead.
Cyprus has mainly ap agricultural and mining economy, the latter accounting for more than half the value of exports.
Agriculture can absorb no more of the labour force; already i accounts for over half.
Although the most important single activity, it is un economic and. heavily subsidised.
A large number of farmers, unable 10 pay off loans, are threatened with the enforced sale of their land.
The question of capital investment to finance such projects has bzen the subject of much dispute.
AKEL of couse advucate taking up the offer, whilst others advise caution and consideration of sAher offers.
The question of future intercommunal . disturbances has recently been given prominence by the statement of a Turkish political leader, Mr Denktash, that attempts by Greek Cypriots to undermine the Zurich and London Agreements would lead to chaos and civil war.
Scarcely a day passes without the Greck and Turkish dailies on the island throwing mud at each other.
The prospects of even elementary political organisation involving both communities seem remote at the moment.
The brightest hope, from the working class point of view, is . the ndmirable demonstration of unity during the recent strikes and demonstrations, which the workers have threatened to repeat.
Both Turk and Greek spoke as one, The Trades Unions have recently opposed the principle, imposed by the Constitution, of 2 70 per cent.-30 per cent. division of Civil Service jobs between Greeks and Turks as being discriminatory and introducing political factors into a purely labour field.
Whilst apprehensive that self-determination would sesult in Enosfs, their “present attitude appears to be in favour of independence.
The present set-up suits them very well, giving them plenty of room of manguvre Cyprus into the communist camp.
True to the prinéiple of “ catching them young”, both groups have already formed vouth Ongamisations.
Under colonial rule, there is often idemidication of the ruling class with tthe colonial power.
The belief used to be current in the “left wing” that after the achievement of national independence the resulting disillusionment would provide the experience necessary for the working class to see the class issme more clearly.
Of course, this is mot believed by Russia who is just as aggious as any other country to woo the mewly independent states, to capture theur trade and to use them as counters im umiernational diplomacy.
In any case it is @ fallacious argument and certainly mot bonne out by the facts.
We are remuded that it was a Atfems thet he fire organised a private amoy, during the Genmen occupation im 1943.
After Greece tad been forced into te camp of Western ment, the Greek Civil War and its oxtcome lad resulted im 2 typical about face.
As always the communist sittitude Was iMconsistent and wacilllating, but ution with a member of the Wester, as oppored to dhe Fasten Cupitaliat London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 The struggle in Cyprus resulted in many fhundreds:of working class dead and wounded.
The voice of its Capitalist Class, as yet young and weak, but strugglin to be heard, finds a ready mouthpiece in its government which has shown itself to tbe just as chauvinistic and trade conscious as any of the other governments set up as a result of national imdependence.
It has taken its place with the other capitalist states in a ‘world of actual and potential aggression, and will add its voice to the general discord which is called “trade and peace”, no doubt falling into line behind one or other of the major powers.
Secialint Knowled This is mot a step forward for the working glass of Cyprus or anywhere else, and far from ther2 being any sign of them becoming sovialist. independence has thrown the nationalistic aspirations of Graek and Turk into relief.
The natrodustion 10 the Cyprus working class Of sostalist knowledge with its clear-cut class issues, uncompl cated by nationalistic anguments, is badly needed to dispel these bars to its emancipation.
FEBRUARY 1961 Finance & Industry IN AN INTERVIEW publishéd in the Observer the banker Lord Brand, asked if he thought that academic economists do more good than harm, replied that they are extremely valuable.
Possibly because Lord Brand would hesitate to claim that economic life has altered particularly (“1 do not think we have an easy time ahead of us in the next year or so”) he went on to blame the politicians for not accepting the good Marx on Piece Work Let us now consider a little more closely the characteristic peculiarities of piece-wages.
The quality of the labour is here controlled by the work itself, which must be of average perfection if the piece-price is to be paid in full.
Picce-wages become, from this point of view, the most fruitful source of reductions of wages and capitalistic cheating.
They furnish to the capitalist an exact measure for the intensity of labour.
Only the working-time which is embodied in a quantum of commodities determined beforehand and experimentally fixed. counts as socially necessary working time, and is paid as such.
Given picce-wage, it is naturally the personal interest of the labourers to strain his labour power as intensely as possible; this enables the capitalists tu raise more easily the normal degree of intensity of labour.
He recalled the reparations chaos after the first world war, when the politicians (backed however by 3 out of their 7 banking economic advisers) insisted on exacting impossible reparations from Germany.
He singles out Lloyd George—* Like most statesmen of the day, he knew little or nothing of finance”—yet Lloyd George had been Chancellor of the Exchequer.
But it appears, according to Lord Brand, that Lloyd George insisted on the mad policy because he had boasted of squeezing Germany “till the pip squeaked ” and dared not back down for fear of losing political support among voters as blind as he was.
But in the second world war the statesmen appear not to have changed much.
Lord Brand tells how Churchill and Roosevelt, on the advice of Morganthau, Secretary of the United States Treasury and with the agreement of Lord Cherwell (a “highly intelligent” man) adopted a plan to reduce Germany to a purely agricultural country.
Lord Cherwell’s defence of his action was that the Brilish Government wanted.a loan from America and acceptance of this fantastic plan would make it easier to get the loan.
Capitalism 1961 LoRD BRAND'S COMPLACENCY about the altered picture of economic life reads oddly in face of the motor car slump and the looming difficulties facing international trade and currencies.
The years between the wars were spent creating currency collapse in one country after another and then laboriously re-establishing stable currencies.
After World War II it was all supposed to be different but now Professor Meade is warning cf the drastic remedies that he thinks may be necessary because of America’s Joss of gold, so he proposes that the dollar and the pound should ‘be cut adrift from their existing link~with gold.
The Guardian in an editorial remarks “ Undoubtedly a period of chaos would follow.
Professor Meade feels sure that stability would return at a new level of exchange rates within six months.
This seems ironical to the Guardian but only because they persist against all conscience in believing that Russia is not a great capitalist power, but something else.
Flood Havoc in China THROUGH FLOODS and storms China is threatened with what may be a catastrophic fall of food supplies.
In a Socialist world such an event would be met by movement of supplies from elsewhere.
America, ‘Canada and other countries have masses of food they cannot sell profitably.
The American government when it wanted to give wheat away or sell it cheaply met opposition from the other exporting countries, who feared this would reduce world prices and cut into their own sales.
According to Reynolds News projected Canadian sales of their surplus to China are likely to meet with objections from the American government.
This is a tribute to the genius and originality of Sir William Petty, the founder of modern political economy.
It is in his Treatise of Taxes and Contribution, London 1662, that we find the lirst idea of surplus value.
This is his main point, as the determination of surplus Value depends on the determination of Value itself.
Petty determines the value of commodities by the relative amounts of labour which they contain; he is concerned not with appearances, but with foundations.
China’s misfortunes, and for the past week they have been rushing to do just that.
Scene of their operations is the Chicago soybean (spelt this way in America) market, biggest commodity futures market in the world.
The present bout of speculation in soyabeans and their products began three menths ago, as reports of crop disaster began to seep through from Chima, only big soya-bean producer apart from America itself.
People in the trade saw then that if the usual Chinese exports did not reach Europe.
Before the Physiocrats The next quotation from the same work interests us. as it is the early examination of the value of labour; The law . . . should allow the labourer but just the wherewithall to live; for if you allow double then he works but half so much as he could have done, and otherwise would; which is a loss to the publick of the fruit of so much labour.
In modern words, in receiving for six hours’ labour the value of six hours, the labourer would receive double what he receives if he worked for twelve hours and got only the value of six.
Thus the value of labour is determined by the minimum necessary for subsistence.
To induce the labourer to produce surplus value and to perform surplus labour, it is necessary to compel him to expend all the labour power of which he is capable, as the condition upon which he may earn the necessities of life.
He divides the second from the first which, for him, as later for the Physiocrats, is the true form of surplus value.
I say that when this man has subtracted his food London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 4 Piece Work in Russia A “norm” on output has been agreed with the Union and payment above the flat rate depends on exceeding the norm.
For the off-peak period output is filled in largely by grecting telegrams received in advance.
In the sorting office working on a 48-box fitting the norm is 2,400 an hour or 40 a minute and on a 72-box fitting it is 1,800 an hour or 30. a minute.
In the first case | was assure that many sorters could reach 3,500 un hour and in the larger fitting it wus not unusual to sort 2,500 an hour, Whether or not a sorter reaches the norm and by how much she exceeds it is determined by weight.
Letters and postcards are stacked in small containers and then weighed.
A record is made and a duplicate slip placed with the correspondence in the container.
Whoever sorts that particular container of work retains the slip and at the end of the duty has a number of these slips which, added together, show the total volume of correspondence sorted.
The interest of other members of the staff flows from the fact that, again in common with industry, the P.T.T. services can win awards for outstanding work.
These awards take the form of “banners ” and are accompanied by cash_payments of as much as 400,000 roubles.
Seventy per cent of this cash payment is disbursed to the staff as a bonus und the rest goes to the Union to be spent on common welfare provisions and facilities.
To Petty, the value of the corn is determined by the labour time which it contains, while rent, equivalent to the total product after the deduction of wages and seed, equals the surplus labour represented by surplus product.
Petty also shows that the individual character of the labour is of no consequence.
As a final tribute, and summing up of Petty’s contribution to political economy, we quote the following extract from Volume III, of Capital.
Good Reading Questions of Today I/Racial Problem 1|Russia Since 1917 I/Is Labour Government ie the Way to Socialism 4d, Nationalisation or Socialism 64.
Communist Manifesto _ and the last Hundred Years _—//Principles and Policy / 6d.
Schools Today 6d, All literature obtainable from SPGB, 52 Clapham High St., London, S.W. ee a Petty . . . and in general the writers who are closer to feudal times, assume that ground rent is the normal form of surplus value, whereas profit to them is still vaguely combined with wages, or at best looks to them like a portion of surplus value filched by the capitalist from the landlord.
These writers take their departure from a condition in which the agricultural population still constitutes the overwhelming majority of the nation, and in which the landlord still appears as the individual who appfopriates at first ° «» hand the surplus labour of the direct producers through his land monopoly, in which land therefore still appears as the chief requisite of production.
These writers could not yet face the question, which contrary to them, seeks to investigate from the point of view uf capitalist production, how it happens that private ownership in land manages to wrest from capital a portion of the surplus value produced by it at first hand (that is, filched by it from the direct producers), and first appropriated by it.
JOHN LOCKE John Locke is probably better known for his philosophy than he is for his contribution to political economy.
He follows William Petty in that he regarded human labour as the principal source of wealth, though Petty regarded both labour and land as the important factors.
He believed that the laws of nature established personal labour as the natural limit of private property—the limit arising from the physical limitation on the amount of labour an individual can perform, and from the fact that no one should accumulate more than his needs.
In his opinion ground rent was no different from usury and, due to the unequal distribution of the means of production, was a transfer from one person to another of the profit that should have been the reward of one man’s labour.
Money, therefore, in buying and selling, being perfectly in the same condition with other commodities, and subject to all the same laws of value, let us next see how it comes to be of the same nature with land, by yielding a certain yearly income, which we call use or interest.
For land produces naturally something new and profitable, and of value to mankind; but money is a barren ' thing and producés nothing, but by compact transfers that profit that was the reward of one man’s labour into another man’s pocket, Locke’s importance is that he is the voice of the juridical theories of capitalist society as opposed to feudalism.
His work in philosophy was the basis upon which the thinking of subsequent English economists rested.
SIR DUDLEY NORTH — Sir Dudley North is best known for his Discourses upon Trade.
This is mainly concerned with commercial capital, and as such is outside the scope of these notes.
The importance of North is that he reflects in his writing the period in which he lived.
From 1663 to 1798, except for the years 1708 and 1709, wheat prices were falling.
Industrial capitalists and landowners were concerned about, and did in fact bring about, a reduction in the rate of interest.
Up to 1760 it was considered to be in the national interest to maintain and increase the value of land.
The landowners gradually lost out to the money lenders and financiers of the. period.
The financiers, with the establishment of the credit system, and the system of State debt, became predominant in society.
Petty, in his works, refers to the complaints of the landlords regarding the fall of rents.
He defended the monied interests against the landlords, and placed the rent of money and rent of land in the same category.
It was in this form that capital gave landed property its first set-back, since moneylending at interest was one of the main means for the accumulation of eapital.
On price and money his Observation that gold and silver serve not as gold and silver in themselves, but only as forms of exchange value, is, for his day, remarkable.
To sum up, the position of the economists before the physiocrats was that they had to try and understand the conditions in which the landlord was being forced out, to the advantage of finance capital which was growing.
SOCIALIST STANDARD, FEBRUARY 1961 4 The Passing Show The Congo United Nations OFFICIALS report that 300,000 people are slowly starving to death in the Congo, with two hundred dying every day.
This is still further proof, if it were necessary, that it is not enough to be merely against capitalism, or colonial, ism, or the rule of a particular imperial power; one must have constructive proposals as to what is to replace the system to be destroyed—one must, in short, work for the achievement of Socialism, not merely for the destruction of any other economic and social system.
We pointed out that this would only entail the Congolese people exchanging one set of masters for another.
It would be hard. to argue, in face of the mass-starvation, in face of the pictures of Congolese children who are nothing more than skin and bone, that the Congolese people are better off today than they were a year ago.
In fact the new Congolese masters, te whom the Congolese people were exhorted to give their support, cannot even agree among themselves.
And in the squabbling and fighting among the various sections of the new Congolese ruling class—each of which calls in help from foreign states, Russia, America, Ghana, and Belgium among them—it is the ordinary Congolese who suffer.
The system of food-growing and ‘fooddistribution has in some parts (notably Kasai) almost entirely broken down.
Before you go, have a look at MacLean’s magazine (it calls itself Canada’s National Magazine) for November 19:h, 1960.
A favourite place for their holidays is Frenchman’s Creek in Jamaica, where millionaires and their wives can have peace and privacy for two thousand dollars a week, Last year a Calgary oil millionaire flew a party of his friends to England to watch his horse run in the Derby; the bill he paid covered a week’s stay at the Ritz for the party and Rolls-Royces for his friends’ trips.
A Toronto manufacturer had two swimming pools put in his backyard, complete with lighted fountain, hi-fi music and Japanese teahouse, for 30,000 dollars.
A Montreal construction business tycoon often flies to Florida or the ‘Caribbean fer weekends in one of the family’s two private planes (a DC-3 and a flying boat); once he couldn’t get a favourite Chinese dish in Miami, so he rang up his usual resturant in Montreal and got them to make it and fly it down to him.
This carries the stories of some of the families of Canada’s 327,000 unemployed workers.
It tells of the bitterness of men trying to make ends meet on unemployment pay.
The stories are much the same—mounting bills which cannot be paid, threatening letters from hire-purchase companies as the payments fall behind, the despair of men combing fhe town every day for jobs and being everywhere refused.
In a system run by the capitalists you would expect the capitalists to be well off.
In other words—capitalism in Canada works out much the same as capitalfsm in Britain.
Emigration will give you a change of scenery, but it can't change your class-position in society.
London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 Unfair to the rich IN THE CURRENT NUMBER Of Oxford Tory, the Conservative undergraduate journal, there was a surprising item.
Flogging Stik THOMAS Moore, the Conservative M.P. for Ayr Burghs, is again agitating for the introduction of flogging for crimes involving violence.
Sir Thomas said that “peace «nd justice’ were the “keywords” of Hitler's policy, and also that “Herr Hitler is absolutely honest aud sincere,’ at atime when Hitler had already set up a dictatorship and begun his campaign to “solve the Jewish problem” with every circumstance of brutality.
GLASGOW LECTURES Sundays 7°30 details page 32 SOCIALIST STANDARD, FEBRUARY 1961 Excuses and Admissions WHEN HE WAS Prime Minister, and a plain Mister, Earl Attlee made something of a name for himself as a calm, quiet, pipe smoking, doodling, ruthless chief, Now that he is in retirement, his views are much sought after by the newspapers, radio and so on, who presumably think that there is nothing so sage and Objective as the opinion of the elder statesman.
If there was one thing for which the last war Was suppose to have been fought, it was to ensure a peaceful world.
Earl Attlee, as Deputy Prime Minister in the wartime coalition, played his part in promoting that idea in the minds of war-weary workers, Yet here we are, fifteen years after, still apparently looking for the road to peace.
Many politicians have a seemingly infinite capacity for explaining away, and promising to remedy, the malfeasances of capitalism.
Whatever the strife and poverty which may be evident at any time, there is never a shortage of smooth politicos, each with his solution to the world’s problems and the hope of better times ‘to come, when we have found the road to peace or prosperity or some other paradise.
Take, for example, the recent trouble in Laos, over which the State Department displayed its famous _ triggerneurosis.
A popularly touted solution to this flare up was the recall of the 1954 Geneva Conference.
This, we were invited to believe, would do something to settle the Laos disturbance.
Now we have evidence that the disputes in Indo-China are as rife as ever.
The new trouble spot—Laos—was, in fact, established as an independent state by the Geneva Conference as part of its supposed peace making.
Nevertheless, this is all that capitalism's representatives have to offer.
But this is only a superficial impression; actually, they can only ever manage to suppress one aspect of a particular problem, which is simultaneously in evidence, or about to emerge, somewhere else.
For years, the Greek Cypriot nationalists fought the British forces on the island, taking occasional time off to kill Turkish Cypriots or their own traitors.
Then came the Zurich Pact which, when the various disagreements had been hammered out, seemed to have put an end to the fighting in Cyprus.
Now, apart from the odd settling of a score which was made during the emergency, all is peaceful on the island.
We have already mentioned Laos; the war in Algeria goes on; the Belgium Congo is still in bloody confusion.
And we know that, if an international conference were to settle these conflicts, similar problems would spring out somewhere else.
This may make the conference look pretty sick as a pacifying instrument, but we can depend on it that it will not prevent the politicians from offering it as a remedy when the world’s next sore spot breaks out.
At home, the working class are familiar with—and, sadly, receptive to—the excuses and nostrums which flood from the organs of capitalist Opinion as fast as the events which provoke them.
Sometimes, directly Opposite solutions are proposed for the same problem.
The government has stated that, to stabilise the British economy, they must impose some strict controls over hire purchase facilities.
In contrast, there are many spokesmen fox the industries which thrive on H.P. who take the vicw that the way to stabilise the economy is to remove, or at any rate to relax, those restrictions.
Neither side has any interest in pointing out that the H.P. boom, and the recession which followed, is an example of the ’ fundamental anarchy of capitalist society.
At least one firm in the domestic appliance industry felt the H.P. cuts extra keenly because, when the restrictions were off, they invested in a lot of extra SOCIALIST STANDARD, FEBRUARY. 196129 productive capacity to enable them to exploit the market which had Opened before them.
When the squeeze came, this production—and a lot of workers-became redundant.
In their ‘eagerness to exploit the boom the financiers trusted their weight to as creaky limbs as their forebears did in the twenties.
Whatever other changes there have been, the basis of capitalism—production for sale—remains.
And with it remain the anomalies and upheavals, try as the politicians may to explain them away.
Wars, uneasy peace, booms, slumps, poverty are part of capitalism because they spring from the roots of that society.
These are the people who produce our wealth, suffer capitalism's wars and its insecurity.
Anybody who is preoccupied with these pleasantries may have missed the petty censorship which was recently imposed upon London’s Tubez stations and which passed, in fact, with only a little comment from one or two newspapers and the House of Lords.
The subject of this censorship was a poster issued by the Family Planning Association which, after being displayed on many Tube stalions, was withdrawn when the Transport Commission received some objections to it.
We Spent a fortune on Tube fares, our eyes grew sore on advertisements for corsets, for films starring curvy B.B. or toughslugging Westerners.
We saw posters which exhoyted the rush hour workers to partake of gracious living by drinking a certain Brown Ale—with out-offocus candelabra in the background.
Apparently, nothing in this pot-pourri of sex, violence and alcohol had raised 4 murmur of protest.
We examined it closely, searched diligently for something in it which a reasonable person might object to.
It is difficult, then, to imagine the majority of Tube passengers objecting to this advertisement.
We can only assume that it was removed because of a minority of religious purgers, who pressed their point in a barrage of protest.
A more subtle method of suppression, this, than of yore, when Catholics would reduce to human charcoal any burglar or peasant who had difficulty in grasping a Papal chemical formula about bread and wine turning into flesh and blood.
Or when Calvinists would burn a scholar who rejected a complex theory which held that there was a being called God, who was three people—and at the same time only one.
More subtle, because the spread of materialist knowledge has made it harder to whip up hatred over theological disputes; but still reprehensible.
For human progress depends upon the decisions of conscious people, not upon gags applied to society by a sanctimonlous minority.
The Catholic Church is as helpless as any other Organisation in these matters.
Without a doubt, much of the religious opposition to birth control is roused by the fact that it is an attempt to shape our own environment, instead of leaving it to the will of a mythical supernatural being.
In fact, birth control is at present only a method of spreading out workers’ relative poverty, an attempt to prevent ourselves slipping too far into degradation and dire need.
Whether we practice if or not. whether 'we have two children or sixteen we remain workers. depending on our wage to I've.
In underdeveloped countries, birth control . is often given official backing, but the o'der established capitalist nations leave it :1s a matter of personal choice, only raising the issue of government support in. for example, times of slump.
We should remember that man’s future lies within his own society and that birth control could be a factor in fashioning the sort of world that man desires.
But this in turn depends upon man’s social knowledge and his rejection of, for example, religious theories with their threats of hellfire and purgatory.
When he has reached that stage, he will be facing the many aspects of living a civilised life in a developed society and there will be no bigots to decide what he may or may not do.
East Street, Walworth February 5th and 19th February 12th and 26th Thursdays Tower Hill, 12,30-.2m.
Society as today constituted is composed of two classes, the capitalist class and the working class.
This is due to workers, in numbers, overwhelmingly preponderate, it is the capitalists who are the circumstance that the capitalist class owns (in the form of the land, factories, machines etc.), the means of producing the means of life.
The workers, on the other hand, have no such means and implements of production, and to secure food, clothing and shelter and provision for their famil’es. must offer for sale to the owning class their mental and physical energies.
The price paid for these energies are at a level that will roughly purchase the necessities of life.
But those very energies are bought for working spells more than sufficient to produce the value of the wages paid for them.
In a five-day working week this value may be produced by the end of the third day; the value produced on the fourth and fifth day. therefore, is a value For a socialist analysis of war read SOCIALIST PARTY AND WAR 1/3 post paid,f rom SPGB 52 Clapham High Street, London, SW4 Wembley Writers Class Commenclng Friday February 3rd, 8pm then alternate weeks Barham Junior School, Linthorpe Ave, Wembley ‘in excess of the workers’ labour-power value and thus the wages that represent that value in monetary terms of the food, clothing etc., required for the restoration of expended energies.
This excess is thus a surplus value congealed, as it were, in the products the workers have produced for their masters.
Surplus value, with the sale of the commodities incorporating it, is realised as profit; which, by continually flowing to the capitalist class enables them to further capitalise their businesses and live without the necessity of working.
Thus one sees the capitalist class as a relatively tiny section of the community, but a section which enjoys benefits denied to that much larger section, the working class.
And added to the economic advantage of ownership of the productive means goes the political advantage of a State apparatus, the machinery of government, which since the birth of capitalism has carried out its appointed function of preserving the social set-up, and of conserving the masters’ monopoly of the wealth produced by the working class.
As a force intended to be the last resort “‘ persuaders ” of large numbers of people—hungry and desperate strikers and unemployed demonstrators as in _ some cases—the Army is provided with weapons and taught how to use them.
The result is that, in cases of threatened subversion etc., the Army is an efficient repressive force through its trained ability to maim or kill.
Whether or not years elapse without such measures being applied, this remains one of the purposes behind the Army’s existence.
There, then, lies the capitalist need for armies in the country of their being.
But each national capitalist grouping also needs an armed force to defend or further its interests outside its homeland.
Behind each of these national groupings, whatever the nation encompassing it, lics the pressure of competition.
American capitalism contends with Russian, British with German, French with Japanese—indeed, each nation contends with all others in a quest for markets by which to sell its commodities, which have been produced by the workers of each competing country.
Hence between the national capitalist factions, there exists a struggle for markets, but for each competitive needs as cheaper fields of exploitation, economical trading routes, and all the other advantages that will enable their possessors to offer their commodities at competitive prices.
Often the acquirement of these advantages can be effected only by filching them from rivals.
From the diplomatic moves, the changing strategies, there come the international crises, the tensions, the cold wars—too often to end in a hot war.
It is then that the Army of cach country concerned is ordered, with the other armed services, to carry out its function as the protector of the foreign interests of its native capitalist class.
Not that the protection of capitalist interests will be the reason given for hurling masses of young men, mostly members of the working class, into bloody conflict against other masses of young men, similarly mainly workers.
The various propaganda machines will manufacture high-sounding excuses.
Augmented now by hosts of wartime conscripts the task for each army is to wreak what havoc, destruction and death it can upon the armies of the “ enemy ” countries.
For no other reason than that they have been ordered to do so by their respective governments, man kills man so that his masters’ trading interests are furthered or at least protected from damage, One can scarcely expect a socially progressive and enlightened development among men trained to carry out the antisocial act of war.
Certain it is that many of those whose military job is to make “ good soldiers” are of necessity tyrannous and not far different to “ The Army Game's” Sergeant-Major Bullimore.
However, the Major need have no fear that “The Army Game ” will in any way harm the Army.
Back to Normal AT THE LAST two General Elections we heard much about the wonderful affluent conditions in which we were living.
We have also distinct memorics~ of “doubling our standard of living within twenty-five years”, Hamlet said “ promise-crammed ” but as he himself tartly added ‘* you cannot feed capons so”, These promises have now come home to roost.
All the other old and wellworn phrases and threats have now been dusted and polished and taken out of storage.
It would be interesting to hear the comments of the recently sacked motor workers on that last bit.
If this purpose of profit-making is threatened, production eases off, and workers are put on short-time or sacked.
The revolutionary requires no other justification than that of expediency.
True they have paid much lip service to Justice and other figments of the popular mind, but that has been only because they have required the assistance of thosc who were to gain nothing from revolution. and who had therefore to be inspired with empty phrases and confused with humbug.
But the highest sanction revolutionaries ever have required has been—opportunity, The Socialist asks no more.
Against the might. of the strong few shall be put the might of the many weak ones.
Before that might capitalism and private ownership will go down for ever.
From the Socialist Standard, February, 1911, SOCIALISM -’ HARD TO GRASP No part of the Socialist propositton seems more difficult to the avcrage worker than the proposal to abolish money, price and trade.
So deep has the idea of commerce been driven into the working class that they have come to believe themselves formed for the sole purpose of working and increasing trade.
In capitalist production the toiler Is, indeed, just a piece of mechanism, necessary to the progress of trade, and he has been taught to believe that such is all he is fitted to be.
His brain, stored with capitalist ideas, cannot get away from the notions connected with capitalist methods of production and exchange, hence the information that under a Socialist system no wages would be paid comes to him as a shock.
From the Socialist Standard, February, 1911. iicaccoceeciieccscaera ee eee Get Newsagents to sell the Socialist Standard Get Subscriptions for the Socialist Standard Get Libraries to display the Socialist Standard Persuade friends and workmates to buy the Socialist Standard Sell.andDisplay the Socialist Standard everywhere od —— London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 32 ~ SOCIALIST STANDARD, FEBRUARY 1961 ® Meetings FILMS AT HEAD OFFICE 52 Clapham High Street.
Bob Rose, February 12th “THE ATLANTIC DECADE” February 19th “ GERMANY—KEY TO EUROPE” Speaker : V Phillips, February 26th “BLACK AND WHITE IN S AFRICA"" Speaker : C May.
Speakers ; J ean and D McCarthy, HACKNEY LECTURE Bethnal Green Town Hall, Heath Road, E.2.
Conference, 1961, is being held at Conway Hall, Red Lion Square, London, W.C.1, on Friday, March 3lst, and Saturday and Sunday, April Ist and 2nd.
Provincial branches Sending delegates are asked to contact Head Office immediately if their delegates need accommodation during Conference.
London members are happy to assist wherever possible, but arrangements can best be made if good notice is given beforehand.
MEETINGS Indoor meetings are being held by many branches in different parts of the country and the notices in this issue are worth special study.
No other organisation can offer lectures of the range and calibre of the S.P.G.B., and they give an opportunity to keep abreast of current developments.
Especially, we would like to emphasise the choice of meetings in London, particularly on Sunday nights during February.
At Head Office, 52, Clapham High Street, interesting films are subjected to Socialist analysis and debate.
Wednesday “ April 7 pm SEE MARCH SOCIALIST STANDARD FOR MORE DETAILS London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 ance, In addition, on February 19th a highly topical meeting is being run at Denison House, Victoria. on the Crisis in the motor car industry.
PUBLIC MEETING MAHATMA GHANDI HALL 41 Fitzroy Square, Tottenham Court Road.
FULHAM & CHELSEA Ist and 3rd Thursdays in month 8 pm, ‘Kings Head,’’ 4 Fulham High Street, Putney Bridge, SW6.
COVENTRY Ise and 3rd Mondays (6th & 20th March) 7.30 pm, The Coffee Room, Craven Arms, High Street.
NOTTINGHAM Alternate Wednesdays (Ist ‘ 7.30 pm, treoples Hall, Heathcoat Street.
SOUTH EAST ESSEX (formerly Basildon and Southend) 2nd and 4th Mondays (13th & 27th March) in month 8 pm, 17 Cotswold Road.
SWANSEA 2nd and 4th Fridays (10th & 24th March) in month 8 pm, The Crypt, St.
WEMBLEY Mondays 8 pm, Barham Old Court, Barham Park, near Sudbury Town Station, Wembley.
WEST HAM 2nd and 4th Thursdays (9th & 23rd March) in month 8 pm, Salisbury Road Schools, Manor Park, E12.
WOOLWICH 2nd and 4th Fridays (10th and 24th March) in monih 7.30 pm, Town Social Club, Mason’s Hill, SEI8.
MITCHAM & DISTRICT Thursday 16th March 8 pm, ‘White Hart,” Mitcham Cricket Green.
THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE meets Cvery Tuesday at the spcp Head Office, 52, Clapham High Street, London, S.W.4, at 7.30m.
Stopping the Arms Race WHEN the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament was launched three years ago the declared aim was to get the British Government to abandon all use of, and direct or indirect reliance on, nuclear weapons.
This was to be a Step to world-wide agreement to ban them and promote a reduction of armaments.
He thinks that the Campaign may by now have passed ils peak and accepts the urgument of another CND supporter, Mr Wayland Young, that CND may be faced with a new situation which will rob them of their best propaganda point.
This “general all-round agreement” has not yet been reached by the H-Bomb governments but the merc Possibility that it may be will weaken CND and help Gaitskell and the Government.
President and his acceptance by Mr Crossman as well as by Mr Gaitskell as a supposed “ progressive” influence more likely to reach agreement with the Russian Government.
By doing this CND will take its place with the long line of humanitarian campaigns to lessen the horror of war by opposing each new and more horrible weapon as it came along; the campaigns against making war on civilians. against artillery bombardment of towns. against acrial bombing, against poison gas, the blockade, submarine warfare. napalm bombs, flame-throwers etc.. ctc.
None of them have succeeded and cach new decade has seen the accepted weapons grow more destructive.
All of the hundred or so countries in the United Nations have undertaken to settle their disputes by peaceful means and refrail from the threat or use of force but no}government treats this as more than a‘ pious Aspiration, and so it would be with a new declaration about the H-Bomb.
In peacetime the Powers might agree to suspend further tests and manufacture, or even promise to destroy their bombs, but if large-scale war broke out it would all begin again.
If it switches its emphasis to general disarmament the campaign will at once come up against the varying and contradictory aims of the diverse elements that came together to ban the bomb.
They can no doubt all agree on an ambiguous phrase like “ stop-’ ping the armament race” since this has the attraction from.the point of view of the general body of the propertied class in all countries that it holds out hopes of cutting the cost of their armaments and their tax burden.
But dissension will at once appear if one group in CND presses for unilateral general disarmament, by Great Britain on its own.
None of those CND supporters who think in terms of war with “ conventional weapons ” in an H-Bomb world have explained how they would meet a demand from an H-Bomb enemy for immediate surrender under threat of an H-Bomb attack.
Lord Russell, however, the sometime opponent and sometime supporter of war, accepted the logic of the position and tersely declared that it was better to be “slaves” of an enemy power than to be dead.
No doubt the varying views of the different groups in CND explain the Neutralism Other elements. in CND are the Neutralists and the Pacifists.
The colonies held down by foreign armies, the scores of “ neutral” countries overrun in great wars are sufficient answer to this.
Tibet, like Japan and China in an earlier phase, first wanted to be left alone and asked foreigners to keep out, but capitalist greed and arms dictated otherwise.
Abyssinia overrun by Italy, and Hungary kept down by Russian troops, are other examples.
When we come to those who are loosely called “ pacifists ” we are dealing with several quite different points of view.
The term is often applied indiscriminately to those who can grounds of policy want to keep out of confused statements made on_ their behalf by their Chairman, Canon Collins, as for example in correspondence in The Times last November.
But if it is immoral, risky and futile, those arc reasons for each and cvery government to give them up unilaterally, and CND logically ought to be telling them sO. and Pacifism a particular war as did Ramsay MacDonald in 1914; to those who believe that “ pledges for peace ” will prevent war, but who in the event of war hold themselves bound to support it; and those who believe in non-violence and non-resistance whatever the consequences, They all came together between the wars in the “no-more war” movements.
But the British Government and its propagandists, in the build-up for World War II, were not so foolish as to use that discredited slogan again.
Instead the second war was proclaimed to be for “the defence of democracy and human liberty ” against Hitlerism.
So, on the plea that this was “ different ”, most of the no-more war army was converted, to “just one more”, including some, like Lord Russell and Mr Morrison who had opposed World War I The fate of those who, using the term more strictly, can properly be called pacifists is different but no less tragic.
They preach peace’ where there is no peace and advocate nonviolence fn a capitalist world which has to rest on violence, Their best-known spokesman . was Gandhi, who many of them still believe to have triumphed in India.
I have no place in the new order where they want an army, a navy and an air force and what not.
Capitalism cannot disarm The dilemma that faces the Gandhian pacifists and which makes nonsense of all campaigns for “ total disarmament ” is that the propertied class need armaments to protect their property and the functioning of their trading and profit seeking system.
If they gave up reliance on force their privileged position would vanish overnight, as Gandhi tacitly admitted when he justified the use of police against strike pickets.
They likewise need armaments to protect the interests of each national capitalist group in the ceaseless struggle over markets, mineral resources, trade routes, strategic frontiers and so on.
The ones that disarmed on their own would be the immediate prey of the others.
And if, as an impossible hypothesis, we are asked to conceive of them all disarming, the wealth of the propertied class (starting with the gold and currency hoards in the Fort Knoxes and bank vaults) would slip from their grasp.
They are all of them, the pacifists, unilateralists, multilateralists, supporters of United Nations and international agreements, dealing wtth the effects and not the cause.
There can be no secure peace while capitalism lasts, and the beginning of wisdom for the working class of all . countries lies in recognising unitedly that they have no interest in their governments’ wars no matter what the professed aim and no matter what the weapons used.
The only way out is for capitalism to be replaced by a Socialist social system in which all people will coOperate to supply the needs of all, without buying and selling, profits and wages, seeking markets or defending frontiers. workers who are immersed in capitalist habits of thought but one to which all must come.
Those who are oppressed by the thought of inevitable war should see our need to achieve Socialism, without which no tolerable future for the human race is conceivable.
London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 A difficult concept to 37 ‘ wae A Parable by LEO TOLSTOY I see mankind as a herd of cattle inside a fenced enclosure.
Consequently, the cattle are trampling underfoot what little grass there is and goring each other to death in their struggle for existence.
I saw the owner of the herd come to them and when he saw their pitiable condition, he was filled with compassion for them, and thought of all he could do to improve their condition.
So he called his friends together and asked them to assist him in cutting grass from outside the fence and throwing it over the fence to the cattle.
Then because the calves were dying off and not growing up into serviceable cattle, he arranged that they should each have a pint of milk every morning for breakfast.
Because they were dying off in the cold nights, he put up beautiful, well-drained and wellventilated cow-sheds for the cattle.
Because they were goring each other in the struggle for existence, he put corks on the horns of the cattle, so that the wounds they gave each other might not be so serious.
Then he reserved a part of the enclosure for the old bulls and the old cows over seventy years of age.
Another 139,830, most of whom must be presumed to have perished, were listed as missing, and 36,425 were injured.
These figures are from a recently surveyed report by the Japanese Welfare Ministry.
A recently published book, No High Ground, by Knebel and Bailey,* purPorts to tell the secret history of the planning and dropping of this bomb.
To those already painfully aware of the inhuman machinations of capitalist politics, in or out of war, none of the revelations will come as a big surprise.
All too easily we remember the Passchendaeles, the Stalingrads and the Koreas—battlefields to which our rulers were prepared to despatch thousands to their deaths in the defence of their interests.
Nonetheless the atomic act of annihilation deserves singling out both for its unique horror and for some of its lessons, There are those naive enough to imagine that the sole blame and responsibility for the first atomic bomb rested with Truman.
At this time the project was so secret that not even Truman, Vice-President though he was, had any knowledge of the atomic bomb.
What real choice Truman had is revealed by the words of the oragniser of the production of the bomb, General Groves.
Speaking of lost lives, the Japanese rulers (many of whom are still hale and hearty to-day) had no less compunction in sending thousands of their subjects to their doom.
This, the last insult, is part of a proclamation issued by the Japanese cabinet AFTER the dropping of the bomb.
Before this, too, the Japanese cabinet had rejected’ a demand for surrender knowing that the Americans had made preparations to unleash an unparalleled assault on their mainland and that this would inevitably result in very high casualty rates.
In anticipation of this possibility they had a full-scale plan to hand to invade the Japanese mainland in which 100,000 casualties seemed likely to be, to one observer, a conservative estimate.
Hospitals in the Philippines, the Marianas and Okinawa were to have. 54,000 beds ready.
The scientific advisers came to the same conclusions as political advisors.
In April 1945, Secretary of State Stimson urged Truman to appoint a committee to advise him on atomic policy.
This in turn appointed as scientific advisory panel with the leading atomic scientists on it.
This committee was asked to prepare a report on the possibility of an atomic bomb explosion.
They advised that the bomb be dropped on Japan as soon as possible, WITHOUT specific warning, and that it be delivered on a target susceptible to maximum blast damage.
Two billion dollars had been spent in. secret, It was imperative to see if the thing worked Whether an atomic bomb explosion would bring Japan to its knees was, to the American leaders, a moot point and as their military forces were up to their necks in mud and blood on the Pacific Islands at the time they were not prepared to bank on it.
This would put new heart into the Japanese leaders and place them in a better bargaining position.
Far better to drop the bomb for if it were a failure no one would be the wiser and pressure could be continued as before on orthodox military lines.
This was the policy laid down by the Allied leaders and no qualms of conscience on the part of any scientists could make them change td it, If you sup with the Devil.
It .was. the Russian Bear, who was beginning to demand too much and was generally making a nuisance of himself.
On the eve of the Hiroshima explosion Truman was on his way back from Potsdam aboard ship.
On being asked if he had made a deal with Stalin he replied that “ if the Russians had been somewhat difficult at Potsdam it did not matter because the United States had now developed an entirely new weapon of such force and nature that we did not need the Russians—or any other nation” Such is the raw material of capitalist politics—carnage, SOCIALIST STANDARD, MARCH 1961... 39 horror, destruction, annihilation.
In their description of the aftermath of the Hiroshima explosion the authors give us the following cameo.
The nose and other facial features suddenly dropped off with the mask, leaving only a pink, peach-like face front with holes where the eyes, nose and mouth used to be.
Yes, it is the horror story of a society based upon class ownership of the resources of production, whose aim is to supply a ruling class with profits, privilege and power for the preservation of which they are prepared to destroy, mutilate, lay waste and, if necessary, annihilate.
M, JUDD. misery, pain, The Keir Hardie Myth The myth about Keir Hardie’s attitude to war is very persistent.
At an anti-Polaris rally in Glasgow last December, the Co-operative Movement representative had only to refer to him, “.. . if we could get Keir Hardie here . . .”, to have his words drowned by applause.
Whatever the sentiments of the audience may have been, it was certainly in error about Hardie’s atiitude to war.
In 1914, with the Great War drawing near, the Second International called for “ Peace demonstrations ” throughout Europe.
Sentimentality and emotionalism were offered in place of the sound education and organisation needed by the workers.
Two days later the War began. and the Second International collapsed, its unsound base giving way beneath the strain.
In the Labour Leader Hardie proclaimed, “The I.L.P. will at least stand firm.
For the I.L.P. turned out to be standing firm on Socialist Standard 1961 one issue and that was on the question of party unity.
To preserve this unity, to retain the greatest number of members within the fold, the most opportunist and unprincipled formulas were applied to justify the conduct of individual party members, The flag hoisted by Hardie and his fellow “Labour Leaders” was a clear and unmistakeable Union Jack.
In articles directed at his electorate in Merthyr, Keir Hardie made his position clear.
London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 , The man who recoiled from the talk of waging the Class War was quite prepared to have workers serve “ their Motherland” in Imperialist War; he wrote that “We must see the war through, but we must also make ourselves so familiar with the facts as to be able to intervene at the earliest possible moment in the interests of peace ” Let no one be deceived by the mention of the “earliest possible moment” because for Hardie this was a very long way off and he was in fact prepared to support a long, drawn-out conflict in Europe.
Time after time Hardie fed workers 40 the lie that they were part of a “ nation” and as such were bound up in the quarrels of their masters.
Not “ International Working Class Solidarity”, but “ Class Collaboration ” was his rallying cry, for Hardie was a patriot and proud of it.
Press, any proofs that our interests as a nation were in any way imperilled or threatened by a war in which Austria and Germany and Russia and France were involved ” , But although he was a_ patriot, Hardie would not appear on the official Government recruiting platforms.
In the first place he could not Stomach the crude jingoism and Imperialism that emerged from these platforms and secondly he wished to remain free to present the I.L.P. version of the events that had led to Britain’s involvement in the war.
This in Hardie’s view was the “ right method ” and belief in this method led Hardie to boast that he had been instrumental in securing more recruits for the Armed Forces than his Liberal opponents.
SOCIALIST STANDARD, MAIRCH 196) ’ list, 1 would resent more than anything the spectacle of young, strong, flippant upstarts, whether M.P.s or candidates, who had the audacity to ask’ me to do for my country what they had not the heart to do themselves.
Of all causes. this surely is the one in which actions speak louder than words.
Hardie was so determined to prove his point that he tried on a number of occasions to obtain the relevant recruiting figures.
Two weeks later Hardie was able to proclaim that he had obtained the recruiting figures for -his constituency and was able to make good his boast.
Ample evidence exists to prove that in supporting the War Hardie in no way acted as a renegade.
His actions were in fact in concord with the actions of his colleagues in the party leadership and these actions were never repudiated, but were endorsed and underwritten by the party as a whole.
MELVIN HARRIS MURDERS FLEET STREET CRIME PORTUGAL Death Penalty DvrinG the eight weeks up to the end of January of this year, more than fifty murders were known to have been committed in England and Wales.
This is pretty well double the rate at which they Were Occurring before the Homicide Act of 1957 relaxed the death penalty, although for various reasons it is impossible to draw strict comparisons.
Because some of the recent murders were connected with sexual assaults upon very young girls, and others with robberies sometimes involving several thousands of pounds, the ghoulish press gave them the full treatment.
There was a demand, inside and outside Parliament, for a stricter death penalty.
This is a wholly emotional attitude, which disregards the fact that revenge is useless to the murdered victim.
The other argument for the death penalty—ihat it is a unique deterrent to would-be murderers—is quite unsupported by evidence.
The debate on the best method of punishing murderers takes no account of the basic cause of their actions.
To find that, we must examine our social organisation—the brutalising influence of poor living conditions, of periodic wars, the impossible personal relationships which poverty forces upon us.
The hanging fiends are just as far off the mark as the worried reformers.
Neither group wants to alter society's basis; but that is the only effective method of tackling the murder problem.
Lies in Fleet Street THE Mirror-Odhams deal was really big stuff—and it was accompanied by what can only be called some big stuff lies.
On 26th January, a press conference was given details of the prosposed merger between Odhams Press and Thomson Newspapers.
Sir Christopher Chancellor, Odhams’ chairman, stated definitely that no bid had been made by the Daily Mirror.
At the same time, a Mirror director issued a comprehensive denial that any bid had come from them.
We now know that the Mirror had, in fact, made known their intention to bid THE NEWS IN REVIEW lor Odhams some days before the jntended Odhams-Thomson merger was announced.
This merger was actually designed as a defensive move against the might of the Mirror’s financial resources.
But most of the day-to-day events of capitalist society on which the newspapers report and comment are also influenced by some sort of commercial interest.
Crime and Punishment ON his release from Dartmoor Prison after serving a sentence of seven years’ preventive detention, Christopher Patrick Sullivan stole two mailbags at King’s Cross Station.
As a punishment for this theft, Sullivan has gone back to Dartmoor, this time for ten years, It was Sullivan’s eighth conviction.
To the bigoted ~upholder of the sanctity of private property over broad human interests, justice will have been done.
In practice, the view that there is equality before the law is fallacious.
The wim of the Jaw and of the punishments (nat enforce it is mainly the protection of property, and most offences against the law concern property.
As the ownership of most property and especially the Ineans of life and the privileges that arise [rom this ownership are restricted to a relatively small social class, then the whole structure of law and punishments Must be biased in favour of the interests Of the privileged class that owns.
The majority of those who are underprivileged, in the sense that. they own Very little, accept this situation.
The retribution of the law attempts to coerce into faw-abiding conformity a minority of criminals.
Crime must be understood in relation to the social context in which it happens.
It is not that the malignancy of human nature creates anti-social human beings.
The case of Sullivan is a tragedy and in its cruel sadness we all have a share.
The Portuguese monarchy was overthrown in 1911, and after 15 years of political instability Dr.
Amongst those who supported him were Captain Galvao and General Delgado.
The regime in Portugal— Britain’s “oldest ally ""—is one of dictatorship, where only one political party is permitted and opposition is suppressed.
Salazar, is the top job, with that of President merely the state figure-head.
General Delgado stood for the Presidency in 1958, but was defeated, and in 1959 sought political asylum in Brazil.
Salazar redrafted the Constitution so that in future the President would be chosen not by the voters, but by the hand-picked Parliament.
After the war, Captain Galvao was commissioned to report on the Portuguese colonies of Angola, Guinea and Mozambique and his report was presented to the National Assembly in 1947.
The report was suppressed and, shortly afterwards, Galvao was * imprisoned.
London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 SOCIALIST STANDARD, MARCH 1961 4) the facade of-medical care, behind which even minimum sanitary conditions did not exist; the very high infant mortality and the mortality rates amongst workers, 40% not being rare.
He says that he Wants to lessen the economic gap between Portugal's tiny minority of wealthy families and her desperately poor working population, and to democratise the colonies; to have universal suffrage both in Portugal and the colonies and vastly to improve education.
Portugal is the least industrialised country in Europe, and Delgado may well have been reflecting that it is essential to have an educated working class in order to develop industrially.
The Socialist sympathises with aspirations to political democracy, but there is no guarantee that Delgado’s professed aims would be achieved if he succeeded to power in Portugal, nor is there any guarantee that in a private property society, democracy, once obtained, will remain in being.
He may, like many political candidates, be only dangling a bunch of carrots in front of the donkey's nose, in order to obtain personal support.
You may have thought there was only one Kent, the county next to Sussex.
The Express revealed that they had had no regular income from the Civil List since 1942, when the former Duke of Kent was killed.
It is true that King George VI and Queen Mary made payments to the ~ Duchess out of their “ private ” forttines.
It is true that both the Duke of Kent and Princess Alexandra appear from the papers to be able to afford fairly expensive visits to nightclubs and long winter-sports holidays.
Besides the family’s country house in Buckinghamshire, they have a’ rent-free set of rooms at Kensington Palace.
And the Duchess finds it difficult to keep a full staff of servants’ at both places.
This is a question for debate among those who support the capitalist system.
Royal figureheads do a public relations _ Job for the ruling class, and the ruling class pays them accordingly.
For when there is no ruling class, there will be no need to have a public relations staff for them.
Too few hands THAT wasn't the end of the worries of the Sunday Express.
On the same day, same page, there was an article pointing out the dangers of either’ King (of the Daily Mirror group) or Thomson (who rules a large newspaper and television network) getting control of Odhams.
If Thomson were to win, for example, it pointed out that he would control 17 daily papers, three Sundays, 25 weeklies, 46 periodicals, 62 trade and technical journals, plus Scottish television.
If King wins this battle he will control an even larger empire, so the danger is proportionately greater.
Clearly the Beaverbrook papers are worried that such giants might threaten the profits even of the Express group.
The situation the Express claims to fear, where a newspaper owner “ might be tempted to stem the free flow of news or threaten full freedom of expression ”, has, of course, existed for years, Only very wealthy men, multi-millionaires, can now run national newspapers.
And naturally multi-millionaires are not going to allow “full freedom of expression” to Socialists, who want a new society which would abolish their power.
Tt ill becomes the Express group to grumble at this situation only when they think they might not benefit from it to the extent they previously did.
Notice the terms used in these quotes, There is nothing about health or illness. in the general sense.
Now this is quite appropriate, because the very thing Which is suggested~by the name Ford is size.
The group as a whole makes about one-fifth of the world’s. motor cars and has factories in many countries.
Biggest of the babies is Ford in England, which started in 1908 with a sales office in the West End and now employs over £100 million worth of fixed capital and other assets and more than 40,000 workers in plant capable of producing almost half a million vehicles a year.
In 1959, the company’s sales ran to £233,180,000, It Owns an enormous factory at Dagenham, as well as the Kelsey Hayes Wheel Plant and Briggs Motor Bodies, both of which Were once independent firms supplying Ford with components.
It has its own oundry—said to be the most modern in Europe—turning out cylinder blocks and heads and other castings.
Fords are currently hatching an expansion programme, involving a £70 million factory at Halewood, on Merseyside.
The company’s report for 1959 was full of high spirits and optimism, with regret expressed only to the customers who, clamouring for new cars, had to wait their turn in the queue.
Up to the end of last year, nobody at Fords had been put on short time and nobody had been sacked, although by then the clouds had started to gather over Dagenham.
The report for the first half of 1960 carried warning words about strong competition in America and the expectation of lower profits in the future.
In January of this year, Fords announced that more than 16,000 of their workers would shortly start working a three day week.
The lovely new machinery, some of it installed in the post-war expansion scheme, was soon working at only half capacity.
Fords are not in trouble on their own, B.M.C. have about forty thousand on short time, Vauxhall nine thousand, StandardTriumph about seven thousand.
The motor car recession has struck all sorts of firms, large and small, (although after the mergers of recent years there are very few small firms left), as well as the makers of components and accessories, This means hard times for the motor car workers.
This argument would not survive a prolonged slump in the car world; ia any case, it is poor consolation to the short-timers that, however bad their conditions may be, there are others who are in worse straits.
At the time of the great Ford takeover, we heard a lot of false theories about the motives for industrial investment.
Man, people thought that the American company was taking over with the intention of deliberately allowing Ford in England to decline.
These opinions are the sounder because they take account of the fact that the realisation of a profit is the motive of capitalist production, and at the same time is the end to which commodity distribution is organised.
Perhaps Ford want their Cologne factory to work the European Common Market and Dagenham the European Free Trade Area.
Here, too, is the reason for the plans for expansion—and for the slumps which occur when, for example, rising stocks become a threat to profitable sales.
This is something over which the administrators of capitalism have no control, Many large companies, includLONDON OUTDOOR MEETINGS Sundays Hyde Park 3m.
East Street, Walworth March 5th March 12th & 26th March 19th Thursdays Tower Hill, 12,80--2m.
They have spent a lot of money on market research, on advertising and on ‘planning their production, But in the end, the essential anarchy of capitalist society beats them to it.
When a market opens up, each interested firm must do its best to capture it, which means gearing its production to a high rate and often investing millions of pounds in development schemes.
Ford, as we have seen, is sinking £70 million in new plant on Merseyside.
On the other hand,’ it could sometime make Ford more vulnerable to the ravages of a recession.
Then, even though they foresaw that storms were ahead, they were quite powerless to avoid them.
Mr Reginald Maudling, the President of the Board of Trade, put it lek neatly in the House of Commons debate on the car depression.
The record of \the car industry offers plenty of proof of the validity of Mr Maudling’s words.
Proof, also, of the falsity of the assurances of the smug economists who were so fond of telling us that the days of boom and slump were over.
For in 1956, the industry was in slump, which it had climbed out of by 1959.
This is typical of capitalist industry, with the built-in compulsion to join in the trade war which dominates its every move.
Perhaps Mr Lindsay would not accept that capitalism must, therefore, make enemies of us all.
But that, in fact, is what it does, For it is the capitalist basis of society which is the sand in our gearbox.
Fords are an example of a complex, sophisticated industrial unit, parts of which are evidence of humanity’s ability. to create abundance for itself.
But capitalism sends it on its way shuddering and wobbling, just like a stalling car.
The slump in Canada, the growing depréssion in U.S.A. and the troubles of the motor industry in ‘Britain and most other countries will-give plenty of scope for this kind of evasion by delay.
The form it will take will be the demand for more information, the setting up of committees of inquiry, urging employers to be more enterprising and workers to work harder and strike less.
Nearly everyone concerned behaves and talks as if the overproduction of cars ard the unemployment of car workers is something strange and surprising, something never before seen by mortal eye, yet in its essentials it is exactly what has happened before in that and every other industry at intervals for a century and a half.
From America a correspondent of the Financial Times reports towns such as Welch, West Virginia “ where 28 per cent of the labour force lacks work ” and in which unemployment has been continuous for several years, In the area named it is due to the decline of the coal industry but not all of the “distressed areas” owe their troubles to the growth of rival fuels.
Mr Kennedy has set himself the formidable task of promoting an expansion much more impressive than that which followed either the 1953-54 or the 1957-58 recessions.
It will otherwise be impos‘sible to absorb today’s unemployed plus new additions to the Jabour force and workers displaced by the onward march of automation, But even if more of their unemployed find work elsewhere and the Douglas Bill produces some new industry, the depressed areas will inevitably lag far ‘behind the rest of the economy.
The long-term answer may lie in the massive development of a whole region pioneered by the Tennessee Valley Authority, but Mr, Kennedy, with enough economic THE U.S.A. problems on his plate already, will doubtless wait before plunging into new projects on this scale, Labour Saving Machines BECAUSE some machinery does reduce the total amount of labour required to produce an article, or does get rid of particularly hard or unpleasant work, the fiction is often asserted and believed that these are the purposes for which new machines and new processes are introduced.
In fact the manufacturer is interested in making more profit by reducing costs, and to achieve it he will pay little regard to the convenience of the worker and will be prepared to waste labour if that suits his end.
How little the convenience of the worker counts is shown by the. extent to which the use of more expensive machinery and plant in recent years has led to an increase of night and shift work regardless of its effects on health, for the employers’ interest is to avoid having costly machinery standing idle for two-thirds of the 24 hours.
Percentages for those on permanent night-shift, whose rhythm of life is less disturbed, are generally slightly lower. except for stomach trouble which affects half.
As regards labour. saving, industry in all countries gives innumerable examples of work being carried on by methods which take up much labour in spite of the existence of (Machines and processes by the use of which labour could be saved, Marx noted this a century ago and it is still to be observed.
He remarked on. the seemingly inexplicable happening that labour-saving machines would be produced in one country and not used there but sold in other countries.
The explanation was and is that SOCIALIST STANDARD, MARCH 196] the employer is not interested in the amount of labour he uses but in the cost of the labour-power he pays for, remembering of course that in buying the workers’ mental and physical energies at their value he is obtaining some unpaid labour.
As a writer in City Press puts it when explaining how “ high wages” have caused a boom in the industry producing vehicles and equipment for the mechanical handling of materials, “ this is the age of mechanisation in industry, of recognition that in his new found prosperity, the working man is a valuable property to be used with the utmost economy”, Of course if wages began to fall under ' pressure of unemployment the worker would no longer be “ valuable property ” to the employer and the latters’ interest in labour-saving would diminish.
Among other actual happenings under capitalism is that when rival manufacturers are racing to be first to flood a particular market, speed becomes more important than cost and it may pay one of them to use a faster but more costly method of production if it enables him to have his commodity first in the field.
I Chapter XV, (see particularly Section 2) and remarked incidentally on the very different scope for the use of machinery there would be under Socialism than under Capitalism.
American Fears INTERNATIONAL politics can never for long present a simple choice of issues for governments. — To. start with, each overnment is likely to have behind it ‘Joint Shop Stewards rival interests each wanting its own line to be followed.
Then as soon:as one problem is settled others emerge which may require that the ancient friends shall become enemies and enemies become friends.
Added to which, alliances are formed because of the greater strength that comes from unity—but’ no country wants any one of its allies to become too strong.
After the war it was the American government that took the lead in trying to get Europe to unite so as to form an economic and military group strong enough to stand up to Russia, Europeans were invited to consider the absurdity of ‘European frontiers and customs barriers and to note what strength would come from a single European market in which large blocks of capital would have room to operate efficiently.
But now that the European Economic Community is a fact for the six countries France, Germany, Italy, Holland, Belgium and Luxembourg, some American interests are becoming as worried about European trade competition as arc some British industries which see their continental sales in danger.
The City Editor does not doubt that Kennedy shares the report's apprehension and omitted it only. because it might give offence.
Of course the problems presented by this single European market can be lessened for U.S.A. and British capitalists by operating inside the customs wall, but this means a double investment of capital.
The interview did not mention that Russia is itself an exporter of cars’ and commercial vehicles but did indicate the way in which Mr Etheridge thinks Russia and other countries could Be induced to import British cars,e. that the British government “ must advance big credits to them so that they can buy our goods ”, Perhaps if the Russian government were to “advance big credits” to unemployed British motor workers they would buy some Russian cars tov.
Fred Evans died in harness, He had just delivered the Western Sucialist to a news stand in Los Angeles when he collapsed and died of a heart attack.
He was a tower of strength to the W.S.P. on the West Coast; an indefatigable speaker and propagandist.
He visited England a few years ago and spoke on our platform in ‘Hyde Park.
He also gave considerable assistance and hospitality to two of our comrades who visited Los Angeles during speaking tours recently.
Over the years he gave & great deal of financial help to the S.P. of C He visited England thirty years ago and met some of our older members, He had been ill for many years and lost both his wife and daughter in the last few years.
A full account of these two old comrades will appear in the Western Socialist, but we wish to add our tribute in this brief note.
But in the matter of their conduct of the fight, we have seldom found a British trade union in the right— and the present strike affords no welcome exception.
These men demanded a reduction of 43 hours per week, und the limitations of their union are shown by their compromising, in the midst of a “ winning fight,” for a 2) hours reduction.
Those who know anvthing of the printing trade do not necd to be told that this 5 per cent. reduction does not anything like counterbalance the increased output per head which has taken place in the decade or. so that has slipped away since the last reduction of hours.
The speeding-up and the development of machinery in all departments have been astounding, and new processes are discovered almost daily.
The Physiocrats Notes on Economic History ‘ ALTHOUGH the Mercantile system was abundantly criticised, it was a long time before opposition to it became formed into a new doctrine.
He graduated as a doctor of medicine and became a physician to Madame de Pompadour and Louis XVth.
Quesnay’s teaching is something more than economics; it appears to be part of a general philosophy.
Setting out from the materialist notions of his time, he wanted to have social and moral phenomena regarded as being no less “natural” than physical phenomena; and the laws governing the former as well as the latter were to be seen as mechanical Jaws of nature.
The natural right of human beings in primitive society, he “argued, was the right to property—that is the right to the free disposal of goods which the individual had made or appropriated by means of his own labour.
When at a later stage, men, for the better safeguarding of their natural rights, entered into the social contract, it was essential that they should not lose the right each of them had to earn his own living.
Bound up in this right is another natural right of the individual—the right to foster his own economic interest and to shape his own future as best suited to him.
This following of self-interest, according to Quesnay, leads to the establishment of a “natural order” in the economic association of huma beings.
He endeavoured to study the laws of the economic “ natural order”, which were to be deduced by reason from the general plan of nature.
This doctrine of “ natural order ” is important to him for two reasons.
Secondly, the persons who, in their economic life, act consistently because they are guided by Cc) 4 * motives of self-interest, resemble atoms with fixed properties.
The phenomena that result from their mutual contacts (in the market and elsewhere in society) are mechanically determined like those that result from the mutual contacts of the atoms.
It follows, says Quesnay, that political economy, like the realm of material nature, is governed by natural laws.
To the question of what activity of the individual it is that regulates the economic machinery, and upon what foiindation economic life depends, Quesnay answers—upon natural economic activities, namely agriculture.
Not money, trade, traffic and industry, but the tilling of the soil is the true source of public welfare.
The agriculturist renders them possible by nourishing those who engage in them, and he supplies the raw material without which they cannot be undertaken.
Commerce, industry and transport are to be considered as dependent upon agriculture.
The countryman gets hides, leather, and in the end his boots and other articles from his oxen; wood, and in the end his tools, from the trees on his farm; and so on.
But, they said, to avaid the wasting of materials and energy, it is better that he should not himself undertake the work that transforms these basic materials, but should have it done for him by various specialists (the tanner. bootmaker, joiner, etc.) whom he must support out of his agricultural surpluses.
The only productive, the only creative labour is, therefore, labour on the land.
It is true that work which transforms materials derived from land, or moves them from place to place, can.enhance the value of these things, but the cost of the supplementary labour is really defrayed by the agriculturist, who must feed the workers who perform it.
The increase in value thus produced is, therefore, according to the cost of the labour and is equal to the expense of maintaining the workers who do it.
The tanner, joiner. etc. who shape the raw material derived from land work merely earn their own keep in the form of wages; they make nothing new.
All they do, says Quesnay, ‘js to’ “add” not to “create "" The agriculturist’s work is a work of creation; the'industrial workers perform only a work of addition, of transformation, or of transport.
Thus the class of landworkers (consisting in those days chiefly of tenant farmers as contrasted with the landowning nobility) appear to Quesnay to be the only “ productive” class.
The land Owners, on the other hand, form an “owning” or “distributive” class, while the industrialists and craftsmen comprise a “sterile” class.
These three classes are considered to he the “active” classes of the population, whilst the wage carners make up a fourth, a “passive” class, with no cconomic activity of its own.
Agriculture cannot continue to be prosperous, adds Quesnay, unless grain realises high prices, for only then can agriculture provide a large “net product""* and thus become able to provide large incomes for the landowning class, the manufacturers, and the working class, and in this way diffuse general prosperity.
It was essential, therefore, to do away with all restriction upon the export of grain—Quesnay completely rejected the mercantilist theory of the balance of trade.
The Physiocratic system also gave a picture of the formation of value and of price.
In certain connections Quesnay emphasized the nature of value as utility but with his doctrine of net product, value and price are derived from cost.
In his view the transformative labour of industry added to goods only so much value as this labour itself consumed— only an amount of value therefore equivalent to its own cost.
It follows from this that for Quesnay wages represent nothing other than the cost of replacement of the labour power that has been expended.
A young man buys a second hand car and, eager lo show it off, packs in his family and takes them for a spin.
Carbon monoxide seeps from the broken pipe, through the rotten floor and quietly kills the family’s baby son.
That car Was bought and sold at a time when workers in the British car industry are being sacked or put on short time because the owners of the industry cannot find sufficient markets for their goods.
Perhaps he believed all the talk about the affluent society and decided to get in on a little of it himself.
Perhaps he simply fell for the advertising line that a car denotes status, gets you the job, the girl, the smiles of the passers by.
Perhaps he knew that not to own a car now almost indicates that you are either fabulously wealthy and eccentric (all his mates know that he isn't), or that. you are practically down and out.
Yes, you've missed the point. profit making basis of capitalist society means that we must deliberately turn out inferior goods—-like cars—because the vast majority of people can only afford something very much less than the best.
The working class have to live with the second or third hand because their purchasing power is not sufficient for them to acquire the first class stuff, Sadly, rather than face this fact, many _workers take refuge in a life of putting on the style.
And if the style demands a car, it sometimes does not matter that it isan old and dangerous one, This is a typical result of our capitalist world.
They need funds in order to get the Socialist message over as powerfully as possible.
Victoria, B.C. ee CORRECTIONS We must apologise for two printing errors which resulted in some sentences in the February Sociatist STANDARD reading rather strangely.
In the article Sin on the Underground this appeared ; A more subtle me‘hod of suppression. this, than of yore, when Catholics would reduce to human charcoal any burglar or peasant who had difficulty in grasping a Papal chemical formula about bread and wine turning into fiesh and blood.
D McCarthy lems like transport congestion in a humane fashion; a world which is not cluttered up with articles which do nothing to enhance our happiness and welfare.
Road, and Head Office film lectures, ‘Ihe last of the films is being held on Sunday, | March 12th.
However, at the Mahatma Gandhi Hall, Fitzroy Square, W.1, a further meeting is being held on Sunday, Marci 19th, at 7.30m., on Capitalism, UNO or Socialism, —Speakers—Comrades P Bryant and E Grant.
On Wednesday, April 19th. al 7m., a Demonstration for Socialis meeting is being held at St.
Both these meetings will be successful if all comrades support them in every possible way, bringing as many friends along as possible, being available to sell literature, and most of all arriving in good time, The St.
Pancra; Town Hall is large, comfortable and centrally situated—three additional factor. which should encourage a good attendance.
QUTDOOR PROPAGANDA will be zeiting off to a good start in April and the more Comrades there are who supoort. the meetings and sell literature, the sooner workers will hear about the case for Socialism.
It is hoped to feature some articles on the American Civil War in the April issuc.
Make sure of the April issue (and also for every following month) of the SociaList STANDARD, obtainable from 52, Clapham High Street.
COVENTRY Ist and 3rd Mondays (6th & 20th March) 7.30 pm, The Coffee Room, Craven Arms, High Street.
SOUTH EAST ESSEX (formerly Basildon and Southend) 2nd and 4th oer No} & 24th April) in month 8 pm, 17 Cotswold Road.
SOUTHEND (see under South East Essex SWANSEA Isc and 3rd Monday (3rd & 17th April} in month 8 pm, The Crypt, St.
WEST HAM 2nd and 4th Thursdays (I3eh & 27th April) in month & pm, Salisbury Road pee Manor Park, E12.
WOOLWICH 2nd and 4th Fridays (i4th and 28th April) in month 7.30 pm, Town Social Club, Mason’s Hill, SEI8.
ORDERS for literature should be sent to the Literature Department, spcp, at the above address, CORRESPONDENCE for the Executive Committee should be sent to the General Secretary, spos, 52, Clapham High Street.
The Strategy of attrition of that war, and the way in which it organised the resources and population of‘ the Union into an all-out effort. was a foretaste of the two great wars of thc twentieth century.
It is hardly too much to say that modern warfare is one hundred years old this month.
The bitter fact is that the world is no safer for peace today than it was in 1861.
War. actual or potential, is as much « part of our lives as any other aspect of modern society.
Although we are at present living in a period of peace, we know that all over the world national powers, great and small, have their bases and their forces in readiness for a future conflict.
The Soviet Union has developed accurate intercontinental missiles of fearful destructive power.
By any standards of sanity, it is incredible that a society which possesses such enormous productive potential should devote so much of sts effort fo making weapons of destructon.
That would be to approach the problem London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 from the wrong end.
Weapons are not produced to satisfy a government’s destructive impulses.
They are produced to prosecute the armed conflicts which in turn are caused by the economic rivalries of capitalism.
What it amounts to is that weapons of war are an inevitable product of capitalist society.
Those who support capitah_ ism, yet wish that its governments would voluntarily deprive themselves of the most powerful weapons available, are baying for something even more remote than the moon.
Into this category fall the unilateralists, the pacifists and some members of the Labour and similar parties.
Nazi Germany, nuclear weapons-these are only some of the issues upon which we have been urged to concentrate our efforts at the expense of our Socialist integrity.
We have rejected these appeals hecause we know that such problems find their roots in capitalism propotty basis To end them. x must establish 4 Secsalist society in which the world’s wealth 1s owned hy the world.
By the time it ended, four years later, it is estimated that out of a population of 31,000,000, between 750,000 and 1,000,000 men lost their lives, and many more wounded.
In many ways, it was the fore-rgnner of the total warfare we know today.
THE revival of interest in the American Civil War is a4 phenomenon of the Jast decade.
Chicago boasts of a successful hook store where only Civil War items can be bought.
The Socialist searching through the mountain of Civil War books, is hard put to apply his yardstick of histurical materialism.
What seems to vecupy the attention of the various authors, for the must part, is the spectacular bravery and dauntless courage displayed by Union warriors and Rebels alike.
The social forces underlying the conflict, with the exception of the Slavery issue, are buried in a mass of drum and thunder history.
It is easy for the casual reader to be left with the thought that the North was engaged in a crusade to wipe out slavery while the South was imbued with the “ noble” ideal of saving it through secession.
While this might have been typical of the average ideology of the War, it was certainly not a basic force in its origin.
Then tov, the idea of opposition to slavery on moral grounds becomes ridiculous when one regards the low moral conscience of Northern industrialism.
There was no revulsion at the horrible mills and mines where men, women and children toiled long hours for a pittance; at the miserable slums, unfit for human habitation in all the ilies and towns, at the periudic crises which threw the workers on the streets to starve; at the universal blacklist for those who spoke of unionization.
Certainly” it was not opposition to slavery on moral grounds that prompted Massachusetts, in the early 18th century, to abolish it.
Nor were Lincoln and his party, a century and a half later, concerned with the morals of slavery.
In fact, the Emancipation Proclamation was issued as 4 war measure against the Rebels and did not apply to those slave States loyal to the Union.
Obviously, the conditions for this type of labour did not exist in the North, whereas in the South, the cultivation and ginnine of cotton for nine months of the year filled the bill, There were, however, serious contradictions which prevented the peaceful co-existence of the Southern and Northern economic systems. and which caused the Southern system to disintegrate prior to 1860.
The American South, despite its slave labour, was basically a commodity society in which goods and services were produced for sile on the market with a view to profit.
A more filling designation for the system is Plantation Capitalism. — Certainly — the South fought to maintain the chattel status of its Negroes, but mainly because | { this’ type of labour was vital to its | economy and because its very system was falling apart largely as a result of Congressional laws which favoured Northern interests and which helped make chattel slave labour too costly.
The control of Congress by the North resulted in high tariffs on imported manufactured goods which interfered with the important trade of Southern raw cotton for English textiles.
The development of Northern seaports and railways also brought about a loss of trade to the South from the Western agricultural regions—long ship hauls down the Mississippi to the Port of New Orleans became unnecessary.
And tlie South, which desperately needed new land to replace that used up by their wasteful one-crop system, was losing out in its bid to bring in frontier areas as slave states.
As its losing economic war withthe North and ifs internal contradictions progressed, the beneficiaries of the Southern plantation system became fewer, their holdings ever larger.
In 1860. tion Of 9 million Southern whites are reckoned to have made ery profit from chattel slavery, of which a mere 10,000 were the actual ruling class, In , this crumbling fabric of the South, the problem confronting the 10,000 was how to maintain dom‘nance under universal white suffrage.
Support came from the , professional class and the clergy with their One or two personal slaves.
As an added bonus, there was the lift to their spirits to be had by identifying themselves with the Southern aristocrats.
The elections of 1860 tore any government from the hands of the Southern rulers.
The plantation capitalists knew that. their social system could never prosper With a government they could not control.
They had no more need for the North, since their system was barred by soil and climate from expanding in that direction.
There was Mexico to be conquered, Central America, Cuba, and even the vast continent of South America —all offering vast areas of land for the smooth operation of their economy.
Their backs were to the wall, they had nothing to lose, so they took the plunge and the hot war began.
The Armed Conflict The South, as an‘oligarchy, was better prepared in 1861 to begin a war than the more industrialized, but highly disorganized North.
Productive work falling on the Negroes, the Rebels could put their entire fighting strength into the field without disturbance, and they inflicted defeat after defeat upon the army of farmers, mechanics and sailors of the North.
The united South was faced by a North, divided, and to a considerable extent dominated, by the border states which were loyal but which were certainly not in favour of Abolition.
The North found it difficult to raise the 300,000 men requested by Lincoln.
Morgan who made a fortune by selling thousands of previously condemned rifles to the War Dept. with a profit of $18.00 on each, the relatively highly developed North prevailed, and under such ruthless and capable generals as Sherman and Grant. swept away the last vestiges of chattel Slave labour in America.
The socialists of the period, for the most part, actively interested themselves in the cause of the North.
Karl Marx worked within the | International Workingmen’s Association to rally the workers to the support of Lincoln.
Whatever the validity of the motives which influenced the socialists of the period, they definitely gave their support to what they regarded as a progressive type of capitalism.
Looking back, we can question some of their views and the emphasis they gave to the chattel slavery issue and show that their all-out support of Northern capitalism was unwarranted.
With peace, the youngsters who had fought in one of the bloodiest wars in history (more than half of the Union Army were under 19 years of age and more than 300,000 were between 15 and 16) went out in the world to resume or begin the task of earning a living.
Many of them, having become quick with the gun, were shortly to dot the Boot Hills of the new towns and mining camps and to help write the blood history of the West.
Those who returned to the industries London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 found a new foe, warlike and pitiless, but in industrial rather than military warfare.
Alan Pinkerton, a spy of Lincoln’s, now became the Jeading industrial spy and strike breaker in the land.
By worming his way into the inner circle of the society, he was instrumental in bringing about the exposure of the Molly Maguires.
Ten of their members were hanged and many more sent to prison, bringing to an inglorious end the careers of some of the former heroes of the Union Army.
Many more of the veterans were to witness the same generals who had led them to “ victory ” now march upon them with their former brothers-in-arms, to shoot, kill and jail them.
It was-a rude awakening and was to teach them that the war was not fought for them, as they had thought, but to build an economic system that would enrich a handful.
SOCIALIST STANDARD, APRIL 1961 The Passing Show As such THE two American RB-47 airmen who were released by Russia recently after being shot down over the Barents Sea gave their own stories to reporters at an American air force base.
One of the reporters recalled that previous American reports of the incident had claimed that the aircraft was unarmed.
The aircraft as such, was not armed with an offensive weapon of any sort.
We carried two 20-millimetre automatic @ Subscription form To SPGB Literature Dept 52 Clapham High Street, London, SW4 6 issues 4/post free [2 issues 7/6 post free Send me Socialist Standard for the next _—_ issues | enclose Name Address ' cannon which were mounted aft, pointing to the rear.
This was a defensive weapon purely to protect us from attack from the rear, How automatic cannon, whether pointing up, down, forwards or sideways, can be anything else than offensive weapons was not made clear.
An aircraft carrying automatic cannon is armed as an aircraft, not as a submarine.
But merely to point out the absurdities of the airmen’s statement would be to over-simplify the matter.
For these airmen are only repeating what their masters, the American ruling class— along with every other ruling class—have always said.
No country, to judge from its own propaganda machine, ever attacks another.
Jomo Kenyatta Sir Patrick RENISON, the Governor of Kenya, recently refused to release Jomo Kenyatta and gave two reasons for his decision.
The political campaign for Kenyatta’s release, “which has roused many emotions and which has not allowed divisions and personal fears a natural atmosphere in which to diminish.” -Kenyatta’s refusal to “ make any statement or reveal his thinking about the great issues which Kenya is facing,” in spite of the fact that six Ministers, including three Africans, had visited him in August.
Leaving out the long words, the first one means simply that the Governor of Kenya isn’t going to release Kenyatta because the Kenya Africans have made it plain that they want him to be released.
The Governor can hardly expect anyone to believe that he would have released Kenyatta if there hadn’t been a campaign demanding it.
Dictators have often put people in jail, or kept them in exile, be| cause they have “made statements” or | “revealed their thinking” about public | issues; this must be the first time a political leader has been kept in exile because he refused to take up a political stand.
When thieves fall out The Socialist position is straightforward, We are opposed to any attack on democratic freedoms, whether it is jailing for political reasons, restrictions on the right to vote, or any other weapon in the colonialists’ armoury.
But we are not blind to the real nature of the struggle in Kenya, it is the old struggle between land and capital.
On the one side are in Kenya, it is the cld struggle between capitalists, whether they are those who hope to establish full-scale industrial | capitalism in Kenya, or those who have already established it in Great Britain.
We welcome any extension of democracy in Kenya which this struggle between two rival propertied classes has produced or will produce.
That has been seen in Germany, in Italy, in Spain, in Czechoslovakia and the rest.
Out of my way AN irate letter-writer in the Sunday Express-recently told how he had parked his car beside a parking meter in accordance with the instructions on the meter, went to the theatre, and returned to find his car vanished.
Eventually, after very considerable frustration, annoyance, and expense, | found it at one of the police yards miles away.
The ouly explanation | could get from the police, was that | had committed the offence of being on the royal route to the cinema-although how I was expected to know this is beyond my power of reasoning.
The removal of one’s car, however, 1s only one of the minor inconveniences that may follow if one gets in the way of a royal progress.
In Katmandu, for the visit of the Queen and the Duke of-Edinburgh to Nepal, a new road was built from the SOCIALIST STANDARD, APRIL 1961 airport to the royal guest house.
So much for the respect paid to religion when it conflicts with the convenience of the ruling class.
Religion, of course, is maintained by ruling classes because it helps to keep the rest of us in our places.
Perhaps it is naive for us to expect a ruling class to take its own propaganda too seriously.
E Mankind under Capitalism THE constant endeavour that has marked man’s life since his biological emergence to human status should have created a world befitting the dignity of manhood.
He has learned to observe, and, to a large degree, understand surrounding phenomena; to connect causes and effect; to make and use tools; to harness natural forces to his own ends.
But the latter part of humanity’s history has seen the arrival of class-divided orders of society where those who rule seek to confine education to what will do no more than preserve the existing order of rulers and ruled.
On the whole, therefore, man under capitalism has not learned to study the economic foundation of his world to probe into its shams and anomalies, to to devote his mind to establishing a society no less advanced than his biological development.
And so, with the acquiescence of nearly everyone, a social system which has long outlived its justification as a phase of social evolution, hangs on with its spoilation of personalilies, its unnatural relationships and _ its sordid purpose.
Nothing so determines the character of man as his manner of securing his means of living.
Of legitimate ways of securing these means under capitalism there are only two--the employment of each of which is dependant upon the sucial class to which each man belongs.
By his very position in capitalist society, therefore, this person becomes a parasite, an exploiter.
No matter if his inclination be one of kindliness, his survival as a capitalist entails expropriation trom his fellows.
More, to remain a contending factor in the competition for markets he must offer the commodities produced by his workers at competitive prices.
Wages must be kept as low as possible; output pushed to the highest reachable peak.
He becomes the hard business man, a fevered participant in the capitalist rat-race, the ruthless strikebreaker.
And, although as a man he may have repugnance. towards the thought of war, as a capitalist he may quite well find justification in a conflict which has for its aim the preservation of markets and market accessories from the hands of foreign rivals, or even the capturing of further markets etc., for himself and his fellow capitalists.
This is the way in which the existing order forces the capitalist to behave.
But he gets off lightly compared with the men and women of the working class.
These are the people, overwhelmingly exceeding in numbers the members of the capitalist class, who daily are compelled, by the necessity of getting a living, to sell their energies to the capitalists.
But, however “ posh, ™ respectable “, y 55 or “ degrading ” the means of their getting a living, each and every one oi of these workers cannot escape the brusa with waich capitalism tars thei.
Ine better-paia workers smug witn a tancied superiority and an imagined exclusiveness trom working-class dependence on wages, are nonetheless just as reliant as other workers on their salaries.
Struggling to maintain the appearances expected of tneir “good position” they lead lives, very often, of gilded poverty.
The foreman— once “one of the men”, and perhaps happier as such—has accepted promotion because of his inability to manage on his former wages.
Expected by his employers to prevent slacking and to raise Or maintain output, he must now either boldly show himself as committed solely to the interests of production, the overseer with the whip, or, to preserve continued popularity among his former bench-fellows, he must resort to the under-handedness of maintaining a “ still one of you” demeanour whilst carrying tales of non-co-operation to his masters.
Very often, for the sake of a “bigger shilling”, they take a job that nauseates by its unhealthy conditions, its tediousness, or its lifeless repetition.
And, although the cause may be unknown to the sufferers, it is frequently felt that for all the dayto-day striving they never reach a condition more comfortable than that of just getting by.
Indifferent clerks behind postoffice counters, curt or Officially “ nice” shop assistants, unashamed “ behind. time” bus drivers and conductors— these are but a few of the human products of capitalist society.
And ever commenting on the faults of these are the critics—mostly members of the working class themselves, and in all cases the creatures of capitalism.
Not recognising that here is behaviour engendered by capitalist environment, they condemn what they call the basic nature of the offenders.
Instead of being helpful and courteous to the public they are disinterested and curt.
Ironically, this is true When one considers the universal compulsion upon the working class to go to work and in many cases perform the most nauseating of tasks in order to get the necessary wages to exist upon.
Of course it is nice to think of men doing well-loved work with happy heart, and with no thought of repayment.
Of course, there are many of us who feel the revulsion against the indignities, the incongeniality and the oppressiveness of our Occupations, and the reasons we keep at these Occupations (and a proof of our wageslavery) is because, ‘to keep alive we must have, and subsequently want, the money.
The salesman in whom smooth falsification has become so much a part that he cannot eradicate it from his behaviour outside business, deceived into believing that the training he receives is not to make him a killer, but to make him a man.
The youngster who, in a world that takes the carnage of war for granted and, in the name of “defence”, devises and uses the most diabolically destructive weapons, becomes somehow attracted to the violence of the age and experiences a thrill in embarking upon a little violence himself.
Sometimes the clash between the workings of capitalism and the ideals of mankind produces ideas which contrast with those promoted by ruling class propagandists.
For instance the existence of Oppression, anomalies, inequalities, cutthroat practices and preparation for wars that threaten to imperil the whole of mankind, brings into being the rebels against these ills.
Most of those express themselves through political or humanitarian organisations which lack the sound sociological knowledge which alone can promote action that will eradicate the anti-socialist behaviour objected to.
Thus these rebels remain, ardently protesting against the horror of nuclear -war, pleading that votes for particular individuals might serve beneficent ends, but missing altogether and failing to deal with the real cause of the trouble.
But within the womb of capitalism, as of all social orders, is the seed of its own destruction.
There are some who have sought to understand the world ANNUAL CONFERENCE EASTER 1961 Conway Hall, Red Lion Square, London, WC1 | Friday March 31st I1am1pm, 2-6pm Saturday April 1st 2.30 6pm Sunday April 2nd 1 1amIpm, 2-6pm SOCIAL & DANCE Saturday April Ist, 7.3011 pm Conference Rally, Sunday April 2nd, 7.30pm SOCIALISM-THRE NEW HORIZON Speakers C, May, M Harris The soldier . 1961 around them, and to base upon scientific fact their efforts towards a social reconstruction.
Later, we set sail for new horizons, also to find the same old wage slavery elsewhere.
But, such auctions of working class “ property” never hit the headlines.
They prefer such stories as the recent Franz Hals write-up—the Cavalier painting with the £182,000 touch.
In June 1959, the famous Rubens painting Adoration of the Magi from the late Duke of Westminster's collection. realised £275,000.
The following day's sale saw bidding on the Westminster Diamond Tiara begin at £40,000 and close on the selling price of £110,000.
A collection of porcelain belonging to the Marquess of Exeter, was sold in July for a total of £21,250, a 45 piece Swansea dessert service from the above collection, realizing 4,800 guineas.
Christie’s 1959/60 season turnover was £3,500,000, a substantial increase on SOCIALIST STANDARD, APRIL. 1961 : 8 a7 the previous year. -A Matisse oil painting sold for £21,000, and a diamond and sapphire necklet belonging to the Earl of Harewood was knocked down for a mere £28,000.
As Messrs Christie's have been providing opportunities since 1766, their records must show the handling of a sizeable proportion of the wealth of the ruling class.
One nod of the head at thesc sales can often equal 5 or 10 weeks’ wages of a member of the working class.
The assumption that those who collect, can afford to pay the piper, is never in doubt and runs through most of the sales literature of these firms.
The fact is that the Ministry's separate Index figure for “ housing “ costs, which consist mostly of rent and rates but allows also for the cost of repairs etc., has risen continuously for 10 years and particularly since 1956.
It is now a third higher than in January 1956 and two-thirds higher than it was in 1950.
This sharp rise has had comparatively little effect on the final Retail Price Index because people are assumed on average to spend over nine times as much on all other items of expenditure as they do on rent, rates, etc.
Of course many people will find that they spend far more than the assumed proportions on rent etc.; which would not of itself invalidate the Ministry's assumption because there are some rents etc. which represent a very much smaller percentage, and both extremes enter into the average.
Nevertheless, with the rapid rise of housing costs in recent years it is probable that a larger proportion than the official 8. per cent of expenditure goes on rent, rates, water charges and repairs.
Yet despite the rapid rise in recent years the average increase of rents since 1938 has been far less than the per, centage increase of food prices, clothing prices, or drink and tobacco.
American Depression POLITICANS and Economists giving their views on the course of trade and business prospects are curiously like doctors telling the relatives how the patient is fairing—probably for the same reason, that they are not sure.
Christie's literature is of course written for the “ haves” in society.
The vast majority, the * have-nots,” require a world in which auction sales and all other commercial paraphernalia will be thrown overboard and the means of life made accessible for all.
And if the governments and their economic advisers could make exact diagnoses and prescribe specific and certain remedies, they could be equally confident.
But as it is, they are never quite sure whether things are getting better or worse.
If they fear the worst it is best not to say so because something may turn up, and in any event spreading gloom may itself help on a downward slide.
So it is not surprising that the reassuring statements of last autumn have slowly given place to admissions that American industry is in a rather bad way.
But only a week later the President's council of economic advisers was informing Congress that it would be unreasonable to expect recovery until after mid year and simultaneously the news of six million unemployed. the worst since before the war.
And’ the chairman of the council disclosed other reasons for>not taking an 58 SOCIALIST STANDARD, APRIL 1961 optimistic ‘view.
He pointed out that even when the upturn in business does take place it will not be the solution to the longer term problem of a growing gap between production and productive capacity.
When therefore the Treasury announced in February that investment in manufacture has been rising very fast and that the building of new factories this year is expected to be 40 per cent above last year, there was quite a Jot of satisfaction, not to say pride among those who wanted this to happen.
The first is that all countries are engaged in the same competitive rat race of hoping to be better off in the future but not now.
The second is that a sudden burst of 40 per cent more factories will be followed by a slackening off of factory building and by a burst of additional output when they are completed, and this in a \situation in which the “sellers market ” phase after the war has long since passed and been replaced by a phase of greater difficulty in selling, and . keener competition.
H The Physiocratic School Notes on Economic History No examination of the ideas of physiocracy would be complete without a reference to those who took up and developed Quesnay’s teachings.
Turgot, one of the members of this group and author of an important work on the subject of physiocracy, (Reflections on the Formation and Distribution of Wealth) was appointed ControllerGeneral of the Finances in 1774.
Another Of Quesnay’s pupils who became political chief of the physivcratic school, was the Marquis Victor de Mirabeau, generall, known as Mirabeau the elder.
The physiocratic doctrine soon spread from France to other countries. but made little impression in England. {t had immense influence in Germany, where Karl Friedrich, Margrave of Baden, aided by Schlettween, the most distinguished among the German physiocrats, made an unsuccessful attempt to put in practice the physiocratic pricciples of taxation.
Leopold I, Grand Duke of Tuscany, endeavoured to introduce a “land tax” in his duchy.
Joseph If, Catherine, and most of the other monarchs of the period, were affected and influenced by physiocratic ideas.
After Quesnay's death in 1774, dissensions broke out among the French physiocrats, chiefly because of Condillac, who insisted that commerce and industry were ~ fruitful” as well as agriculture, which was unorthodox to other physiocrals.
The disputes that followed paved the way for the collapse of the movement.
The dismissal of Turgot from office as a result of the poor condition of the State treasury, the bad harvest of 1775, the rise in the price of bread, and the bread riots all over the country, all helped this collapse.
Finally the French revolution, bringing the birth of Modern Capitalism ww France, relegated the idea of physiocracy to the realm of the past. tes The ideas of the Physiocrats did not escape criticism, even in the country of its SOCIALIST STANDARD, APRIL 1961 origin.
Linguet,. who wrote ironically about conditions of the period, appzars to defend chattel slavery against wage slavery, and ridicules all the physiocratic ideas of property.
It is the impossibility of gaining a livelihood in any other way which forces our day labourers to till the soil whose fruits they will never eat, and our masons to dive buildings in which they will never dwell. [1 is poverty which drives them to market to dance attendance upon the masters who might wish to buy them. ft is this which compels them to kneel hefore the rich, and to beg of them permission to enrich them.
They can live only by renting their hands, They must find someone to sent them or dic.
Believe me, for his interest, and for your own, and even for theirs. leave them in the persuasion where they now are. that this cur which bays at them has more power itself alone than all they together.
Trenaman & McQuail, Methuen 30/A Hestony of Mopenn France, Alfred Cobham, Pelican $'their fold, society.
Necker in his work shows that the development of the productive forces of the workers merely permits the worker to devote less time to the reproduction of his own wages and more to the enrichment of his employer.
The importance of this is that Neck2r derives profit and rent, the wealth of the capitalist class. from surplus labour.
But he sees it only as relative surplus value, produced not by the prolongation of the working day but by a reduction of the necessary labour time.
The following quote from his Administration of French Finances snows the class position of his time.
That class in society whose fate seems as though fixed by social laws is composed of all those who, living by the labour of their hands, receive the imperious law of the proprietors and are forced to content themselves with the simplest necessities of life.
Their mutual competition and the urgency of their wants constitutes their dependency ; and these circumstances can in no way change.
In assessing the value and place of physiocracy in any history of political economy, we must take into account the economic development of France and other countries where the doctrine was accepted.
For us today. physiocracy can be seen as 4 link in the chain that leads up to. and influences. later economists.
Finally. its weakness has been shown by Marx in Volume 2 of Capital. as already mentioned in these notes.
RA LONDON OUTDOOR MEETINGS Sandays Hyde Park 3ax Fast Street, Walworth April2nd & 23d April 19h April 16th & 30th Tharsdays Tower Hill, 12,30—2 p m London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 THE CONGO Con Disaster by Colin Legum.
Strong nationalist parties grew up and at the Brussels Conference in January last year they made their surprise demand for independence within six months.
The climb-down in Brussels was followed by the elections in June, in which the nationalists swept the board.
But no section of them had a decisive lead and the ring was cleared for the unitarians and the federalists to fight it out.
Mr Legum indicts the Belgians, reveals Tshombe as a vicious fop. disposes of the notion that Lumumba was baking a troubled pie for Moscow to stick its thumbs into.
Mr Legum’s suggested remedies are essentially old hat and. not surprisingly. ignore the commercial nature of society which is the real causz of the strife in the Congo.
It is the more welcome because it does meet the principle points of difference between us, even if | am right in my submission that it promptly runs away from them again.
But I want to know about it and J feel that a means-test of any variety should be repugnant to both of us.
These are not trivial points for they involve the tremendous issue of administrative tyranny against communal freedom, stateism against decentralisation; indeed, syndicalism versus the commune.
Are you for mass-production of everything despite the fact that. as every good farmer knows, mass farming i; bad farming, and the other fact that quality craftsmanship beats factory products in length of life four or five times over.
In food products and manufactures alike it is recognised that it costs six times as much to sell an article as it does to make it.
The difference is in transport costs, insurances, marketing charges, multifarious agency profits, wholesale and retail percentages—all . arising from remote and competitive marketing, and all to be avoided, as Socialism would avoid them . by leaving production and consumption to loosely articulated small units wherever possible.
The definition we gave was that everything that is in and on the earth would be the common possession of all mankind.
In our property and privilege ridden society it is not easy to give a helpful illustration of what we mean, but we will try.
Air is the common possession of all mankind, you can breathe as much of it as you like without anyone raising an objection.
Similarly you can drink as much water as you like at a public fountain.
The point I wish to make here is that there is nothing tc stop such development except the fact that the workers are in the main indifferent.
There are the orthodox co-operative societies, of course, numbering in membership ten millions, a quarter of ‘the population, owning the means and instruments of production and distribution.
The business of any genuine co-operative group is not to beat anything or anybody, but to cooperate.
As it stands, however, the co-operative societies, after a-century-and-a-half’s dedicated membership rise to the giddy height of “save up for summer holidays ” but fall lamentably short of any co-operative commonwealth — whatever.
Not because there is anything at all in the way unless the competitive ratrace is still held sacred.
The one is possible only where control of the means of production is direct and immediate, just as democracy is possible only where the people are in direct and effective touch with public affairs.
The other cannot be more than an impersonal power process to be rendered quite ghastly by modern automation and atomic energy.
With the present drift towards a totalitarian economy, and in trades-union politics the one-party state. your own utopian belief in a miraculous “dawn” upon the morrow of an equally miraculous release of pent-up proletarian virtue is as abstract and full of heles as i Henry Moore sculpture.
The people with the intelligence to build up the new society will also have the intelligence not to expect the impossible.
For example, the Literatur3 Committee finds out from branches what literature they require—-the local branches do the assessing.
They make an estimate from experience of what further supplies are required.
They then obtain from the printer the total amount they have arrived at and proceed to fulfil the needs of SOCIALIST STANDARD, APRIL branches and individuals.
There is no administrative tyranny in this, it is purely a technical problem.
Production in cach area will be based on what individuals in that area nced— they will make their own assessment. of what they need.
Experience will enable the production assessors to have available sufficient in quantity and variety to fulfil these needs, The articles will be available in suitable places in the crea and all that people will have to do is to go there and take what they want.
We used the evxample of a self-service store in the limited sense that people can go there and take what they want of what is available.
In that instance, of course. they nave to pay for what they take—in the fuiure they will just take, While the new society is getting on its feet there may be people who. still affiicted with the possessive inclinations of the past. may want to low themselves up with more than they need.
These arrangements are just technical questions which can be dealt with by groups of people at given centres who are interested in this kind of work.
In the future society there will be no isolated communities, split off from the rest of the world.
They will all be part of a world Socialist system, decentralised but each working in harmony with the rest. without statism or tyranny, to enable everyone to live a useful. interesting and satisfactory life.
If there aro occupations that are necessary but uninteresting then some method of sharing will he devised.
A great deal that is mass produced nowadays will be unnecessary in the future—armament production is one example.
The mass produced article is as a tule the cheap. the short-lived and the lacking in variety.
Whether mass production saves a really appreciable amount of labour in the long run is questionable.
Obviously the aim will be to limit that kind of work as much as possible.
The accent will be on craftsmanship, and if mass production still operates it will only be in operation in instances where it is essential for the benefit of the community.
More than this we cannot say, We agree with Lord Amwell’s description of orthodox co-operative societies as just capitalist concerns in which petty investors have neither cuntrol nor influence, though they can make a lot of nyise at times.
Socialist Standard 1961 Finally. we do not believe in any miraculous dawn.
We believe in the developmeni of understanding, which will be transferred into action by the mass of the population who suffer under the present system.
Socialism can only be established when the 1961 6l majority of society understand it. want it. and take action to bring it about.
There is no other way, but there are plenty of roads into the morass of confusion and disillusion.
Orphaned very young, he eventually entered a naval training school, then. as sailor and musician, travelled the wide world for the better part of twenty years.
OF such stull is capitalism made. and Bill was the last to question the justice or sanity of the social system.
Having survived the tirst world war-toend-wars he chose civilian life and by the early twenties had settled in a London suburb to raise a small family.
Trained to worship at the shrine of service and security he became a post office worker.
He had served his king and country; he would now serve his neighbours in the role of conscientious workman.
If. then. the social system has anything te offer jt perfect preles one would assume Bill’. rake-off worthy of attention—certainh worthy of Bill.
He worked hard. pinched nothing, acknowledged his ~ station”. doffed his hat to the vicar, was faithful to his wife and suffered children—his own and everyone else’s— with immeasurable patience.
I'm afraid. is the point at which. dear reader. you are in for a shock.
True he squandered good money on ten fags a day. a weekly flutter / on the Pools and a pint or two at thy/ local on Sunday mornings. | leave it to you to judge of his extravagance.
He did. in fac. challenge the staty qi and put his findings to his father in no unceviain terms.
Discussions played merry hell with the sanctuary of Bill's apathy. but to no avail.
Bill either wouldn't or couldn't sec the pyint—or. more precisely, the pointlessness.
With typical humility Bill swallowed nis pride when the second world war-toend-wars blew up and his son contracted out of it.
Discussions continued. mostly in letters or during their infreyuent meetings when his son visited Gome while doing land work in various parts of the country Eventually a fying bomb blotted out a he’s work for Bal) His sen. summoned by telegram, found fem picking at the charred and shattered remains of his paltry goods and chatiels.
His hair changed colour overnight. humour drained from his personality.
Three sears later he way pensioned off ay a worker. months more he ~ languished ~ on fits bob a week, then died.
Hie estate totalled £47. anmsaer oto uheat | or fine 2 it tome —a a aan SOCIALIST STANDARD, APRIL 1961 ND APRIL 191] THE LIBEKAL GOVERNMENT'S PEACE CAMPAIGN OF 1911 It is significant that no hope is held Out of a “ peace treaty” except with America—a country with whom all serious differences have already been composed, against whom, in addition.
Britain would hurl her might in vain. and who could inflict damage, where they can inflict it all, with impunity.
They could starve us out by Stopping their own and Canadian wheat at the grancrics.
It is admitted that on the day when the States and Canada join hands the “ mother country ” has vot fo submit.
On that dav the treaty hecomes in all eves what from the first it must he in reality -waste paper.
No _ responsible person Suggests a treaty with that country— yet it is Germany that has made a British Liberal Government increase its annual Naval Estimates £14,000,000 in five years.
Just as 4 treaty with America brings peace no nearer because the two could not fight. treaty OF No {reaty, so a treaty with Germany would bring peace no nearer because, in the face of conflicting interests (without which they would nof fight in any event), the treaty would not be worth the cost of its inscription.
The humbug. therefore. of the cry ‘of “Peace” and “ Disarmament,” js apparent.
And while the British Liberal Government are making the remote corners of the earth echo and re-echo with the empty nothing, “ Peace they are voling the enormous sum of 75.00.) for war—on the principle that theyll have peace if they have to fight for it.
They talked ~no longer frittering time in argument about capitalism, war, poverty, ugliness, man’s inhumanity to. man and the way to resolve these social ills through Sociatism.
It could be said that Bill had to learn the hard way, but he learned in the end.
One might be tempted to dismiss Bill as a felic of the past, but. nothing could be further from the truth.
There are millions of Bills in the world today, all destined to receive the same treatment until they challenge and overthrow the system that mocks their every virtue as “ good ” human beings.
The Lot of the Miner Deer down in the efficient modernised, mechanised and electrified mines men still grovel, sweat and inhale black dust.
They have all the public's svmpathy for any small inconveniences met with while extracting Our Coal.
In their clean trim offices where thexsupporting beams never collapse. they think mining has reached the millenium.
So they scream “peace ” by waypof a soft answer to turn away wrath—and also in the certain knowledge that the result will demonstrate that peace. even as the capitalist understands it, is possible only at the cost of crushing armaments --Or national extinction.
Exacily one-half of the Labour Members in Parliament came up to scratch to save the face of their party by voting against the Liberals’ immense Naval Estimates.
Keir Hardie says the party were bribed, the Osborne Bill being the price of their defection. and he should know.
But we wonder how many would have opposed the Estimates had they been really in danger.
How many would dare have gone back to their Liberal constituencies with the confession on their lips that they had helped to defeat a Liberal Giovernment’ Not many, we venture to UES [The Osborne Bill.” which Ken Hardie says was the Liberal Govern ment’s bribe to get Labour MPs to vote for increased armaments, became the Trade Union Act.13. legalising the political activities of Teach anssnentes | and the like; in the face of every improvement, free coal, and more pay, the fellows still complain.
There are better jobs outside the pit they think—which only shows the extent of their ingratitude.
In an age that reaches for the myon, the mining of coal a mile under See without turning men into moles, would seem rather a small order.
But ours 1s 4 paradoxical society; aspiring to dizzy heights we plumb the depths of human exploitation.
At the end of the last century after a life-time of study that saved untold millions, Louis Pasteur commented regretfully on this terrible and characteristic feature of our advanced civilization.
Just as Jarge numbers of medical workers all over the world are busy curing diseases and wiping out plagues and fevers while other men are devoting all their skills to designing bombs which can shrivel whole cities, so also in the field of commerce us one interested group tries to solve problems which may free men from degrading toil. another section of the industry sees profits threatened and resists progress.
The complexity of the antagonisms and contradictions in any one trade would fill a book.
The miners’ employer, anonymous shareholder though he is. views the goose as coldly and dispassionately as the former mine-owner did; he levels the machine against the worker as keenly as his nineteenth century counterpart did, when-he sees the possibility of increasing profits.
To tend it the man must go at the machine's speed and this proves a great strain. physically and mentally.
He may work fewer hours but the pace during those SOCTALIST STANDARD, APRIJ hours has become fiercer.
The muri now works for the machine; he has hecome the appendage of a machine.
The miner is free to change his occupation and Jet us admit he is the best judge of whether the change is a good one.
But it is a sad, as well as a safe thing to say, he has only thrown off some of his shackles.
A sensitive ear can still detect above the din of the bright and busy factory. a rattle and clink of chains.
T.U.C & THE BUDGET As happens every vear the TUG ‘s pre budget recommendations have been placed before the Chancellor of the Exchequer, and as in past recommendations platitudes abound.
It would appear that this year's remedy is economic expansion with an export drive. which the T.U.C. say is based on a need for long term planning.
The T.U.C. added that for the export drive to succeed not only physical controls limiting less essential industries may be necessary. but that if these measures affect Britain's balance of payments the Government should take a “calculated risk” by controlling non-essential imports.
The T.U.C.’s further warning was that although the measures suggested may be unpopular the alternatives could be worse.
It would appear from all this that the workers have very little choice either wav.
Since however the nature of capitalist. production compels all other capitalist nations to introduce the same measures the contradictions of the system with all its disasirous consequences is made more obvious.
Wit London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 BRANCH MEWS ccrcinecs from pore 64 month.
The first, on Vridas, April Tth, deals with post-war Germans, and the second, on Friday, April 28th. subject—the eventful year of 1848.
Events last month were a film show. the first of the monthly canvasses in the Acton area, and on the social side a visit to the Toulouse Lautrec Exhihition at the Tate Gallery. followed hy the usual get-together at 2 member's heme in the evening.
The next canvass in the Actom ana will he held on April 9h time and meeting place to he announced.
Attendance of members at Branch meetings has heen remarkably high of late.
ISLINGTON | Islington Branch continucs to hold successful lunch hour meetings every Thursday at Tower Hill.
Attentive audiences of two to three hundred are hecoming a regular feature.
The branch view seems to have been justified that members need to brush up their knowledge «i contemporary religious theories.
So further lectures will be arranged later, covering Modern Nos-confosmism.
At the end of February, Comrade Bryant talked to the branch about Automation.
All, welcome. vind five A wri interested. full fetaihy fromm the feremeh secretary.
At the beginning of the outdoor season in May. we shall try a canvass in Portsmouth and follow this with a meeting on the sea front in the aftermoun.
During the winter. we have had the benefit of writers classes held in Wembley on alternate Friday evenings.
Emphasis has been laidehere on improving our style of writing by applying the yeneral principles of journalism —forceful presentation and economy of words.
We hope that the results will show themselves shortly in better articles for the Sociauist STanpagp.
For seme time, fairl regular letters have passed between them and London.
But it is an uphill. struggle against isemendous odds. particularl, since the Soctalist movement over there is small and scattered.
PANCRAS, APRIL 19th Most members will already know of the demonstration for Socialism meeting being held at St.
This is 4 very special occasion and calls for the enthusiasm and practical assistance of all London comrades.
From Monday, April 10th. until the meeting date, » programme has been arranged for advertising the event by distriouting handbills.
The urgency and necessity for the wort, cannot be too strongly stressed.
B.C.i London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 NOTQG CIA AY STANDARD DMay DAY 1961 -We reaffirm interRae SEE RE LIC TRY national working-class solidarity and the aim Se gee ce 2 ey BE RO ab EE its of human brotherhood. years ago this ; month, Daumier — the Communard — illustrates the inhumanity of capitalism and in particular the savagery of the French ruling class in crushing working-class Paris May 1871.
BRADFORD & DISTRICT Correspondence: Peter Hall, 10 Spring Grove Terrace, Leeds 6, Tel: Bradford 71904 any time.
Catt at above latter address, EALING Fridays 8 pm, Memorial Hall, Windsor Road, near Ealing Broadway.
S.P,G.B, 2, Davenport Road, SE6, NOTTINGHAM Alternate Wednesdays (10th & 24th May) 7.30 pm, Peoples Hall, Heathcoat Street.
SOUTH EAST ESSEX (formerly Basildon and Southend) 2nd and 4th Sooty 8th & 22nd May) in month 8 pm, 17 Cotswold Road, Westcliff-on-Sea, Essex.
Cottis, 19 Kingswood Chase, Leigh-on-Sea, Essex, SOUTHEND (see under South East Essex SWANSEA st and 3rd Monday (ist & (5th May) in month 8 pm, The Crypt, St.
P Mellor, 13 Waterloo Place, Brynhill, Swansea, WEMBLEY Mondays 8 pm, Barham Old Court, Barham Park, near Sudbury Town Station, Wembley.
WEST HAM 2nd and 4th Thursdays (Iith & 25th May) in month 8 pm, Salisbury Road Schools, Manor Park, E12.
WOOLWICH 2nd and 4th Fridays (12th and 26th May) in month 7.30 pm, Town Social Club, Mason's Hill, SE18.
EACH YEAR, as the first of May comes round, it is our custom to reflect upon its significance for the working class.
For the better part of fifty years we have devoted either the editorial or leading article of the SociALIst STANDARD to May Day.
We do not need to check on every past issue to know what all those editorials have said.
If there is any essential difference to be found between them it will be in their growing awareness, as each May Day comes and goes, of the widening gulf between the present and the past.
All those editorials will have spoken about the origins of May Day in the struggles of workers in the past.
Of the way in which it has gradually been losing its meaning for them in the present.
Of how its message has been distorted and degraded over the years by so many people and parties claiming to be Socialist—but who are far from being so.
Above all, they will have reflected on how an event born in the spirit of the international brotherhood of the working class has become an occasion for displays of the crudest nationalism and military pageantry, and of the way in which an idea that, for all its shortcomings in practice, at least had some relevance to the movement of revolutionary Socialism, has deteriorated into an annual charade for the prime benefit of the Labour reformists of the world.
Say what we will, May Day reminds one of the few occasions capable of enthusing workers to come together and demonstrate politically.
May Day gives * the opportunity—from our platforms, through our literature, and by discussion with them as individuals—to do just this.
This year we are holding two open-air rallies, one in London and the other in Glasgow.
Each of them will be followed by a large indoor meeting in the evening.
In a world of sordid nationalism and political reformism, the cause we stand for is international Socialism.
The total rose from 79,020 in 1900 to 100,609 in 1905, while between 1905 and 1907 there was a further striking increase, the figures being :— Total.
As regards engincering. the increased speed of cutting tools was referred to, and evidence was given showing that the speed of punching. shearing. bending. and squeczing machines had increased.
In iron and stcel works, and in tinplate works, the Committee were told that improved machinery had led to increased speed.
There was something of a diversity of opinion as regards Piece Work, but generally the evidence was that piece work, task work, and bonus systems of payment tended to cause undue hurry.
STANDARD, sd a mental thing worth demonstrating for, more confidently and more effectively than ever before, this May Day, 1961.
Azikiwe, the Govéfnor-General of Nigeria, put on the uniform of a fieldmarshal and addressed the two houses of the Nigerian Parliament.
In the first speech from the throne by a Nigerian Governor-General, he said the Government intended to seck expert advice on how to establish an air force.
The new Nigerian ruling class are clearly losing no time in building up armed forces to protect or extend their interests both at home and abroad.
Thanks to their own efforts and to their allies in the reformist parties in this country, they have established their rule over the people of Nigeria.
Paris in the springtime The idea of gay, fashionable Paris, the city of elegance and spacious boulevards, took a hard knock recently.
Unfortunately from their own point of view, this showed just what living conditions in Paris are now.
Of some 2,700,000 Cdwellings in the Parisian area, 800,000 have been condemned as unhealthy.
Of the homes in the city itself, only 17 per cent have a bathroom, while in the “suburbs the figure sinks to just over ten percent.
Needless to say, there is already a “housing drive” in progress to “ solve” the slum problem.
And besides those born in Paris, thousands more stream in every year from the provinces—600,000 in the last five years.
There is more to Paris than the tourists at the Arc de Triomphe and the Champs Elysées ever see.
One would have thought that clerics were the last people to be able to accuse anyone else of taking fiction for reality.
Easter is a Christian celebration Get your Easter greetings cards here.
After making Christmas the excuse for an intensive,two months’ sales campaign, they appear to be starting on Easter.
All that remains now is for the supermarkets to put up large notices reminding shoppers of their duty to fast during Lent.
E * * COMMONWEALTH * PRESIDENT KENNEDY * HOUSE OF LORDS * TORY SPLIT * TANGANYIKA South Africa out THE usual products of Commonwealth Prime Ministers’ conferences have been toothy photographs and solemn, empty communiques, Astonishing, then, was the campaign to expel South Africa.
Racial discrimination is quite detestable, but it is only one of many types of suppression.
It was not just a matter of the Premiers making a pact with their consciences.
The Commonwealth, despite the unctuous propaganda about it, is nothing more than a world-wide trading tie-up, as was appreciated by the City Editors who, in the first few days after South Africa’s withdrawal, anxiously looked into the commercial effects of it all.
The ganging-up against South Africa may have been partly inspired by political motives, but was also a reflection of the South African industrialists’ opposition to Verwoerd’s policies.
Let nobody think that it was the result of charitable concern. for the African underdog.
Washington Whirlwind EVERYBODY in Washington has been fascinated by the ruthless energy of President Kennedy.
White House correspondents are fond of telling us that Kennedy is busy because he is building a new America There are hopeful murmurings about — young aspirations, new frontiers, and so on, There is nothing new in this.
Eisenhower was described as the man to bring probity and courage to American government.
And the Eisenhower era left behind a sticky unemployment problem; during the first quarter of this year there were 54 million people out of work in the United States, ‘Unemployment is only one of the new President’s headaches; others are the situation in Laos and the continuing disarmament wrangle.
It the Kennedy administration sorts these out, it will find that American capitalism has turned up a few other problems.
Whatever the personal characteristics of a leader, his actions and his reputation are largely governed by the conditions of capitalism which he tries to control.
Perhaps it is as well for United States capitalism that the President is so lively.
Kicked Upstairs Mr ANTHONY WeEDGWOOD BENN has fought a furious fight against his transfer to the House of Lords.
Despite his struggles, the government showed that they were determined to have him kicked upstairs, Some lobby correspondents whispered that Mr Macmillan personally gave the thumbs-down to Mr Benn’s efforts to renounce his peerage.
The P.M., said the rumour, is at odds with Lord Hailsham, and doesn’t want to set a precedent which might bring him back to the commons.
And Mr Benn’s constituency used to elect Sir Stafford Cripps, who was at one time an ardent opponent of royalty, titles and the rest.
By the time Labour achieved power in 1945, they had dropped their old pledge about the Lords.
Now, in fact, they do their bit towards helping the Upper House alive by supplying their share of life peerages, ‘It is Mr Benn’s bad luck to have been bord the son of a peer.
Mr Alan Brown, the member for Tottenham who gave up the Labour whip because he thinks that the party is too soft on the unilateralists, was not bothered by such discomforts.
The Labour leaders, who know that British capitalism must have the most efficient weapons and armed forces possible, Object to the “ eat-our-cake-and-have-it ” attitude of the unilateralists in the party.
But it is as well to be reminded that the Tories also have their splits, on colonial policy and other issues.
Whatever incidental quarrels they may have, they all agree about wanting capitalism to stay.
Tanganyika has just achieved its independence, and as the politicians there have been telling the workers that this is the most glorious event in their lives, they had visions of celebrating the -great occasion with a nice long bout of fun and feasting under the African sun.
We will make nothing of Tanganyika and we will set no example in the world unless it be by renewed efforts of hard work.
It is just as logical that our way of looking at things should produce one set of consequences as it is that the outlook of the pro-capitalist organisations should produce another.
As an organisation founded upon class consciousness and Socialist understanding, what we say about wars, crises, housing, racism, crime and poverty must be fundamentally different from what those organisations founded upon patriotism and ignorance say about these things, The question of leadership underlines the difference between Socialists and nonSocialist organisations.
In the relationship of leader and follower are to be found the expression of all the prejudice, alrogance, and ignorance which make the continuation of capitalism possible.
No leader can advance further than the concepts and limited objectives of those who follow.
It is therefore this situation that controls the leader, not the other way round.
They are at all times the products of events, and their popularity rises and falls according to how they act in given circumstances.
It Is not a question of “ betrayal” but the inevitable disillusionment that comes trom ignorance.
Capitalism, with its minority class Ownership of the means of production, the profit motive, and the seething antagonisms which it generates throughout the world, prevent any fulfilment for the working-class in terms of peace and happiness.
Having trusted their leaders of kinds and not having yet achieved socialist understanding, they end up bewildered and frustrated.
This pitiful process is already showing itself in those parts of Africa where capitalism is just coming into its own.
As capitalism develops in Africa it brings the same problems and property conflicts common to capitalism everywhere, Nationalism, the expression of the rising capitalistclass interest throws up the “ leaders” who are the agents through which the conflicting factions press their property claims.
Once more the question of which group of blood-suckers, land-owners or industrialists, home-grown or foreign, shall rule is rallying the workers around. the leaders who represent one gang of exploiters or another.
Nothing dismays our Opponents more than when we tell them that we have no leaders and are opposed to the very idea of them.
It is truly amazing, despite the hundreds of leaders in the world (political, religious, trade union) and their utter failure to do anything about the plight of the world, that the faithful persist in believing that we can’t do anything without them.
The ultimate logic of leadership and its ideal personification is the dictator.
Lenin, who was probably the champion verbal acrobat of all time, was able to | ‘ negate democracy while posing as its supporter.
The Soviet Socialist democracy is in no way inconsistent with the rule and dictatorship of one person; that the will of a class is at times best realised by a dictator, who sometimes will accomplish more by himself and is frequently more needed.—Quoted by Martov in his “ The State and the Socialist Revolution,” page 31.
This contempt for the ability of the working-class to understand their own interests and to act in an enlightened way, was not shared by the founders of scientific Socialism, Marx and Engels.
The Marxist view is found in the Communist Manifesto, the joint work of Marx and Engels who always addressed themselves to the working-class, not to any elite.
They spent their lives teaching and explaining, which, of course, is the last thing a leader can do, All previous historical movements were movements of minorities or in the interest of minorities.
The eee movement is the self-conscious, independent movement of the immense majority, in the interest of the immense majority.
What is true in the political field also holds good in the industrial side of the class-struggle.
We have already mentioned trade-unions; a few points in elaboration are worth making.
The proper function of a trade union is to organise its members in the fight for better wages and conditions of work.
To the extent that nationalism dominates the thinking of trade union members, so they will support the capitalists of a particular country against the international interest of their own class.
They get involved in the capitalists’ affairs of markets and production efficiency and, listening to their leaders identifying their interests nationally with the capitalists’, they fall for the idea of doing what is good for their masters’ country.
As a result of trusting leaders, since the war workers have lost many opportunities to increase their wages.
Even now, unofficial wages in some industries are well ahead of the trade-union rate which shows that there is a discrepancy between what workers can get when labour is relatively scarce, and what the unions accept as sufficient.
In fact, the term “ human nature ” —the need for food, air, water and so on, and some biological peculiarities— can only apply to those characteristics which are unalterably human.
There is a lot of evidence to show that, when the conditions are right, human beings do not behave in an anti-social manner.
For example, there has recently been published the translation of Jens Bjerre’s most interesting account of the latest Danish Kalahari Expedition, when he spent several‘months living with the Kung Bushmen at Samangeigei.
This natural feeling of solidarity within the clan begins in their childhood.
Even though mothers for preference look after London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 their own children, they are just as often to be seen looking after other children—even suckling them if the child is hungry and its,own mother is not on the spot.
The older children eat sometimes with one, sometimes with another family—according to where they happen to be when they , are hungry and when food is ready.
The children help to collect firewood and food for the older people who cannot travel far, and sometimes they even sleep alongside them to keep them warm at night.
These Bushmen are primitive people —they are, in fact, probably the oldest surviving human race, But they know that, were they to adopt the very forms of behaviour which so many in our “ civilised” society call unchangeable “human nature ”, they would destroy themselves.
The people of the world will establish Socialism because they want to live cooperatively, in a free and abundant society.
They will, in fact, practice the “virtues ” which the Kung Bushmen have kept up for so long.
THE INCREASE IN ACCIDENTS ELSEWHERE in this issue is a quotation from the SociaList STANDARD May 1911 about the increase of accidents in industry in the years 1900 to 1907.
The accident figures continued to increase and in 1913 reached 208,949, though the deaths had decreas2d to 1,091.
If the mines, railways and other industries are added, total deaths number about 1,300 or 1,400 a year, and the number injured is more than doubled.
In the mines over 200,000 workers every year suffer injuries which disable them for more than three days, On the roads and railways a further 7,000 or more are killed each year and over 300,000 pedestrians, drivers and passengers injured, Over the whole field injuries have increased since 1938 by about 200,000 a year.
National Income IN the Spring of each year the Government publishes several documents dealing with the changes that have taken place in twelve months in production, trade, wages, profits and the national income and expenditure.
Much of the newspaper comment consists merely of quoting impressive looking figures to support the theme that everything is getling very much better for everybody.
As many readers know very well that their own standard of living isn’t changing much, if at all, doubtless the result ds 4 growing disbelief in the accuracy of the figures themselves; which is rather hard on the civil servants concerned who take a deal of trouble to find the facts and present them accurately.
Much of the difficulty arises out of that ingrained capitalist habit of expressing nearly everything in terms of money and price; which is most misleading unless due allowance is made for the fact that prices can change, and for twenty years have been changing upwards.
To say that expenditure on rent and rates increased between 1956 and 1960 by about £400 million a year does not mean that people were moving into larger or better houses but that they are paying more for the same house, and in many cases paying more for something worse.
When we apply this corrective to the figures showing that the national income jumped from about £5,000 million in 1938 to £20,000 million in 1960 we find that the real increase after discounting higher prices is somewhere in the region of fifty per cent.
But because a larger proportion goes to the armed forces and armaments and to capital investment the real increase in the amount available for “consumers ” goods and services, (food, clothing, housing, entertainment, travel, etc., etc.) has increased by a smaller amount, probably between 35 per cent and 40 per cent.
Then a further adjustment has to be made because this is spread over more people, the population having increased by over 5,000,000 since 1938.
After allowing for this, the real increase per head of the population is about 25 per cent or 30 per cent, not at all a striking achievement for a period of twenty years, though quite a normal one for British capitalism.
The way in which this modest advance has been made is also interesting.
The increase is due as much to increased numbers of workers as to increased output through improved machinery and processes.
Because unemployment is about one and a quarter million less than in 1938, and many more married women go out to work, and workers stay on to a later age, there are probably about four million more workers in civil employment than there were before the war.
While many workers are rather better off than before the war (average industrial weekly wage rates having gained about 16 per cent on the price level for a somewhat shorter week) there are many workers, especially clerical who have actually lost ground. workers, Those Hi gh Wages IN a press interview about the start of the graduated pension’ scheme the Minister of Pensions, Mr John BoydCarpenter, gave figures that should be noted by those who believe that the £14 10s.
Od. a week average earnings of adult mala workers in manufacturing and some other industries, are typical of the working class as a whole.
Seven months ago I reported that the ground and first floor maisonette at Castlemaine House, the seven-storey block of flats which Mrs.
James’s Place, was in the market at £128,750, making it just about the most expensive home of its type in the world.
I now reveal who is to be the occupier of this home wtih its own garden backing on Green Park.
It is City banker, Mr Walter H Salomon, 54, who will move in with his wife, Kate, and two children in July.
The study, drawing-room and library opening on to a terrace, are in antique pine panelling.
Each of the four bedrooms has a bathroom; there is a wrought-iron staircase, luxurious staff quarters and a huge kitchen.
The same issue of the Evening Standard reported that the Hampstead Council is cutting its housing list from 1,799 families to 1,328 families.
The Chairman of the Committee is quoted as saying that he is agreeably surprised by the number they were able to eliminate because they have moved away or for other reasons.
MAY 1961 93 hope of getting Council accommodation or have found decent accommodation and are quite happy.
The Evening Standard reports that “the L.C.C. wants to speed up the work of modernising their pre-1914-18 war blocks of flats”, six thousand of which lack baths and have other defects.
But there are obstacles, one of which is the “three-year wait” between approval of modernisation schemes and the actual start on the work.
It is ironical to go back to the optimism of the reformers who started the movement to solve the housing and slumclearance problem over a century ago.
The first of these great personal measures was the Shaftesbury Act of 1851, which aimed at providing lodging houses for the working class in towns and populous districts, .. . the next great step was taken in 1868, when the Terrens Act was passed.
This dealt with improvement or demolition of unfit houses and brought into prominence the second part of the Housing task, namely, in addition to the provision of new houses, the maintenance of the old.
Sometimes they exist behind the decaying red brick walls of gaunt Victorian houses, And these, because they are frequently shielded from the public gaze, are the most difficult for authority to deal with.
Mr Brooke, the Housing Minister, has been describing a visit to such a Victorian slum.
He found three floors of utter squalor, cut up into flats without proper kitchens or lavatories, and with a basement used by two women of, to say the least, rather doubtful probity.
We are told that this is an ~ urgent reform”, one brought to light by Mr Brooke’s personal injunction.
H Wealth of Nations Notes on Economic History Since England was the first country in which modern large-scale industry developed, it was only to be expected that capitalist political economy would appear and flourish here.
The introduction of spinning machinery (Wyatt 1783, Lewis Paul 1741, Arkwright 1769); the steam engine ; and later of the power loom (Cartwright 1785, Jacquard 1802); and similar transformations in the methods of industrial production, induced changes that led to an enormously accelerated growth of large scale industry.
Adam Smith was the man who, under these conditions, established a new system of economic doctrine.
Smith spent three years in France, where he became known personally to the physiocrats, and was greatly influenced by them.
For ten years after his return from France. he devoted himself to economic study and to writing his book Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations published in 1776.
Adam Smith defines the wealth of 4 nation in the opening of his inquiry.
The annual labour of every nation is the fund which originally supplies it with all the necessities and conveniences of life which it annually consumes, and which consist always either in the immediate produce of that labour, or in what is purchased with that produce from other nations.
Labour which is not devoted to the production of useful things, which have an exchange value is to Smith unproductive.
The wealth of a nation is greater accordingly as a larger proportion of its inhabitants are engaged in useful labour.
This in turn depends upon the amount of capital devoted to the employment of workers (the wage fund), but above all, upon the productiveness of labour.
According to Smith the productiveness of labour is increased mainly by the division of labour.
He illustrates this thesis by the many processes required for the manufacture of such a simple thing as a pin, The further the division of labour is carried, the more is production carried on with a view to marketing.
Now for the purpose of the market there must develop an acceptable means of exchange, or instrument of trade —in other words, money.
Commodities are exchanged in the market by means of money as the medium of exchange, and thus originates an exchange-value or price of goods, as distinct from their use-value.
We see. then, that the division of labour is the starting point of the economic process and its development; it is the cause of the exchange of goods. for no one can live upon the product of his own activity a 14 & But exchange is effected in accordance with exchange-value and the exchange value is therefore decisive for the distribution of the goods, since it settles the question who can buy them; and for their production inasmuch as this is guided by the expectation of the price to be realised.
Upon this premise Adam Smith builds up his economic system, and so do all the capitalist schools that follow him.
The laws that regulate the formation of exchange-value are held to be also laws in accordance with which the wealth of nations comes into being; they are, according to Smith, the primary laws of economic motion.
By formulating this conception of the nature of political economy, Smith made an important step forward in capitalist theory.
Whereas both the Mercantalists and the Physiocrats had made productive circulation the basis of their reasoning, now for the first time a study of the laws of exchange-value was undertaken.
Thenceforward the theory of value and the theory of prices became the basis of economic theory in general.
For since prices are the determinants of the production of goods, the law of prices decides what goods shall be produced; and since prices decide which would-be purchaser has sufficient purchasing power, the laws of prices are also the laws of distribution.
President Kennedy has been shown on British T.V. threatening to use the might of the American armed forces to protect the democratic rights of Laos.
He appears. so young, forthright and sincere, but perhaps, after all, it would be just as well if we were to critically examine his claims that the United States stands for democracy in Laos whilst the Russian Government js attempting to undermine and. destroy its work by Communism.
Civil war has been going on in the country since the middle nineteen fifties but has only become world news since Kennedy threatened to enter the affray openly with United States troops.
Until now the United States has encouraged the Royalist faction but they have recently been opposed by another faction—Pathet-Lao.
Laos is part of an ancient civilisation overrun by the French at the time of the general European scramble for colonies and incorporated into their former colony of Indo-China.
But as so often happens when a whole community of people are caught in its grip, religion’s ministers and _precepts develop great influence.
The population becomes more pious as their material poverty increases and they seek the excuse of dogma, creed or belief to explain their intellectual poverty.
All totalitarian regimes are destructive of the things of the spirit of man, but of all totalitarianisms the clerical is probably the most harmful.
The factions never seem to have been compressed into any sort of seclusion.
Large numbers of half-castes have resulted from the occupation of the country by the French military.
Laotian soldiers who deliberately fired Over one another's heads for fear of taking human life are gradually being taught by their “ betters” to aim straight and kill.
The country is torn with civil strife carried on with arms and ammunition provided by the Russian and American Governments.
The United States bears the entire cost, $40 million a year, of the Royalist army.
The whole of Laos, both Pathet Lao and Royalist territories, are ruled by one ruling-class feudal family and this alone makes nonsense of Kennedy's claim that Pathet Lao must be opposed because they are communists.
The charge is absurd because the ruling-class of the Pathet Lao territory have never shown themselves to have particularly different ideas from their relatives who rule the Royalist territory.
Both sides of the family run the usual pattern of Asiatic feudalistic governments normal for undeveloped areas in that part of the world.
Prince Souphannavong, the Pathet Lao Leader, is half-brother to the Prime Minister of the Royalists.
A_ third brother who lives in Siam acts as elder Statesman to both sides.
They are more concerned with exploiting their subjects, which they do with the inefficiency usual with that type of adminis. tration, than in theoretical and alier theories of communism and democracy.
Pathet Lao and the Royalists are puppets of Russia and America, respectively.
In 1956 Laos and China signed « Treaty of “peace and neutrality” in Peking.
This was regarded as another failure for American policy in Asia and even a retrogression from the position already established at the time in Laos.
For if Laos gets out of the clutches of America and really becomes independent, then it will drive a wedge between the two American bastions of South Viet-nam and Thailand.
If, on the other hand, the Chinese controlled Pathet Lao takes over the whole of the country, then Laos becomes a hostile wedge and S.E.A.T.O. (the American controlled South East Asian Treaty Organisation) becomes nullified for then the Chinese bloc will extend to the borders of Thailand which has a large resident Chinese fifth column.
But, apart from her strategic value, Laos is a so far almost untapped vast reservoir of wealth in coal, copper and tin.
There are 204,000 sq. kilometres of valuable hardwood forests just waiting to be cut and exported.
This must alone be worth fighting for, remembering that the British ruling-class squandered the health and lives of so many soldiers in fighting the Chinese nationalist insurgents for the tin and cash crops of Malaya a few years ago.
The struggle for Laos will bring greater power and wealth to one or other of the two great powers concerned.
To the internal ruling-class it. is already bringing wealth in the form of assistance amounting to millions each year.
Whichever side wins, because each is the puppet of a capitalist overlord greedy for power and profits, capitalism will come to Laos in the form of mines, plantations of cash crops, and the development of industry.
To enable capitalism to thrive there the Laotians will have to be shaken out of their lethargic happy state.
Happy workers contented with their existing standard of living are not satisfactory subjects for gapitalism.
In place of laughter, song, and making love, must come the tax collector, conscription, wage-slavery, the chargeland, the foreman and the boss, hard work in the tropical heat, threats of the ‘ak, piece work, bonus systems, over“me and ulcers.
But for the budding aotian ruling-class, there will be stocks and shares, rent, interest and profits.
Certain Students raised objections to my views and reported me to the authorities and I was eventually called to account for it.
It should be remembered that no more than about 5 per cent of the students come from the working class; the bulk come from the propertied class with a more pronounced orthodox, bourgeois outlook than the sons and daughters of workers.
I was asked to send in-the manuscript of a brochure The Social Question—Its Being, Origin and Solution, which I had prepared.
Soon afterwards, without warning or getting a chance of answering the charges, | was ordered forthwith to stop lecturing and publishing my writings, and suspended from service.
It meant that 1 had to give up my living at Innsbruck and move to Vienna, where I was “ graciously ” given a small job and a pension many times less than would have been my due.
All this happened in this boasted democratic welfare state Austria, “while the “great socialist leader” Dr.
The unsoundness of that party’s policy is also glaringly demonstrated by Dr.
As a result of Press reports of a conference of “socialist catholics” in November 1959, at which I gave a lecture on Marxism, I received a letter from comrade Frank, expressing a desire to meet me.
We subsequently had some talks, and I also had the pleasure of making the acquaintance of his son on a visit to Vienna, when we had a most interesting and heartening discussion.
Not the smallest obstacle is the dull apathy of the masses of the working class, who seem to use their undoubted talents for nothing but making profit for, and increasing the wealth of, their masters.
Comrade Frank has also made available to me copies of your publications SOCIALIST STANDARD 1961 @ Subscription form To SPGB Literature Dept 52 Clapham High Street, London, SW4 Pe a I ES a a) 6 issues 4/post free |2 issues 7/6 post free Send me Socialist Standard for the next issues | enclose Name Address 76 SOCIALIST STANDARD, MAY 1961 and those of the companion parties, which I am assiduously studying and tremendously enjoying.
Let me express my deep admiration for the fine work of so many devoted comrades.
A group of workers in the English-speaking world saw through the monstrous nature of capitalism and saw the way out of its quagmire years before the first worldwar, and started, in the S.P.G.B., a revolutionary movement.
And now a word on the false friends and the betrayal of the Marxian teaching.
The life of modern industry becomes a series of periods of moderate activity, prosperity, over-production, crisis and stagnation.
The uncertainty and instability to which machinery subjects the employment, and consequently the conditions of existence, of the operations become normal, owing to these periodic changes of the industrial cycle.
Except in the periods of prosperity, there rages between the capitalists the most furious combat for the share of each in the markets.
If the bankruptcy of the big selfstyled “socialist” parties and their betrayal of scientific socialism were ready clear when Dr.
Karl Renner declared that two of the largest worldempires, namely the Russian and the British Empire, were under the leaderShip of the working-class and that socialism was close at hand, the leaders of these pseudo-socialist /communist parties have now sunk the last vestige of the revolutionary content of Marxist theory by finally and completely identifying themselves everywhere with the avowed capitalist parties.
Renner lived to see his ridiculous assertion belied, for it must be evident to even the politically little informed that the Russian workers are today unfortunately as far away from socialism as their English brothers.
What it really does can at best be described as a kind of leftist bourgeois reform politics —no more.
Anybody observing the attitude of their leaders must come to this conclusion.
It now even recog. nizes the Dollfus Concordat (concluded on May Ist 1934 between Austria and the Vatican), although it had previously refused to do so.
Even the financial claims of the Church are being recognised (church property and estate confiscated under Josef II returned to the Catholic church, plus hundred million schillings annually), It does this in the hope of getting votes.
On the occasion of the annual Conference of your party I send fraternal greetings to all delegates and other participants, and hearty wishes that your great efforts for the spreading of revolutionary socialism may bear further good fruit.
We here shall continue to add our bit to the furtherance of the great cause.
MORRIS & CO At the Victoria and Albert Museum in April there was to be seen an Exhibition, Morris & Company 186/—1940.
On show were specimens of textiles, tapestries, wall papers, etc., produced by the firm of which William Morris was chief partner and designer.
These art and craft products are considered to be the most artistic of their period.
But such fine work was not for the homes of the great multitude, as Exhibit 61 (an order book) quite clearly showed.
These words from the chief partner and designer of the Morris firm indicate that under capitalism “Art for the People” is just a phrase but that under Socialism where goods will be produced for use and not for profit Art will be « part of daily life and work in such ways as a free people living in a democratically owned and controlled society wish.
Morris wrote a number of essays and gave Jectures on Art and Socialism.
Art, Labour & Socialism was a clear statement on the subject and it is possible that before long we may republish it, it having been out of print for many years now.
She excelled in this work but regarded it as no more than a necessary duty.
She had a fine, resonant voice, and it was a pleasure to listen to her.
At street corner meetings the slim, attractive girl on the SPGB platform, clearly enunciating the socialist case, commanded respect.
In the lecture hall, her material was thoroughly prepared and delivered with economy.
Her learning was wide and deep, yet she was severely critical of her own ability.
Many women, unfortunately, still accept and delight in playing the role of the “second” sex.
She expected to be treated as an equal and the standard she set for herself was the highest.
And yet, when all this has been said, one has hardly begun to describe Lisa Bryan.
Socialism for her became inseparable from her whole person, affecting all her feelings and attitudes.
To know Lisa was to make a friend, and her friends were many and diverse.
Staunchly independent, asking little for herself, her humanity consumed her.
She was consistently loyal to her friends; unstinting with help when they were in trouble; cheering when their spirits were low.
WILLIAM MORRIS Art for Everyone Unless something or other is done to give all men some pleasure for the eyes and rest for the mind in the aspect of their own and their neighbours’ houses, until the contrast ts less disgraceful between the ficlds where beasts live and the streets where men live, I suppose the practice of the arts must be mainly kept in the hands of a few highly cultivated men, who can go often to beautiful places, whose education enables them, in the contemplation of the past glories of the world, to shut out from their view the everyday squalors that most men move in.
Sirs, 1 believe that art has such sympathy with cheerful freedom, openheartedness and reality, so much she sickens under selfishness and luxury, that she will not live thus jsolated and exclusive.
I will go further than this and say that on such terms I do not wish her to live.
I protest that it would be a shame to an honest artist to enjoy what he had huddled up to himself of such art, as it would be for a rich man to sit and cat dainty food amongst starving soldiers in a beleagured fort.
I do not want art for a few, any more than education for a few, or freedom for a few.
MAY 1961 BOOKS © The Influence of Television Television and the Political Image by Joseph Trenaman and Denis McQuall, Methuen, 30s.
Durinc the last few years, a new word has crept into the English language.
Psephology is the name given to the business of putting voters under the microscope and probing their innermost electoral reflexes.
Where once people simply voted at election time, now every cross must be checked and analysed.
Good Reading Questions of Today I/Racial Problem — I|Russia Since 1917 I]Is Labour Government the Way to Socialism 4d.
Nationalisation or Socialism 64, Communist Manifesto and the last Hundred Years —//Principles and Policy 6d.
They closely studied the campaign on television and at the same time sampled political Opinion among the voters in the two Yorkshire constituencies of Pudsey and West Leeds.
The authors conclude that television had little effect on the outcome of the 1959 election.
Hence the recent almost frantic attempts to patch up-the differences that exist within the party on these issues.
Whatever know. ledge the viewers had on the issues of the campaign tended to increase as a result of their watching television.
Television and the Political Image is not light reading, and it is loaded with statistical tables and graphs which demand close study.
Doubtless, we shall see many more such works, for if the power-conscious parties can find out why the working class vote as they do, they are a long way towards winning an election.
If Trenaman and McQuail are any guide, Labour's problem in 1959 was to convince everybody that their promises were not rash bribery.
The Tories, it seems, must still work hard to persuade us that they really care about the aged and the needy.
And _ the psephologist, busily adding up his figures to discover the reasons for the working class preferring one type of capitalist subjection to another. does not make it any cleaner.
IVAN, HEALTH CHARGES instead of being able to make a concentrated attack on the government-imposed charges on the health service, Mr Gaitskell and Co. have been forced to defend the last Labour Government who set the example by themselves imposing such charges.
It was not noticeably Labour policy when in office to relate profit to the plight of workers in the way they now seek to do.
Socialists have never supported these so-called social services, seeing in them nothing but an endeavour on the part of capitalism’s administrators to give the master class the cheapest and most efficient labour force possible, under the conditions prevailing at the time.
This was by no means the first challenge to society to meet the paradox of want in the midst of plenty, and the report that to-day, in Toronto, thousands of children are starving, provides ample evidence that the challenge has not been met.
When man was the slave of nature, shortage and want could be explained in something like intelligent terms, but to-day, when his productive capacities are virtually unlimited, he must find some other answer.
Seven years later, the Oxford economist, Mr Colin Clark, remarked that in two years no authority had disagreed with Professor Dudley Stamp, who pointed out that if Danish agricultural standards were to be practised on the available cultivable land, there would be enough food produced to give an excellent diet to probably seven times the world’s present population.
What Lord Boyd Orr and Mr Colin Clark failed to recognise, or at least make no mention of, is the fact that however capable man may be of producing wealth, it is ultimately the question of ownership which decides whether or not he will partake of that wealth.
Food, like every other commodity in our modern world, is produced primarily for profit, and the fact that it eventually may satisfy hungry children in Toronto or elsewhere is incidental and of secondary importance.
The answer to the News Chronicle's question will not be found in the speeches of politicians and economists; if it could, the question would not be asked after a century of Parliamentary Statutes and fact-finding Commissions, designed to reform capitalist society in the interest of those who make it tick.
One of the Paddington Comrades, jin an effort to preserve the literature, wrapped individual copies in cellophane for protection.
It is hoped also that the ihandbills (which were also distributed) advertising the April 19th meeting at St.
COVENTRY GROUP Coventry members are still very active and are in contact with Birmingham Branch with a view to holding some joint outdoor meetings in Birmingham during the summer, The Group members regularly attend political meetings, jtake part jn discussion and then sell SocIALIST STANDARDS outside the meeting places.
For a small group this is very good work and the Group members are hoping that their various contacts will, in the not too far distant future, enable them to form a Coventry Branch.
Correspondence has been returned from their addresses, without details of change.
DEMONSTRATION FOR SOCIALISM A full report of our successful meeting in St.
We can nevertheless give the essential details, An audience of 400, plenty of questions and lively discussion, and a collection of over £25.
At both these meetings, the support of as many comrades and sympathisers as possible will add. to the success of the demonstration.
In Glasgow, at Queen’s Park, meetings will be held, followed by an indoor Rally \at St.
Their efforts resulted in the sale of literature to the extent of £13 14s.d.—350 SociaList STANDARDS and 89 War pamphlets.
May, Epanety London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 for War pamphlets.
Among these enquiries were requests from Montrose in Scotland and Aberdare in Wales.
East Street, Walworth May 7th & 24th May 14th May 21st Thursdays Tower Hill, 12,30—2m.
Friday May 19th — “THE JEHOVAH WITNESS” Speaker : J, Law ue MITCHAM LECTURE The White Hart.
SOCIALIST STANDARD b The Alyerian tragedy continues its melancholy course.
Ist and 3rd Mondays (Sth & 19h June) 7.30 pm, The Coffee Room, Craven ms, High Street.
SOUTH EAST ESSEX (formerly Basildon and Southend) 2nd and 4th Mondays (12th & 26th June} inemonth 8 pm.
SOUTHEND (see under South East Essex pe ppg a pea gy nla era une} in pm, pt, St.
WEST HAM 2nd and 4th Thursdays (8th & 22nd Sune) in month 8 pm, Salisbury Road Schools, Manor Park, £12.
H 9 Milne Eltham, SE9 MITCHAM & DISTRICT Thursday {Sth June 8 pm, “White Hart,” Mitcham Cricket Green.
CORRESPONDENCE for the Executive Committee should be sent to the General Secretary. spGe, 52.
SPOR. at the above address, Postal orders and cheques should be crossed and made payable to the spcs.
Rising to high drama at one moment, it topples over into anti-climax and something often close to farce the next.
We are still too near to the event to know the full story of the “four days ” last April.
Regardless of speculation de Gaulle proceeds at full speed to implement the plans he has been working towards ever since he came to power in 1958.
The Army has played into his hands, its morale and self-confidence shattered, at least for the moment.
The way has been left wide open to the objective he has sworn to achieve before ne dies—the “ decolonisation ” (he uses the word as though he was talking of getting rid of a disease) of France.
Wiser to the ways of the world of modern capitalism and\more far-seeing than many of the ruling-class he represents, he sees the march of events and where they are leading.
He knows that no Power in the modern world can hold on to its possessions according to the old imperialist traditions of the past.
In the three years of his administration almost the whole of the former French empire has been granted independence.
Of the former important territories of that empire, only Algeria remains.
Daddy's Algeria may well be dead. but nobody knows what the new one will be like.
De Gaulle is staking all on an independent Algeria still within the orbit and influence of French capitalism, as he has successfully achieved with the great majority of the other former French territories.
What is supremely important now for the French ruling-class is to retain their control over the Saharan oilfields and the vast deposits of natural gas. not to speak of the mineral wealth they also hope to discover in the future.
Nobody can say what the talks at Evian between the French and the FL. will bring.
Nobody knows what the European setilers will do, particularly the fanatics among them—-there is already evidence that these latter are prepared to go to any lengths to frustrate de Gaulle’s plans.
Nor does anybody have any real idea of what is in the minds of the leaders of the F.L.N.. preoccupied for seven years in fighting a bitter war and now faced with sitting round a conference table.
There is still a terrible possibility that the next news to. come out of Algeria will be of carnage and devastation as to make even the last seven years of its sufferings only a prelude in comparison.
We know that history. by which we mean in this case the inexorable demands of capitalism. will catch up with Algeria. as it will with East Africa.
On the rostrum beside Mr Khruschev, he was the star turn at this year’s Moscow May Day parade.
Gagarin’s exploit, Commander Shepard's flight. and the arrival of the Russian Venus rocket shot, have puit spaceships right back in the. news.
We all know that Russia and the United States are feverishly applying the knowledge which their space probes give them to the production of more accurate missiles.
Some of these were paraded before Gagarin in the Red Square on May Day.
Without a doubt, the quest for more accurate and more powerful weapons is the main incentive in the space programmes of the great powers, Incidentally, they may also gain knowledge which has little or no military value.
Capitalist society is bound to distort human knowledge for inhuman ends.
Scientific investigation can only come into its own when this world is sanely organised.
We may think that the Milan Football Club, who paid that amount to THE NEWS IN REVIEW Chelsea for Jimmy Greaves, have a millionaire somewhere behind them.
This is why they can afford such enormous wage bills, and can offer irresistible financial bait to British footballers.
Greaves put it on record that he did not want to leave England, but Milan were offering him such a high signing-on fee that he really had no choice in the matter.
Helpless, the English fans moan as their golden boys take off for sunnier lands.
They blame the clubs, the Football League, the Italians, for being a lot of poachers.
But the millions who weekly cheer their favourite club, support, almost to a man, the social system in which whoever pays the most money takes the best choice.
When he was campaigning for the United States Presidency he seemed so calm, so cool tempered.
Lots of Republicans, in fact. thought that he might want to be too soft on the Russians.
President Kennedy inherited the plans for the landing which the Eisenhower administration had laid.
He chose to go ahead with them—and when the invasion failed, with typical acumen. he pointed out that his predecessor must take part of the blame.
This is the sort of ruthlessness and cynicism which we have come to expect from capitalism’s leaders.
Kennedy promised an era of sanity and calm judgment in foreign policy. fi their millions, American workers voted for him.
The signs are that Kennedy will be reviled not so much for agrecing to the Cuban expedition, as for the fact that the whole thing was a flop. [gnorantly patriotic, the working class will forgive almost anything but that.
At the same time, Penguin offered £450,000 worth of shares to the public, the more prosperous of whom applied for them to the tune of £67 million.
Now a lot of the people who tried to get Penguin shares are known, in Stock Exchange jargon, as stags.
Hence the little jokes about gamekeepers, and Lady C., in the City columns.
The stags have been rampant lately. in shares other than the Penguin issuc.
Wednesday 19th July 7.30 pm MASS SOCIALIST RALLY CONWAY HALL sco son cunt we Full details July “‘Standard”’ A ee ae eee SOCIALIST STANDARD, completing a newspaper coupon—and which are likely to rise quickly on the Stock Exchange.
The idea is to sell the shares at a profit before the cheques have had time to be cashed.
Many sage ecosomists have since told us that JUNE 1961 85 it aggravated matters in 1929-—and that it could never happen again.
The stags have shown that capitalism is the same old animal as ever was.
The Myth of Moral Rearmament MoraL REARMAMENT—that high pressure political religious movement—has been making quite a lot of noise lately.
The premier of its latest film, The Crowning Experience, was shown a few weeks ago in the West End of London.
Full page advertisements have caught the reader's eye in such respectable newspapers as The Guardian and The Times.
According to Ivan Yates in The Observer, this publicity offensive represents their most sustained effort yet for support in.
A costly campaign it is, too, and quite clearly the wherewithal is not lacking.
The outstanding name of the movement is, of course, Doctor Frank Buchman; it was he who officially launched the movement in 1938 at East Ham Town Hall.
Buchman’s speeches , talks glowingly, almost gushingly, of his chief’s Swiss ancestry, of his folk brought up “with democracy in their blood ”.-whatever that may mean.
Buchman’s conversion came when he was visiting Keswick, Cumberland, during a holiday on doctor's instructions.
He entered a little church and listened to the service and suddenly he was aware of his own faults.
He sent letters of apology to the members of the board of a children’s home against whom he had harboured ill-feeling and was then all set to carry his ideas to practically every part of the globe.
Buchman’s movements are vague during these earlier years, but we do know that his sctivities were to lead to the formation of the Oxford Group in 1928, when a number of Rhodes scholars and other Oxford students were given this name after a propaganda visit to South Africa.
Moral Rearmament was launched ten years later, in face of the threat of the second world war.
Such was the new cry, and perhaps here was the beginning of the political side of the movement which was to be more obvious Jater.
It holds its meetings and congresses, and publishes lashings of Jiterature, and when a person has received the message loud and clear, he becomes “ changed” and supports the movement.
And what support this movement has, although The Observer article of March 26th claims that there has been disappointment at a recent falling away of influence in England.
Nevertheless, it must be admitted that there is a considerable zeal and enthusiasm among Morai Rearmers, many of whom have given every penny they possessed and have surrendered themselves completely to the task of spreading the message.
To say that it is a religious movement is to state the obvious, and as with religion generally, there is a vagueness which the high powered techniques and sweeping statements fail to mask, in fact, serve only to accentuate.
Gabriel Marcel, for example, talks airily of a “community life based on faith” and that last word gives the reason for the vagueness.
It must be so, because its basic assumption of the existence of the supernatural has not one jot of scientific evidence to support it.
This is not to doubt the sincerity of the bulk of “ Buchmanites,” of course.
As Geoffrey Williamson points out in London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 his illuminating book Inside Buchmanism, just to talk to them is to see how fervent “and conscientious they can be.
Aware of the terrible problems of modern society, and lacking the essential knowledge of their origin, such people are comparatively easy meat for such movements as Moral Rearmament.
Or. to put it a little more kindly, they turn to Moral Rearmament for the answer.
That only when the world’s people “ listen to God” and become guided by Him, will we have harmony in the human family.
The world. awaits an inspired answer from statesmen as well as the ordinary man... guided... by that added help which sees and recognises the Supreme Plan.
As men listen to God and obey His orders, nations find a pattern that makes plain God’s will for Government.
Which just goes to show how relative their “ absolute” standards can be when the occasion demands.
With the outbreak of war, as Geoffrey Williamson puts it. the word “ patriotism ” began to appear in the M.R.A. vocabulary, and although the movement came under fire in some quarters on the grounds of army-dodging, the more astute capitalist politicians, particularly in America, were quick to recognise it as a stimulant to the war effort.
They even produced a National Defence Handbook You Can Defend America, and its transatlantic counterpart Buttle Together for Britain.
In England alone, they claim to have distributed some five million books and pamphlets during the war.
In the post-war years, an openly political note has sounded in M.R.A. propaganda with a heavy “ anti-Communist ” bias.
Adenauer and Robert Schuman, and some following seems to have been captured in the new Capitalist States like Burma.
Sweeping claims have been made for the success of their ideas in the field of international politics, and it is then that charges which have recently been levelled at them seem to have most force.
True, M.R.A. has supporters in many countries and is not without influence, but it is about as useless as any other reformist movement and shows the same ignorance of the world of Capitalism.
On the industrial field, M.R.A. has served only to worsen confusion in workers’ minds and blind them. still further to their interests.
In June, 1948, the Warwickshire mineworkers’ president is said to have claimed that M.R.A. had given “real teamwork and better output” in the British Coal Industry, while in 1952, a French Iron and Steel Boss paid tribute to the part M.R.A. ideas had played in securing an agreement with his workers to forego wage increases for four years.
What a tragedy’ indeed that many workers should have been sufficiently gullible to fall for this gigantic fallacy that is Moral Rearmament.
Quite openly they are discouraged from thinking for themselves and are told only to “tune in” to some mythical God, Spirit, Intelligence—call it what you will.
His followers seem ready to quote his words parrot fashion and to treat his most commonplace utterances as world-shatteringly important.
Their hysterical “anti-Communist” outbursts, their denial of the class struggle on the one hand, and their fanatical religion on the other, are a menace to Socialism and even to the limited capitalist democracy that we enjoy today.
It may seem comfortable to relinquish responsibility for one’s thoughts and actions and shut out the uncomfortable world of reality.
Socialist Dear Comrades, On this Continent, the pressure of capitalism on the working class is not minimized by welfare-state palliatives.
Today, all the problems, whether of the homeless families, or of the young, or the old, of increasing criminality, etc., etc., not only remain, but are accentuated.
Life is getting harder for the workers, more difficult. and more insecure.
One need not detail the daily reports of domestic tragedies caused by want and misery—one need only look at the newspapers’ headlines, and leading articles, such as “ This Lost Generation,” “Courage to see things in their real light,” “The alarming rise of criminality ""—a feature which, one of the papers says, shows a deep crisis in a sick society.
The working class of all other European countries are in no lesser plight.
You have read of huge strikes in Italy and of demonstrations in Belgium against the further lowering of the workers’ fiving standards.
In France, unemployment, cuts, short time working and strikes are on the order uf the day.
Perhaps this will remind you of the Abbé Pierre campaign in Paris to arouse the well-to-do to a realization of the terrible plight of the French capital's poor and homeless outcasts, though when all is said and done by these philanthropists, the workers remain the wretched and heavy laden in this capitalist world.
JUNE 1961 87 Principles A glance at the world in general reveals a sadly sick and chaotic sociciy.
That behind the fine facades there exists 4 tortured humanity and 80 much happiness, seems paradoxical.
Surcly, with the daily references in Press and Radio to such questions as Germany, Berlin, Laos, Indonesia, Algeria, the Sahara, the Congo, Palestine, Pakistan, and Africa and Asia in general, and to the nauseating thieves quarrel over the contro] of the tremendous resources and exploitable populalions, the workers can no longer fail to sce the real CAUSE of all the trouble commercial rivalry.
Of course, not one of capitalism's apologists or statesmen would lay his finger on the root cause of the social dilemma.
Not one would point out that what is in all logic to be done, is the removal of the private ownership barrier in favour of common ownership by the people as a whole, which alone wou'd enable mankind to rise to higher and loftier forms of human co-existence.
Many of capitalism's cada a to have been in the “ resistance “Mmovement and to have suffered for their Opposition to war.
But the only genuinz Opposition movement in the world to capitalist war was and is today the revolutionary organisation of the S.P.G.B. and their companion parties.
All others are not opponents to war as such; they were only on the wrong side of the warmakers’ line-up.
The gap between Marxist theory and practice could not be better illustrated than by the extension of the capital penalty in Soviet Russia.
The fact that 44 years after the Marxist Revolution it should be necessary to reintroduce the death penalty for a number of crimes is surely a very much more important propaganda point for the West than who manages to be first in orbiting the Earth with a satellite.
Over and over again the opponents of Socialism are able to make speeches and write articles sneering at Socialism on the strength of what the Russians are doing.
If we say that Socialism means the end of war, they retort that the Russians have Socialism, and they also have one of the biggest war-machines that have ever been built.
If we say s% means the end of wage-slavery, they retort that the Russian workers still have to labour for wages.
If we say it means the end of crime, they show the Russians’ own reports revealing widespread crime in the Soviet Union.
If we say it means the end of money, they point triumphantly to Russia—they have Socialism, and they have found they can’t do without money.
From both sides of the Iron Curtain the flood of lying propaganda is endless.
The Russians maintain they have Socialism, hoping thereby to secure the allegiance of the world’s workers, and make ‘the task of any states which go to war with Russia much more difficult.
The Western world also maintains that the Russians have Socialism, because they hope that their own workers, seeing that the Russian workers are no better off London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 than they are themselves, will therefore turn against Socialism.
STATE & PUBLIC PROPERTY FURTHER grist to the mills of cap.talism’s supporters comes with the news that capital punishment in Russia has now been exiended to further offences.
Now it has been decreed for persons convicted of large-scale theli of “state and public property,” for forgers, and for criminals who “ terrorize “ fellow-prisoners.
The British newspapers have not been slow to make capital out of the news.
But this has to be done in face of the capitalist monopoly of the Press, pulpit, radio, cinema, and television, all of which Strenuously maintain the opposite.
STRIKE OVER ALGERIA Monpay, ApriL 24TH was a notable day in the history of France.
At five o'clock precisely all industries, all public services, all organised labour ceased, and there was a nation-wide strike lasting one hour.
All the trade unions—communist, social democrat, right-wing—joined to support this tremendous demonstration.
The answer, of course, is Algeria, The revolt of April, although led by four generals, was a movement of the French settlers in Algeria and their sympathizers.
Their position as a propertied class depends on their keeping the Algerian land which they or their forerunners seized.
While the Algerians themselves could be subdued without too much expense, the French capitalist class was prepared to support these landed settlers.
A whole rebel army is in the field, and large-scale military operations are necessary to keep Algeria from falling into their hands.
A new Algerian moneyed class, which is the mainspring of the rebellion, is growing up.
It is in the interests of the French capitalist class to cut its losses, and by giving independence to Algeria to escape the crippling financial burden of the Algerian war.
Even though the General was brought to power by a movement which had its Origin among the settlers in Algeria, the necessities of the ruling class dictate his course.
Which explains why there have been two more attempted coups in Algeria since de Gaulle took power, led by the very men who at first supported him, and who now, of course, regard him as a traitor.
Basically it is a conteyi between the new Algerian capitalist class and the landed settlers, with the selfinterest of the French ruling class forcing it at last to come down on the side of the former.
And the massive strike carried out by the French trade unions was in support of the French ruling class against the settlers, When the workers devote half ihe tire and energy which they now give to fighting for the interests of their masters, to fighting for their own interests, they will be irresistible.
Soon returning to London after spending the winter months in Jamaica are Lord and Lady Brownlow.
Property-owners throughout the ages have been at pains ‘to make this clear to the non-property-owners, So insistent have property-owners always been on this point that we would be tempted to believe them—if only they showed they meant it by giving up their property.
Jehovah's Until a couple of centuries ago human knowledge of the physical universe and —Of man’s historic development was scattered and very limited.
The principal guides were religious works and teachings, 'the most familiar being the Bible.
The idea of the World and Universe coming to an end, and being reborn again in some other form, stemmed from man’s primitive struggles with nature, the observance of life and death among plants and animals, the waxing and waning of the heavenly bodies.
The strong religious theories and dogmas influenced ideas about society.
It was when the class struggle became more acute that suppressed groups cormbined theories about new societies with the contemporary religious ideas on the ending of the world.
Politics in 'those days were never far removed from religious hair-splitting and supplication.
In the 16th century Germany was in a state of upheaval, The creed of one Protestant group, the Anabaptists, included a belief in the return of a divine power and the establishment of a system of common ownership.
The dramatic outcome of this movement was in 1535 when the Anabaptists under John of Leyden, took over the town of Miinster and attempted to set up the millenium on earth.
The adventure was an experiment in a commonweal society which the feudal landowners, aided by the Church, stamped out in mass bloodshed.
In England at the time of Cromwell a similar but smaller group called the Fifth Monarchy men _ exisied.
Successfully hampered by the magnates and Cromwell, they awaited the Restoration to gain a place in history.
Frustrated then at every turn they took to the murder of legal gentry, and followed this up by a comic opera attack on the Tower of London.
With the opening up of the United States the ideas of the Millenium took on a more peaceful form.
In North America, where land was_ plentiful, colonies calling themselves the Lord's Elect set up their Edens, practising mutual aid, pooling of resources, and strict living.
Others more colourful awaited, whai they hoped was to be the second -coming under some self-appointed Messiah or Shiloh.
Known as the Christadelphians, they laid down very definite views on their God's plan for mankind which they based on biblical study.
They claimed that the old earth would pass away with Christ's return, and a new world with no evil, oppression, or wars, would be the reward of the believers, with an everlasting life thrown in.
They made a name for themselves aS conscientious objectors in the American Civil War.
By 1872 Pastor Russell, living in the U.S.A., had formed another group based on Christadelphian theories.
These groups called Bible Students were worldwide, linked to their chief, Russell, by a system of publications and pamphlets that embodied the Russellite theories.
After the death of Russell in 1916, the mantle of leadership fell on the shoulders of Judge, Rutherford, who had American know-how on sales pressure, publication and organisation.
The Bible Students were banned in the United States during the first World War and Judge Rutherford was jailed, It was in the unsettled conditions of the world after 1918 that the Bible Siudenis turned their propaganda to eyecatching and shock provoking tabloids.
Such statements as, “ Millions now living will never die” (in a world still numbed by the World War losses) or “ Religion is a racket” at least arrested attention, even if the subsequent arguments were lacking in proof.
The Rutherford clique tightened up on the old members and widened the base of membership.
The original select class were quietly pushed out and the members eventually became known as Jehovah’s Witnesses—a more comprehensive name and helpful in making new members.
They renounce the conventional ideas of heaven and hell, the immortal soul, and the holy trinity.
Backed up by Biblical quotes, the Witnesses argue that Man was created and lived under perfect conditions, but fell under the influence of a fallen angel, namely, the devil.
Since then the world and its social systems have fallen more and more under the sway of the devil and his legions.
Wars, sovereign states, hunger, poverty, oppression and death itself are all manifestations of mankind's turning away from Jehovah's revealed truth, The current troubled society fills them with hope, however, as the Witnesses proclaim that the day of Armaggedon cannot be far away.
The faithful, they say, will survive the final struggle in which the devil will be made captive, and “this system of things” swept away.
Christ will rule the. earth, supported by some 144,000 spiritual beings who once lived on earth, The rest of men will not die, and under the theocratic order ’ the earth will flourish as a garden.
When the earth is fruitful again a resurrection of all the dead will take place.
All will enjoy the paradise on earth and so remedy past sins by acknowledging Jehovah and Christ.
However, after a thousand years the devil will be released to tempt the wavering.
This is the final struggle and the devil and his followers will be finally condemned to death.
Many may howl with laughter at these theories —at the same ‘time as they are swallowing other dogmas, religious and political, that are just as unreal.
Perhaps that is why we are hearing so much about trouble in the Tory ranks.
It is strange, as the article pointed out, that there is at the moment no immediately obvious choice to take over from Mr Macmillan.
When Churchill was Premier, everyone knew that he would one day hand over to Eden.
And Eden, it once seemed, would pass on the burden to Butler, But Macmillan has not brought on any bright London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 thrusts at the weak links in Darwinism.
They are the type of religious opposition | to keep materialists on ‘their toes.
They have been scourged by the dictatorships which have tried to keep them from their domains as if they were the plague.
The Jehovah's Witnesses may be painstaking in argument, energetic, skilful in propaganda, obedient in organisation; but after all this they are supporting some theory that has no basis in fact.
For their case ultimately pivots on a manlike conception of a god; a deity with human emotions and ideas, a god made in man’s image.
The grimness of © capitalism has driven ‘hese people to feel that man cannot help himself; he must forever wallow in blood and hatred, never growing up, always dangerously infantile.
In ‘spite of the setbacks, heartbreaks, and mistakes, Man learns step by step to deal with his problems.
That is the final answer to the Witnesses of Jehovah, and to all other purveyors of religious theories, JACK LAW. the Boat young man as his heir apparent—there are many who look. as if they have a chance of one day stepping into his elegant shoes.
Now the interesting thing is that The Director should bother its head about the matter of the next Prime Minister at all.
He has been in the job for barely four years and is hardly cool from his last smashing electoral victory.
Some political correspondents are saying that not only Mr Macleod is a sharp boy; Macmillan himself has shown a crafty hand over Africa.
The Prime Minister’s problem is to bring his wilder and woollier supporters to accept the realities of modern British capitalism, on issués like Africa.
Gaitskell, who has a similar problem over nuclear armaments, has not shown up half as well as Macmillan.
The recent history of colonial nationalism must have convinced many influential sections of the British capitalist class that the most economical way of dealing with the nationalists is to give them what they ask and to make the best of it.
Then, they should be able to continue to invest money in the newly independent territory and so keep their influence with the native government, SOCIALIST STANDARD 1961 @ Subscription form To SPGB Literature Dept 52 Clapham High Street, London, SW4 6 issues 4/post free 12 issues 7/6 post free Send me Socialist Standard for the next issues | enclose Name Address This policy is much less ruinous than the sort of warfare which the French have waged over Algeria and the British over Cyprus.
The sharper British statesmen must shudder when they recall the famous “never™ speech of LennoxBoyd in a debate on Cyprus.
They must realise that it is better for the colonial powers to do a deal with a rising nationalist movement rather than to attempt to suppress it.
This is one of the reasons for the sudden changes of front which we have seen recently over colonial affairs, changes which have transformed men like De Valera and and Makarios from terrorists, reviled by every popular news-rag, into respected politicians who are welcomed to the conference table.
Willingness to come to terms with the independence movements may be, for the capitalists, the saner course, but the Tory Empire men do not appreciate it.
Macmillan did his best to soothe everyone, saying that Blake's espionage had done no irreparable damage.
This is impossible to reconcile with the words of Lord Parker, when passing sentence, that Blake had brought a lot of British intelligence work to nothing.
No member jeopardised his majority by pointing out that all nations have their spies.
Nobody said that spying is one of the results of the involved diplomacy of the various capitalist powers., who are all the time working to extend their influence and power.
Not one honourable member suggested _ that, whilst armed forces exist, they are bound to need powerful weapons, and to keep their latest methods of organised murder a close secret.
There was not. in other words, one voice, however small, raised to say that espionage is part of the sordid way of capitalist ‘life, that most capitalist nations have their own spies—whom they regard as heroes, whilst scourging their Opposites as dirty snoopers.
All sides of the House were united in defence of British capitalism; the only discordant note, in fact, was struck by a few Labourites and Tories who think that perhaps the government is not vigilant enough in this defence.
Some government supporters may even have been a little irritated with Macmillan over the matter.
There he waS,sO smooth and assuring, so full of honeyed words and all the time letting all that scandalous espionage go on behind his back.
It the Tories are a little down in the mouth, they can have found little in the Budget to cheer them up.
We all know that Budgets can often win a few votes, even for an unpopular government.
This year's Finance Bill gives the government power to introduce, as it likes, a payroll tax and to vary certain excise rates by ten per cent. either way.
Because they are all basically working to the same end, there is every reason for them occasionally to swap policies.
But let us always remember that there is no concern for high flown principles of democracy and freedom in this, It is simply a matter of national housekeeping for their capitalist class.
A short time ago he had the unusual distinction of stroking his eight to a third consecutive victory, but there are some signs that the tide is not running so well for him now.
We all know that Dapper Mac is a clever political oarsman, who is well capable of pulling his crew together.
In any case, the other possible eight is squabbling on the bank about nuclear disarmament and doesn't seem able to agree on who they want for their captain.
IVAN, Adam Smith’s theories of Income Notes on Economic History ADAM SMITH establishes an elaborate theory of the formation of value and of price, arguing that under primitive conditions, when there is little capital and when rent has not yet come into existence, the value of goods is determined solely by the amount of labour embodied in them.
Things, like water, which have a great use-value, have no exchangevalue; and conversely, things with very little use-value, like diamonds, have a very high exchange-value, It follows that as the measure of the exchangevalue of goods it is their “ natural price ” that matters.
Not the utility of an article, but the amount of labour that has been expended in producing it.
In accordance with the fluctuations of supply and demand this market price swings to one side or the other of the labour expenditure price.
The distribution of wealth is effected in accordance with the constituents of every price; the worker receives the equivalent for his labour, and the capitalist and the landlord receive equivalent for the coOperation of capital and land.
Thus all the commodities which compose the whole annualcproduce of the labour of every country must resolve themselves into the same three parts, and be distributed among the different in-. habitants of the country, either as wages. profit on capital, or rent for land.
Smith’s theories on the laws of distribution may be briefly phrased as follows.
G The more capital there is in a country, the greater is the demand for labour, and the higher therefore are wages.
The more capital there is, the lower is its rate of profit; the more capitalists there are, the greater is the tendency to underbid one another.
Consequently, the more labour there is in a country, and the richer it therefore is, the lower in general is the profit of capital.
Increase in the productiveness of labour the division of labour and the expansion of manufacture leads to a fall in the prices of the products of industry.
To the extent to which this happens, the products of agriculture automatically exchange for larger quantitics of industrial products ; that is, the former become dearer.
This rise in agriculture prices is attended or followed by a rise in rent, Rent also rises concurrently with an increase in capital, for since more capital and labour are applied to land, and land is therefore used more effectively, the income from land necessarily increases.
Economic activities when perfectly free develop. harmoniously, and free competition must be left to do its work.
Competition forces everyone to follow his own economic aims, to develop all his forces, and to produce as cheaply as possible, Consumers are suppli¢d with goods at the lowest prices, 0 London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 capitalists can devote their energies to their tasks unhindered, and workers can seek employment wherever wages are highest.
At the same time, it results that everyone engages in the occupation which comes most natural to him.
Division of labour takes place along the lines that ‘are most economical.
By virtue of its own mechanism, society ‘can get the better of that selfish outlook which is hostile to society.
Everyone becomes enabled, by the pursuit of his own advantage, to enjoy his natural rights.
Our natural wealth being limited to coal and iron, we are entirely dependent on the means of survival to a prejudiced, vindictive capitalist world.
I would be pleased to know my fears are ungrounded, and would be grateful for a reply.
He himself points out that England, for example, is deficient in many types of natural wealth which are essential to a modern society.
Even. those countries which ure naturally rich often find it to their advanlage to import raw materials or manufaetures.
The modern process of producing and distributing wealth is an intensely social and cO-Operative act, which no country can opt out of.
Because of this, any attempt to set up Socialism in one country must come to grief, for that country would be forced to enter into commercial relations with the capitalist part of the world.
The very fact of that country trading with others would mean that its “ Socialism ” was at an end.
In the presence of Our Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Premiers of the five Dominions of “ dur” Mighty Empire, and the ani Monarchs of many lands, and the ord God of Isracl and the Stock Exchange himself.
That question our capitalist masters fought out many years ago, They have left the King his name and his robes, his crown and his palaces, but they have stripped him of every vestige of power.
There is today, in this country at all events, no institution of capitalism that the cupitalists themselves are not fully able to maintain, or that they trust to other hands than their own.
Behind the person of the King the capitalists can hide the fact that it is they in reality who rule.
By parading their kings before the workers at every possible opportunity, and with every circumstance of pomp and display that their ingenuity can invent, by investing them with divine right and something of divinity itself, the capitalist) awaken and Stimulate and nurture that spirit of reverence, which is so deadly an cnemy to the growth of revolutionary ideas, and so detract attention from themselves.
FINANCE & INDUSTRY SOCIALIST STANDARD, JUNE 1961 The Manufacturer’s Dream | Stock EXCHANGE speculators and the financiers who manoeuvre take-overs can, within limits, accommodate themselves to the fluctuations of markets and production but the manufacturer has them always on his mind.
When demand Jeaps he may suffer the anguish of knowing that if he had expanded more he could sell more and make more profit; and when demand drops he may find he has stocks of unsaleable goods, The manufacturers’ dream of heaven is a market that steadily grows and never catches him unprepared.
People just don't understand the problems that a sudden boom and an equally sudden slump bring to the industry.
As long as the demand is there the overseas dealers keep clamouring for cars and you have to keep supplying them.
At any moment there may be thousands of vehicles in ships or on railway sidings awaiting shipment and your factories are in top gear, Then overnight the market goes ” soft” and the pipelines are choked with cars nobody wants any more.
The motor firms and other manufacturers may go on hoping, but there isn't anything they can do about it, for the “trade cycle” of alternate expansion and contraction is how capitalism has always operated.
Already there is talk of another set-back for motor cars later this year, and now the cotton industry is facing trouble again, as well as the furniture industry and the clothing trade.
For many years politicians and economists claimed that. with the lessons learned from the depression of the ‘thirties, governments could handle the problem, but fewer now confidently hold that view.
One popular business theory was that firms could gain stability by extending their activities into several different fields, but the experience of the oil companies shows the flaw in this remedy.
For some years now the oil companies have been hit by overproduction of oil, recently aggrayated by the Russian drive to invade Western markets and by the opening of the Sahara oil fields.
The Royal Dutch-Shell group of companies found new outlets by developing methods of producing chemicals from oil, including fertilisers, industrial chemicals, plastics and resins, which, of course, meant competition with the chemical industry.
Consequently, “there is some danger of surplus manufacturing capacity being created as the result of investments based on an _ over-optimistic assessment of profitability. — Perhaps when there are too many chemicals the research chemists will develop another new industry, to turn the surplus chemicals back into oil.
Tipping publish the results of a new aatempt to estimate how the wealth of the country is distributed.
Of this, nearly £31,000 million was owned by three million persons possessing over £2,000 each; and the remaining £9,000 million was owned by the other 32 million persons aged 20 or over.
In the top capital group there are 20,000 persons with more than £100,000 each and an average holding of over £250,000; in the bottom group are 16 million persons with less than £100 each and an average holding of less than £50.
They warn that their figures are very rough owing to the difficulties of handling the available material.
They think that there has been some redistribution during the past twenty years but have not found it possible to give even a rough cstimate of its extent. average Views of ‘Inflation IN THE PAST, Inflation had a precise meaning.
Mr Frank Bower, M.A., Lecturer on‘ Political Economy, gave a definition in 1908 which was in harmony with that given by Marx half a century carlier.
A fall in the value of. money, with a rise in the cost of living, caused by a comparatively permanent excess in the amount of money in circulation over that which is needed to perform the transactions of the community.
Inflation usually means the artificially high prices causcd by an over-issue of inconvertible paper money.
They were describing what would happen if an inconvertible paper currency replaced the gold and convertible notes, and if notes were issued in excessive amounts.
Then came Keynes, who used the term Socialist Standard 1961 to mean something different again.
For him it was a question neither of currency nor credit, but of whether there are unemployed workers, idle factorics. and reserves of materials.
This disregard of the over-issue of notes reached its culmination in the remark of the Committee on the Monctary System in 1959, that “ bank notes are in effect the small change of the monetary system,” and that the Government’s action in expanding the note issuc is merely the passive one of secing that Sufficient notes are available for the practical. convenience of the public.
As the total volume of production in this country is about 50 per cent. above the level of 1938, those who hold such views have yet to explain why it has been “convenient” for the government now to have in issue over four times the amount of notes then in circulation from £530 million to £2.250 million.
Earty each April the financial columnists go in for the sport of guessing what sort of budget it is going to be.
It is like backing horses, but with a difference; for after a race you do know which horse won.
Not so with the columnists, who, when the budget comes out, can rarely agree what kind of budget it is.
The reader can take his choice according to the paper he reads, This year on the 11th April the Telegraph headed its column “ Chancellor puts Checks on Inflation”; but the Mai/ found the budget “ inflationary,” as also did the Express.
The confusion is partly the result of the “ experts” not being able to make up their minds what effect, if any, particular governmental policies for managing production and trade will have, but it is also a by-product of conflicting views as to the meaning of the term inflation.
Human astronauts are too few and disorganised at the moment to insist on union membership.
And if an Astronaut Union meeting was held to discuss the matter, it’s likely that there would be more chimps there than men.
They accept the truck system of payment, fully satisfied with a weekly wage of bananas.
They demand no danger money and can easily be bribed with a full length cover story in Life magazine.
Mechanisation and mass production have reduced most factory jobs to a simple routine.
They could be farmed in colonies and crossbred to produce strains suitable for all conditions.
Naturally they'd have to be kept happy but industrial psychology is already a science.
National Veterinary Service could be set up to make sure a sick chimp could go back to work as soon as possible.
British law would have to be extended to cover the chimpanzee; be should be able to 94 SOCIALIST STANDARD, JUNE 1961 sue his master for the loss of five bananas at the cost of only a hundred bananas.
As a reward for work, patience and obedience, he would look forward to a life after death in which he would be introduced to a Gorilla father image who presided over a banana plantation.
He would learn modesty and cover up his bottom. read good books and bz BOOKS prevented from reading bad books about his promiscuous ancestors.
None of these things is impossible with careful scientific breeding and conditioning, and our modern age would be far better served by chimp workers.
For it's becoming increasingly obvious that in our modern age, human beings simply don’t belong.
P MCHALE, Waste Making CAPITALISM has solved the problem of production.
The system of capitalism, which already exists over much of the world and is rapidly capturing the rest, has given birth to sufficient productive potential to satisfy all the reasonable demands of mankind.
All that now remains to be done is to bring in a system in which these potentialities can be realised to the full.
On the other hand, in May, 1960, when the Russian capture of the U-2 plane was followed by the collapse of the summit meeting, Wall Street stock-market prices advanced during seven successive days.
But even the unprecedented spending on arms cannot solve their problems.
One is that consumer goods are deliberately made worse, so that they will wear out sooner, and therefore have to be replaced.
A guided-missile expert is quoted as pointing out that there was no technological reason why television sets could not be built to last for cight years without repair; while (according to Packard's carefully-marshalled evidence) the quality of TV sets was in fact deteriorating.
Another waste-making device is regular changes of style, so that with enorFor a socialist analysis of war read SOCIALIST PARTY AND WAR * 1/3. post paid, from SPGB 52 Clapham High Street, London, SW4 mous advertising campaigns plugging the new style, everyone with an older car or refrigerator or set of china is made to feel out of date, and has to buy the newer style to keep up with the Joneses.
In this connection the board chairman of the powerful Whirlpool Corporation told engineers at a washing-machine technical conference that ‘an engineer's principal purpose as an engineer is to create obsolescence,” Yet a further means of pushing goods is the never-never.
The result is that many American families now have a load of unpaid debts.
One “ solution ” is for the wife—including wives with young children—to go out to work as well as the husband.
And a doctor in the same city said many of his patients’ aches and pains were caused by money problems.
You may disagree with the author's conclusions, but the whole book is thought-provoking.
JUNE Worker’s Prosperity in 1961 THE town of Watford, in Hertfordshire, is claimed by its Press to be one of the most prosperous in post-war Britain, One local weekly claims for it the distinction of being the second most prosperous town in this country-—second afte Coventry, in fact.
The sort of criteria applied are the number of vacancies at the local Labour Exchange, wage rates offered, enquiries for juveniles leaving schools.
Income fax returns, rents of shops. increase of population and, logically cnough, price of house room either in rent or mortgage repayments.
Unfortunately, this * prosperity’ brings many unpleasant and disagreeable results.
In some ways, it is a miniature of what is happening on a national scale in Great Britain these days.
By the same token, a further 50,000 West Indians are coming to Britain this year, not as tourists looking at ruins, but workers seeking jobs.
The employers, through their Govern. ment, can easily control this foreign emigration—turning it on, or off, as required, like a tap.
They have always done so, as when Campbell Bannerman’s liberal Government in 1904 boasted that any Jew landing at London docks with C15 in his possession might remain here, or when the successive American Govcroments at the turn of the century admitted emigrants by the million.
It is not quite so easy to keep them ill at work once admitted, as all the historical cases show.
Although some employers, in their extremity, are making Special provision for housing — their workers, the unskilled (and paradoxically enough, even skilled puilding Workers) are finding accommodation hard to get.
All this ‘has prompted a local scribe to gently but firmly disillusion the large number of Easter Brides about their chances of a roof in “ prosperous ” Watford.
Before the war, there were houses galore for renting.” 1 haven't Iet a house in years,” one agent told me.
Advances on mortgages are granted only to applicants in permanent and secure employment.
Another house advertised this week is a good semi-detached home in North Watford with garage space.
So many young Watford couples fail to realise just how much they will eventually pay for the house of their dreams.
Borrowing only £2,500 on that terraced house Bob and Sylvia would, during those 20 years. repay the staggering total of £4,560.
Sv do not think the Building Society is doing you a favour in lending you the money, They get it back with gold-plated interest.
Just as sellers seek the highest price —buyers chase the lowest, and there may be those who hope that new towns and estates will supply their need.
At least 4,000,000 dwellings in this country today are over 75 years old.
This has been dropped, and is not reaching anything like that figure today.
The present position is that slums are growing faster than rebuilding is taking place.
He can either pay up to £6 a week repayments, which includes £3 a week interest—or move further afield where rent and mortgages are lower.
Then, if he wants the higher wages, he must pay fares, or run a car and spend time in monotonous travelling.
At least one valuable lesson, which we have all learned. is to look at our own writing with a far more critical eye, KELVINGROVE Since January the Branch has held no less than 16 indoor mectings.
The average audience has been 30, with collections of over £1] at cach meeting.
Nine different speakers took part and there were good ‘questions and lively discussion on nearly every occasion.
G Browne for SPGB: J D'Arcy Wednesday June 14th at 7.30 pm Public Hall, High Street, (Carshalton x Branch News DEMONSTRATION FOR SOCIALISM They say that the day of the big indoor meeting is over.
That working pcople won't leave the telly for a serious political meeting.
They were attracted by an_ intensive publicity campaign, embracing a serics of Icaflet raids on Islington and St.
Pancras homes ; concentrated displays of striking red and white posters all over London, and advertisements in political journals and local newspapers.
For nearly three hours, the audience heard Comrades Young and May outline the case for Socialism, answer a stream of questions, and reply to a lively discussion in which contributions came mainly from C.N.D. supporters.
Opening, Comrade Young quoted facts and figures exposing the fallacy of the “ You’ve never had it so good” argument.
The gap between the wages of the workers and the wealth they produced had greatly widened.
Tragically, workers still believed they could solve their problems by voting for reformist partics.
They would always remain wage slaves until they voted for an international Socialist society, with no wages, no money, no national states, and where goods would be produced for human need, not profit.
To Labour and Communist questioners, Comrade Young said that nationalisation was a form of capitalism.
Neither had the \ \ state capitalist system operating in the Sovict Union and other so-called Communist countries, To C.N.D. and pacifist questioners., Comrade May said the way to abolish war, both nuclear and “ conventional,’ was to abolish the capitalist system that bred it.
There could be no guarantce of permanent peace without a world-wide system> of common ownership and social cquality.
MAY DAY The weather was kind to London's May Day, allowing us to hold an outdoor rally in Hyde Park.
Members made the best of some unaccustomed sunshine to notch up some good literature sales, An interested audience heard the case for Socialism from Comrades Ambridge, D'Arcy.
In the evening we followed up with an indoor meeting at Denison Housc, where Comrades Grant and Baldwin spoke.
WEMBLEY Four members of Wembley Branch sold twenty copies of the SoctaList STANDARD in one hour’s canvass of the Fratton area of Portsmouth on May 14th.
In the afternoon of the same day, they were joined by comrades from Camberwell and Kingston Branches on the front at Southsea, where a meeting was commenced at 3.30m. and continued until almost 8 oclock, apart from a short tea break.
Although it was still fairly early in the season, there was an average audience of about fifty, taking a lively interest and asking many questions.
The previous Monday, Comrade Ja Touche showed us some colour slides of the West Indies and gave us some useful general information on that area.
G Maclatchie PADDINGTON LECTURE The Olive Branch, Crawford St., W1 Wednesday 14th June 9 pm “THE STATE OF ISRAEL” Speaker : J Keys MITCHAM LECTURE The White Hart.
Political freedom is something of such ; overwhelming importance to the working class that it loses To Strike or not it at its peril.
COVENTRY Ist and 3rd Mondays (3rd & 17th July) 7.30 pm, The Coffee Room, Craven Arms, High Street.
C Skelton, SPGB, c/o above address, KINGSTON upon THAMES Fridays 8 pm, 80 Farm Road, Esher, Surrey.
LEWISHAM Mondays 8 pm, Co-op Hall , Davenport Road, Rushey Green, Catford, SE6.
NOTTINGHAM Alternate Wednesdays (Sth & 19th July) 7.30 pm, Peoples Hall, Heathcoat Street.
SPGB, 76 Ladbroke Grove, WII, SOUTH EAST ESSEX (formerly Basildon and Southend) 2nd and 4th Mondays (10th & 24th luly) in month 8 pm, 17 Cotswold Road.
SOUTHEND SWANSEA Ist and 3rd Monday (3rd & I7th July} in month 8 pm, The Crypt, St.
WEST HAM 2nd and 4ch Thursdays (13th & 27th July) in month 8 pm, Salisbury Road Schools, Manor Park, E12.
WOOLWICH 2nd and 4th Fridays (14th and 28th July) in month 7.30 pm, Town Social Club, Mason’s Hill, SEI8.
ORDERS for literature should be sent to the Literature Department. spas, at the above address.
CORRESPONDENCE for the Executive Committee should be sent to the General Secretary, secs, 52.
LAKE, SPGB. at the above address, Postal orders and cheques should be crossed and made payable to the spas.
After being convinced for years that it would fail, the Government has now belatedly realised that it may after all be here to stay.
But so late have they left it, and so long have they dithered, that if they are to do something about joining they must do it quickly.
Otherwise, it will be impossible for them to jump on the bandwagon at all.
Hence Mr Macmillan’s somewhat panicky efforts to get matters straight with the Commonwealth and his undignified haste to prepare the ground at home.
For it is clear that the issue of whether Britain should go into the Common Market is causing a lot of heart-searching in many quarters.
As far as industry is concerned, to the giants like I.C.I. the whole question is academic.
They are going into the Common Market regardless of what decision the British Government may take.
Confident of being able to compete on equal terms with the Europeans, the only thing they are afraid of is being left outside.
On the other hand, there are many industries and firms that are very much afraid of meeting European competition and who are consequently violently opposed to going in.
The majority of the agricultural interests share this view, worrying whether their system of protection will disappear once the British market is thrown open to efficient Dutch production and the fast rising food surpluses of France.
These anxieties are also shared by Commonwealth countries like Australia, Canada. and New Zealand whose agricultural outlets in Britain would be seriously threatened and who have nothing to gain and everything to lose in a unit which is largely self-sufficient in foodstuffs save for those of tropical origin.
These are only some of the conflicting economic interests which the Government is being called upon to resolve.
Unfortunately for Mr Macmillan on this necasion, however, the usual policy of British Governments when conflicting inlerests are at loggerheads to make a show of compromise that is really only a temporary camouflage for the dominant capitalist interest to have its way in the Jong run is # non-starter since the Common Market is itself in no mood for compromises.
For the British Government, then. the long prevarication will soon have to end-—a decision must be made one way or the other.
But this may be only part of Mr Macmillan’s softeningup tactics and the opposition may be stronger than he thinks.
Whatever the outcome, it will throw interesting light on the political strengths of the various sectional interests in present-day British capitalism.
But much more interesting will it be to watch how the economic forces of capitalism, driving society's development towards ever larger units, will eventually win the day—whatever the decision.
Race hatred, with its violent undertones, still festers in ‘the Deep South.
When we remember this, the ‘sit in’ victories seem to have been too easy.
Colour bars cannot be justified by scientific argument, because there is no evidence lo support them.
Here is fertile ground for the ignorant, vicious mobster to flourish unhealthily.
Racial freedom cannot be safeguarded by the military victory of one capitalist state over another.
Capitalism, with its anomalies and insecurity, breeds many brutal and inhuman ideas.
The Freedom Riders are tackling something which may be bigger than they think.
His top level visits showed that, after the years of dispute, the American capitalist class still concern themselves deeply with European affairs, ‘Even after the wars which were supposed to eliminate them, there are still enough conflicts of interest in Europe to Start another -international blood bath.
There is no reason to think that a third world war need begin anywhere else.
Kennedy did not see Macmillan until after his important talks with de Gualle and Khruschev.
Certainly, it showed that the days are gone when Britain’s gunboat word was law and that international capitalism has new bosses to sort out its problems.
Eisenhower was one of the latest of the exponents of top man-to-top man chats, but when he left office the world was as far from a secure peace as ever.
In truth the representatives of the ruling class rarely, if ever, talk peace.
If Kennedy can be taught anything in this, he is probably learning fast.
LORD HOME IN PORTUGAL Lorp Home, according to the people who know him, is a most charming and amiable fellow.
An expert at disguising any inner feelings which may embarrass his host.
Lord Home must have needed all of his resource during his Portuguese visit.
It at any time he touched on the massacres in Angola, it was doubtless with the greatest of delicacy.
The Foreign Secretary did not go to Portugal to discuss ways of expanding democracy.
True, some governments— like the British— profess a deep concern for freedom.
We may sometimes wonder at their cynicism, but we would be wrong to blame them for the faults of an entire social system.
Summit Talks Portugal & Britain Trade Unions & Politics Ocean Liners Russian Trading Support capitalism with one hand, and hold up the other in horror at its brutality and suppression.
STICK TO YOUR BUSINESS Mr WALTER PaDLey, President of U.S.D.A.W., made the headlines recently for his statement at the Bournemouth Conference of his Union.
Then perhaps Trade Unions will discuss at Conferences what they are really there for, NEW CUNARDER THIS MONTH, the invitations to tender for the contract to build a replacement fur the Queen Mary will go out to the shipbuilders.
There seems to be little prospect that the new Cunarder will be very profitable, The government are sinking £18 million in the venture to keep British shipowners in the scramble for the transatlantic sea traveller.
Cunard argue that the best way of doing this, and of boosting British prestige, is to build a 75,000 tonner.
Some workers may object to the government’s subsidy because they think that it comes out of the income tax and other taxes which they grumble about so much.
However much the State takes from a worker's wage packet—and however much they . leave in it—he still receives, on average, about enough to live on.
The attitudes which the political parties have struck about the new Cunarder may cause some surprise.
This is not the first time the requirements of capitalism have persuaded political parties to abandon what they call their principals.
A NEW MARKET FOR RUSSIA THE INVOLVEMENT of the Russian bloc in Cuban affairs must be seen in the context of their desire to penetrate a Latin American economy which hitherto had been the exclusive preserve of Western Capitalism.
But even with their huge increase in commerce with Cuba itself, their share in Latin American exports and imports last year was still only about 2 per cent of the area's total trade, as against 47 per cent for the United States and 29 per cent for Western Europe.
However, Russia has embarrassingly large exportable surpluses of petroleum and her highly industrialised satellites, East Germany and Czechoslovakia, urgently require outlets for manufactured goods and capital equipment.
Meanwhile within Russia there is a growing demand lor foodstuffs such as sugar, coffee, beef and bananas.
Most Latin American countries are utterly dependent upon the export of one or two main crops or raw materials only.
Yet it is just these commodities that have suffered a prolonged decline in price in recent years bringing about a continentwide economic crisis, An important factor contributing towards this decline has been the hardening of United States tariffs against so many of the products that she herself produces.
This last fact is rather depressing, because it indicates a lack of class interest among a section of the working class.
But those interests exist and sooner or later they operate, whether they are openly recognised or not.
He sometimes manages to screw a little extra out of his job in expenses, free entertainment and the like.
Yet tell him that this is exactly what the docker, with his militant attitude and his little fiddles is doing, and you will find yourself in argument with an angry man.
Transport strikes, for example, can cause a lot of suffering to the workers whom they leave stranded.
But the strength of a strike is often measured by the inconvenience which it causes; there would be no point in coming out if the strikers’ labour was easily dispensed with, The strike, in fact, is a weapon.
We all know that we go to work because we must have London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 wages in order to live.
So does the docker and the dust— man, Our employer does not give us our wages as a favour, or because he thinks we have done a good job.
They are the price of something we have sold to him; they are the price of our working ability.
Whenever something is sold, there is immediately set up a mutually antagonistic relationship of buyer and seller, The buyer's interests are in paying as little as he can for whatever he is buying and the seller’s are in getting the highest price he can.
This applies to the sale of a worker's labour power; it expresses the division of interest between employers and employees and the unity of interest among the working class.
This is what forces Stiff Collar to ask for his rise, and to work his expense account.
He has a point there, For, apart from the tactical requirements of a strike—that it should be solid, short and simultaneous—workers should make sure that they only strike for a worthwhile reason, They should strike only for something which is of value to them as workers, 3 Unhappily, this does not always happen.
There are strikes by one set of workers against another, often over trivial disputes, We have all heard of the demarcation strikes in the shipyards, when men downed tools over who should bore holes or who should chalk lines.
There have been strikes by “ white ” workers against the employment of “ coloured ” workers, Last October, for example, the dustmen of Westminster City Council threatened to strike because a Jamaican had been promoted, so that instead of emptying the dustbins into the dustcart he would be driving the cart.
W. wants the coal because it is at present about sixteen shillings a ton cheaper than Welsh coal.
We, might have expected the National Coal Board to contest the application; it is a threat to one of their big markets.
But Mr Robens was dead-heated in his protest by the leaders of the National Union of Mineworkers, who also had strong words to say on the matter.
The next day, a delegate conference at Porthcawl passed a motion which threatened to use the miners’ “ industrial strength ” to prevent the importation of the American coal, We may appreciate the fact that the Welsh miners are anxious to keep their jobs, which they fear will be jeopardised by the cheap American coal.
A monthly average of 455,000 tons—including bunkers—went out during 1960.
Most of them probably agree with the theory that cheap coking coal means lower steel prices , which means that more British steel may be sold and that their jobs may become more secure.
The working class throughout the world, whatever their job or colour of skin, should realize that only one sort of strike is worthwhile.
That is one which is aimed at protecting or advancing their interests against their capitalist employers, Such strikes are worthy of wholehearted support from all sections of the working class.
Strikes which are directed against other sections of workers can only damage working class interests as a whole, because they attack the very unity in which workers must find their strength.
The miners who are resisting the imports of American coal are fighting their employer’s battles.
The National Coal Board want to protect their markets, and at the same time they would like to take over the markets which are exploited by the coal industries in other countries.
They would also like to control the market for fuel in this country——witness their smart advertising campaign and the financial inducements they offer, in competition with the oil companies, to householders who are thinking of installing central heating.
Certainly, they are no different from the steel companies, who are all in favour of making their own product as cheaply as possible and exporting as much of it as they can but who, as Mr, Whitehead cannily pointed out, would not like to \ see cheap Japanese steél pinching the market in Great Britain.
Capitalism is rife’with divided interests, The working class, who depend for their living upon selling their mental and muscular energies, should ignore them all, save one.
That one is their own interests as a subject class, When they have come to grips with that, they will get down to some fundamental question. ing of society.
The Passing Show WE MAKE NO APOLOGY for returning to the subject of Sir Thomas Moore, the Conservative M.P, for Ayr Burghs, Sir Thomas is the man who advocates a return to flogging and more frequent hanging as the answer to our troubles, But he only supports these punishments in cases of petty vio'ence.
Where a dictator is able to carry out a long and wideSpread campaign of violence, then Sir Thomas (provided he agrees with the tyrant’s brand of politics) is all for it.
In the early days of Hitler's regime he was an outspoken supporter of German Nazism; and he is still a loyal champion of Spanish Fascism.
This is only the latest of a long series of trials of political opponents which Franco's courts have held since he—having shown himself more successful at violence and killing than his opponents—came to power in the Civil War.
These thirtytwo farm workers, and the thousands of others in Franco's political jails, would no doubt be interested to learn of Sir Thomas's contention that Franco seized power in order to forestall an attempt to put a “stranglehold on freedom” in Spain.
To defend Franco on_ these grounds is like giving a medal to a man who saves a child from drowning, only to stab it to death immediately after. wards, Democracy But, of course, political freedom need not be Sir Thomas's concern.
If the Communists were in power in Spain, they would probably (not necessarily, of of course, as Yugoslavia shows) ally themselves with Russia—which is now the main overseas enemy of the British ruling class.
Franco and his Fascists, on the other hand, would come in with the British ruling class in any war against Russia.
So Sir Thomas supports Franco, and Mr Butler goes to Spain as Franco’s guest, saying it is a shame that Franco Spain has been left out of things for so long.
Borgwards Just as state control was applied here to rescue the coal and rail shareholders from the complete loss of their investments, so nationalisation—or municipalisation—is used for the same purpose in other countries.
Johannes Semler, who took over the direction of the Borgward car manvfacturing company in February, said today that the firm would have to cut its staff by another 2,500 people.
In March the board empowered the management to dismiss up to 2,500 workers, Borgwards was taken over by the Bremen municipal authorities earlier this year after it ran into financial difficulties.
Raw material An advert’ aimed at capitalists has recently been appearing in the more expensive newspapers, It tries to persuade industrial concerns to move to Durham, or at least to open new works there.
This offering of human beings as promising raw material to employers bent on the extraction of surplus value is surely degrading both to the men themselves and to those who planned and those who read the advertisement.
One of the many advantages of Socialism is that human beings will be considered as human beings, not simply as so much factory-fodder.
Expense accounts The next time you read figures showing the gross inequality of incomes—after tax—in this country, the next time you hear of the handful who get £120 and £140 per week after tax, compared with the millions who get less than £20 and the millions more who even get less than £10, remember that this is by no means the whole story.
The directors’ fees, the share dividends are only part of the real income of the owning class Besides the actual money, which is taxed, there are the large allowances on the expense accounts, which are untaxed.
So excessive have some of these junketings On expense accounts become in America that the American Treasury investigated the position, and has now released some evidence showing what has been happening.
A corporation which owned luxurious facilities on a subtropical island, including its own fishing cruiser, and aircraft to take its execulives and their guests down there, was allowed $375,000.
A supply firm had its own yacht, ranch and hunting lodges, SOCIALIST STANDARD, and was given a_ tax-allowance of $473,140 to cover its expenditure on them and on night club entertainment.
If we can be sure of anything, it is that the ordinary workers in these firms never saw these sub-tropical islands, or the hunting lodges.
E A Lesson in Futility MARCHES from Aldermaston and Weathersfield, treks from London to Holy Loch.
The campaign for Nuclear Disarmament and the Direct Action Groups seem to be more intensely active as the days go by.
No one can reasonably oppose a spirit of protest against intensifying hideousness in the instruments of war.
But to treat the subject, as do the campaigners, in isolation from its causes is to make of C.N.D. an endeavour of impotence and futility.
Here, on occasions like the Aldermaston and Wetherfield marches, were organised public protests against nuclear weapons, Yet throughout the whole proceedings there was no expression of antagonism towards the social system of capitalism which imposes upon each of its national capitalist groupings the need to have the most effective means of successfully waging war against their rivals.
The leaders —Supporters without exception of the existing social order—were cheered to the echo for their references to a capitalist world turning to nuclear disarmament for humanitarian reasons.
It is not inconceivable that governments will eventually give up the thought of waging nuclear war.
The latest development in H-bombs has made these weapons so widely destructive that the use of them might well mean the destruction of the coveted markets and the extermination of the coveting capitalists themselves.
Thus, to avoid the danger of destroying themselves and the very market expansion they are seeking, the various capitalst groupings, through their governments, may revert to “ conventional” warfare.
The colossal funds which governments have provided for the development of nuclear weapons reveals the financial lengths to which they will go to ensure the armament supremacy which, in the capitalist struggle for markets, alone offers « reasonable chance of triumph over rivals.
And, now accustomed to greatly increased provisions for defence, they O London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 would be quite prepared to spend huge sums on “ conventional ” weapons.
We know, in’any case, that with or without the bomb, war takes a sufficiently hideous toll in bloodshed and misery.
And in a capitalist system which compels, from time to time, a resort to force, wars will inevitably arise.
To denounce “the bomb” whilst acquiescing in the social set-up that brings it into being is contradictory and absurd.
The object of the working class should be the ending of a system which, at worst, offers universal annihilation through H-bombs and, at best, brings death to millions through other destructive alternative weapons.
THE CUBAN COCKPIT and CASTRO The Background IN APRIL, the American backed invasion of Cuba by a force of United States trained exiles became yet another issue that could have ‘triggered off world war.
As the invasion was under way, the American President warned Russia that “in the event of any military intervention by outside force the United States is ready to protect this hemisphere against external (our emphasis) aggression ” America’s “ egg-heads ” had hardly. recovered from their exertions in campaigning for the election of President Kennedy, the bright young “ progressive”, before they were to be distressed and dismayed .by the dishonesty and hypocrisy of his policy towards Cuba.
Much more important still has been the harmful effect upon the American alliance and the less committed countries within its sphere of influence.
The Guardian editorial of the 22nd April summed up these feelings and did not mince its words in the process.
The editorial went on to say ""as a result the United States had made Dr.
What the Guardian regretted most of all was that American policy. has facilitated Russia’s aim of posing as the “ protector of small nations” struggling to free themselves from foreign tutelage.
Like Germany and Japan before her, Russian gapitalism is a latecomer in the world arena.
The American bloc, of which West Germany and Japan at present form part, is on the defensive.
But it is not democratic rights nor the aims of Socialism that motivate their policies, It is the maintenance or enhancement of power, trade and class privilege that each government has as its function.
In January, the SOCIALIST STANDARD carried an article which pointed out that for a small power to attempt playing off the great powers as a means of fostering its own economic development involves very considerable risks.
The chief risk is that in freeing itself from subservience to one overlord it may well be forced to succumb to another.
Certainly, experience elsewhere in the field of bourgeois national revolutions of recent times has not been encouraging.
Throughout the former colonial or semi-colonial world, embryo capitalist classes or would-be capitalist intellectualmilitary élites are asserting themselves.
Their aim is to supplant the foreign interests who, in the process of exploiting the natural resources of those parts, brought into being this rival social class, But just as the old powers find it necessary to disguise their rapacious motives under the cloak of the “struggle for democracy ”, so the new local exploiting class must obscure its cruel réle in terms of the self-determination of small nations, their national liberation and the establishment of human dignity.
As regards the claim of human dignity, it is true that with the ousting of the former colonial power, many an African, an Asian or a Latin American need no longer feel humiliated just because he was born where he was born and was what he was, That is an advance.
That is that in the eyes of his employers he will not even be an inferior man.
He, that is to say his ability to work, will become a mere commodity, to be bought and sold on the market.
The Socialist measures working-class progress in terms of its heightening awareness of its needs and aspirations, Consciousness in short, of its liberating rdle in history.
The Nationalist teaches the worker to identify himself with his ruling-class, The Socialist says that the worker has no country and should recognise his common bonds with workers everywhere.
Each new state that is set up has as its number one task the inculcation of a sense of differentness into its schoolchildren and of their loyalty to a piece of territory quite arbitrarily arrived at.
For the past year or so fierce argument has raged amongst Castro's admirers as well as among his critics in the outside world.
Those who’ have viewed the scene through Bolshevik eyes have felt the necessity of “explaining” the social forces behind the Cuban revolution in the set terms of Leninism.
Hence efforts have been made to show that, like China, it was the peasants’ support that made victory possible as the workers played no great part.
Then realising, perhaps, that the peasant’s classic demand is for the land he worked and that state-farms would replace estate farms more efficiently, a new angle was developed.
Truly speaking, they said, those working on the sugar plantations were not peasants at all but sharecroppers hired and fired by the three month season.
Concerning the other end of the social scale, it is being debated whether it was a middle-class revolution betrayed because so many of its staunchest professional and managerial supporters have been alienated by now.
These knotty problems can be un‘ SOCIALIST STANDARD, JULY ravelled, however.
According to Geografia de Cuba, a book quoted by Theodore Draper in his well documented article in Encounter last March, the population was more urban than rural and increasingly so.
Of the 40 per cent who were dependent upon agriculture for a living over a quarter were classified as farmers and ranchers.
The urban population was mostly literate but nearly half the rural population was not.
But whatcver their category, the mass of the people have readily given their support to a régime that promises to put an end to seasonal unemployment by diversifying agriculture and which is making strenuous efforts to raise the educational level of the people.
Except for a pioneering few that were built up under anarcho-syndicalist influences at the turn of the century, most unions date from a much later eriod and were sei up under Stalinist influence.
Nevertheless, within their limits they became quite valuable workingclass instruments.
Under very great pressure they carried on through the Batista dictatorship and came out more or less intact.
This was partly due to the fact that in the early days of the guerrilla war the trade-union movement remained neutral.
Support for Castro came from professional and managerial circles who still lacked the constitutional righés promised as long ago as 1940 and from an increasing number of the rural population who saw him as the man who Would at last enact the land reforms that had been promised in the same constitutional proposals.
As late as April 1958 it broke, in effect, the general strike called by Castro since the key transport workers under CP leadership did not join in.
A few months after Castro’s triumphal march into Havana, the union elections that were held put most of the country’s union branches firmly in the hands. of his 26th July Movement.
National conferences of various union federations during June, July and August secured him control over most of these groups.
It Should be noted that the new government had debarred from the elections been failed by such middle-class elements as existed when the change came.
Rarely has nature repeated the perfect juxtaposition of coal and iron that so favoured the pioneers of British capitalism.
Coming so much later onto the scene there is the problem of important sections of the working-elass being already organised to resist encroachments.
In these circumstances and bearing in mind the extent to which the middle-class is compromised to the metropolitan power, it falls to a determined and far-sighted section of that class to actually throw off the fetters, often at the expense of some of the comforts and privileges of the class as a whole.
At the congress of the local TUC early in 1959 there was a struggle between the proand anti-communist elements within Castro’s movement, the anti-communists having held power since his victory.
According to Robert J Alexander in his new book, The Struggle for Democracy in Latin America, both Fidel and his brother Raul intervened on behalf of the pro-communist elements, As a result all but one of the leading anti-communist figures were purged from the Executive.
Since then the government has taken stringent measures to regiment the organised workers.
By decrees promulgated early in 1960 all collective bargaining was abolished and all matters previously dealt with through joint negotiations were to be submitted to the Ministry of Labour for arbitration.
In the Soviet hierarchy it presumably ranks higher now than mere “Popular Democracies” which is what most of the satellites remain.
Freedom of dissent whilst not entirely gone has been drastically curtailed.
Adlai Stevenson was reported by Tim, as saying at the United Nations that nearly two-thirds of Castro's first cabinet now form the leadership of Cubans in exile.
It can be seen that those who fought with Castro in the belief that it was a struggle between democracy and dictatorship are Silenced, in prison or in exile.
Political freedom is something of such overWhelming importance to the workingclass that it loses it at its peril.
INSURANCE Just as with Labour Exchanges and Old Age Pensions, so with the latest dodge, State Insurance, it is a soporific.
All along the line of Liberal legislation an examination shows that the benefits go to the employing class, not to the employed.
How well he is looked after—well fed, cared for and doctored, If he does not feel up to the mark he has got a guardian there specially looking after him.
Just so, To keep the worker in a fit condition ensures a greater output, and the increased efficiency resulting from such condition will enable the employer to wring more profit out of his victim, for, while the labourpower may cost a little more, the return is certain to be greater.
But what concerns us here is an amendment, debated at the Conference, which would have postponed any effort to re. duce armaments until such time as a law had been passed providing full maintenance for workers who Jost their jobs in the armaments industries.
It can be answered categorically from past experience as well as from general considerations that capitalism is not kept going simply by armament expenditure and therefore the effect that reductions of armament expenditure will have depends on all sorts of other factors 4s well.
To start with, except in war-time, expenditure on armaments and armed forces represents only a small proportion of total national income and production -—in Britain it is now about 74 per cent, in U.S.A. about 11 per cent, and in other European countries very much less than that to combat Germany they must economise, they must obtain 4 better quality of labour-power -if possiblewithout increasing its cost.
Hence there is a welling-up of the milk of human kindness im the capital breast, and we yet Stale Insorame and the like.
If trade conditions were alreads depressed af that time the effects might be severe and prolonged, but they would non be different in magnitude from the cHhects produced by any other sudden cessation of demand for labour and goods totalling £1,400 million a year.
One factor to be remembered here is that what is called “defence expenditure” is not wholly or mainly on weapons of was; about half is on the food, uniforms, buildings and pay of military and civilian staffs.
In 1945 war expenditure was equal to nearly half the total national income.
Then in two years it was cut from £5000 million to under £850 million, and the size of the armed forces was slashed from $ million to $00,900.
The effect of this on unemployment was negligible though it involved millions of men changing their work and millions of others finding jobs after demobilisation.
All that happened was that as the armed forces dwindled the aumbers of workers in civilian employment grew, for capita lism was in a vigorous phase of expansion.
America immediately after the end of World War tl hud much the same erSOCIALIST STANDAKD. perience as Britain when it demobilized most of its war-time armed forces, but unemployment did not fall to so low a level.
They were not going through a phase of expansion in the easly post-war years and their demobbed soldiers and redundant munitions workers largely went to swell the very heavy unemployment that lasted for ten yeass OF more.
But later, though Germany's armament expenditure still represented only about 2 per cent or 3 per cent of national income and production, German industry has had several years of boom conditions with more vacancies than workers to fill them and hundreds of thousands of workers being brought FINANCE & INDUSTRY JULY in from neighbouring countries.
We can therefore say that though ari, and armies play a considerable part in the whole field of production and employment and can af times exercise a considerable influence on the total magnitude, expenditure on them is no more decisive than any other expenditure of similar size. ic. on average about 5 per cent to J0 per cent of total national production and expenditure. [t all depends on whether capitalism is in an expanding or a-contracting phase.
To put it in perspective. it may be added that while capitalism continues no government is in fact going to abolish its armies and armaments though, as in the past, there may be occasions when expenditure is reduced.
H Capitalism’s Sensitive Spot {1 HAS LONG been noticed by observers of capitalism that among the crimes it punishes most savagely is anything which affects the sanctity of the currency.
In Britain the maximum penalty for counterfeiting gold and silver coins (which includes the current cupro-silver substitutes) is penal servitude for life.
Nothing more clearly highlights the essentially capitalist nature of the Russian social system than the news that the extension of the death penalty in that country includes the offences of uttering or passing forged currency or securities, and therz afe sentences up to five years and confiscation of property for speculators.
According to David Floyd (Daily Telegraph 26451) 4 big case is now before the courts of speculators who are alleged to have made 2) million roubles m a yeas (25 million at the official Russian exchange rate) by illegal dealings in foreign currencies and gold.
He expresses the opinion that Russiz has been spending on rockets as much as the total British cost of arms and armies.
British capitalism could keep abreast of the development of costly technique. but can now no longer do so.
The Employers’ Attitude Bec st'st. under near ~full employment”. it has not been quite so easy for em ployers to discipline the workers as it was before the last war. is often claimed that worker-empliver relationships have undergone 2 fundamentsi change.
It seems to have been vers good for the firm as its profits have gone up in ten years from £26000 to £575.00.
The Cost of Advertising Tac advertising costs are sometimes very high for particular articles, especicll) when a new product is being launched or there is fierce competition for the market. the total cost of all advertising ts not as large as might be expected.
According to an estimate of the evpenditure on all forms of advertising made by Dr.
Mark Abrahams and published in the Observer the total in 196) was £455 million. [t has however been rising fast and is expected 10 touch £500 million this sear.
So much political capital has been made out of the workers’ alleged “ prosperity” that if we merely succeed in getting the facts and-establishing the truth, we shall have done something really worthwhile.
One of the most recent assessments is Professor Morgan's book The Structure of Property Ownership in Britain.
Professor Morgan estimates that the total ~ nominal wealth gf this country today is ‘£40,355 millions, Of this, 5 per cent or 1 in every 20 own a total of £30,000 million.
That means that the remaining 95 per cent own a balance of £11,000 millions.
In other words, 1/20 of the population owns” 3/4 of the nation’s wealth.
The remaining 19/20 own about 4 quarter between them, but of this 95 per cent over a half own nothing.
In 1960 10 million people paid Income Tax on £10/20 a week; nearly 6 million paid on £3 to £10 weekly; while only 16,000 paid tax on over £10,000 a year income.
The number of millionaires in Great Britain increased from 37 in 1956 to 67 in 1961.
Some. such as Mr Clore, Mr Hugh Fraser and Mr Cotton, are multi-millionaires, of the order of 15 to 20 million or more.
As might be expected, many increased their wealth by vast “ take over ~ deals.
In the first quarter of 1960, there were mergers to the tune of £200 million.
The first quarter of 1961 more than doubled this figure with £427 millions, which included the largest bid of all time—£130 million for Ford's Motor Works, besid2s £39 million for Odhsms Press.
Six per cent more retail trade passed into the hands of the great multiple combines in 1950/60.
This is based on the Ministry of Labour's Price Index, which always starts an argument.
Were the clerical workers. local Government lower grade Civil Servants and teachers included * London and Cambridge Economic Service. there would hardly be any increase.
Behind the purely nominal increases, real wages have remained practically stationary.
Assessment of the situation in 1961 would be incomplete without some reference to Automation.
In practice, this means that more processes are controlled by pre-set electronic and other devices.
The worker has less choice than ever in the character and quality of his product, and so is more completely than ever the appendage of a machine.
It ensures that workers work regularly at a faster pace, and is a fruitful source of more surplus value and higher profits.
The large amount of overtime worked, and long hours spent in travelling to and fro, do not improve matters.
In fact, 1960 might be summed up by saying that it gave the very best that workers can expect under Capitalism—plenty of work.
Unfortunately workers cannot get straight improvements under capitalism —they all have strings.
Wages may improve, but with a big demand for labour, up go rents and the price of food and necessaries.
So that, overall, it might be said that in spite of the fantastic technical developments of the last decade—thz fundamental position of the worker (with his television set) remains the same.
And this, after hundreds of Reforms. scores of leaders, the finest Health Service, the best Insurance Scheme and thz most democratic rights in the world.
Perhaps I ought to say a word about atomic power, space-flight, the penetration of the mantle of the inner earth etc.
Apparently some people think that all this supersedes or invalidates Socialism.
So far from refuting the analysis of Capitalism as a passing stage in social which prepares the ground for Socialist society, they confirm it.
The bourgeoisie, by the rapid improvement of all instruments of production, by the immensely facilitated means of communication, draws all, even the most barbarous nations, into civilisation.
The cheap prices of all commodities are the heavy artillery with which it batters down all Chinese Walls.
It keeps on doing away with the scattered state of the population centralised means of production and concentrates property in a few hands.
The capitalists have created more massive and more colossal productive forces than have all preceding generations together.
But that bewildered workers should turn back to Liberalism in their despair is tragic.
Even more than this, they claimed to be ~ practical ~ Socialists who knew the way to gt Socialism without explaining it to the workers.
Socialism alone can free the workers from the necessity of selling himself for the profit of a master.
Socialism alone will strip him of his merchandise character, and allow him to become a full socal being.
This was the start of a 57-year record of job-hunting and place seeking, culminating in the Labour Government, in which the Labour leaders systematically opposed the very JULY reform measures they had themselves used, to clamber into positions of power.
War, Conscription in peace-time, Strike-breaking by Troops, Wage Freeze, Atomic and Hydrogen Bombs, they have supported all these and actually implemented most of them.
Their Nationalisation schemes, with their disastrous failure to understand that Society (meaning today, the workers) or the “Community” cannot “control” industry without owning (that means taking them out of capitalist hands) through political power first, are bogged down and discredited.
Their housing projects, as soon as they became landlords, bring them both opposition and hatred.
The myth of the working class marching steadily forward to Socialism by increasing Labour majorities is well and truly finished.
Notes on Economic History ADAM SMITH’S ideas on the development of economic life led him to make a clean sweep of all feudal ties and servitudes.
The abolition of serfdom, the introduction of freedom of occupation and industry, freedom of movement, political autonomy; these were the inevitable corollaries of the new doctrine.
A demand heavy with consequences. the demand for free trade, formed a logical and essential part of the demand for the abolition of all restrictions upon production and distribution.
Smith's theory of free trade was as follows :— If trade be freed from all restraints, through the working of competition, it will come to pass in the long run that every country will produce those commodities which its natural facilities enable it to produce most cheaply.
Thus there will arise a natural international division of labour. which will rebound to the maximum benefit of each nation, for each willbe able to buy all it wants in the world market at the lowest possible prices ; while selling there to the greatest advantage those things which it is exceptionally fitted to produce.
It is the maxim of every prudent master of a family never to make at home what it will cost him more to make than to buy.
In regard to the applying of these free trade principles, Smith was pr2pared to compromise.
He agreed to the need of Socialist Standard 1961 excise duties as a source of revenue, as also to the expediency of retaliatory duties imposed upon imports from countries whose policy was protectionist, and for duties for special purposes, for instance where an industry was judged to be essential for the safety of a country and was in need of protection.
Smith, not being the dogmatist, as those who subsequently opposed his doctrines declared, was very cautious in practical matters.
Much of present day opinion of Smith’s views is based upon the modifications his teachings underwent at the hands of Ricardo. and later still in the eighteen-thirties by the Manchester School of Free-traders.
It is necessary to point out that Smith was not hostile to the landowning class.
On the contrary, he considered that the interest of those who lived by rent was “ strictly and inseparably connected with the general interest of Society ” for their income increased proportionately to an increase in the general welfare.
Of the capitalist class he wrote that its interest had not the same connection with the general interest of Society as that of the landowners and wage-earners.
For. he said, the rate of profit does not. like rent and wages, rise and fall with the booms and slumps that affect society.
On the contrary, it is low in times of boom, and high in tirfes of slump.
He advocated high wages and freedom of combination, but he deprecated State interference in wage contracts.
Smith’s teaching brought about an entirely different way of looking at political economy.
It did this, first of all, by showing investigators that the source of wealth is not a simple matter.
He regarded labour as the primary source of wealth, but the conditions under which labour had to operate were of vital importance, and especially the increase of productiveness by the division of labour.
Smith regarded everything from the outlook of exchange in the market, he conceived of economic phenomena as centring in exchange in the processes of “trade”, and his explanation of the motive force of economics was derived from this conception.
Smith’s chief contribution to economic doctrines was his neatly rounded and bold notion that economic life was a series of processes of exchange linked to each other.
He finalised the physiocratic idea of the natural order. that is the harmonious encounter of numberless individual self-seeking econvmic activities.
In his doctrine, exchange. the trading intercourse of separate economic agents, became the central manifestation of economic life.
His system was not a theory of production, tut a theory of price and value which he considered determined production just as much as distribution.
The fact that the development of the productive powers of labour brought no benefit to the worker is Stressed by Adam Smith.
Smith notes that the productive power of labour underwent no really important development until labour was transformed into wage labour, and until the means of production had taken the form of private ownership, either of land or of ‘capital.
Thus, labour’s productive powers did not begin to develop until the worker was no longer able to take for himself the results of development.
The deposit for nomination of candidate was £25, Though the Branch realised that they would lose their deposit. they considered the resulting propaganda would justify the expenditure, They contested Duncairn Ward, as it was only in this ward that they had enough members to sign the nomination paper.
It is a very thickly populated ward but not particularly suited to their purpose.
Families living in dwellings that are sub-let, and adults other than the occupier and wife, are denied the right to vote.
On the other hand a “ property” vote enables businessmen and company directors, with branches or diverse business inlerests, to vote as many as eight times.
Consequently the small group of Belfast comrades had to name and address the ten thousand Election Statements, and deliver them to houses over an area of 16 to 18 square miles.
This was a colossal task, which took well into each morning, after holding. meetings in the area during the evening and night.
Their opponents contented themselves with touring the constituency with music, processions led by buntingbedecked lorries, and loud-speaker exhortations telling people how to vote.
Yet homelessness and slum-dwelling have become an accepted thing in our society.
House building, like every other productive activity under capitalism. is pursued. for the purpose of profit-making, human needs are as nothing beside the great god profit.
No party will solve the problem of bad and insufficient homes while profit remains the accepted system of social Organisation.
Only in Socialism, where production of all things, including homes, is solely for the satisfaction of people’s needs, is a solution to he found.
Certainly not because everyone has a sufficiency of the things workers produce, or can produce.
Unemployment is just another permanent feature of a buyingand-selling capitalist society.
In Socialism, where human needs will be the only factor governing production, when a point is reached at which a sufficiency of all things has been produced. it will simply mean more leisure time for the producers without the attendant hardships of today.
The problems of the workers North and South of the border are similar and are Not caused hy the geographical Border, but by 4 division much more evil in its effects--the class border hetween us of the working class, who produce everything and own nothing, and the capitalists, who produce — nothing and own everything.
SOCIALIST STANDARD, JULY Every night, in ‘spite of bad weather, a number of meetings were held.
The first meetings were accompanied by three car-loads of police, motor cycle police, and several police on foot.
Places were visited where opposition was usually violent, but only once was a voice raised in anger against us.
In their literature and from the platform, the Belfast members urged voters only to vote for Socialism if they understood it and wanted it, as outlined in the Election Address.
We congratulate our Irish comrades on the tremendous and self-sacrificing effort they put in with such good results.
It augurs well for the progress of the socialist movement in Ireland, and is heartening to their comrades in other lands.
Coventry Re-Blitzed WE ARRIVED in Coventry at about 11.30m. and by noon we had our platform up and our literature displayed on our stand.
The speaker opened the Meeting and comrades moved to the various points, some selling “Standards” and pamphlets and others distributing “ Introductory ” leaflets with the address of the Coventry group stamped on them Soon we had a sizeable audience and the questions came fast and furious.
In the afternoon an individual in the audience, using some youthful arrivals from the local beer shop, attempted to create some trouble.
Soon after we had reopened the meeting, the local police arrived on the scene.
They insisted that we close the meeting, but not before our speaker had put the issue to the audience and secured a majority vote of hands for us to carry on.
Nevertheless, we were obliged to give way to the forces of the State, and dismantled our platform to cries of “Shame” from the audiencedirected , at the police.
The Precinct in Coventry is the city’s vpen, ultra modern, traffic-free shopping centre, and our meeting had attracted sv many people that it was impossible io get into or out of the stores on either side.
The Superintendent of the police later remarked that, whoever we were. we certainly hit Coventry with a bang, and apparently this was loud enough to stop the “ commercial symphony ” being played on the cash register bells‘ However, we finally fixed things so that we could open again. and this we did at 4.30m.. though in a different spot.
We carried on for about half-an-hour and then had to vacate the speaking place in favour of some hot-gospellers (this description provided by the police). who had apparenth hooked it.
So back we went to the scence of our former triumph. and here we carried on a successful meeting with no interruptions until 7m.
Since the above report was written we have heard of two further propaganda ventures in Coventry.
On June 10th and 17th London members joined with our Coventry comrades in running very successful outdoor meetings.
One thing the Victorian members are sure of is that thousands of people have heard their Message for the first time. and a lot of confusion about the relation of Socialism. to Soviet Communism was cleared up.
We congratulate our Overseas comrades on the effort they have put in and the results thes have obtained.
IRELAND We learn from the W.S.P. of Ireland that owing to the death of a recently elected candidate in one of the wards, they are again entering the election contest.
They tell us that. in their opinion. the greatest single fac‘or in obtaining treir surprisingly high voie was because thes emphasised the international nature of their message. and the fact that they are part of a greater movement.
The workers may not vet have awakened to the need for Socialism. but they are beginning to demonstrate that they at least realise that so far whatever party they have voted for no change ensues for them--hence the abstentionists are the real majority—they continue to accept capitalism. but they are not voting for it.
We believe that. especially among such people. real.eflort on our part can carry the day and convince them that there iy something worth voting for.
E Grant, E Hardy Branch News EALING The branch is carrying on with its programme of fortnightly discussions during the summer months, alternatively with the usual business meetings.
Comrade Jack Law gave a very interesting lecture on the Jehovah's Witnesses last month and will be giving another on the “ Opening up of the American West” on July 7th.
The weekly outdoor propaganda meetings have started at Earls Court and all members ars asked to make a special effort to support them.
A group of members went down to Southsea for an outdoor meeting on Sunday, June 25th.
Literature sales were S.S. £1 9s.d., Pamphlets £1 Os.d., Collections £2 15s.d.
One open-air meeting was held in Leicester and two were held in Nottingham.
LONDON A reminder of the mecting being held at Conway Hall, Red Lion Square, on Wednesday, July 19th, at 7.30m.
Lessons were learned from this meeting and as a result the Conway Hall meeting should be exceptionally well supported and organised, Members and sympathisers—rally to the meeting and keep up the good work.
JULY 19TH, 7.30 PM Please note your diaries and bring as many friends along as possible.
There is a good gallery and plenty of Standing room, in addition to the spacious hall on the ground floor.
BRISTOL > Durdham Downs is the regular outdoor meeting place for the Bristol Group members who have been holding meetings this season.
During the month of May four meetings were held, audience averaging 50 and literature sales 9s.d.
The comrades are hoping that with constant Support they will be able to continue throughout the summer with increasing interest from the workers of Bristol.
Their candidate had two half-hours on T.V. and a brief appearance after the vote was counted.
COVENTRY Ist and 3rd Mondays (7th & 2st Aug) 7.30 pm, The Coffee Room, Craven Arms, High Street.
SPGB at above address, LEWISHAM Mondays 8 pm, Co-op Hall , Davenport Road, Rushey Green, Catford, SE6.
NOTTINGHAM , Alternate Wednesdays (2nd, 16th & 30th August) 7.30 pm, Peoples Hall, Heathcoat Street.
SOUTH EAST ESSEX (formerly Basildon and Southend) 2nd and 4th Mondays (14th & 28th Aug) in month 8 pm, 17 Cotswold Road.
SOUTHEND SWANSEA Ist and 3rd Monday (7th & 2Ist Aug) in month 8 pm, The Crypt, St.
P Mellor, 13 Waterloo Place, Brynmill, Swansea, WEMBLEY Mondays 8 pm, (no meeting Aug, 7th) Barham Old Court, Barham Park, near Sudbury Town Station, Wembley.
WEST HAM 2nd and 4th Thursdays (10th & 24th Aug) in month 8 pm, Salisbury Road Schools, Manor Park, E12.
WOOLWICH 2nd and 4th Fridays (lith and 25th Aug) in month 7.30 pm, Town Social Club, Mason's Hill, SEI8.
In spite of all the optimism a few months ago it is now clear that output is not going to get back to the previous high levels for some time to come.
As for exports, the outlook is not bright at all and much of the manufacturers’ former confidence about prospects has evaporated.
The pre-war seasonal sales pattern, high in the spring and summer, and low in autumn and winter, seems now to have re-established itself.
There may well be further difficulties later this year, therefore, as the graph turns downwards.
Nor are manufacturers reassured to hear of the various dire measures which the Chancellor of the Exchequer is said to have ready once the 1961 Finance Bill has become law—an increase in the purchase tax on cars is hardly likely to improve their sales prospects, A further worry is, of course, the Common Market.
If Britain stays out it means the end of any hopes to step up sales in Europe since the everincreasing tariff against countries outside the Market will put British prices completely out of the running, If Britain goes in, the position may hardly be any better since British cars will be open to the full blast of European competition.
Recent large-scale hire purchase defaulting has made the finance companies jittery.
The result has been that many firms have gone out of business or are on the point of doing so.
American car production is still bumping along the bottom, with little sign of an upturn.
In Germany, Volkswagen is still apparently doing well, but Borgward has run into difficulties and may be forced to go out of business altogether.
The tempo everywhere has slackened off compared with the hectic scramble of 18 months ago when the United States market in particular was wide open to the exports of the European small car manufacturers.
Like Britain, every one of the other major national producers has largescale expansion programmes ahead.
Some firms are already far advanced with their plans and almost ready to go into production. -Volkswagen in Germany, Citroen in France, Fiat in Italy.
Others, such as Renault in France and Lancia in Italy, have also actully started work on their big new projects and until recently, at any rate, were pushing them ahead with all speed.
Further to these, Alfa-Romeo in Italy has just begun building an important new plant near Milan and Peugeot in France has recently bought a large piece of land near Mulhouse for a further factory.
No doubt all these firms are wondering, like their British counterparts, whether all this projected expansion is going io be worthwhile.
The Daily Mail recently interviewed Sir Leonard Lord, the Chairman of the British Motor Corporation.
He smiled broadly, raised both his hands, and showed two sets of crossed fingers.
Which, come to think The result of unloading so much barley onto the British market has been to force the price down to less than £16 a ton— and it may fall further yet.
One hundred million pounds down the drain! — Didn't that prove how inefficient nationalisation is” Vhis may or may not be true.
But there is une Way in which nationalisation jis very good business--for the people who are prosperous enough to have money invested in it, B.T.C.’s loss of £100 million was arrived at after £45 million had been paid in interest and other charges, This makes its true deficit more like £55 million.
Everybody knows that a private company which finds itself with a deficit in its accounts does not usually lumber itself with an even greater loss by paying out enormous amounts of interest.
But that is exactly what B.T.C.~ and all other nationalised industries—must do, because their capital is wholly guaranteed, unlike the equity shares which make un the bulk of most private companies’ capital.
British Overseas Airwavs Corporation had a kick about this last’ Mav, when they announced that their interest payments had transformed an operating profit of £4:75 millions into an accounting deficit of 1-7 millions.
A lot of people were taken for a ride when public transport in this country was nationalised, but the shareholders were not among them.
Berlin IT IS NOT so very long ago that British, French and American workers were being killed in their attempts to blow Berlin to pieces.
There is now a possibility that more workers will be killed in an attempt to put the German capital together again.
The division of Berlin, and of Germany, has been a bone of great power contention ever since those same great powers decided to carve it up in 1945.
At that time, the division was supposed to be one of the essentials of peace in Europe.
Everybody expected the usual peuce treaties to be signed within a few vears, The tacts have disappuinted these expectations.
Whenever Mr Khruschev starts talking about a German peace (realy, there is an ominous sound of the release of safety catches.
Perhaps Europe has never recovered its nerve from the 1948 Berlin blockade.
Another world war could start before the last one has been officially signed into history.
E.T.U. and | the Communists NoBoDY NEEDED a long and expensive court case to tell them that the Electrical Trades Union was dominated by energetic Communists.
And no trade unionist needed the capitalist press to tell him that it was all his fault and that he must take a greater interest in his union's affairs.
Such solicitous concern from such a quarter is, to say the least, suspicious.
After all. when trade unionists become sufficiently active to organise a strike for higher wages, they have hardly a friend in Fleet Street.
Nowadays, the Communists are in the vanguard of trade union actiyity and for this they earn the disapproval of the press.
But let us remember that they have been a nuisance to British capitai ism only since Russia ceased to he Britain's ally.
An upset in the international line-up could make Communist shop stewards useful to British employers, as they were during the last war.
We should all be as active as possible in trade union work which is in working class interests.
And we should all realise that trade unions should be the enemy of the capitalist class, instead of the docile hangdogs which the newspapers would like them to be.
Kuwait GENERAL Kassem is only the latest of a long line of post-war bogey men in the Middle East.
King Saud of Saudi Arabia used to be a bogey man, a fact which was played down when he sent (roops to support the British landings.
British influence in the Arab states has been extensively undermined, and the Foreign Office policy of propping up One feudal despot against another has been a comprehensive flop.
Most of the despots agree that. before most other things. they want the British to leave.
The oil-rich states are especially anxious 10 be “ free.” so that they can make the best of their natural wealth.
This is the fact behind the newspaper blah about big brother coming to the aid of little boy set on by big bully, Kuwait is the Middle East's greatest oil producer, with half of its main concession held by British Petroleum.
But it is improbable that they realised that it was all for the welfare of 8ritish capitalism.
But politicians are, of course, men who have to work and, some of them, to worry.
Cut away all the hand-out material about their alleged brilliance and sincerity and we are left with people who are hard worked administrators of the detailed alfairs of capitalist society.
Whatever department a minister may have under his control, his twenty-four hour concern must be to protect the interests of the ruling class; all his decisions must conform to society's capitalist basis.
The unfortunate fact about this, though, is that capitalism can often be most difficult to administer.
And when the ministers think they have settled a problem, they often find that capitalism has an ungrateful way of undermining their solulion.
In foreign affairs, the pressure is particularly strong—we can all think of prominent politicians who have been sent to an early grave by the persistent worry of trying to sort out the tangle of clashing national interests.
Similarly. attempts at taming the economic waywardness of property society have virtually killed some ministers and reduced others almost to invalids.
Yes, a polilician, apart from needing to be cynical and industrious, must also be tough.
One of the acutist and most persistent of capitalism's problems is the conflict of commercial interests.
We do not need to be very observant to appreciaiz that the goods and services which contribute to our lives today-—and even those which are completely essential to our lives—are turned out only to be sold.
But before the car gets into any driver’s hands, the commercial requirements of capitalism must be satisfied.
Now where the problem comes in is that selling capitalism's commodities need not be an easy business.
There are many motor car manufacturers after the money of our incompetent driver.
They all point out the extra-super qualities of their car, prove that it accelerates better, runs faster, travels safer, uses less petrol, than the cars of their competitors.
But, for that particular customer there can be only one satisfied car maker.
The rest must be disappointed, and try extra hard to catch other sales.
The capitalist class regard the selling of commodities as vital because unless they are sold, the profit which the workers have built into them with their every working action can never be realised.
The shareholders of the motor car industry would never invest their money in enormous factories, labour and costly machinery if it were only to make a loss.
So, unless a profit can come from selling cars, none of them will be turned out.
No clothes would be tailored, no houses built, no television sets assembled, if there was no prospect of a profit being realised somewhere along the line.
Nobody would cut your hair, or put you up in an hotel, or entertain you.
Barley growers in this country have every prospect of harvesting a record crop this year.
For the French also have a lot of barley in the offing and so have the farmers in Western Germany.
Meanwhile, the Russians have already shipped some of their surplus barley over here and, because they are determined to sell the stuff no matter how cheaply. they have knocked the bottom out of the market.
China, faced with famine. has been forced to ask Canada and Australia for shipments of it on credit.
London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 there is so much barley knocking about.
The National Farmers’ Union, in fact, has asked for action under the Customs (Dumping and Subsidies) Act to keep out the foreign barley.
This does not mean that British farmers are always in favour of tariff protection for all British industries, Just like any other industry under capitalism, the farmers are interested in holding onto their own markets and in getting the best price they can for the goods they sell.
When they buy goods, their attitude is rather different—they want them as cheap as possible, even if it means that foreign industries must be allowed to export cut price commodities to / this country.
For example, British farmers would like to see unrestricted entry allowed for fertilisers and farm machinery, and some for feeding stuffs.
A couple of years*ago, the chairman of the Farmers and Smallholders Association spoke bitterly of what he called “.. . the fertiliser monopoly . . .” making “.. . at least an extra £10 millions by charging the British farmers more than the European price for fertilisers.
Aithough they would not like to see the tariff wall which shelters them knocked down. they might perhaps be in favour of cheap barley and other foodstuffs, which might mean fewer wage claims for them to face.
Whatever you did, you could bet on it that there would soon be another, similar problem clogging your In tray.
For not only the farmers and fertiliser kings are in conflict over issues like tariff protection.
Capitalism, because it moves on its bearings of profit motive, turns up + multitude of opposing interests. [t is the politician who must sort them out and must offer his solution to the voters as the sanest, surest method possible.
Percontinued bottom next page SOCIALIST STANDARD FINANCE INDUSTRY Chancellor’s Pay-roll Tax IN THE BUDGET earlier this year the Chancellor of the Exchequer announced that he would get power to levy a Payroll Tax to be used, when he thought fit, as a means of encouraging employers “to use more labour-saving machinery” and seek ways of cutting down the number of workers they employed.
The amount proposed is 4s. a week for each worker, the tax to be paid by the employer.
It had a very hostile reception, not only from the Opposition but from many Conservative M.P.’s and employers.
Nobody seems to have remembered that a “ Keynesian ” scheme very similar to this was agreed by the three political parties in the war-time national government and set out in a document called Employment Policy, which was to be the blue-print for maintaining full employment and for preventing prices from rising.
It was to be operated by making workers and employers pay higher national insurance contributions when unemployment fell to a low level, and lower contributions when unemployment increased.
The idea was that if demand for consumer goods fell and unemployment increased, reducES continued from previous page haps, at the previous election, he offered an opposite policy, which he said was also sane and sure.
They are the people who suffer, and are exploited as a result of the anomalies of capitalism.
However hard the going a politician must endure, it cannot compare with the rough road of working class existence.
Like many other plans it has never been used, so we have no factual evidence to show what result it would have had.
Discussion about the proposed Payroll Tax has however produced some interesting information about developments in industry that have been going on and would presumably be stimulated by such -4 tax.
There are in the engineering trades today thousands of one-man firms or small companies where the entire labour force consists of directors and which have no pay-roll at all.
These firms produce drawings or tools on a free-lance or subcontract basis for the larger organisations.
In the building trade there is a growing tendency for the craftsman, plumber, mason or joiner to employ himself and hire his labour out to the small builder who again may have no pay roll at all. lipetus has been given to this by the development of small electrically driven machines which can be set up in home workshops and he says that on the Continent the idea has been extended to the point of operating a factory on the basis that the workers Come in as self-employed master-men, hire the machines and sell the products to the management without any wages relationship.
As the contribitor points out, a pay-roll tax Icvied on the number of workcrs dircctly emAUGUST 1961 -ployed would be avoided by these methods, Notes on Automation SIX YEARS AGO in these columns (September, 1955) the opinion was expressed that automation would not develop in this country as quickly and ‘extensively as many people were claiming.
It is interesting to look at some of the trends to see what has happened since then and is likely to happen.
The prevailing mood of comment today is one of caution, allied with disappointment about the results of automation so far.
Often there is contrast with the progress made in other countries, especially America.
Mr F Griffiths of the British Motor Corporation writes that in the motor in‘dustry “the pattern of automation . . . still remains mainly in the machine shop.
Mr Griffiths lists the many technical and organisational problems that need to be solved before automation can become general in the motor factories.
A scientific correspondent in the Financial Times estimated that it might be 1965 before this development was completed.
In the field of electronic computers for commercial purposes, experience has been mixed.
According to a correspondent writing in 1959 (Financial Times, 2nd April) many firms that had bought computers for commercial purposes had found them a failure from the financial point of view.
But in the engineering and scientific fields “there have been equally remarkable successes,” And while automation and electronics manufacture have rapidly grown to “ big business,” employing nearly a quarter of a million people, there aren't enough orders for the home market and according to a report in the Times almost every firm in the business is losing money on its manufacture of data processing equipment.
As regards the total numbers of workers employed, the process of automation in the past six years has had little effect, either in manufacture or in offices. though clerks in banking and elsewhere are becoming increasingly worried about the future, especially on promotion prospects.
The answer in most instances js that even when the labour-saving is as high as stated it is effective only in a small part of the total process of production.
If labour is reduced by savy 40 per cent. in processes representing a quarter of the total factory operation, the average for the whole factory operation is 10 per cent, and if production and transport of materials is not affected the overall reduction from start to finish may be less than 5 per cent.
And this leaves out of account the. sometimes. greatly increased amount of fabour needed for production and maintenance of the automation plant.
Living in one room WORKERS HAVING a hard time in the country of their birth find it easy to accept travellers’ tales about the summer weather and the “ gold paved streets ~ in some other part of the globe.
Governments all try to counter these beliefs because they encourage discontent.
Recent observers from both sides of the “ curtain ” have been commenting on housing conditions in Britain and Russia.
First, we have Mr Yur Fokin, a Russian broadcaster, who wrote in the Daily Expr2ss giving his eve-witness impressions of this country.
Reita Ovsyannikov, married to a Russian, has just returned to this country after thirty years in Russia.
In her article in the Sunday Telegraph she notes the contrast that Mr Fokin did not see.
For the last ten years of our life in the Soviet Unioh we had a flat of our cwn, a car, and all the money we needed.
Many visitors to Russia have commented on the large number of familizs compelled to live in one room and nobody, not even Mr Fokin, believes that Krushchev and the other V.LP.’s or the “rouble millionaires ~ live in one room.
The implication is that ~ Russians~ and Swedes and French don't mind living in overcrowded condilions.
Not belonging THE DOUBLE-TALK of politicians, newspaper editors and business men is sometimes so odd as to be hardiy comprehensible. as witness an editorial in the Daily Mail on Ist July.
He said that ~ all employees need to have a feeling of belonging to the company.” each one ~ must feel he counts as a person.
Of course, legally the Ford Motor Works and all its properties belong to the company, in effect the shareholders. — to whom also the £J8 million profit in 1959 belonged.
And last year when the American Ford company bought out the 45 per cent. of the shares that they did not already hold, for £129 million. they paid the money to those shareholders.
The English company.now therefore belongs wholly to the American Company.
The 20,000 Dagenham workers who, according to the Mail are the Ford Company as much as Mr Ford himself, weren't even asked whether they wanted the sale to go through, much ‘less paid for handing over what the Mail thinks is their own company.
They no more wanted to see Fords win than the Ford’s management wanted to see them win.
The strikers and the management both see plainly that there is a conflict of interests between them.
Which brings us to the firm’s medical officer who worries because the workers don't fezl that they belong.
They feel very strongly that they are treated as if they do belong to the firm, as if they were part of the equipment, along with the machines and trucks and typewriters; instruments for making profit.
He will find that they “ belong ~ all right, because Fords belongs to them.
Henry Ford might also tell him more about the £100,000 they spent recently on a party for their daughter (reported in the Sunday Telegraph, 25'7/61.
See Sept issue for report SOCIALIST STANDARD, AUGUST 1961 YE DAUGHTERS OF ISRAEL WEEP | | a The State of Israel, now thirteen years old, has, by Jewish custom, come of age.
It is timely, therefore, to attempt an assessment The Zionist Movement The assumption underlying the Zionist movement was that to establish a “national home for the Jewish people ” was the only way to end their age-old persecution, especially under the yoke of the Tsars.
This closely mirrored the aspirations of other thwarted nationalities such as the Poles, the Czechs, the Finns and the like.
There were, of course. workers who were taken up with this cause but very few of them prior to the first world-war.
Cramped into a narrow strip of the vast Russian Empire, the Jewish millions lived almost entirely in the towns, where they formed the majority of the population.
They were skilled and unskilled workers; some on the land, more in the factories and workshops; they were porters and cart drivers.
Only a minority were merchants of any substance, bankers and factory owners.
In this background it was the idea of Anarchism and SocialDemocracy that gained the greatest acceptance.
They saw that on the principle of divide and rule the Tsars had actually fostered anti-semitism.
They were convinced that the Jewish problem was a by-product of the private property system and would end with the end of that system.
They did not think in terms of a return, to “the promised land” as a solution to their problems.
Neither did the Anarchists, Emigration to the freer and relatively more prosperous West, the Russian Revolution, and the rise of Nazism. affected Jewish opinion ovepwhelmingly.
Faith in a SocialDemocratically reformed Capitalism withered in the face of the anti-semitic mass hysteria that was being harnessed to the needs of the German ruling-class.
Faith in Bolshevism, on the part of others, was likewise to vanish when the Soviet reality became clear.
The end of the second world-war saw Zionism reaping a harvest of disillusionment and despair.
Despite the brutally callous turning back of their ships by the British Labour Government, many joined with the pioneers to oust the British and set up the Jewish State. under a Labour Government strangely enough.
Few who had witnessed the holocaust of the Jews could fail to be moved by the determination of the survivors to have a home of their own, to live in a land where they could walk with heads held high, where they could till the soil and make the desert bloom and little by little heai the wounds of two thousand years.
But national ideals and political reality have never been compatible and never can be.
True to form, the territorial demands of one set of Nationalists were diametrically opposed to the demands of the other set, The “ solution ” of the Jewish problem turned out to be its transference from Europz to the Middle-East.
The Arab States The Arabs, too, had national aspirations that had been thwarted by Turkish domination in the first instance and by an Anglo-French carve-up of the region subsequent to that.
The Arabs were divided into several different states each of which was subservient to external forces.
In order to weaken Germany's ally Turkey, Britain had deliberately cultivated an Arab sense of national identity during the 1914-18 war.
Once victory was won, this policy no longer served British Capitalism and it was dropped.
Henceforth, playing oft one oil producer against another, one tribal dynasty or one community against another, paid better dividends.
Once created, however, Arab nationalism filled a need and the Pan-Arab capitalist class to be saw to it that not only did it survive but that it flourished.
In Palestine, where a majority of Arabs had lived for centuries, the territorial demands of Jewish and Arab nationalism proved utterly irreconcilable.
When the clash came the Zionists, who were then militarily superior to the combined Arab armies, gained a victory sufficient to set up a state, but with less territory than had traditionally been demanded.
A million Arab refugees subsist to this day on the verge of starvation, caged like animals, within sight of Israel's borders, They refuse to move.
The popular insistence on an eventual “ ingathering of the exiles” does not, in fact, explain why the Arab governments have left the refugees idly by the frontier, breeding and hating.
With the calculating cynicism normal to ruling classes, they are seen as an invaluable political weapon.
Over the past thirteen years the situation within the Arab states surrounding Israel has not remained static.
The Zionist claim that hostility towards Israel was fostered by corrupt feudal potentates out of fear that their peoples would demand similar living standards and civil rights obviously has some truth in it.
The United Arab Republic and Iraq have both undergone substantial changes in social organisation, Many of the kings who had been propped up by foreign and feudal interests have been swept away.
Today, a key reason for continued hostility to Israel is an external one.
In facing the pressures of both western and eastern imperialism, a show of Arab unity is of no mean value in the bargaining chamber of the United Nations.
Conflicting as their economic interests are, hostility to Israel presents the one issue on which they can all agree.
It would be a mistake, however, to forget the real possibility of Israeli expansion which would inevitably be at the expense of the Arab states, If increased to any extent, the pressure on land and resources is bound to become explosive if Russia was to permit the emigration of any number of her two million Jews, for example.
Israel's governments being subject to the wishes of an increasingly nationalistic electorate, cannot afford to ignore their 9 SOCIALIST STANDARD, AUGUST expansionist demands, In the sort of way that the Russian Revolution was able to command a great deal of passionate though misplaced devotion, so Israel could never have been established without tragic sacrifices and self-less idealism on the part of many of its people.
But as in all cases where it has been argued that the end justified the means, it is the very idealists who are most bitterly disappointed ‘by the outcome.
A flag-wagging mentality, convinced that one Israeli is worth any three Arabs, is easier to pound out of the propaganda machine than the former subtle distinctions between reactionary Arab rulers and misguided soldiers who were but pawns in the game.
Strikers have learnt that Jewish truncheons wielded by Jewish policemen feel just as unpleasant.
They even have a Jewish problem in Israel, what with pietists who deny the authority of a man-made Jewish state which profanes the language of the Bible by every day usage, and the religious discrimination against Indian Jews as regards marriage rights.
Communal Farms For the Zionist who had ideals, the bitterest pill of all is the changing rdle of the Kibbutz.
The pioneers regarded these communal farms, this utopian Socialism of a kind, as the pattern of the future nation.
Just as the American “ wildwest ” was penetrated and peopled in the first instance by dissenting communities of one kind or another; just as they imagined they were building Christianity or Communism all by themselves, so the Kibbutznik has extended and strengthened the national horizon to see, on arrival, the growth of a way of life the very antithesis of all that he stood for.
Yet they pave the way for class divided capitalism of one kind or another.
Israel’s international position, a tiny state among the giants, illustrates their dilemma.
Which of their Labourites could have foretold an alliance with the The Eichmann Trial And now in this year of reckoning.
But if we were to accept its claim to dispense a timeless “ justice ” to all men it would be hard to deny the monumental appropriateness of the exterminator’s trial before his surviving victims.
However, we Socialists spread throughout the world as we are, hold that for justice to be done the entire social system would have to stand trial and be found guilty.
Courts of law are not competent to judge the barbarity of our present social system.
They are there to condemn those who Jose the struggles that go on within it.
Then all sense of common guilt, all sense of common fesponsibility that weighs so heavy on the conscience of man in Capitalist society, can be relievingly focused on some now helpless perversion of a man.
As to the why and wherefore of this latest show-piece of the prevailing quality of moral standards, we strongly suspect an element of political manoeuvre.
BenGurion faces other contenders for power as the recent “Lavon Affair “ showed.
With French backing he was able to take up an intransigent attitude towards his enemies.
Despite General de Gaulle’s assurances to the contrars at their recent meeting, once France has made peace with Algeria her enthusiasm for Israel is likely to wane.
Friendship with an oil producing Arab Algeria will have far greater rewards to offer.
With diplomatic relations re-established witi Nasser, Israel cannot expect supplies of arms from Britain.
His aim.is to woo the “* uncommitted ” nations, most of which side with the Arabs.
An increasing fear of military isolation in a situation where Russian training and arms have immensely strengthened the Arab armies has resulted in pressure from some Israeli quarters for some sort of compromise with the Arabs.
If Ben-Gurion, ,by staging a show-trial which by its ghoulish racital of the most hideous details of Nazi crime, can raise a wave of nationalistic frenzy, he will ride it to victory at the polls.
So long as there are Jewish workers attached in any numbers to the divisive and anti-working-class national idea, so long as their Arab brothers believe likewise, so long wiil strife ensue, so long will their respective ruling classes remain in the seat of power.
It is an aspect of the workingclass problem which has no solution outside of world-wide Socialism.
Only sixteen years have passed since the end of the war, and yet the governments of the t world keep publishing more and more material revealing how far the real Allied war aims were from the “ truth, justice, democracy,” and so on, which were the professed objectives.
They would scarcely do this if they believed that the working class could learn from past mistakes.
They seem to have no fear that the workers, having been shown how much they were fooled in the second world war, will refuse to be fooled in the third.
The latest revelation of what went on behind the scenes in the war comes in some American diplomatic papers recently released. by the State Department.
In other words, the Communist leader defended himself on the ground that he was only doing what the Czarist tyranny had done before him.
Having settled—without asking them —the fate of the people of the Baltic countries, the three leaders proceeded to settle the future of the Poles.
Stalin wanted 4a slice of Poland, so proposed to compensate the Poles with a slice of Germany.
It seems a far cry from this secret carving-up of Europe to the public support for “ democracy “-and “ the rights of small nations.” e I did not suggest So far from telling the workers the truth about what was going on, they weren't even honest with each other.
I want to get away from the difficulties of large staff conferences or the red tape of diplomatic conversations.
Therefore, the simplest and most practical method I can think of would be an informal and compleiely simple visit for a few days between you and me... . this summer.
Africa is almost out of the question in summer and Khartum is British territory.
Iceland I do not like because for both you and me it involves rather difficult flights \and in addition, quite frankly, would make it difficult not to invite Prime Minister Churchill at the same time.
Therefore I suggest that we could meet either on your side or my side of Behring Strait.
Churchill got wind of this and sent a message to Roosevelt protesting strongly against being left out in the cold.
Edwards said the need was to realize man’s spiritual identity and to halt the discounting of God.
The view that man had only himself to rely on had spread into such present day issues as industrial disputes and sex and family life, This wrong philosophy of human nafurc showed itsclf in industry, in lack 1961 of discipline or interest in work; absenteeism, excessive attention to short hours and long pay packets, and the quick readiness to strike for private interests regardless of the larger moral issues involved or the public suffering caused.
Edwards counters the fact that most workers spend their lifetimes in monotonous, boring tasks, or in single, meaningless operations not by condemning the society which organises production in such-a way, but by blaming the men for “ lack of interest ” in their work.
And, of course, this fine impartial-sounding phrasemaking about both sides playing fair with each other is, in the context of our society, not impartial at all.
It is exactly on a par with the church in a society besed on slavery calling on the slave-owners and the slaves to play fair with each other.
Happy and useful life In parliament recently Mr Ramsden, for the Government, announced that the Vickers machine gun was going to be retained by the regular army until 1965, and by the Territorial army even longer.
From Conservative M.P.s, belonging to an avowedly capitalist party, this is only what one could expect.
But those people who still confuse Labourism with Socialism would do well to ponder Mr Mayhew’s benevolent wishes for a machine-gun.
Scrip issues are made when a company has accumulated large reserves and decides to “ capitalise” them.
The result in the balance sheet is that the reserves are reduced and the capital correspondingly increased.
If the company decided to issue one £1 share for each existing £1 share, each shareholder would have his holding doubled.
For example, in 1959 when the Westminster Bank capitalised £34 million from reserves and_ issued 3,500,000 new £1 shares the Daily Worker reported it under the heading “£34 Million Gift to Bank's shareholders,” and the Daily Herald had the following comment on British Petroleum’s issue of four new shares for each share held.
Easy to make a tax-free fortune here—if you have the money to start, It sounds too good to be true.
It alse presents a problem for the Marxist, who knows that profit, rent and interest come out of the unpaid labour of the workers and cannot suppose that between onc day and the next, by means of a piece of manipulation in a iat surplus value has become five times as great.
There is, of course, a catch in it, because the stock-exchange pricé of cath share immediately falls in approximately the same proportion as the number of shares increases.
Recently the Limmer and Trinidad Lake Asphalt Co., Ltd., made an issue of shares (and also an adjustment of the nominal value of each share), with the result that the shareholder who on 22nd June, 1961, held one hundred 10s shares with a stock-exchange price of 60s. each, found himself a few days later with three hundred 5s. shares with a stock-exchange price of 20s. each.
The total price at which he could have sold the one hundred shares was £300, exactly the same as the price at which he could afterwards sell the three hundred shares.
The British Petroleum shareholder, referred to above, saw his shares fall from a stock-exchange price of £18 2s.d. each on 16th December, 1954, to £3 14s, 44d. on 21st December.
So the Daily Worker's statement on 4th November, 1954, that the “oil kings get £80 million,” implying that the shareholders had suddenly become richer by that amount, was pure phantasy.
The real explanation is that, apart from the fluctuations of stock-exchange prices due to other causes, including general waves of buying and selling and varying estimates of the future profits of the company in question, stock-exchange prices are determined by the amount of profit the company has been earning and the amount they have been retaining for paying out as dividends.
If profits are high and go on rising a share of nominal value £1 may be selling at say £3, and no capitalising of reserves will make any appreciable difference to the stockexchange valuation of the total of the company’s shares.
The issuing of bonus shares does not and cannot add to the value of a company’s. assets or to its earning power.
The reason why there is sometimes a small total gain is that a bonus issue is usually read as a sign that the directors are optimistic about future prospects.
One reason is that direetors do not want to make their dividends look very large because, or so they believe, this encourages workers to press harder for higher wages.
The directors think that paying out dividends of £100,000 in the form of 20 per cent. on 500,000 £1 shares does not look so tempting aS paying out £100,000 in the form of 10 per cent. on 1,000,000 £1 shares.
An additional reason for bonus share issues is that some companies see advantage in raising their issued capital up to the £1,000,000 required by law to qualify their shares to be held by those responsible for the investment of Trust Funds.
He determines the value of a commodity by the labour time contained in it, but then relegates the principle to older or more simpler times.
What seems to him to be true about a simple commodity does not apply to the more complex forms of capital—wage labour, and rent.
There is also confusion in his analysis of commodities about which he varies regarding the determination of exchange value.
He makes the exchange value of labour, wages, the measure of the value of commodities.
Thus, wages are equal to the amount of commodities purchased by a stated amount of living labour, or to the quantity of labour which can be bought by a given quantity of commodities.
The value of labour, or rather labour power, varies, like all other commodities, and in this respect does not differ in kind from the value of other commodities.
And so value itself be. comes both the measure and the explana. tion of value and we go round in a circle.
He also Said, very appropriately, “ It is one of the chief failings of classical economy that it has never succeeded. by means of its analysis of commodities, and in particular of their value, in discovering that form under which value becomes exchange-value.
Even Adam Smith and Ricardo, the best representatives of this school, treat the form of value as a thing of no importance, as having no connection with the inherent nature of commodities.
The reason for this is not solely because their attention is entirely absorbed in the analysis of the magnitude of value. ft lies deeper.
Smith was the product of the early manufacturing period in this country, He made a valuable contribution to political economy, and was one of the most painstaking and critical of the small band who tried before Marx to find out what ” makes society tick.
The Housing Question A place of your own One of the prime necessities of life is shelter.
Here in Britain at the moment quite a number of people because of their poverty are living in furnished rooms.
The same also goes for the people who are “ lucky ™ enough to find unfurnished accommodation.
Pancras council flats, the Kenistoun House barricading shemozzle, along with the other unhappy incidents up and down the country speak for themselves.
Another side to this housing tragedy is revealed by those who find themselves in the position of having a bit of surplus space in their houses and who, instead of utilizing the roominess for their own comfort, are stricken with a kindness of thought and let their rooms to the more unfortunates at two, three or four pounds a go.
The kind of room in which you can clearly walk around the table is classified as a “double room”. compared with the one in which, when you open the door, you trip over the bed.
Wages are so low the Guardian reported the African as saying, that in his own territory the African worker had to have subSidised housing, as in so many cases the bread-winner earned only £6 per month, After they had patted the Londoner made his way across the Square.
It was a modest sign advertising a mews cottage in Knightsbridge at-150 guineas.
He found on enquiry that it contained two maids’ bedrooms and a dressing room as well as two ordinary bedrooms and was furnished in antiques of impeccable pedigree.
Even if the worker were to live rent free in one of the Stately Homes with its own approach and the forecourt framed with iron wrought gates, and surrounded by North, South, East and West lawns—if he still had to work for a living he would be no better off.
As Engels said so long ago, Let us assume that in a given industrial area it has become the rule that each worker owns his own little house.
In that case the working class of that area lives rent free, housing expenses no longer enter into the value of its labour-power, Every reduction in the cost of production of labourpower, that is to say, every permanent price reduction in the worker’s necessities of life is equivalent “on the basis of the iron laws of the doctrine of national economy ” to a depression of the value of labour-power and will therefore finally result in a corresponding drop in wages.
Wages would thus fall on an average as _ Much as the average sum saved on rent. that is, the worker would pay rent for his own house, but not, as formerly, in money to the house-owner, but in unpaid labour to the factory owner for whom he works.
In this way the savings of the worker invested in his little house would in a certain sense become capital, however not capital for him but for. the capitalist emploving him.
STANDARD, AUGUSI MASTER AND WORKER How OFTEN has it been’ proclaimed that the planning of constitutions and the _ founding of leagues of nations have been for the purpose of establishing equality among all men.
Yet, as long as capitalism exists, the equality of men can be nothing more than a Utopia, or, at best, just a fancied reality.
Laws may propose that employer and worker have equal rights; that just as employers have the right to employ or not to employ, so have the workers the right to work for whomsoever they please.
On the employers’ side, there exists not only the “right,” but the power.
This may not apply to those who; by their own desperate struggle and long hours of work, manage to run small businesses with a return hardly higher than the wages paid to an outside worker.
These are not capitalists, but men forced to work, very often more arduously than most other workers.
They may delude themselves that they are “upper class,” but actually they are of that vast army which must toil in order to live.
When Socialists speak of the employing or the capitalist class they refer to that small class in current society which, enabled to employ and to exploit the workers by its ownership of the land, factories. mines, railways, etc.. is, if necessarv, able to live without working upon the proceeds.
At the sweet will of this class men can he employed. exploited. dismissed.
From the very first appearance of a working-class applicant for employment the whip-hand is held by the capitalist.
Their diminution or failure to rise above a certain level may mean for capitalists a check upon expansion, and a drop in interest, even a curb upon luxurious living.
For the working-class applicant for employment the case is very different.
Dependent upon his success or failure is the problem of whether or not he will be able to provide for himself, his wife und family without recourse to assistance boards and the like.
Thus does the encounter between prospective employer and prospective. employee show the inequality in the “master and man” relationship.
The * governor ™ himself is seldom seen in the factory for there is no real need for the presence of one who takes no part in production, wnd who possibly knows nothing of the working side of the industry.
But ever present are the works manager, the supervisor, the foreman, the progress chaser. -those members of the working class who. for somewhat higher wages. must see, on behalf of “the governor,” that ‘production is carried on speedily, conscientiously, and as profitably as possible.
This overseership, whether tyrannous or not, reveals the existence of someone at the top; of an individual or group with something to gain from working-class exploitation.
Experience shows that wholesale sackinys and dismissals are the accepted order of the day as soon as the employment of workers is not profitable enough.
It matters not that these dismissals might mean for the workers involved long spells of unemployment, a depression of living standards already far from satisfying, and minor-—-or even major—domestic tragedies.
For such is the accepted pattern of master-class behaviour in capitalist society.
That it is accepted—and not least by those who suffer most therefrom —1s the most pitiful feature of modern life. bw.
SOCIALIST STANDARD, AUGUST 1961 News from Wales THE PRINCIPALITY continues to provide events and talking points for that section of its people (alas, still the great majority) who see no further than the day to day controversies of those personalities and organisations whose business is to carry out the function of maintaining capitalism.
The unimportance and—in some cases—the absurdities associated with the comings and goings of the various individuals who make up our Council Chambers can only be appreciated by the Socialists among us who are still much too few to have an effective voice in affairs, Pride of place must be accorded to the local elections.
The usual candidates representing the usual parties, with one or two exceptions, took the field.
Se NETS EDS PETORE REET IE and Welsh Nationalists got a fair number of votes.
In the Llanelly area the Welsh Nationalist candidate made great play in his election address on the question of local rates and “abuse” of public funds.
The Swansea branch SPGB made a fairly detailed statement on the question of the effect of bigger or smaller rates and tax demands and challenged the participating candidates to show how the raising or lowering of rates and taxes , efc., in any way affected the working class.
Another point of discussion has been well aired recently, namely, the question of Sunday Opening.
Despite the virulent attacks of various religious organizations, the position appears to be well on its way to a final solution—the possibilities being that in the none too distant future onc will be able to have a pint of one's favourite on a Sunday.
Socialists again see this question in its true perspective and only point out that the “ new freedom” when it comes may be such that pub managers and servers, etc., may have to forego a day off.
Naturally such workers may be prepared, like so many more, to sacrifice more and more leisure for more and more money in order to catch up with more and more living costs, The Report of the Committee on the Re-distribution of Boundaries, etc., has created quite a stir.
Roughly, the Welsh Counties are to be amalgamated to form five large counties which will presumably cut down costs in administration, Glamorgan being the exception.
This again is an example of fiddling with trivialities, What has concerned many of the steel and tin-plate workers of the Swansea and Llanelly areas recently was the “ Lock-Out ” that took place at two of the Steel Co.’s of Wales strip mills.
Briefly, sales in tinplate have been falling off, with increases in stocks as a result.
The workers’ reply to this has been to operate a “ go slow” policy which resulted in the Company closing the factory gates.
It should be perfectly plain to the workers now that not being owners of the means of production, they have no right to work or be on the premises unless they are wanted.
The law, of course, would, if necessary, have fully supported the Company.
We were also to have been treated to a visit from “God Incorporated,” the Billy Graham menagerie, Billy, it seems, was taken ill, but the meeting took place despite this and attracted over 30,000 delirious hymn-singing workers.
It may be significant to note, lest one becomes too_despairing over the scene of 30,000) workers chanting for “ pie in the sky "" while the Steel Company locks them out, that a report in the Western Mail points out that more and more churches in South Wales are closing down and that there is a shortage of young blood entering the Ministry.
Perhaps we shall be in a positions to report in a short while on the German Panzer troops in Pembrokeshire, In the meantime, the invasion has not yet been fully arranged.
When it has been then the Welsh contingent of the Polaris army at Holy Loch and elsewhere can “ fight ” nearer home.
As for Socialists in Wales, we try to reach the brains of our fellow workers with all the means at our disposal.
Faced with a straight fight with the Unionists we had to make doubly certain that our propaganda in the ward was as far-flung as possible in order to ensure that we did not get the usual Labour and anti-Government vote.
In spite of the fact that our opponent (a certain William Christie, owner of a well-known local chain of wallpaper stores) stated that he would hold no pubSOCIALIST STANDARD, AUGUST lic meetings but would conduct a campaign with the assistance of a large team of door-to-door canvassers we decided on a full programme of public meetings.
We challenged Christie to repudiate these statements or meet us in debate before the electorate and present his evidence of our ‘ communism” but true to the role of cowardly master of a cowardly campaign hie answered us with silence.
Night after night during the campaign eighty per cent. of our membership turned up to support the meetings and, when these concluded, give out election Statements.
Nearly ten thousand Statements, plus five thousand leaflets were given out/in this way and in addition to this large posters were pasted on walls in the ward.
Mostly 2 or 3m. was “quitting time” and towards the end a few hardy members had a couple of all-night sessions.
As in our last campaign, from which we had scarce recovered, the great majority of our comrades worked splendidly.
We were unwilling and unable to “ man the polling booths” and we contented ourselves sitting convenient to a few of the larger ones suitably identified, in the hope that some people would want to discuss with us.
Very few people came on foot to vote and though many did vote for us it is unlikely that they would have run the risk of publicly identifying themselves with us—in view of the considerable show of numbers the Unionists had on duty around their expensively hired caravan Tally rooms at the different polling booths.
Between eighty and one hundred cars were in service by A letter from Weymouth Dear Comrades, I am managing to get out quite 4 bit of propaganda. | emphasised this to the local comrades along with the suggestion that we get together and have a concerted bash at all West Country papers.
My greatest joy was in finding that the local people are not as behind as people in a place like London might think.
Their moans and groans have exactly the same ring as the workers anywhere.
I am, as you know, here on my own and {[ am managing perfectly well to carry out as much party activity as could be expected from any one member, no matter how staunch he may be.
We have got to start emphasising this to other members strewn all over the place who feel they are living in political isolation. | would like to see a reminder go out to all of them, saying that there isn't anything preventing them from writing in the SociALIst STANDARD, selling the S.S., distributing propaganda leaflets, or szeking openings in the correspondence columns of their local papers.
I can appreciate the fact that Socialists will endeavour to speak to people about our case.
We must be busy in more ways than one if we expect to impress and forge ahead.
When I approach anybody on any organisation | do not feel lon:some; I act and speak just as if we had a branch, nay, just as if the whole machinery of Socialist organisation was down here beside me.
One is still being considered by the editor of the Dorset Evening Echo, whilst the other has been published by the Southern Times.
The corporation will let me know after their committee meeting on July 15th.
In Spite of this, however, most of the cars sat for very lengthy periods and often when active it was to convey a single voter.
Each candidate had a ticket to attend and a further seven lickets was available to each for the purpose of providing scrutineers.
The Unionists, on the other hand, must have had several hundred present—by virtue, apparently, of being “visitors ” of other Aldermen and councillors, and these conformed with the usual standards of a Unionist mob-~ mean and vicious, very stupid, and very, very noisy.
Amidst the culogies of Asquith, Balfour and the rest of the holy capitalist family, they have toured the country urging the propertyless wage slaves to emigrate to the scene of ‘Labour's triumphs’, and su escape from. the sufferings they encounter here, The State ownership of such services as are already nationalised has been a mixed blessing to the toilers.
New South Wales is the State of Labourism’s greatest advance, yet the capital , will be remembered as the centre of the great strike of State employed tramwaymen for ‘a living wage’, State ownership is the refuge of the business man being crushed by the trusts, % THE TAXATION of Land Values is a prominent feature of the Labour programme.
Its existence in the Commonwealth has led to it being boomed here, and in view of Australia being the pet example of the ‘good ’ effect of land taxes. it would be well to show their real character and influence.
More supPort from members would be welcome as this is an excellent outdoor station, and experience proves that with such regular support these meetings will prove most valuable, Literature sales in particular have been most encouraging, All members are asked to note that the Branch will close down fon its summer break this month.
There will be no Branch meetings on 18th and 25th August and Ist Sep‘ember.
The outdoor meetings will be maintained during this period, GLASGOW Kelvingrove Branch has been working very hard and taking advantage of the good weather.
Od, and over £2 in collections, In Glasgow. five meetings were held—average audience 50, literature sales and collections over £2.
WEMBLEY Wembley Branch will not be holding a meeting on August 7th but will resume their meetings on August 14th.
LITERATURE SALES The new Literature Sales Committee has gone into orbit with great success.
One of the first assignments was to have a group of comrades outside the Russian Exhibition at Earls Court.
Julv 11th, an urgent call was received at Head Office that they had sold out and urgently needed fresh supplies.
A comrade was hastily despatched on his motor cycle with fresh supplies and a call was made for branches to return any spare copies they may have had of the pamphlet.
The archives at Head Office were also raided sw that all available pamphlets could he sent to Earls Court.
P.H. be RE LONDON OUTDOOR MEETINGS Sundays Hyde Park 3 pm & 6 pm East Street, Walworth August 6th & 20th August 13th & 27th Clapham Common 3 pm Beresford Square, Woolwich 8 pm Thursdays Tower Hill, 12.30—2 pm Hyde Park 8 pm Earls Court 8 pm Gloucester Road 8 pm Saturdays Castle Street, Kingston 8 pm.
Rushcroft Road 8 pm a GLASGOW OUTDOOR MEETINGS Saturdays Royal Exchange Square 3 pm Sundays West Regent Street and Renfield Street Corner 7.30 pm —_—_—_——— BRISTOL Durdham Downs, Every Sunday, 6.30m.
MITCHAM LECTURE The White Hast, Cricket-Green Thursday August 17th 8 pm ** WHERE IS CND GOING” WEMBLEY LECTURE Barham Old Court, Barham Park.
BASILDON see South East Essex), BIRMINGHAM Thursdays 8 pm, ‘' Big Bulls Head,""’ Digbeth.
COVENTRY Ist and 3rd Mondays (7th & 2ise Aug) 7.30 pm, The Coffee Room, Craven Arms, High Street.
NOTTINGHAM Alternate Wednesdays (13th & 27th September) 7.30 pm, Peoples Hall, Heathcoat Street.
SPGB, 76 Ladbroke Grove, WII, SOUTH EAST ESSEX (formerly Basildon and Southend) 2nd and 4th Mondays (Ith & 25th Sept) in month 8 pm, 17 Cotswold Road.
SOUTHEND SWANSEA st and 3rd Monday (4th & 18th Sept; in month 8 pm, The Crypt, St.
WOOLWICH 2nd and 4th Fridays (8th and 22nd Sept) in month 7.30 pm, Town Social Club, Mason’s Hill, SE‘8.
MITCHAM & DISTRICT Thursday 2Ist Sept 8 pm, ‘White Hart,’’ Mitcham Cricket Green.
THERE ARE SOME modern historians who take the point of view that the period between the first and the second world wars was one which saw a succession of diplomatic and military blunders.
Germany could have been contained, there would have been no need for the Western powers to allow the Soviet Union to make the great inroads which she has now made into Europe and the post-1945 tensions would never have happened.
This is a convenient attitude to adopt, for it solves all our problems in retrospect.
Equally, the statesmen’s decisions, in their context, may have been perfectly correct.
Whatever the truth of it, there is something which stands above all others as the reason for the declaration of war.
German capitalism was trying to elbow its way back into a position of strength and influence and was therefore a challenge to the other capitalist nations of Europe which none of them could ignore.
However clever, or inept, the governments may have been, it would have had no effect upon the threat from Germany.
For that threat was the logical continuance of the competitive nature of capitalist society.
No statesman—-and no historian, for that matter -—has ever been able to find a way around the problems which arise from that nature.
The many wars and international crises which we have passed through since then might suggest that they did not.
Now, both sides are declaring that they would go to war again over the division of Germany.
Whatever the incidentals which aggravate a tense interNational dispute, they do not explain the dispute itself.
To do that we must explain the basis of capitalist society, its commercial rivalries, its anomalies, its inhumanities.
So long as they biame their leaders’ mistakes for the problems of capitalism, they will be content to try to put things right merely by changing the leaders, or by something else equally futile.
Which means that they will not consider Socialism as the only way out of their nightmare.
ANDREWS HALLS MID HALL, DOOR G Sunday 24th Sept, 7. 30 pm SOCIALIST STANDARD, SEPTEMBER 1961 THE NEWS IN REVIEW Bizerta PATRIOTIC FRENCHMEN like to regard themselves as a civilised race, who know all about the finer points of living like making love and drinking the right wine with their food.
They have also showed, in the long Algerian conflict, that they know all about making war and using the right weapons in battle.
And if there was any doubt about this, it must have been removed by the short, gory struggle over Bizerta.
The French ruling class wanted SOCIALIST STANDARD 1961 @ Subscription form 52 Clapham High Street, London, SW4 ae 6 issues 4/post free 12 issues 7/6 post free | | | | | | To SPGB Literature Dept | | | | | Send me Socialist Standard for the next issues | enclose Name | | | | | | | | | | to keep the base, to help them look after the commercial interests which they are hanging onto in North Africa, not forgetting the oil in the Sahara.
The Tunisian ruling class wanted the French to leave because they did not want to get involved in any trouble which might follow the breakdown of the negotiations between the French government and the Algerian rebel leaders.
These are the common excuses for the sort of dreadful slaughter which happened when the paras went in.
It must be revolting to smash human beings, some of them children, into destruction.
But that is what the French soldiers, with their mortars and _ their guns, did at Bizerta—and all in the interests of their masters.
Which goes to show just how much civilised instincts are worth to the barbaric capitalist social system.
Little Budget MANY BIG-TIME financial editors applauded Mr Selwyn Lloyd's second attempt at producing a Budget for 1961/2.
Here, they said, was the strong medicine which was needed to sort out our troubles once and for all.
This was the sort of comment which greeted Mr Butler's autumn Budget in 1957, when Bank Rate last went up to seven per cent.
It is what is always being said about the so-called remedies for the economic and financial crises of capitalism.
The trouble this time, said Fleet Street, is that we are all living too well.
Agricultural workers, who are getting by on an average wage of £10 11s. a week and local government employees who are somehow making do on an average of £10 16s a week, must have been very surprised to hear that nowadays their life is one long spree of opulence.
Whatever measures successive Chancellors may impose, the economy keeps on staggering from boom to recession, from expansion to retrenchment.
One budget knocks a couple of pennies off beer, a couple of shillings off income tax.
The workers end up where they started, with a personal budget which is very finely balanced, often on a tightrope supplied by the hire purchase companies.
Yet they keep their faith with capitalism—if they blame anything, it is the planners, or their plans.
But capitalism—unplannable, chaotic, unbudgetable —is always doing its best to teach them better.
Common Market THE BRITISH CAPITALIST CLASS are gingerly easing themselves into the European Common Market.
Many of these firms have spent a lot of time in summing up their chances in Europe, and are convinced that they will be able to cut a fine dash against their foreign rivals in the Common Market.
On the other hand, industries like agriculture quake with fear at the thought of a flood of cheap Continental produce washing them out of their traditional markets and sweeping away the protection of government guaranteed prices, Similarly, the Commonwealth countries which sell a iot of agricultural produce to this-country are anxious about losing the advantages of Imperial Preference.
Not only the Tories have their doubts; on the Opposition benches, Lord Morrison speaks in favour of the Common Market while Mr Shinwell and Earl Attlee oppose it.
This often happens when capitalist industry is reaching for its markets.
But nothing is certain, The Common Market could be a costly flop for Britain —it could turn out, on the whole, to be unprofitable.
For nobody has yet discovered a certain method of guaranteeing industries’ prosperity under capitalism.
ONE OF THE THEMES On which our newspapers love to turn a spare column is the alleged laziness of the British worker.
Germans, for example, are said to take only one week’s holiday a year, to refuse to strike and to turn out such cheap, efficient goods that they easily outsell the products of their British counterparts.
Why, we have even heard the same sort of thing about Russian workers, who were reported to have smiled superior, mystified smiles when — they saw English workers knocking off for tea during the preparation of the recent Soviet Exhibition at Earl’s Court.
Nobody need feel upset that he does not work hard enough to satisfy his employer.
The ideal worker, from the capitalist viewpoint, would be somebody who stuck at it twenty-four hours a day without needing those irksome breaks for sleep, food and the rest of it.
However lazy the British worker is supposed to be the fact is that, like other workers all over the world, he turns out some pretty substantial profits for his master.
In the midst of the worries of working for his living, paying off the H.P., the mortgage and the rest, he also finds time to fret about the fortunes of his ruling class.
He will always get upset to hear that foreign capital has moved into the country and has taken over a British company.
In the ""bus queue, at the bench, around the canteen table, many workers expressed the opinion that this was alien investment with a sinister motive.
Some of them thought that behind it all was a scheme to undermine British industry, to buy up a prosperous rival and then let it g0 bankrupt. sriges This is a strange idea.
The capitalist class find it difficult at times to assure themselves of a profit from their business, let alone deliberately investing a few million into a loss.
And we should remember that there are plenty of firms in this country which are offshoots of foreign companies, and which are thriving concerns.
Some of them, in fact, have become larger and more prosperous than their foreign parent.
Mr Heathcoat Amory, who was then, Chancellor of the Exchequer, when questioned in the House about the Tube Investments deal, stated that this country is a nett exporter of capital.
A few months back, for example, Courtaulds bought a four per cent. interest in the Koppers Company Inc., one of the largest American chemical and plastic concerns.
At the same time, they put two men onto the board of the American company.
No heat was generated under any white collar at this new example of one country investing in another.
No British newspaper carried stern warnings about threats to prosperity.
Presumably because BritisH workers, like their brothers abroad, are nothing if not patriotic.
They think that American ownership of Ford Dagenham must be a baleful influence, but that British investment overseas is an example of enterprise and anyway is all done for the benefit of the natives.
In fact, it is quite unimportant to the British worker whether the firm which employs him is owned by foreign shareholders or not.
He can live only by persuading some firm or other to buy his working ability and wherever he works he will receive, on a broad average, the same wage.
Every capitalist concern, whatever the nationality of its shareholders, is in business to make profit.
They were, in other words, trying to rebuild some of the investments in the United States which the British government compulsorily sold for them during the war.
Nobody has yet found a certain way of making capitalist industry, anywhere in the world, able to rely upon its profits.
That is why we have booms and depressions, and why some firms go out of business.
All over the world, the interests of the worker must clash with his master’s.
Because they think that they have some stake in the country of their living, which gives them a common cause with the British capitalist class.
About the biggest and most valuable thing that most workers are ever likely to own is a house.
First they must take on a lifetime's mortgage or loan which, although in fact it deprives them of real ownership of the house, saddles them with the full legal responsibilities of ownership.
If a slate falls off the roof onto somebody's head they—not the building society—must pay compensation.
If the house is struck by lightning or damaged by flood water, they must suffer the consequences.
The money for the house is often lent at such an interest rate that in the end the borrower will repay about twice as much as he originally borrowed.
While he is repaying the loan, his occupation of the house can be hedged about by all manner of legal. restrictions, which are imposed to make sure that if he defaults in the repayments the house will have a good resale value.
A working class house which has cost him nearly twice as much as it would have done if he could have originally afforded to pay for it outright.
Over the years, there have been many investigations into relative ownership and incomes.
They have always pointed to the same conclusion— that most people own very little and a few people own a great deal.
There™are twenty thousand people in this country with over £100,000 each in capital, averaging £250,000 each.
Ten per cent. of the population over 20 owns ninety-eight per cent. of company stocks and shares, and seventy-four per’ cent. of land, building and trade assets.
FINANCE INDUSTRY Supply and Demand ACCORDING TO THE ECONOMISTS who explain and justify economic laws, supply and demand have to be accepted as a necessary mechanism of the free market.
And this, they say, is all to the good becausz falling prices of a commodity cause production in that industry to be curtailed and capital and labour move into new industries where they are needed.
This does not leave much for the rest of the population, for the working class—the loyal, struggling mortgagors.
There are, it Says, sixteen million people with what it calls a net capital of less than £100, and an average holding of £50.
These are the facts behind the great myth of working class ownership, patriotism and employer-loyalty.
Perhaps, at times, a glimmering of the facts gets through to the workers and sets them realising that Britain does not belong to them.
That a very small minority in the world own almost anything that is worth owning, whilst the rest spend their waking lives in work to keep things that way.
That the majority scrape along with the shabby and tawdry whilst the few can have—literally—the best.
And—-final irony--they can have all this without needing to work for it.
But when it comes to wages they find it necessary, in their own interests as employers and property owners, to take a different line.
They no longer preach the beneficial effect of a “true market price” when it is wages, the price of labour-power, they are considering.
Politically, for vote-catching purposes, the parties which seek to win elections have to pay lip-service to “ full employment ” and high wages.
But full employment and high wages mean reduced profits, and capitalism, whether under a Tory or a Labour government, can only function when commodities can be sok at a profit.
So we have the government at the present time trying to threaten or persuade the workers not to take advantage of the labour-shortage by pressing for wage increases.
One form this takes is that the expanding firms, which need to recruit more workers, offer extra inducements to entice workers away from rival firms.
The British Employers’ Confederation recently made an analysis of the total wages of industrial and commercial Wage-earners, It was summarised in the Times and Financial Times on July 29.
A further £1,500 million represents excess payments above agreed rates, paid by employers to attract scarce labour, and another £600 million represents payment for overtime.
Naturally the employers would prefer to get the labour they need without having to compete with each other for il, and the Government shares their view.
London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 ] appeal to workers in all industries and employments not to press at this time for increases of wages or changes in conditions which would have a similar effect, especially when these increases are put forward on the basis of maintaining differentials between various categories of workers on the basis of former practice.
A Telephone WHEN THE POSTMASTER-GENERAL recently announced some higher telephone und postal charges figures were given out by the Post Office to the Press about the numbers of houses with and without a teleplione.
According to the Daily Mail there are over 13,000,000 homes without a tclephone.
The number of people with a residential telephone is less than 34 million, of whom one million have a shared telephone.
The price of Land THE HIGH PRICES of land in Britain, resulting from the pressure of demand on limited available areas have their counterpart in Germany and Japan.
Near Cologne, beyond the green belt. the price in 1950 was DM8 and is now some five times more, while in Kiel it is as high as DM.90 for residential sites.
In good class residential areas of the city, the pressure of population has increased land values by 4,000 per cent in 10 yearsand land continues to increase in value in most parts of Japan on average by 20 per cent annually, Enforcing the Law THERE ARE MANY well-intentioned reformers who work on the assumption that when you pass a law declaring something to be illegal the thing ceases, They forget that economic pressures go on Operating and if strong enough will tind ways of evading the law.
In particular the 7 ints writer estimates that there were at least half a million controlled houses in 195Y that were being let at rents higher than the levels permitted by the Acts.
Goodbye Siesta ly HAS BEEN OBSERVED in many coun tries that among the “advantages” G1 industrialisation the workers have been forced to forego many of the numerous religious holidays that belonged to earlier and less strenuous times.
Now in Spain the government is making war on the siesta and on keeping Jate hours.
A new law requires shops, cinemas and theatres to close ‘earlier, and it is expected thi the midday siesta will be shortened.
Sometimes they were cheerful --gratingly, hysterically so, Sometimes apathetic, Today, they were sombre, only wanting to talk ubout their afflictions, to tell each other what it was that had laid them paralysed and incapable in the forecourt of the Holiday Home.
Might as well be dead.” | should break this up, thought the orderly, this is the worst mood of all.
Then Old Harris chimed in, bringing what he always imagined was sunshine and relief into the invalids’ depression, “I'm as helpless as any of you,” he said, he eyes gleaming.
They fell into silence and sullered themsselves to the attentions of the orderlies, who came from inside the Home to wheel them off, They were a tragic Jol.
Here was it man who had lost his limb because of ao apparently trivial scratch at work, Here another whose back broke when he fell from a ladder on a high job.
These human wrecks were some of the unfortupale, who had felt the concentration of cay talisin’s bitterest effects, for although we know that capital cunnot be blamed for every illness and accident, the fact is that it is responsible for many of them.
Some of the most common, and persistent ailments which people nowadays suffer are traceable to the stress of modern living -to the working, travelling, cating pace which modern industry and its profit incentive sets for us.
High time for accidents iy the time when everybody is going to work —they call it the rush hour and it is in the rush that so many accidents happen.
Capitalism’s wars maim hundreds of thousands, and undermine the health of countless others.
What you may not realise is that, as long as capitalism lasts, there is little chance of society ever really tackling the problem of ill-health and accidents, and of reducing them to the very minimum possible, We know, for example, that cancer research comes a long way behind arnis production in the priorities of modern society.
And let us look forward to the day when a crippled world can throw away is crutches.
Russia about grandiose schemes the government there has announced for a higher standard of living, shorter working hours, free bread, free housing, free transport, free gas and electricity, etc., all by 1980 or thereabouts.
It may not have had that effect on governments and political commentators, but it certainly set them wondering what is the purpose of the manoeuvre and the pressure behind it.
It seeks not only to demonstrate that the Soviet Union is in the lead and intends to stay there, but also to create a new ideological dynamic, thus confounding fellow Communists all over the world who have lately come to the conclusion that they must look to China for agressive and bold leadership.
There must be no war, A war would not prevent the triumph of Communism; but the cost would be so great in misery that it cannot even be considered.
This includes even trying to come to terms for the time being with the United States.
Here is the great issue between Pekin, which seeks short cuts, aid Moscow, which fears them, having so much to lose, Here, of course, the interpretation of the hidden meaning of the Manifesto itself has to be interpreted for the Russian and Chinese governments are not really entering into rivalry about ways of achieving Communism—a matter in which they have only a preSy tended interest.
But just as the Western capitalist interest in such things as oil and. markets and air routes and Strategic frontiers is presented to the workers in terms of democracy, religion and the “ Western way of life,” so the real aims of the Russia-China group of expanding capitalist Powers are proclaimed in terms of a supposed desire to help the workers; oppose colonialism and promote world Communism.
The Manifesto can then be seen to be both a counter-blast to Western propa-. ganda and an endeavour to strengthen Russia against its threateningly powerful Eastern ally, We must also remember that when governments draw up programmes and make promises of blessings to come they have their anxious eyes on their own working class.
And Kruschev has one of Russia’s own “ colonies” much on his mind, Eastern Germany.
There the workers, instead of looking East to the Russian paradise flock westwards in their thousands.
Only a year ago Kruschev was announcing the abolition of income tax, due to be completed by 1965, and in 1952 the Daily Worker had splash headlines like those with which it greeted the latest version.
Workers in Britain ought to be well-versed in the methods used by a privileged class to safeguard its privilege by promises of better times for the workers.
It should not be necessary to say that there is always a snag about ° these promises.
An economic blizzard blows up, or a war; or re-armament has to have priority; or the multiplication of money wages only means were pounds to buy the same goods at higher prices.
Russia is supposed to have first got rid of capitalism, then built up Socialism, and is now wavering towards Communism.
They both evolved the practice of giving the name Socialism to State Capitalism.
Later on, the State Capitalism that Russia had was falsely labelled “Socialism,” an afterthought with an obvious political propaganda purpose.
Within a year of promising equality Lenin announced that, because of the shortage of specialists for industry, the government had to pay them high salaries, so the “ equal wage ” principle was suspended.
But it was, in Lenin’s words, not to be a change of principle but a regretted temporary suspension.
He did not at. time time try to cover it up but candidly admitted that it was a “retrograde step,” forced upon them.
If now Kruschev promises that some time in the future inequality is to be reduced it must be weighed against the forty year old pledge made and broken by Lenin.
What we face then is not the image vf the future Russia presented by Kruschev but the present reality.
Not a “ Socialist” economy moving towards Moneyless Communism, but the government which has just re-introduced the death penalty for currency offences.
Forecasts of free housing, free transport, etc., may look attractive, but in the real world of the ceaseless struggle over wages in their relation to prices they have a very different look.
Already in Russia rents are kept at a very low level, so that most workers spend on rent between 3 per cent. and 5 per cent. of the family income.
But along with very low rents it is government policy to have very high prices for clothes and socalled “luxury goods.
And when the Daily Worker reports that by 1980 Russian workers will have “free education at all educational establishments; free medical reviews .. . including the supply of medicines ” it is only a development that capitalism can carry without difficulty and, indeed with advantage to the employers.
One forgotten prelude to the Kruschev promises for 1980 is the suspension in 1957 of repayment of interest and capital on the Russian Government bonds.
The period of “freezing” is for 25 years, which carries us up to the early 1980's.
David Floyd stated that the total accumulated amount of these government loans was £23,500 million, and the annual interest payment to the bondholders £640 million.
Like everything else that the Russian government does the Russian workers were alleged to have welcomed the suspension, though it was their own savings that were involved through the year-long practice of calling on them to make a “ voluntary” investment of one or two weeks’ pay whenever a new loan was raised.
Pope and Czar, Metternich and Guizot, Fr:nch Radicals and German police-spies.
It was a spectre right enough; both in being a danger for the ruling class and in being exaggerated and distorted in their eyes ‘almost out of recognition.
They warded olf the threat and capitalism has grown from a European to a world-wide system.
But we still have to wait on the future to see Russia, America, Europe and the other Powers forced into mutual protective alliance by the growth of a Socialist working class in all countries bent on ending capitalism.
Not Lord Citrine, if we are to judge by his recent speech in the House of Lords.
For a socialist analysis of war read SOCIALIST PARTY AND WAR 1/3 post paid, {rom SPGB 52 Clapham High Street, London, SW4 This is lamentable, because 1 do not think that really broad-minded policy can ever come from the bottom.
II his views are held by many others in the head offices of trade unions, it would partly account for the yawning gap which exists in many. unions between the officials and the rank-and-file.
He delivered a swingeing attack on the workers for their ignorance of economics.
The average worker has not the least realisation of the dangers of inflation.
He does not understand that the economy can get out of hand and that savings can disuppear overnight.
Perhaps the workers would show more concern about the fate of savings if the system we live under allowed him to accumulate any savings worth mentioning.
But since one of the basic laws of capitalism is that the workers are paid only enough to keep them able to do the work required of them and to bring up the next generation of wage-earners, the protection of savings is a purely academic point for them.
Those who have savings, e., the capitalists, will do their level best to see that nothing happens to them even if sometimes, since capitalism is essentially an anarchic system, they are not altogether successful.
Lord Citrine, however, had better be more careful about upbraiding the workers for their ignorance.
If they take him at his word, and find out the real nature of the present system of society. their next step will be to end it and to introduce Socialism.
Nothing defensive Socialists have pointed out many, many limes the absurd misuse of words when a ruling class arms itself with weapons London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 like bombs and then claims that is simpl, taking “defensive” precautions.
The odd thing is that any ruling class, and its tame propagandists, can see this perfectly well—when the actions of any other rul. ing class are being discussed, One example was seen recently in the Times.
The Times leader-writers have very often discussed Britain's * defence ~ preparations, the “defence” estimates, the country’s “ defence” forces, and su on.
But all this was forgotten when the , executive of the Indonesian ruling class.
President Sukarno, got Russia to agree tw supply him with modern military aircraft.
The Indonesian claim that these were merely for “defensive” purposes was seen at once as a hollow pretence.
What was obscure to the leader-writers when it happened under their noses in Britain became crystal clear in the distant lands of southeast Asia.
Jet bombers that are as advanced as any in the world have nothing defensive about them and it is obvious enough that West New Guinea provides the motive.
Obviously, as the leader says, modern yet bombers have nothing defensive about them.
Over-salted In a world where many millions gu hungry, one would have thought that the rich would try to conceal their more exlravagant excesses of over-eating.
Attemp:s to develop his ideas led to endeavours to explain the poverty and misery of the working class and all the defects that had become apparent during the rapid development of Capital, from the time of publication of7his Wealth of Nations.
One was a condemnation and a criticism of conditions—this led to ideas about Socialism.
The other was a pessimistic resignation, accepting the conditions and declaring them to be the result of the working of natural laws.
Malthus was responsible for two important works; in 1820 his Principles of Political Economy was published preceding by some 22 years his Essay on the Principle of Population, first published in 1798, and for ever associated with his name.
Franklin that there is no bounds to the prolific nature of plants or animals, but what is mad2 by their crowding and interfering with each other's means of subsistence.
It follows from this, he says, that population has a constant tendency to incr2a52 beyond the means of subsistence.
Studying the increase of population 1A America, where there was an ainple supply of good fertile and virgin land, and where there were few natural checks to growth of numbers, Malthus arrived at the conclusion that during about oft. hundred and fifty years the population had doubled itself every 25 years.
The natural increase of population therefore took place like the increase in a sertes of numbers—1, 2, 4.
On the other hand, says Malthus, it is impossible to increase the produce of the soil in such a ratio.
Under favourable conditions we may suppose that by improving the land already under cultivation, and by utilising the comparatively poor and neglected land, it would be possible to increase yields considerably.
Sut the increase in twenty-five year periods (those in which population can double) could not be expected lo be more rapid than is represented by the series of numibers-1, 2.
To sum up, whereas population can increase in g2ometrical progression, the means of subsistence can increase only in anihmetical progression.
Population for Malthus, therefere is limited by the means of subsistence.
As a result of the tension inherent in the contrast between these two rates of increase, there is a tendency for population to increase beyond the means of subsistence.
The result is that population increases in any country when the mean, cf subsistence increase, wheiher 2s 4 result of more intensive syvriculture. the import of food, or changes in the distribution of national wealth.
Prevenlive checks are those which are deliberately undertaken, such as refusal to marry, and what Malthus calls the postponement of marriage, moral restraini.
In the cultivation of land, assuming that the technique remains unchanged.
Malthus argued that each successive addition of capital and labour appiied to i beyond a ceftain amount (the opimumn . delegate. expenditure upon a particular technique) produces a smaller increment of yield.
Accordingly, beyond the optimum expenditure further increments of capital and labour no longer produce equal additions of yield. but progressively diminishing ones.
To put the matter in more general terms—-the conditions remaining unchanged, additions of expenditure prove less profitable.
If, for instance, the expenditure of £1.000 of additional capital produces an additional product of , the expenditure of a second £1.04"") will produce an additional product of only £300; that of a third £1,000 wall produce no more than £200, and so on.
Jt assumes that the productive technique remains unchanged, an assumption which 1s contrary to all evidence.
In fact, Malthus himself says that this “law” is valid only so long as agricultural techniques remain unchanged.
It would be difficult to find a period since Malthus wrote the essay. during which advanced countries’ technique of production has not been corlinucusly changing and must, as man’; knowledge increases. continue ty chang.
WH AN IMPRESSIVE SHOW. as betit. government party. the annual conterenes of the SPA. was held in Vienna from June 6 to 9, 1961.
Because, for the working people of our times, the ownership of the means ° of production is no longer the only question which is decisive.
Pittermann seems to be quite oblivious of the fact that capital is not a thing, not some dead object, but a peculiar social relationship between man and man.
Thus, despite the S.P.A.’s boasted many decades of activity, the “ factor labour” has so far not yet found recognition.
It would seem that this representative of “ Socialism” too had never heard of capitalist conditions and of the capitalist mode of production.
Proksch distinguishes between the present questions of the day and the fundamental issue,e.. the essential aim of Socialism.
Strange it is. however, that a Sociatist~and Proksch claims to be one-—sees in the new formulation of labour rights a fundamental task of Socialism.
But apparently such is no longer Pittermann, Proksch and consorts’ concept, if ever it has been.
It will be understood that at a party conference questions of the day, and measures for dealing with them, are discussed.
It may be argued that one cannot always and exclusively concentrate on the all-important supreme aim, But in dealing with pressing temporary problems, as well as with proposals and plans in cases of emergencies, the genuine great Socialist principle must ever be allpresent and all-transcending.
This, however, was Sadiy missing in the speeches and discussions at the said party conferencz.
Rather had one the impression that any allusion to the real aim being the abolition of the exploitition of man by man through the wages and money system, was designedly shunned in order not to give offence in any quarter.
This, however, means nothing less than abandoning the supreme principle, which cannot but please its adversaries.
All demands and decisions made at the S.P.A.’s conference will only serve to consolidate the present constitution of society and, if possible, perpetuate it.
And very nice, too; they would not sell much shortbread by showing Edinburgh's slums. although there are enough of them.
Panorama went there a few months back, showing up the damp and rotting houses around Arthur Street, where the workers pay \ rent to live with the rats and broken sewer pipes.
And like a lot of other places, Edinburgh also has dwellings which are not classified as slums, but which are not much better; it has its prefabs.
The Edinburgh City Council Housing Committee has said that, because the process of removing them is long, and because alternative housing has to be promised for the tenants before the sites can be cleared and new dwellings erected, the prefabs will be with us for some time yet.
Let nobody be deceived that as the slums come down new housing is bound to take their place.
Sometimes the land on which they were built has what is called a high site value.
In narrow Kirkgate and the surrounding streets a lot of tenements. some of which have been Standing for a century or more, have zen demolished.
No new houses have gone up on the site; instead, a whiskey bond store is being built there and Woolworths are putting up another of their ted and gold shops.
What is to the point in all this is that the working class, although they build the beautiful mansions and palaces, can only afford to live in the slum, or the prefab, or the council house, or the little semi-detached.
Simply because the workers have only one method of getting their living by selling their energies and skills to the capitalist class.
The great cities of Scotland are not theirs, nor are the Lochs and Highlands which they sing about.
Sad Irish lads may dream of the Lakes of Killarnev, but they are owned by an American capitalist, just as the song said they never could be.
The working class of the world, in fact, own no country, no city, no land—most of them do not even own the place where they live.
No use to approach that problem with just another slum clearance scheme.
It needs a world in which society’s first concern is for the security and happiness of the human race.
The prefabs were supposed to be temporary, but they have been temporary too long.
Professor Kaufman took the best part of thirty years to produce these seven volumes and in so doing has amassed a wealth of facts regarding the origins and the nature of Israelite religion—Judaism.
Many of these facts are incorporated in this abridgement, which makes fascinating reading and one wonders at what was left out.
This is the first time that any part of Professor Kaulman’s major work on Judaism has been published in any other language but Hebrew.
For those concerned with Judaism as the first monotheistic religion from which sprang Christianity and Islam and the connecting links between Paganism, Pantheism, Polytheism, and Primitive Magic, there is a good argument in this book and much to cogitate over.
Socialists will value this book in much the same way as they do Fraser's Golden Bough, and Darwin's Origin of Species, as an explanation of mankind's activities and of his earlier inability to understand natural phenomena, such as the rising and setting of the Sun, the waxing and waning of the Moon, storms, floods, and so on.
Primitive Magic was early man’s way of endeavouring to deal with the things he did not understand, and as he * became more sophisticated his superstitions hardened into religion.
Pantheistic and polytheistic to start with and then Monotheistic, today we have variants all along the line, enough of them in fact to make the soup firms’ varieties look sick.
In the bargain, organised religion in the early days of propertied society— somewhere in the Middle East—gave rise to science, which is today busy burying religion beneath a mountain of facts.
All of this has been brought about by man endeavouring to come to grips with the problems that confronted him.
Homo Sapiens has solved most of his problems, and we are confident that he will continue todo so.
Latin America Latin America—The Balance of Race Redressed, by Halcro Ferguson for the Institute gf Race Relations.
WITH THE EXCEPTION of The Times and The Economist the only British newspaper that regularly covers Latin American affairs is The Observer, which has ii Halcro Ferguson a highly informed student of what is going on “south of the border.” welcome addition to the limited literature available on the racial aspect of that part of the world.
It is regrettable that the author makes no attempt to define his meaning of the term race.
It is far too “loaded” a word to leave to the reader's personal interpretation.
Fortunately, there is nothing in present day Latin America to compare with the specific discrimination on grounds of colour to be found in the Southern States of America or the Republic of South Africa.
It would be a mistake, however, to think this is due to some kind of moral superiority.
From Mexico down to Paraguay the Spanish speaking descendants of the conquistadors have exerted a repressive social, religious and linguistic domination over their Indian subjects whose preColombian culture was by no means inferior to that of their conquerors.
Mr Ferguson likens the break-away of the Spanish colonies under the leadership of Bolivar and San Martin to the current White-Settler and “ Colon “ quarrels with the home country, although as he himself shows the social gap between the élite and the masses was not a principle of racial superiority.
What it does mean is that as London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 His first book is therefore the countries of Central and South America undergo their national bourgeois revolutions we are likely to witness the rise of the Indian majority as a key political factor with the subsidiary demand for literacy and equal rights of language.
Despite the fact that numerically the peasants were preponderant in both Mexico of 1910 and Russia of 1917 it is an error to equate the respective Struggles of that period.
In the words of Rudolf Sprenger, “ The Russian Revolution was a bourgeois revolution without the bourgeoisie.
In Mexico's case it was not a question of a fundamental change in the social basis of society, which is what we understand by the word revolution.
Rather was it one of the last of the great peasant revolts so tragically doomed to failure by the inexorable laws of social development.
This would be the only logical position that your party could take, but as it is now you seem to be running with the hares and hunting with the hounds.
Capitalism ts 4 social system in which most people have to go to work for wages in order to live, This means that they arc forced to sell their mental and physical energies to an employer, The interests of the seller of any article are in getting the highest possible price for what he is selling.
Thus the workers are forced to struggle for the best conditions for the sale of their labour power, This means that they must struggle for shorter hours. less intense working pace, higher wages and so on.
They are the only weapon which workers can use under capitalism to defend and to improve their working conditions.
It is true, however. that trade unions do many things which are quite opposed to working class interests; some of them. as our correspondent points out. tend to help capitalism run more smoothly.
Thus we opposed trade union participation in the war cflort and dater their support of government productivity drives.
When Socialism 15 established. trade unions will cxist no morc the need for them will have disappeared, Until that day. life under capitalism i> a hatile, and the workers must fight it with the hest weapon available.
CHambers, Chairman of the Imperial Chemical Industries, on a recent visit to Russia on behalf of his Company, reported on some very interesting observations he had made.
The one exception was in the sphere of actual living conditions,” It appears Mr Chambers wanted to $22 for himself how the people lived and asked for perinission to visit their hemzs.
The vast blocks of flats erected in and around Moscow represent by European standards 4 low level for new accommodation.
In Industry. it seems to be the general rule for husband and wife to do a full day’s work and the children are left at a nursery or creche. or in the care of some relation.
Mr Chambers claimed that, although it is said hours of labour are reduced, if Statistics were available they would show that many more hours are worked per thousand of the total population than in the United Kingdom or in Western Germany.
Clothing and toilet articles. he said, are expensive, meat and pouliry was of z00d quality and not unreasonable in price.
Like many other Directors of the LC.L who have previously visited the Soviet Union, Mr Chambers has clearly shown that this country organises its industrial affairs just like any other capitalist couniry and has the same anomalies to contend with, The claim that Socialism exists in the Soviel Union is disproved by the evidence from Mr Chamber's visit.
Its workers, just like ‘the working class elsewhere, have to sell their power to labour.
There is commodity production, private property and the same sort of social problems.
Capitalism exists in the Soviet Union-and until such time that its Working Class understand and desire Socialism, poverty and insecurity will be the lot of the workers there.
This regulates the behaviour between older and younger brother and other members of the family and subjugates them all to the head of the household.
The system of responsibilities goes all the way through society to the head of the State, who is compared to the father of a family.
This lack of religious belief, however. does not help them from. pandering to even the most stupid of superstitious practices when it suits their interests, Witness the recent episode of Buddha’s tooth.
Kandaranaike, the Prime Minister, and members of her Cabinet took a prominent part in grecting it. (eylon has its own tooth — the left one enshrined al Kandy’s Dalada Malicawa tefpple.
It is about half the size of the Chinese relic but equally venerated in the Buddhist world.
The Chinese Government can very weil understand the excitement and keenness of the Ceylonese ruling-class at the possession of this,relic. for it is a help in the very important task of doping their workers minds.
The Ceylonese rulingclass, no doubt, consider this acquisition very fortunate indeed.
Buddha's tooth helps to whip up religious fervour, and this is channelled into support of the Buddhist church, which, in Ceylon, is 4 pillar of the State.
A “must” for all those wishing to know just how not to solve the problems of society.
Acting and presentation good in some parts, but in others, oh so awkward and stultified 4S to draw embarrassed titters even from i sympathetic audience.
And the plot? —Well, when we tell-you that The Crowning Experience is a Moral Re-Armament Production, maybe you can guess the rest.
South Carolina, and became a special adviser to Presidents Hoover and Roosevelt.
Broadway singer Muriel Smith portrays the leading part of the good lady, here called Emma Tremaine.
This leads to a first class row with Emma when he tries to form a “Cell” in Fmma’s own college, and gets thrown off the campus for his trouble.
But everything comes right in the end, of course, because they all somehow find their way to an MRA conference on Mackinac Island and become * changed.” liven the stubborn Charlic (who has really gone along there to get his wife back) melts before the powerful appeal of the four absolute standards of honesty, purity, unselfishness and Jove.
In a matter of minutes he has switched his worship from the God in the Kremlin to the one at Mackinac.
Finally, there is a truly tear-jerking session with politicians and leading figures from various parts of the world confessing their past dishonesties and swearing to uphold and apply the principles of MRA in the future.
The political simpleton will find much in this film to encourage him in his ignorance.
Apart from the scientifically quite untenable “ God ” idea there is the fatuous and futile notion that the MRA * Absolutes ” will give us the peaceful and happy world which we all so desperately want.
Of course, it is desirable to be honest, to harbour no hatred or ill-feeling, and to be free from fear.
No doubt we have all felt the strain imposed by having to cheat and lie at some time or other, and no one but a madman really approves of it.
Again, how nice it would be if the statesmen were to be absolutely honest with each other—a sort of “ cards en the table” policy.
It is only in posing and answering such questions as these that we can hope to achieve a satisfactory explanation of the bloodshed, suspicion and misery in which modern society abounds.
London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 a > September 1911 THE LIMITATIONS OF INDUSTRIAL ACTION In August (YW there was a strike of railwaymen, The Liberal Government, with the support of the Tories called out the troops and there were many casualties when police were used to break up strikers meetings.
Among those hardest hit by the great events of August are the Industrial Unionists.
They have witnessed a strike in the industry most able to paralyse society.
That it could paralyse society has been amply demonstrated—but then. we have never denied that they could accomplish this.
However, events have gone on to prove our claim that, considered as an instrument for * taking and holding’ the means of life Industrial Unionism, with its most perfect. weapon, the General Strike, can accomplish nothing more than general paralysis.
The ‘riotous mob’ of August 1911 were an appalling power for destruction—everybody knew that.
But when it comes to taking and holding and operating one shillingsworth of the productive wealth of the capitalist class, they are powerless.
They can destroy and die, but to hold and operate they must live—and in the difference between these two.
The final lesson, and the greatest of all, is to be found in the crushed hopes of the Industrialists. the Syndicalists, the Anarchists.
These claim that the means of production must be seized in the teeth of the armed forces; the Socialists hold that the preliminary must be to get control of the armed forces by capturing the machinery of government.
To an audience of nearly 400, Comrades Grant and Hardy held an inspiring meeting.
The audience put some excellent questions and took part in discussion—all dealt with by the speakers in full.
Good literature sales were made and a collection of £25 odd was taken up.
The Propaganda Committee arranged this meeting and plans are being made for a further Demonstration for Socialism on October 18th, in the Caxton Hall, London.
The other item of moment was the result of the small band of literature sellers organised by the new Literature Sales Committee, who sold literature at Earls Court during the Russian Exhibition.
ScotPublic Meeting DEMONSTRATION FOR SOCIALISM CAXTON HALL WESTMINSTER, SWI Wednesday 18th October 7.30 pm land and Wales.
Plans in hand at the time of going to Press, included a combined canvassing and propaganda trip to Southsea on August 27th and an indoor public meeting in the Autumn at Wembley, This will be the Branch’s first attempt at indoor propaganda and careful arrangements will be necessary.
All branch members will be informed and are urged to give their utmost support.
The Branch has held a series of very successful meetings at Gloucester Road with attentive audiences and literature sales showing a marked improvement on_previous seasons.
We hope so and anyway Branch members will do their best to exploit it to the full.
Canvassing efforts continue and the practice is to send a team to selected areas month by month, with one comrade following up the contacts made.
Some good contacts have been made, but the Branch is restricted by manpower shoriage, Absent Comrades please note.
Many young married workers I contact are very worried about the future. not simply at being unemployed, but at losing overtime work.
LONDON OUTDOOR MEETINGS Sundays Hyde Park 3 pm & 6 pm East Street, Walworth September 3rd & 17th September 10th & 24th Clapham Common 3 pm Beresford Square, Woolwich 8 pm Thursdays Tower Hill, 12.30—2 pm Hyde Park 8 pm Earls Court 8 pm Gloucester Road 8 pm Saturdays Castle Street, Kingston 8 pm Rushcroft Road 8 pm BRISTOL Durdham Downs, Every Sunday, 6.30m.
MITCHAM LECTURE The White Hart, Cricket-Green Thursday September 21st 8 pm LEWISHAM LECTURE Davenport Hall, Davenport Road, Rushey Green, SE6.
Looe ting} UNe Case for Sanity Back poge poeenaT The Stagnant Society een This Yea rs 1.
M Evers, 64 Pennard Road, WI2, ECCLES 2nd Monday in month 7.30 pm, 5 Gaskell Road, Eccles.
COVENTRY Ist and 3rd Mondays (2nd & 16th Oct) 7.30 pm, The Coffee Room, Craven Arms, High Street.
NOTTINGHAM Alternate Wednesdays (iith & 25th October) 7.30 pm, Peoples Hall, Heathcoat Street.
SOUTH EAST ESSEX (formerly Basildon and Southend) 2nd and 4th Mondays (9th & 23rd Oct) in month 8 pm, 17 Cotswold Road.
Cottis, 19 Kingswood Chase, Leigh-on-Sea, Essex. SOUTHEND SWANSEA Ist and 3rd Monday (2nd & I6th Oct) in month 8 pm, The Crypt, St.
P Mellor, 13 Waterloo Place, Brynmill, Swansea, WEMBLEY Mondays 8 pm, Barham Old Court, Barham Park, near Sudbury Town Station, Wembley.
WEST HAM 2nd and 4th Thursdays (12th & 26th Oct) in month 8 pm, Salisbury Road Schools, Manor Park, E12.
WOOLWICH 21d and 4th Fridays (13th and 27th Oct) in month 7.30 pm, Town Social Club, Mason's Hill, SEI8.
Ramsay, 9 Milne Gardens Eltham, SE9, MITCHAM & DISTRICT Thursday 19th Oct 8 pm, ‘White Hart,’’ Mitcham Cricket Green.
To pick up awnewspaper is to find a daily catalogue of wars and thicats of wars, hatreds and atrocities, murder and violence.
In Berlin, the two big power groups face up to each other like squabbling children, each trying to shout “ Yah” louder than its rival, each daring the other to strike the first blow.
In the Congo, still rent with violence, that monument of ineptitude, the United Nations, decides to intervene and chooses to do so in a sordid scramble of colonialism mixed with petty economic rivalry, the whole sorry business made worse by the usual intrigues of the big capitalist powers.
Russia, after a short period of quiet, proceeds to explode nuclear devices at a frenzied rate, sending clouds of poison into the atmosphere to threaten the health of all the earth’s inhabitants, and of even the unborn.
Between times they have both been spending astronomical sums in perfecting the ways of delivering their bombs.
Huge crowds have been cheering the astronauts of both sides for their heroism, apparently oblivious that behind it all lies the terrible threat that missiles can now be directed with pin-point accuracy to annihilate places thousands of miles away.
There is uneasy peace in Tunisia, but in Algeria the dreadful carnage go¢o on.
Laos has dropped out of the news as quickly as it came into it, but could just as easily erupt again.
In South America, Brazil looked as though it might develop into another Cuba, but has not done so, at least for the moment. {n East Africa, the Rhodesias, and South Africa, things remain only outwardly quiet.
The fact is that we are hardly surprised any more at anything anywhere.
Even more encouraging are the preparations for the winter season, the indoor programmes of branches being more ambitious than ever as the meetings advertised in this issue will show.
Most encouraging of all in these days of alleged political apathy, when even the big guns of capitalist politics find it hard to hold a good meeting, is the fat that we have run two really successful indoor rallies.
The third of these is being held this month and we are confident that it will prove more successful than those previously, a fitting conclusion to the fine summer season and an auspicious opening to an even finer winter one.
There was enough of it to be had, when Moscow announced the resumption of nuclear tests.
The Russians said that it was all America’s fault -they had to let off their bombs to show that they were ready to defend themselves against Western imperialism.
Washington and London professed shocked dismay. and anxiely for the future of the human race.
To hear them. 4 simple soul. could have been excused for assuming that neither Britain nor America had ever tested 4 bomb, and that ‘the Americans were not all ready Ie go on their own tests as soon as they got the excuse.
In fact, there was a lot of military pressure in both Russia and the United State, to resume the tests.
It was certain that the first power to break the ban would come in for a propaganda lambasting.
We could, therefore, expect the Americans to derive maximum political valuc from Khruschev’s bangs, and the Russians to do their best to play the thing down.
For that is typical of the cynicism with which capitalism’s propagandists regard such matters of life and death.
At the end of it all, when the bombs have exploded and the propaganda points made, we are back where we started.
Cheddi Jagan came out on top in the elections in British Guiana, to set the old DELEGATE MEETING 52 Clapham High Street, London, SW4 October 7th & 8th Saturday 2 6pm Sunday 1 1am Ipm, 2-6pm ladics in the Colonial Office looking under their desks for Red bogymen.
Now restored to respectability and back in power with an absolute majority, Dr.
His government will accept this from anywhere—Britain, the United States, Russia; eveg Cuba is lined up as a potential source of investment.
Jagan knows that some capital would be scared off if he went ahead with what he once professed as his principles of wholesale nationalisation.
So he is soft-pedalling on the issue although, like most newly independent states, British Guiana has its eyes upon the foreign interests in her mineral wealth.
A false step the cther and he will be dubbed a laekey of Western imperialism.
When the moment of decision comes for British Guiana, we may depend that there will be no lack of wordy journalists to spill their particular brand of beans.
But there will be a shortage of people to point out that all the time the Guianese workers are cutting the sugar and mining the bauxite and the rest and still, as ever, getting precious little out of it.
Labour Conference THis MONTH, barring landslide, earthquake and the end of the world, Mr Gaitskell will climb into the ring at Blackpool to disprove the already disproven theory that they never come back.
Now, enough unions have changed their minds to make it seem certain that Mr Cousins will be left alone to uphold the cause of C.N.D. and that Mr Gaitskell will be champion once more.
In past debates on the issué) the platform has made it quite plain that, whatever decision the delegates might take, a future Labour government would be London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 guided in its actions by the necessities of British capitalism.
This means that the Conference might decide against the bomb—but a Labo government would keep it, perhaps use it.
This was the theme of one of Bevan’. last important specches, to the Confzrence in 1958.
There has never been a government which acted otherwise, and never will be as long as the working class support capitalism.
Anybody who took this seriousiy must have been shocked by the recent government decisions to ignore the recommendations of the Civil Service Arbitration Tribunal, to restrict the statutory Wage.
In fact, the teachers are wasting their time if they are pining for fair play, for there is no such thing in the class war.
The Ministry of Education, for example. took over the Burnham Committee's functions because the government decided that the committee was being too generous to the teachers.
But in terms of the conflict of interest between any employer and his employees, it makes very good sense indeed.
Teachers as a whole, like manv civil servants and other white collar workers have always denied the existence of the class struggle.
That is one of the things Mr Selwyn Lloyd szems to be doing his best to teach them.
Indeed, it stands out as yet another example of man’s technical ability and his power to acquire knowledge and apply it to solve the problems he faces.
In the space race these must be formidable, yet such has been the fantastic advance in the last few years that Professor Sir Bernard Lovell of Jodrell Bank hardly turned a hair when told of the latest Russian achievement.
According to 4 spokesman at his observatory, the Professor holds the view that a manned flight to the moon is only about five years off and nobody laughs at him for thinking it.
Yet it was not so long ago that the British Interplanetary Society talked with daring optimism of nerhaps a 50 year wait.
But it is against a background of evenis here on earth that we must view the Soviet feat.
Western diplomats and politicians were doubtless reflecting gloomily on this latest indication of Russian rocket mastery. {t Was just One more worry to add to their already splitting headache over Berlin.
Be that as it may, it has certainly been exploited to the full by Mr Khrushchev and the propagand. organs of the Soviet ruling class, as a boost to Russian confidence.
There is lithe doubt also that American prestigz suffered a corresponding blow. although i remains to be seen to what extent, particularly among the newly rising captlalist states, the Guardian of August 8th offers a crumb of comfort to the American rulers und tells them not to be downhearsted.
Icy have some new and powerful rochess coming inly sefyne in the nest Socialist Standard 1961 Rockets’ Galore year or two; they may soon be the pacemakers again.
If Vostock I] was a military weapon, a twelve months start might be technically decisive.
In the history of scientific exploration twelve months is the blinking of an eye.
The last sentence is true enough, bui how foolish it is to ignore the war-like potentialities of scientific study in a capitalist world.
This neat little piece of * compartmentising ” just does not face up to the unpleasant reality that there really is no such thing as research for * peaceful purposes ” in private property society.
While Vostock If itself was not a war weapon, it does nevertheless point to the undoubted technical lead currently heid by the Soviets, and the military significance of this will not be overlooked by the United States and her N.A.T.O. allies.
We can all remember the fear expressed in some sections of the British press, when the Russians successfully fired their * Moon Probe” rocket, that it would be possible to set up 4 military base on the moon, from which a power would be able to bombard its earthly enemies in 4 future was.
But even ignoring this possibility. the sheer power of the present rockets and their accuracy as inter-continental siissiles, give us all a glimpse of the terriiying prospect which we face if the cold war gets hotted up at any time.
More specific was the Soviet Government’s announcement of August 30th that they would resume nuclear testing and that “ Titov-type ” rockets could be used 10 carry their new superpowerful bombs to any part of thy globe.
An acceleration of the arms race can now be confidently cxpected and the space race is part of it.
Although, «at present, she lags behind Russia in rocket development, she will make frantic efforts to catch up and snatch the lead.
Already. anyway, there are three very advanced American rockets available—Polaris, Skybolt, and Minuteman-—all highly mobic, but having warheads of no more than about | megaton yizld.
Now that Russta has broken the three year old moratorium on tests, the U.S, Government has the ideal political excuse to try out 4 greater range of bombs and develop the rockets to carry them. {ft is admitted in the Guardian of September Ist that pressure of opinion in favour of this has been building up in American military circles for some time, and designs already exist to increase the yield of Polaris and Skybolt to 2 megatons each.
So it is clear that the usual dirty and cynical game has been played by both sides over the past two or three years. and that all their talk of banning nuclear arms has been so much hypocritical eyewash.
We shall not here take part in the futildebate on the relative advantages of the Russian and American types of rocket.
Despite all these melancholy develuopments, do not let us lose sight of the tremendous possibilities of rocket propulsion, It is here to stay. and in the year. since the end of the second World War. we have seen great strides in its develop. ment.
One thing is certain. will unforiunately suffer perversion and defilement Lke so many other things in 4 capitalist world.
JHE WORKERS, whose wages and jobs are involved, view the latest “crisis” as a serious matter, as also do the employers who are fearful about their falling profits, but in every other respect it has the appearance .of a farce, represented almost every other year since the end of the war.
The Opposition, forgetting that crises also happened when they were the government, say that the thing itself and Selwyn Lloyd’s methods of handling it are evidence of Tory ineptitude and viciousness.
The Tories, embarrassed by their promises that it would not happen again when the people were “ set free” from Labour government planning and controls, now find themselves committed to the idea of planning, though this time it is to be by a national economic council, representing government employers and trade unions instead of planning from Whitehall.
Except for variations of detail and emphasis there isn’t a single original idea in the new Tory policy and no indication that they are any better at smoothing out capitalism than were the Labour government.
Most of Selwyn Lloyd’s speeches and actions might have come straight from the late Sir Stafford Cripps.
The manufacturer, if he is to sell his goods, has to offer them at competitive prices, “as high as the market will bear,” but not so high as to leave the market to cheaper competitors.
If wages increase too much his profit suffers so he needs something to act as a brake on wage-claims and at present the unemployment brake is missing.
But that means bringing factories and transport to 4 temporary standstill, at enormous cost in the shape of lost production and profits, and with the risk that the government would lose the next election.
Two policies that had looked promising for a time were Cripps’ appeal to the workers not to claim higher wages, and the policy of raising the price level by currency inflation.
If manufacturers know they can count on steadily rising prices for what they sell they do not have to be adamant about wage increases induced by the rising cost of living.
Cripps was eventually persuaded to devalue the pound in order to make it cheaper for the foreigner to “buy British ”; but in the nature of things this is a remedy that cannot be safely repeated every few years.
The other part of the Cripps plan that has been copied by all his successors is to ask for more output per worker.
The idea behind this is that provided all the additional output is sold, it would permit wages to rise without cutting into profit.
There should be no increase of income from profits and rent, and rises of wages should only be asked for either when productivity was increased or to attract workers to industries short of labour.
In particular he objected to workers in one industry demanding increases to keep up with workers in another industry, and in 1949 when the devaluation of the pound again put up the cost of living he condemned wage increases aimed at keeping up with the rise of prices.
The present government has no hope of ‘ getting T.U.C. support for a wage freeze, but it calculated that the T.U.C. would be unable to resist the bait of “ planning,” because that has long been one of their demands.
This isn’t the first time a government has exercised its power to withhold agreement and thus delay wage increases proposed by wages councils.
It was done in 1957 in respect of National Health Service workers, and back in 1948/9 the same delaying tactics were used by the Minister of Labour in the Labour Government.
It took nearly a year for the retail food council and the hairdressing council to reach agreement in 1948 on proposed pay increases but the Minister, Mr Isaacs, referred back certain of the proposals.
The councils sent them back to him again almost unaltered and the Minister rejected them again in August, 1949.
The T.U.C. reported (1950 Report, 167) that after a meeting with the Minister the difficulties were removed, and the increases were put into operation in October, 1949, after nearly a year's hold-up.
According to Press reports at the time, the Shop Assistants Union had threatened to embarrass the Labour Government, by putting down an emergency resolution for the Trades Union Congress.
The tough talk from the government about the “ pause” on wage increases aroused similar tough talk from trade union officials declaring that they would * have none of it; that they were not going to be dictated to and that “ legitimate ” wage claims would go on as usual.The unions are quite right to continue the wage struggle but they are only deceiving themselves if they think that there would be no restriction on wage increases if Selwyn Lloyd had not put it there.
Wages are always restricted; basically by the fact that they represent the value of the mental and physical energies the worker sells, and at any given moment by the demand, and the amount of unemployment.
The employers have to aim at keeping wages down to a level which leaves a surplus for profit.
This is capitalism, and it is idle to pretend that it can be made to operate as if its purpose was to provide constantly rising real wages without regard to profit.
In practice, trade unions are forced to recognise this fact, hence their almost invariable practice of having to settle at some figure far less than they claim; railway unions ir 1958 claiming 10 per cent, and accepting 3 per cent., and the same unions under the Labour Government claiming 12s.d. in 1948 and eventually being put off with a few shillings for the lowest paid only.
The present government obviously hopes that the imposed standstill on government employees will stiffen the resistance of employers in private industry.
The Prospect While the unions are anxiously watching what the government does, other indicators may turn out to be more important.
Some of the economists think that if unemployment rose to about 2 per cent. —2} per cent., the unions’ ability to press for higher wages would be curbed.
Disregarding merely seasonal changes, unemployment has since been creeping up and unfilled vacancies have been declining.
There will not of course be large-scale unemployment, or anything remotely resembling it, but labour should become a good deal easier to obtain in the coming months.
If the present crisis follows the pattern of the others since the war the pressure will last for a few months.
Profits which have recently been falling will start to go up again because wage increases will be harder to get.
The Chancellor will then announce that we have “turned the corner” and the workers will be invited to rejoice.
London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 in the coming.
To the Ea THOSE BONUS SHARES Although bonus shares ‘* does not add to the market value of a company’s shares ~. it could put increased dividends in the pockets of shareholders.
Assuming that the following financial year the particular company made increased profits, the shareholders could receive £200,000 dividends in the form of 20 per cent on 1 million £1 shares, or 10 per cent on 2 million £1 shares.
REPLY, The article set out to show how erroneous is the belief that doubling or trebling a company’s shares, by an issue of bonus shares. doubles or trebles the market price of each shareholder’s holding.
All that each shareholder gets from the change is double or treble the number of shares but with the market price of each share reduced to approximately a half or a third of what it was before. leaving the market price of the whole of the company’s shares unchanged.
The Guardian took up the first criticism after the 1960 Congress, which it said, spent its time mainly on issues “ almost irrelevant to all the real problems of the Unions,” and which would not even discuss a resolution put down by a small Ser SOCIALIST STANDARD 1961 To SPGB Literature Dept 52 Clapham High Street, London, SW4 Se Eee | | | @ Subscription form | | | | | 6 issues 4/post free | 12 issues 8/post free | Send me Socialist Standard for the next issues I enclose Name Address Union urging more time for industrial affairs.
It may well be that it is largely this factor that keeps outside two large Unions, the National Union of Teachers and the Local Government Workers Union , as well as some others of the four hundred and seventy Unions that are not affiliated, though for the smaller Unions finance is probably a considerable factor.
It has been heard less in recent years because the big Unions have been divided, with the largest Union of all, the Transport and General Workers, voting against the General Council’s recommendations on such issues as armaments.
No doubt if votes at Congress were cast by each Union in proportion to majority and minority opinion on Union executives and among their members some decisions would go the other way, though in the main it would show itself only in the form of closer votes and smaller majorities.
Looking at the trade unions in the world today it is astounding to recall that in their infancy they were regarded by the employers and governments with real fear, as revolutionary organizations that threatened property and the social system itself.
Now the danger has been largely contained, partly by concessions and legislation, but also through the aims that the Unions set themselves.
Instead of thinking of themselves as part of the world working class struggling against the employers and the capitalist system, the aim of the trade union leaders in each country is to be consulted by the employers in the running of the industry, and by the government in the determination of national economic policy.
There is, of course, a sort of fatal logic about the direction in which the Unions « are going.
If it is once accepted that world-wide working class action for Socialism is impossible then it can seem to be “realistic” for the Unions to try to help British capitalism against its foreign competitors, by trying to gain markets for exports, by keeping down costs and avoiding strikes, by giving support to armaments, and in the last resort, to wars.
All through Congress debates this readiness to think in terms cf * British” interests instead of world working class interests comes out, as ii did for example in the decision aboui wage restraint.
In the years 1948 to 1950, in response to the appeal of the Labour government, the majority of the delegates accepted it.
Even in 1950, when it was turned down on an E.T.U. resolution, the door was still lef; open.
The E.T.U. resolution rejected wage restraint but cnly until such time as profits were “reasonably limited,” prices controlled and “a positive planning of our British economy ” js introduced.
So it might have been a clever waiting game, with each side needing to test but reluctant to make the first move for fear of the political repercussions in countries like India and on the African conlinent.
There is no reason to blame the U.S.S.R. for losing the game, nor to suppose that the Americans held out for liumanitarian reasons, For when it came to it, they were just about as ready to let off their bombs again as were the Russians.
We know that all capitalist countries like to describe their policies as being inspired by zeal for human benefits.
But that simply does not even start to Wash as far as nuclear weapons go.
There is one certain way in which Russia, America and the rest could serve human interests, and solve the problem of nuclear warfare at the same time.
Capitalist vations build up their armouries because ley must always strive for military supremacy, to defend the economic and commercial interests of their ruling cl:ss.
The speakers went on to say that they ure still willing, on terms, to have a hand, with the employers and the government in working out economic plans.
A Daily Herald editorial puts its finge on the double-edged nature of planning.
Whether the government will make concessions in order to secure trade union collaboration remains to be seen, but one thing is made very clear by the anxious comments in various Liberal, Tory and financial journals, that is that they attach a great deal of importance to avoiding a head-on clash with the trade unions in the coming months.
They know the losses the employers can suffer in widespread strikes and are not at all happy that the present government should have behaved as if it wanted a show-down at all costs.
It only remains to emphasise again the truism that the trade unions will not usefully change their direction until the members themselves think out their class position in capitalism and see that whai is needed is world-wide working class zaction to establish Socialism.
The alternative, collaboration in each couniry with the government, may end by bringing the unions nearer to being what the so-called trade unions are in Russia, part of the governmental machine of capitalism.
H a H-BOMB DIPLOMACY | continued from back page she can keep troops and weapons there, handy to move into Kuwait or any other trouble spot in the oil rich, economically vital Middle East.
The United States wants its missile bases on the Continent, its Polaris ships in Holy Loch, because they cannot allow Russian capitalism to expand freely into Europe.
Now thes2 competing economic interests are an essential part of capitalism; if Russia and America were to settle their differences tomorrow, the day after we would have some other powers at loggerheads.
Once you have armed forces you have weapons, with each force trying for the weapon which will make it the ‘most powerful of the lot.
That sounds too simple for words, but it is in fact the reason behind the horror story of the development of weapons.
That is the story to tell the unilateral nuclear disarmers, because it is the hundred p2i cent. reason for not being one of them.
Khruschev and Kennedy have punched « big hole in the casz of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament.
Let us sup. pose that the C.N.D. had its way, and that the governments of the world agreed to renounce the use and manufacture of Nuclear weapons, All the diplomats London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 would gather at Geneva, or some other equally pleasant place, to sign the instrument of renunciation.
Germany’s signature to the 1919 treaty which disarmed her was worthless.
The powers whien signed the Locarno Treaty of friendship in 1924 were very soon at war with each other.
The post war problem of Beflin is chock full of agreements which have been broken or ignored.
And in the same way, now that it suits their purpos. to do so, the nuclear powers have ignored their 1958 agreement to ban tests.
There is no evidence to suggest that they would behave any differently about an agreement to renounce nuclear bombs completely.
The diplomats in themselves might be men of sensitive iMlegrity, It is the disputing nature of capitalist society Which forces them to make. and break, their pledges.
In fundamentals, the policies of capitalist governments never change, although in more superficial matters there are Opportunities to alter their iminediate policy, and they often do so, For example, there is’ lot of evidence that since Stalin's death the Russian ruling class has tended to adopt a less belligerent attitude towards their opponents.
Stalin, whatever else can be said of him, was one of capitalism’s strong men; his Successors have shown a more subtle touch.
That is what has made Moscow’s tough attitude on the tests that little bit more chilling.
Travellers from the United States and from Eastern Europe tell the same story — of people all in a panic about war.
But we should keep the bomb tests in their perspective, and remember that weapons are not in themselves the cause of war.
The next conflict will spring from the disputes of capitalism — from the Koreas, the Kuwaits, the Berlins.
In the meantime, with their bomb tests, space shots, subArctic submarines and the rest, the powers are only taking the normal capitalist precaution of arming themselves as destructively as they can.
Because for the majority of people, happy to keep capitalism going, that is the way they want it.
Archbishop Makarios, the leader of the fight for “liberation,” and now President of Cyprus, takes the lead.
The Cypriot workers are no more “ independent” or “ free” now than they were under British rule, Freedom and Justice Another non-paradise is Ghana.
The Coronation oath of the British monarch, to keep the laws and customs of the country, is one which would be rigidly enforced if necessary.
Any monarch disregarding it would get his or her marchFLORENCE DALE With deep sadness, we have to hnnounce the death of Comrade Florence Dale of Wembley Branch, who was better known to many party members by the friendlier name of Queenie, She joined the party in 1950, becoming first a member of Ealing Branch and later helping to found the new branch at Wembley.
Queenie was not a speaker or a writer, but she played her full part in the backroom. jobs without which the more “glamorous” work in the party could not carry on.
Much of her work was on the party’s Library Committee, looking after our collection of books, and —most essential—seeing that each month the SociaList STANDARD went out to the long list of postal subscribers.
She also served on the Head Office Social Committee and on many working committees in her branch.
Queenie was an active, warm, humane person who has left many friends in the party to grieve that she will no more listen to the music, and hike over the.
She worked hard for Socialism and we shall carry on that work, because we know that that is what she would have wished.
To Queenie’s husband, Comrade Leslie Dale, also of Wembley Branch, we offer our sincere, comradely sympathy.
OCTOBER 1961 ing orders from the ruling class forthwith, Only twenty-five years ago the ruling class sacked its then figurehead, Edward VIII, giving him less notice than a well-behaved butler could have expected, simply because that monarch showed signs of wanting to ignore the code of behaviour laid down for him by the ruling class and marry a divorced woman.
And if a monarch was dismissed merely for wanting to breach a social code, how much more speedily the ruling class would act against one who contravened the laws made for the benefit of that class.
President Nkrumah is not merely a figurehead, but the chief executive of the Ghanaian ruling class, and he is sure of his position so long as he serves his masters well.
If the exigencies of policy require that opposition politicians shall be jailed without trial, then to jail they go.
And no pious oaths, however solemn, about upholding freedom and justice can be allowed to stand in the way.
Anti-strike effort But Nkrumah’s police-state methods do not stop there.
In the twin port towns of Takoradi and Sekondi, the centres of the strike, “convicted saboteurs” can be jailed for ten years.
Police headquarters reported © that all was quiet in the two towns, and all gatherings of workers were being dispersed.
The Minister for Presidential Affairs warned civil servants—a term which includes railwaymen and some of the port workers — that if they stayed out on strike more than ten days they would be sacked and not taken on again.
The Ghana Government appears to be going very near to making striking itself illegal — in other words, almost introducing a system of, forced labour.
More Freedom A third country to gain its “ freedom ” in the last decade is Nigeria.
There, thirteen citizens of the Northern Region recently had a drink—harmless enough, one might think.
So the offending Nigerians have been fined, and sentenced to eighty strokes of the cane.
A further clause in the bill declares that any person who incites, encourages, or aids in any manner any employer to declare and continue a lock-out, or any employee to go or continue on strike, shall be liable to a fine of not less than £10 nor more than £200.
ERRE SEEKER LEK For a socialist analysis of war read SOCIALIST PARTY AND WAR 1/3 post paid, from SPGB 52 Clapham High Sereet, London, $W4 down THE STAGNANT SOCIETY The Stagnant Society, by Michael Shanks.
IN CASE YOU SHOULD think from the title that this is a radical attack on the very basis of modern society, let us disillusion you right away.
Mr Shanks is very much concerned (that Britain in the 1960's is losing the productivity race with other countries and is failing to compete successfully in world markets.
Labour relations, financial policy, government planning, export drives, labour mobility—they are all there, und many more besides.
Perhaps you should read 7/ic Stagnant Society, {t will possibly give you an insight into current misconceptions about the Capitalist World—that's if you don‘ die of boredom halfway through it.
We regret we cannot recommen it for an honoured place on a Socialist’ bookshelf.
Notes on Economic History Malthus on Poverty ROM HIS LAW of population, Malthus infers that Governments should, on the one hand, retnove all obstacles to the cullivation of the soil and, on the other, favour preventive ch2cks, especially the postponement of marriage.
Malthus therefore recommends the reduction of paupers’ relief to a minimum.
Money used to support the poor or destitute, he argues, is taken from the other classes in society, and especially from that section of the working class that is only just outside of destitution.
Arising from this, it was proposed to put legal difficulties in the way of marriage.
The poor who had no prospects of being able to support a family were to be forbidden to marry.
The Malthusian doctrine attracted Widespread attention, and was accepted almost without qualification by many scientists.
It also made a strong impression on governments, and its effects were seen in the increased stringency of the marriage laws.
Down to 1918 vestiges of this persisted in Bavaria and the Austrian Tyrol, where marriage could not be cntered into without the permission of the commune.
The astonishing fact about the Malthu‘ian theory is its persistence in face of evidence that confutes it.
To go to the core of the question, we can say there is no evidence to warrant the assumption that there is any tendency in population lo Increase faster than subsistence.
The facts stated by Malthus to show. this tendency, simply show that where, owing to a small population in a new country, or where, owing to the unequal distribution of wealth, as among the working class in the old country, human Jife is occupied with physical necessity of cxistence, the tendency to reproduce is at a rate which, if unchecked, would at some time exceed subsistence.
But it is not correct to infer from this that the tendency to reproduce would show itself to the same extent where population was sufficiently dense, and where wealth was distributed in such a way as to lift the whole community above the necessity of devoting their energies to a struggle for mere existence.
Nor can it be assumed that the tendency to reproduce, by causing poverty, must prevent the existence of such a community; for this obviously would be assuming the very point at issue and be reasoning in a circle.
And even if it be admitted that the tendency to multiply must ultimately cause poverty, it cannot be stated of existing poverty that it is due to this cause until it is shown that there are no other causes which can account for it.
The Malthus theory has persisted, and will persist, because it does not in any Way Oppose or antagonise any powerful interest.
It is soothing and reassuring to the class who, wielding the power of wealth, largely dominate thought.
ANDREWS HALL, Berkeley Street, Room 2, Door G London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 question and examine society, i came fo the ald of the ruling class.
The hsyvay on Population was written as an answer to William Gedwin’s Inquiry concerning Political Justice, a book which dealt with the principle of human equality. and the effect of Malthus’ book was to justify the existing inequality by shifting responsi bility for it from the laws of society to some kind of God-given laws, The Socialist of today still has to con tend with Malthusian ideas, in a modern form.
They become more prevalent in times of large-scale unemployment, ard are also uscd as an excuse to justify poverty in such places as India.
Poverty, as dealt with by Malthus, 1 not in fact the result of excessive breed ing.
It is the chaotic nature of the capi talist system which must be blamed.
Its solution is obvious-—remove the cause which the Socialist claims is the private properly relation in the means of production.
Make this property common property, and the common access to wealth which follows such a change will provide the answer to poverty, present or future. my.
All that it tells us is that if a company’s profits increase sufficiently it can pay out twice as much dividend, whether it makes a bonus issue or not.
The final paragraph is cqually irrelevant to the question of bonus shares.
It is quite true that if a company makes enough profit to pay out an annual dividend equal to 10 per cent of the original capital it will take only ten years for the shareholders to get back all their original investment and still hold their shareholding.
But this result is achieved whether the company issues bonus shares or not. it all depends on making sufficient profit.
If the company does not make cnough profit an issue of bonus shares is not going to make any difference.
We repeat-—the issue of bonus shares does not add to profits or dividends.
Richard Headicar NO: Melvin Harris | i RR ° Branch News DEMONSTRATION FOR SOCIALISM Wednesday, Oltober 18th, is the day of the third central London meeting in the DEMONSTRATION FOR SOCIALISM series and is being held in CAXTON HALL, Westminster. p The two previous meetings (filling St.
Pancras Town Hall in April and Conway Hall in July) were stimulating and successful by all standards.
Now. with one speaker drawn from each, a bigger and, it is hoped, an even more fruitful meeting will be held.
Since it is quite a long time since the SPGB has held meetings at the Caxton Hall, a word or two on the situation of the hall might be timely.
Caxton Hall lies just off Victoria Street about mid-way between Victoria Station and Parliament Square.
DELEGATE MEETING The Autumn Delegate Meeting will be held at Head Office, 52, Clapham High Street, S.W. on Saturday and Sunday, October 7th and 8th.
Arrangements are being made by the Standing Orders Committee to re-arrange the seating arrangements in order that the maximum comfort will be possible, GLASGOW The two Glasgow Branches, having joined up again in their work for Socialism, have reverted to their original name— Glasgow Branch instead of City and Kelvingrove.
They have had a most successful outdoor season this summer, both in Glasgow and Edinburgh.
December 1961—The British Political Scene, January 1962—Power Politics.
SOCIALIST STANDARD, OCTOBER 1961 SSE The subjects for October and November are listed under Meetings.
EALING Ealing Branch is now meeting regularly again after the short holiday break in August.
The Branch has been given a new meeting room—bigger, more comfortable. and generally much more pleasant than its previous onc.
This will certainly provide more incentive for members to venture forth on miserable winter nights.
Branch intends to take the fullest advantage of this in arranging its lectures and discussions, The new room will also be much more practicable for this purpose.
We hope to give further details of the programme next month, PADDINGTON Having the Overseas Secretary as their own Branch Secretary is not the only reason for its increasingly international flavour.
The proximity of Hyde Park and their virtually West-End location are also important factors.
It was the eve of his trip round Europe prior to his return to Australia.
He was deluged with the addresses of people all over the Continent whom we know to be in sympathy with us.
Some members met him in Italy last year but for some time he has been working in Scandinavia and he reported briefly but with humour and insight on the scene as he finds it there.
He was able to pass over to the Branch some of her old lecture notes which are certain to be of further educational value.
As they meet in a room above a pub their timetable is governed by the licencing laws which means they have to adjourn before closing time at eleven.
However. those who are prepared for a “morning after the night before” usually fit in another three quarters of an hour of discussion at a coffee shop down the road.
A friend. just back from Turke) called just in time to give Peter Byrant a ( SOCIALIST STANDARD, OCTOBER 1961 few interesting addresses in Germany and an Indian sympathiser of long standing spent the evening with us.
Their wide perspective has not lessened their enthusiasm for Branch propaganda outings to places nearer home.
This summer Paddington has made successful and highly enjoyable trips to Coventry, Nottingham and Stevenage and on our very doorstep, Hyde Park has proved to be well worth the running on Thursday nights.
WEMBLEY Wembley Branch are pleased to an nounce that their first indoor public meeting will take place on October 30th when Comrade C May will be “Introducing the SPGB” to the workers of Wembley.
Quite a lot of time and moncy have been spent on preparing and publicising the event, and Branch members are hoping for a good attendance.
The second of the Branch canvassing efforts in Portsmouth was _ successful although hampered somewhat by a late start.
On this occasion we had the welcome help of a member from Woolwich Branch.
During the afternoon and evening, the usual meeting was held on the seafront to an attentive audience, and lit. sales were most encouraging.
Preparations are being made for a series of lectures by Branch members through the winter months.
The last series dealt with various religious movements and was very successful.
Any comrade having a special knowledge of a particular subject is encouraged to hold forth and other members find this a great help in broadening their general background.
The excellent summer outdoor season has, of course, helped a lot but the persistent canvassing efforts must not be forgotten either.
At the same time we shall encourage our present contacts to attend the Steen teteenatbanteriniee tee WEMBLEY PUBLIC MEETING Monday, 30:h October, 8 pm Barham Old Court, Barham Park.
Harrow Road, Wembley “INTRODUCING THE SOCIALIST PARTY OF GREAT BRITAIN ” LONDON OUTDOOR MEETINGS Sundays Hyde Park, 3 pm East Street, Walworth Clapham Common, 3 pm Thursdays Tower Hill, 12.30-2 pm Saturdays Rushcroft Road, 8 pm branch—and in particular the public meeting already mentioned.
Not forgetting. the lighter side, a social will be held at Christmas and we hope it will be at least as successful as last year’s.
Full details and tickets will be available later, of course, but preliminary work has already begun.
Regular donations are a considerable help to a working class party like ours which suffers from restrictive finances.
Thank you Comrade, LITERATURE The small committee which had such great success in selling literature at the Russian Exhibition at Earls Court, have had further success.
A member of the Committee, Comrade Hyams of Hackney Branch, went to the Trade Union Congress at Portsmouth and during the period of the conference sold 60 Socialist Standards and 50 various pamphlets.
AMERICAN TOUR Comrade Gilmac is working hard on his American tour and it is hoped to have details of the meetings he has addressed and his television and radio talks in our next issue, CANADA The Toronto group is making encouraging progress.
Our Comrades Catt, report good discussions and attendances at all of their meetings—even during the hot summer months.
Over 20 meetings have been held so far, a grand achievement, especially when it is remembered that the group has been in exis:ence for only a few months.
Persistent attempts are made to keep in the public eye, and with the growth of the group. other socialist comrades in the area are giving their support, so that there is a possibility of forming a local of the S.P.C. in the near future.
A heartening report indeed of courage and determination in the face of gigantic odds.
Film Meetings commence on 9th October with an interesting film “ The German Story”, which has just been made by the German Democratic Republic.
This remarkable film took two years to make and tells the story of two world wars.
London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 GLASGOW MEETINGS St.
Edge HACKNEY LECTURE Bethnal Green Town Hall, Room 3 Wednesday, 11th October, 8m.
Ever since the atom bomb came mushrooming onto the fvorld scene, there has been no lack of scientists to tell us how bad it is for cur health to have the things tested.
Because, as now seems fairly obvious, the nuclear powers agreed to stop tests in 1958 only after they had completed a significant stage in their nuclear weapon build up.
These tests, with their predecessors, must have yielded enough knowledge for the nuclear powers to mull over whilst they were busily developing othci aspects of their weapons.
We all know that they have been polishing up on rocketry, perfecting their accuracy and boosting their range.
Now, they arc at the stage which demands further bomb tests, if the work of the last three years is not to be wasted.
The big snag is that, for political reasons, neither side wanted to be labelled as the one which started it all again.
Over recent years, Russian foreign policy has often shown itself sensitive to such things.
Perhaps Khruschev did not want Russia to be the country to break the test ban.
DECLARATION OF PRINCIPLES SOCIALIST PARTY OF GREAT BRITAIN Ss; 1] That Society as at present constituted is based upon the ownership of the means of living by the capitalist or master class, and the consequent enslavement of the working class, by whose labour alone wealth is prouced.
SPGB at above address, Groups BRISTOL Enquiries: J Flowers, 6 Backfields , Bristol 2.
COVENTRY Ist and 3rd Mondays (6th & 20th Nov) 7.30 pm, The Coffee Room, Craven Arms, High Street.
DID ' LEWISHAM Mondays 8 pm, Co-op Hall , Davenport Road, Rushey Green, Catford, SE6.
NOTTINGHAM Alternate Wednesdays (8th & 22nd November) 7.30 pm, Peoples Hall, Heathcoat Street.
SOUTH EAST ESSEX (formerly Basildon and Southend) 2nd and 4th Mondays (13th & 27ch Nov) in month 8 pm, 17 Cotswold Road.
SWANSEA Ist and 3rd Monday (6th & 20th Nov; in month 6 pm, The Crypt, St.
WOOLWICH 2nd and 4th Fridays (10th and 24th Nov) in month 7.30 pm, Town Social Club, Mason’s Hill, SEI8.
ORDERS for literature should be sent to the Literature Department, spcs, at the above address, CORRESPONDENCE for the Executive Committee should be sent to the General Secretary, spcp, 52.
LAKE, SPGB, at the above address, Postal orders and cheques should be crossed and made payable to the sros.
The Conservatives surprised the pundits by heavily voting down a resolution in favour of whipping and the birch.
They, all of them, passionately argued their points of view, and seemed to take themselves very seriously.
They searched deep into their archives, digging up a lot of contradictory pronouncements on the question.
In effect a future Labour government would act as the needs of the day (i.e., British Capitalism) dictated.
And if this meant—as in past Labour governments— breaking Conference decisions, it would be unfortunate but necessary.
The majority of us—the working class—suffer the brunt of the system’s evils, which only Socialism will remove.
Socialism in contrast will be based on common ownership and democratic control.
THE NEWS IN REVIEW Wages Battles THE BIG THING about Selwyn Lloyd's small Budget was that it threw out a sort of challenge to the trade unions.
And one of the big things about this winter may be that the unions will accept the invitation to do battle.
The engineers have put in their annual pay claim and the railwaymen are certain to follow suit.
If these unions get the same sort of treatment as the government has handed out to the teachers and the civil servants, there will surely be some big strikes.
This is what governments have tried to avoid since the war, preferring to inflate the currency rather than meet the unions head on.
The Labour government, with its wage freeze, had perhaps the nearest to a strong anti-union policy.
Workers always have a struggle to get by and always have to fight to keep up their living standards.
That will be worth remembering if the wage pause gets a grip, and the usual bunch of muddle-heads mourn the days before Selwyn Lloyd as a time of fre2 prosperity for the working class.
Adenauer Again Dr, ADENAUER’S CHANCES of keeping his grip of the West German Chancellorship were not, at one time, rated very highly.
Most observers expected a close result to the recent elections, with the Free Democrats holding the balance of power in a stalemate between Adenauer's C.D.U. and Brandt’s Social Democrats.
Erich Mende, was quite firm that, if his party was invited to form a coalition government with the C.D.U., he would assent only if Adenauer gave up being Chancellor.
Whether Adenauer, or Erhard, or Brandt, is Chancellor will make no difference to the German working class, But it should be instructive for them to observe the cynical manoeuvres of their politicians and to reflect that this sort of thing goes on all the time, all over the world, Nkrumah Strikes Dr.
NKRUMAH HAS MADE a habit of dis appointing some of the well-meanini asses who supported him because they thought that he wanted to set up a democratic state in Ghana.
These people fall so readily and so persistently for any small-time nationalist who breezes along that it is fair to assume they are able to ignore any evidenc> which points out the error of their ways.
It is just the sort of vague accusations which colonial powers us¢ to excuse the suppression of a rising nationalist movement.
To read it takes us back to the early nineteen-fifties, when Nkrumah was in gaol.
The asses were braying, then, for his release, because he was supposed to be leading Ghana to freedqm.
Even if they drop the dictator in Accra, they will soon be taking up the cause of some other Nkrumah of the future.
Well, no—respectability, Many responsible newspapers have been worried for a long time at Labour's inability to dent the Tories’ confidence.
None of them want to see the British capilalist class having to rely upon only one parly to form their governments for them.
So they were full of concern that Labour should have a dignified conference.
The platform at Brighton played exactly as the press had advised and, except for one or two resolutions, the conference as a whole also fell into line.
SOCIALIST STANDARD, NOVEMBER THE COMMON MARKET Britain on the Brink BRITISH CAPITALISM has decided to take its chance with the Common Market.
After shivering at the water’s edge for a long, long time it has at last ventured as far as the end of the diving-board, It even shows signs this time that it is really going to take the plunge.
At least its political representatives do, Re-inforced by the support of the Brighton Conference, even if it was apparently only given after some heavy gunning from the platform, the Conservative leadership can contemplate the next step with easier minds.
He has already told the Six how anxious Britain is to join them, how keen she is to abide by their principles, and with what determination she is ready to carry them out.
Ever since the Common Market came into existence, and even before that when its predecessors like the Coal and Steel Community were being formed, British Capitalism has held aloof.
For what it no doubt considered quite good economic and political reasons it preferred the safe and easy markets of the Commonwealth to taking risks in Europe.
Even when it ecame clear that the Common Market was becoming a strong economic threat, the U.K. still attempted to thwart it by setting up a rival firm (EFTA or the Seven) as a counterweight.
They tried all¥he other well-known Capitalist dodges into the bargain, such as playing off their rivals against each other, in particular by trying to drive a wedge between France und Germany.
When it became clear that EFTA was hardly in the race the Government immediately set to work to condition British Capitalism to the fact that there was no alternative but to jump on the Common Market band-wagon.
Since then, they have calmly proceeded to swallow most of what they had said before (as well as a considerable amount of pride) and now calmly go forward, cap in hand, to try to get in as though this had been their intention right along.
All the countries concerned with the Common Market are, of course, manceuvring for position just like Britain.
When the time came for them to make application to the Six it was to find that the “ neutrals,” Austria, Sweden and Switzerland, had already been negotiating with the Community behind their backs and had in fact succeeded in obtaining some quite useful concessions.
At the same time, the Six themselves are jockeying for positions of self-advantage.
The Netherlands are the most inclined to let Britain join, the French the most opposed.
These attitudes have nothing to do with anything other than hard economic and political facts.
The Dutch would be very pleased’ to see a‘ further large market for their agricultural produce come into the Community whilst the French are still almost as suspicious as ever that British Capitalism’s only motive for joining is to get inside and smash it.
These are only a few examples of the conflicts of interest underlying everything connected with the Common Market.
Every one of the countries involved has its own economic and political interests to safeguard by almost any method it can.
The Conservatives managed to bulldoze through their Conference an overwhelming vote of support for their decision.
If they get the Six to look favourably on their difficulties with the Commonwealth they will not have too much to fear.
If the Six also prove coOperative over agriculture, they will be even happier.
But should the discussions on either of these topics run into trouble, the Conservatives will be in trouble, too.
Out of office, they can afford London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 ) ¥ 1961 se lo argue amongst. themselves without the need to come to a decision one way or the other.
But if they had been in power, it is a pretty safe bet that they would now be doing exactly the same thing as the Conservatives are doing, with probably the same misgivings and certainly the same dissentions.
It is not, after all, by accident that Tribune and the Daily Express find themselves in one camp with Mr Shinwell and Lord Hinchinbrook, and people like Mr, Heath and Mr Woodrow Wyatt together in the other.
In such ways do the economic forces of Capitalism speak louder than the pretences of Capitalist political parties.
For the essential thing to remember about all this hoo-ha over the Common Market is the harsh Capitalist reality underlying it.
The reason why Britisa Capitalism has at last got to the point of joining the Six is because its economic interests are pressing hard upon it to do so.
Just how hard is demonstrated by what it is having to suffer in injured pride and swallowed words.
And it is these same forces which helped to bring about the Common Market itself and which will again largely determine the attitude of its members to Britain's application io join and that of any other interested nation.
Politics also play their part, of course, politics which again have their roots in the harsh economic reality of Capitalisin.
The Common Market is to some extent the reflection of the realisation by such countries as France, Germany, and Italy, that their days as Big Powers have gone und that it is now the giants, such as Russia and the U.S.A. that dominate the world scene.
It is the forces of Capitalism again, at work in the drive towards bigger and bigger units within individual countries, and in the urge towards bigger units like the Common Market on the world scene.
What is not an issue in the Common Market is the interests of the workingclass.
True, there are such things as plans to standardise working conditions within the Community and, in theory at any rate, the aim eventually to allow completely free movement of workers ‘nside it, but essentially the workers’ position will remain unchanged.
Now what must have struck the audience was that this is the sort of optimistic statement which political leaders are always putting out and which mean exactly nothing.
It is, in fact, curious that on one occasion when they did win, and with a thumping majority, there is evidence that they were not particularly optimistic.
Mr Shinwell once said that, although he expected the landslide victory in 1945, most of the other Labour leaders took a gloomier view of their chances.
Naturally, nobody expects Mr Gaitskell to say that he is looking forward to losing the next election and that there isn’t really much point in all this arguing about election programmes because the Conservatives already have it in the bag.
The task of the working-class, whether Britain joins it or not, will still be to get rid of the system that generates this drive for profit.
And in ‘setting about that task the workers of Britain and of the Common Market do have a common interest.
Labour are out for power over the affairs of British capitalism and to get this they do not have to educate or enlighten people.
They only have to persuade enough voters that they are the cleverest, most responsible, most humane bunch of would be ministers in the land.
Like the salesman who tells you that his product must be good because it sells so well, the political leader must always strive to give the impression that their fortunes are set fair.
This year’s conference rejected once again the idea that they are a party of wholesale nationalisation.
Let us say right away that nationalisation is not, and never was, anything more than an_ alternative method of organising capitalism.
But the Labour pionzers used to cling to it as the cure-all for capitalism’s ailments.
We may depend on it that they would have castigated Mr, Gaitskell for his milk and water version of their favourite potion.
Nationalisation, which might have had a brief fling as a vote-getter just after the war, is now an electoral liability.
The theme of Mr Gaitskell’s great battle over Clause Four was his realisation that the surest way to lose votes was to declare for outright nationalisation.
But his party’s attitude to State control has changed and to that extent so has their public image.
The nuclear disarmers are a small minority in the population—so small that there is no point in them testing their policy in a parliamentary election.
That may not worry a party of rigid principle, but for those who are bothered about getting power before anything else, it is a different matter.
Then there is the little business of strikes and this, sadly for Mr Gaitskell, is something which cannot be shaken off by a conference resolution.
At one time their members were proud to be at the head of the Jarrow marchers, to wear cloth caps to the Commons, to be militant trade unionists.
That was all very well in the old days, when Labour were climbing, to power; it’s very different now.
Firstly, if they get into power over British capitalism, strikes are going to be a nuisance which they will have to deal with, just like 1945/50 all over again.
Secondly, large numbers of workers regard strikes as stupid, or anti-social, or the work of layabouts, and so suspect a political party which they connect with them.
Whatever the evidence, however much Mr Gaitskell may soothe and reassure, no matter what his party may write in their manifestos, the idea will stay in working class heads.
Labour equals strikes, This is the sort of thing which is so bad for the image which Mr Gaitskell is trying to project.
There is only one theory of management that is worth anything to capitalism, and that is that the system is administered in the interests of the capitalist class.
For many workers, among all their other false ideas, support capital and corporal punishment and, although they may not practice a colour bar, in fact regard Negroes as inferior beings and would agree to some control on immigration.
Whatever mistakes they may make, however black their record, they always seem to have enough of what it takes to ride their storms and to touch the responses of the working class, This is ironical, in a party which so Openly stands for the privileges and inequalities of capitalism.
It could be that they are very clever, or that the working class are excessively stupid and forgetful.
Whatever the reason for it, the fact is that the Tory image is a successful one, The two great parties are not alone ‘n worrying about their public image, Every day, everywhere, we are meeting the same thing.
We see it in the advertisements which, since the days of fuller employment came to this country, have adopted an especially irritating image type.
Now the earnest, well groomed, rising young To the Eu “BRAVE NEW WORLD” I recently read one of your SociALIsT STANDARDS with interest, and can to a large extent sympathise with your criticisms and even ideals, but I cannot accept your deductions and methods.
If man was a completely rational and perfect social animal your plans might work, and society could indeed be run in the ways Suggested, but Socialism omits the fact that man is an individual, with a free will of his own and bad qualities as well as good ones.
Many, indeed most, of the working classes would behave in exactly the same way as the “capitalist exploiters” if they had the chance to take power themselves.
Thus Socialism, unless you can change human nature, would be abused and turned into an inverted capitalism, just as the Russians failed with Marxism.
This is the theme, too, of the newspapers with their unctuous human interest stories telling us about rock ’n’ roll stars who still love their deaf grandmothers, or rich greengrocers who would swap it all for the pitter-patter of tiny feet.
Irritating and shameful as this may be, it should lead us to the bigger question of why it should happen at all.
The answer is that the image men always project an impression of general satisfaction with capitalism.
The people who are”. depicted as wholesome and confident are, alter all, supporters of a social system which has produced the terror and insewould stagnate.
In conclusion, I cannot for one moment contemplate a system being accepted which is irrevocable such as yours is.
Unless the population have the right and opportunity to remove the government there is merely tyranny.
REPLY Mr Vine should ask himself how it is that, if man “... will not be regimented, treated like a machine, or tied down by laws . . .” he submits so meekly to this sort of treatment under capitalism.
It is difficult to imagine what more in the way of regi. mentation we could have suffered in the last war; yet the working class accepted it as part of the war effort, which they supported.
This is not because they lack individuality ; they simply cannot afford to do anything else.
Their wage packet forces them to live in a working class house, which is pretty much the same as the others around, to wear the same inferior clothes and to eat the same substandard food as their fellow workers.
In fact, men have always broadly conformed to the relationships of their social system—very few of them are sufficiently individualistic to opt out of society.
Nobody should pretend that man is such an animal; but he is rational enough to organise and maintain London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 curity of the modern. world.
And if we accept their standards the one thing we shall never do is to question the whys and wherefores of capitalism.
They could develop their social consciousness so that the political and commercial images lose their appeal.
They could do this—in fact, they must do it, if there is to be hope of solving the world’s problems.
That is as much as he can expect of himself, and it is enougH to establish Socialism and to keep it running smoothly.
There may be examples of better and cheaper goods being produced as a result of economic competition, There are also examples of better and cheaper goods being deliberately suppressed, of badly needed food being destroyed, of harmful and shoddy goods being produced—all in the name of competition.
International conflict may give something of a boost to, say, some branches of medical research.
Socialism will replace the anti-social spurs of capitalism with the incentive which js based upon the simple fact that the people of the world will own the world.
Then man’s ingenuity and energy will have complete freedom, because they will be working for the good of society, instead of for the profit of a minority.
Contrary to our correspondents view, this was never an issue in Russia because, as we pointed out at the time, the conditions were not ripe for it.
All that happened in 1917, in fact, was that a country with a backward. semi-feudal system was enabled to develop itself into fully-fledged capitalist State.
But that is not to say that Socialism will be irrevocable—eternal, in fact, If, when it is established there were to develop enough faults in it to convince Sdciety of a need to abolish it, there would be nothing to stop them doing so.
Generally speaking, piece-work, etc., is much less common in the non-manufacturing industries; in the gas, water and electricity group, for example, only 2% of workers are on piece-work.
The manufacturing industries are divided into fourteen industrial groups.
Bevan on piecework [iE SECOND WORLD WAR gave a big impetus to piecework among men.
Among women workers it has fallen slightly, from 46% in 1938 to 44%, but among girls under age 18 it has increased from 27% to 44%, The ratio among boys of J in 5 has remained about unchanged.
When the late Aneurin Bevan was Minister of Labour in 1951 it fell to him to sponsor the Government's campaign to increase production by going over to piecework and similar schemes, and the Ministry published its pamphlet Wage Incentive Schemes to encourage the idea.
One of the reasons given by the Ministry for needing increased production. was to help the Labour government’s rearmament programme.
Impact of Automation THE INCREASE OF PAYMENT-BY-RESULTS in recent years goes against some forecasts that it would decline because of the development of automation.
The ex. pectation that it would decline was based on the proposition that the employer has no use for a payment system designed to speed up the worker or group of workers, if this is looked after by the. technique of production.
Payment by piece-rates, based on the Output of individual workers, rarely suits work On automatic processes.
The rate of output will be decided by managements on technical grounds, and it will be controlled by technicians rather than operatives.
But he went on to say that in the engineering industry some managements have tried to adapt old systems of payment-byresults to the new conditions, apparently not at all successfully.
Nevertheless, it has to be remembered that Russian production is still only half tha« in U.S.A. and her oil exports have to ba multiplied many times before they reach the level of the nineteen thirties when Russian oil accounted for about oneeighth of the Western markets.
Among the eighty visitors there must SOCIALIST STANDARD, NOVEMBER 1961 have been some who had seen in their homelands how little falling prices ever benefited the workers, since the employers naturally took advantage of it to press down wages, and in those times of heavy unemployment, with complete SUCCESS, However, rumours, so far not confirmed, have been floating around that —there_is_a—possibility of the Russian government now doing a deal with the oil companies to cut out undercutting, | and to divide up the market.
A writer in the Daily Telegraph alleges that because the Russian government sometimes uses cheap oil exports to further political ends they have been selling their oil more cheaply in Italy and West Germany than to their own allies, Eastern Germany and Poland.
Seemingly, arithmetic is not a strong point at the Express office, because while ‘the national income in money terms actually has nearly doubled in 10 years the adjustment for the rise of prices reduces this, not to 50% but to about half that amount, making an average annual increase of about 24%, a year, Even that exaggerates the increase because in those ten years the population has risen by two million.
Russian Industry MANY OF THOSE who have studied the expansion of Russian industry have remarked on the fact that while some industries have jumped ahead both in size and the use of modern methods, others have lagged far behind the development in other countries.
The latest figures show Russia as having four million telephones, compared with about eight million in Britain, 70 million in U.S.A. and nearly five million in Japan.
The General Strike as a means of emancipation must surely fail, for the working class are propertyless, and if they cease work even the “short commons” that “ work ” means, cease too.
All acquainted with proletarian life know the terrible privation that strikes entail; the suffering writ large on the faces of the helples babes, the toddling children and the struggling wives.
Such agonising scenes as were to be witnessed on the hillsides and in the valleys of South Wales during the year-long Cambrian Strike.
For we depend upon continual production, and cessa. tion means death, But death snatches its first victims from ‘the toilers ; they are most vulnerable--they have no stores, no reserves.
Mr Selwyn Lloyd could hardly have expected his audience to believe him.
Since their competitors, both here and abroad. are always trying to restrict wage-costs, cither by reducing wages or by holding back their increase as much as possible, any capitalist who did not watch this aspect very closely would soon be out of business.
Either his shareholders would withdraw their money from his business, or he would go bankrupt.
Mr Lloyd should take care, next time he addresses an upper class audience, not to speak too persuasively.
The rural dean of Dulwich, however, kept up the good old tradition of those bishops and prominent churchmen who for centuries have Supported the most barbarous of punis}ments against those who broke the law.
When one thinks of the millions of men killed in wars supported (on both sides) by Christian churches, it is not very surprising that the rural dean should seek to defend the “ ending of someone’s life” by the state apparatus, But, of course, the rural dean’s remarks are for export only.
There is, of course, no such thing as “ public property ” in a private Property society.
There is property which belongs to members of the ruling class individually, and property which is usually managed by State or “ public” boards, which act on behalf of the whole owning class.
If this Property was really public, or in common ownership, then it would belong equally to everyone, which is another way of saying it would belong to no one.
So that when Russia holds trials for the “ theft ” of “public property,” it is really the system itself which 1s put on trial.
Affluence After the vague talk about “the affluent society ” come the actual figures. produced by the state machine itself.
In 1960, 10,900,000 people (counting husband and wife as one person), 41 per cent of the total, were receiving less than £500 per annum before payment of tax; 45 pep cent between £500 and £1,000 ; 12 per cent from £1,000 to £2,000; and 2 per cent more than £2,000.
And this, remenber, is counting the wife's income in with her husband’s.
In the small minority of homes where there is an income coming in besides those of the father and mother. the standard will be correspondingly higher; but in the great majority of homes, the standards are indicated clearly enough by thesz figures.
And anyone who thinks they amount to “affluence “ for the ninety per cent., for the workers, should try bringing up a family at today’s inflated prices on anything under £20 per week.
Chasing Shadows SINCE MAN’S EARLIEST Days, he has looked for an explanation of the things he cannot understand.
Not knowing why the sun rises and sets, why the weather changes or why blights and sickness Occur, savage man created for himself gods to worship, placate and fear; gods who controlled the things he could not understand.
With the advancement of knowledge, man’s ideas of the supernatural have changed constantly.
In the present day, when so much of the mystery has been explained and the world is no longer regarded as flat with heaven above and hell below, religion in ” civilised ” countries has subtly changed its role.
In the mid.th century it has ceased to be the explanation of the unknown and has become instead the comforter.
When the problems and insecurities of present-day life become overwhelming, it is soothing to put all one’s problems before an Almighty Being who, in infinite wisdom, will either solve our problems and relieve us of our troubles, or decide that we should bear them to prove our faith and devotion and build up credits in an after-life.
How much easier it is to do this than to battle with the situations and attempt to solve the problems.
The thought that death is inevitable and final is an unpalatable one, especially at times when things go badly or dangerously.
The belief that this life is only a preparation for the hereafter makes it easier to bear frustrations and less fearsome to think of death.
To this can be attributed the fact that every war brings with it a religious revival.
Even the troubles and uncertainties of “normal ” life are easier to bear if on2 can believe that “ the meek shall inherit the earth,” and this is well known and exploited by those in authority today.
In wartime God's help and protection in “Our Just Cause” is called for equally fervently by the leaders and churchmen of opposing sides.
Christian churches have learnt to adapt themselves to modern life—not so much in the advice they give or the lessons they preach, but in the way this is done.
Billy Graham type crusades make Sunday afternoon band performances by the Salvation Army look like very poor relations.
There are even believers in Texas who are not worried by this f they have a little money to spare.
For the price of one dollar, they will mechanically pray 10,000 prayers for any individual contributor.
Socialists do not believe in life after death; our thoughts are firmly fixed on worthwhile future in this life.
We therefore expend our energies in working to abolish Capitalism and establish Socialism which, although no ~ heaven on earth,” will solve most of the problems besetting mankind today.
To achieve Socialism, the majority of men and women must underStand it, want it and work for it.
Unfortunately, unlike the PRAY-ER Organisation, we cannot offer to understand or work for it for them.
The only assistance we can offer is what we are doing; explaining the system under which we live and showing how it is the cause of wars, periodic unemployment and the other insecurities we suffer today.
We try to make them see that it is futile to use up energies to build up rewards in heaven while relying on an Almighty Being to solve their problems on earth.
TRAFFIC JAMS First things first THERE IS NOTHING MORE that devoted, well-meaning people could have done.
Over the years they have altered, added and improvised to try to meet the requirements of changing knowlzdge and needs.
But as it stands now. the structure of this early Victorian hospital has outlived itself and what the place reall, needs is to be pulled down and rebuilt.
Stick your head out of the ward window and watch the giant machines tearing into wet London clay and the skeleton of a flyover taking shape before your eyes.
Don't leave the window open too long, though—the drilling, buildozing and blasting of the great new road developmeni scheme must have a devastating effect on the poor patients.
They did think about spending some more money on the scheme, to make it quieter and so easier on the patients’ nerves.
But in the end they decided that roads come first and sick human beings somewhere after that.
Certainly, they grumble enough about the need for new roads . and the amount of tax which goes into licences, petrol and so on.
Yet they would be wrong to think that the flyovers, underpasses, motorways and the rest are built for their especial benefit and enjoyment.
Our society is based upon private property, which means that a few people own the means of life.
This leaves a lot of people who are virtually propertyless, and who therefore have to work for the few owners.
In this work they create a surplus which must be sold so that the capitalists can realise their profits.
Thesz profits are used by and at the discretion of the international, wealthy ruling class.
Traffic jams prevent profitable goods being moved efficiently; they even stop workers getting to work on time, which means that they might not turn out as much surplus as they should.
Again, if motor cars are to be stuck jorever in jams and queues, a lot of potential buyers may decide to use some other form of transport.
The motor car market is already none too healthy; if there was a developing hardness against the industry's sales jargon there wouid soon be panic stations in the plushy showrooms.
So would there be in the al fresco salons on old bomb sites, wherz many workers obtain their latest model.
We all know that the noxious, smelly fluid can overnight turn 4 flyblown, sandy waste into a world danger spot.
It has lined the pockets of shareholders all over the world. and enabled a handful of Eastern potentates to count their wealth in Cadillacs instead of the traditional camels.
No need io point out that the oil boys think an effiLondon School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 cient road system, with lots of cars using it, is very important.
These are the reasons why the excavators scrunch outside the hospital walls, and why ordinary, decent people think it right to put motor cars higher up the scale of values than sick and ailing human beings.
For sick workers contribute little, or nothing, to the profitability of capitalism.
Capitalism can be attacked coldly, with fact and arguments on economics, history and the rest.
This does not mean that we do not see through the cloying mess of moral standards and human values which capitalism foists on us.
It is useless merely to try to be humane; for many an uphill struggle to implement a reform has been followed by capitalism's unhappy knack of encroaching upon the reform, when it clashed with some sectional economic interest.
The following letter has been received from a sympathiser and we think it will be of interest to our readers.
On September 4 dockworkers and railwaymen at Takoradi and Kumasi in Ghana went on strike against a deliberate attempt by the government to decrease the workers’ share of what they produce.
The austerity budget introduced in July provided for measures which would lead tc an all-round rise in prices.
In addition a compulsory savings scheme was introduced and a wage freeze announced.
The strikers were told that they didn’t really want to strike but that they were being forced to; if anyone wished to return to work the government would gladly provide protection.
Very few cworkers took up this offer and President “Nkrumah from a holiday resort on the Black Sza coast of Russia ordered his Ministers at home to get tough with the strikers.
The strike was, of course, unofficialnce the leadership of the trade unions Supports Nkrumah.
The general secretary of the T.U.C. hurried back from the neutral’s conference in Belgrade, quickly got to know the facts and did not hesjlate to call the strike a “counterrevolution” and to denounce it 4s illegal.
The pposition newspaper Ashanti Pioneer supported these demands and in Sep‘ember the legal daily minimum wage for unskilled workers was raised from 5s.d. to 6s.d.
The austerity budget will make’ the workers worse off than they wer tefore September last.
T.U.C. spokesmen blamed the workers’ dissatisfaction on the remnants of a capitalist, imperialist, colonialist system which still darkened the econcmic and social horizon.
The minority and the Ashanti Pioneer, felt that the workers were dissatisfied because they saw top trade union officials and Government Ministers becoming wealthier while the workers suffered.
For daring to make such observations on the development of capitalism in Ghana and for supporting the demands for wage increases the Ashanti Pisneer found that ir future it would be subject lo censorship.
The Ghana T.U.C. spokesmen are right in attributing the cause of the trouble to Capitalism.
But it is not the remnants but the beginning of Capitalism that is responsible.
Ghana's first gambling casino will open shortly—but only for foreigners and cerlain classes of wealthy Ghanians.
A company set up to run the casino announced today that in conformity with casino licensing laws passed last year, Ghanians will not be admitted to membership unless they have a yearly income of more than £1,500 and are not members of the armed forces, judiciary. police force or public service departments.
As it is, with the legal minimum wage at 6s.d. a day these Ghanian capitalists get about ten times as much a year as an ordinary worker.
The strike at the Williamson diamond mine which Mr, Nyere firmly ended after 12 days, brought this division into the public eye.
After Tanganyika obtained an elected majority in the legislative council in September, trade unionists expected quick action to improve wage levels.
Working closely with Sir Arthur Vasey, his Finance Minister, he is endeavouring to maintain the climate of quiet confidence for foreign investment.
Banda, after his sweeping victory in the Nyasaland elections, seems to be planning similar actions to those of Nkrumah.
The Sunday Express reports that Suzgo Msiska, leader of one of the two rival trade union congresses in Nyasaland “ has lost a great deal of prestige in the eyes cf Banda and his colleagues.
At first Lumumba called out troops against then but eventually gave in and granted th wage increases, but not before he had devalued the Congolese franc.
Even the elementary democratic rights of “one man, one vote” and freedom of political activity that independence-may bring are not secure as in events in Ghana in particular show.
To those Ghanian and other workers who ask if the struggle for independence was worth it, Socialists reply that it was not.
We do not, of course, expect colonial workers to suffer colonisation for ever.
We are just pointing out that independence is not the solution to their problems.
Socialism is the only solution to the problems of the workers throughout the world.
BOOKS Colonialism The Twilight of European Colonialism By Stewart C Easton.
It was to all intents and purposes inevitable that the colonies should have developed their nationalist organisations, to demand that a native ruling class should have the right to exploit their country’s mineral wealth and human labour.
In the Congo, this desire has bred nationalism within nationalism, with the Katangese wanting to be left alone with the immense riches that are under their feet.
Apart from such complications, and unless a colony has a settler population— as in Central Africa—or unless there is a military problem involved—as in Cyprus —the road to independence is usually fairly smooth.
Ghana is the classic example of this; and it has had its effect all over Africa.
When independence has been agreed to, there is a lot of political work -to be done.
A constitution must be drafted, political parties must work out their programmes for the new state, elections must be arranged.
This, and the political events which have preceded independence, make the subject matter of Mr SOCIALIST STANDARD, NOVEMBER 1961 THOUGHTS ON THINKING A few years ago a series of artidles appeared in the Western Socialist dealing with the theoretical basis of Socialism.
These were dearly written, and readers found them interesting and informative.
It is our intention to publish extracts from time to time, as space permits, for the benefit of readers who missed them when they first appeared.
The author knows what the suppression of the African native has meant, and what it must lead to.
And now, such is the tradition of bitterness that it is too late to make amends.
Political developments have their place in history, and we should all be familiar with them.
For this Mr Easton, in his agreeably smooth and economical style, has produced a very adequate book.
IVAN + QUESTIONS OF THE DAY / Socialist Standard 1961 ALL MARINE ENGINES, from Fulton's Clermont to the giant turbines of the Normandie, are based on a few fundsmental mechanical principles of thermodynamics, energy coefficients, reciprocal motion, and the like.
These principles ai least must be understood by anyone who intends to run a steam ship.
And the vast inteliectual machinery of modern socialism is too based on a few relatively simple principles.
And in order to become a Socialist these principles must be grasped, understood and appiicd.
Our philosophy is more than expository and imterpretative—it +5 dynamic, it deals with a seal world, and is itself a potent force for change.
Have you ever listened to an argum-n' between a Socialist and a non-Socialist” If so, the most remarkable thing you wiii have noticed is the degree of disagr-2ment in the meanings they attach to the terms employed.
The Socialist might assert, for example, that we are Materia!ists, not Idealists.
Nine times out of ten because the non-Socialist ""has an entirely erroneous conception »f the meanings of these terms.
Because he looks upon capital as a thing, whereas the socialist regards capital as a condition of a thing.
This reply only confirms the questioner im his suspicion that all Socialists are hopeless mental cases.
When he asks this he has in mind a conception of ~ wages ~ as the unconditioned reward for labour.
The Socialist regards the ~ wage system ~ 23 an historically determined relationship London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 between labour and capital, a transitory phase in social development.
Arguments such as these may go on interminably with relatively little change of view for either party.
Both sides are. in a way. right; the substantive difference between their mental states is seldom 4; wide as it appears.
The clashes are essentially verbal and the viewpoints irreconcilable so iong as each puts a distinctly different interpretation on the terms used.
Our Socialist contender must first realize that there is scarcely an important word used by him that is not tinctured in meaning by our economic theories or by its scientific or philosophical significance.
The nea-Socialist on the other hand almost invariably reacts to the same set of terms by their colloquial or every-day sense.
Confronted with this barrier of language there can never be a meeting of the minds.
So the first step necessary towards 2n understanding of Marxian Socialism is 4 clear comprehension of the terms involved.
Socialists proceed on the incontestably established fact that society has for many thousands of vears been divided into economically distinct classes.
But by the very nature of the game it calls into existence two mutually opposing classes.
Both, *while Capitalism lasts, necessary to each other, yet diametrically Opposed in interests.
Gravitated at one pole are those who, by the rules of the game, sanctioned by the Law, Church, Tradition and Custom, have acquired possession of the machinery of wealth production, and by means of this ownership exact tribute from the rest of society.
These persons, although at war among themselves, are Knit into a cohesive unit in a common resolve that the rules governing the priVate nature of property shall not be changed.
But by their similarity of economic interests they form a category which we variously call the Capitalist, master, ruling or dominant class.
The opposing economic pole is composed of those who, by the very nature of the game, are excluded from participation in the ownership of the means of wealth production.
These compose that heterogencous mass known as the proletariat (from the Latin, meaning children of the soil), wage-slaves or working class, They are the overwhelming majority in modern society and are doomed by an ineluctable law of Capitalistic development to be swamped in the mire of poverty and whipped by the scourge of necessity to offer their only possession—their power to labour—to the owners of creation.
This brief synopsis should give you a fair understanding of economic class distinction.
Do not confuse it with social, cultural, political or educational differences.
These latter may be, and often are, explicable on the basis of different economic levels; but they are effects only, reflections of the actual parts men and classes play in the scheme of the economic system.
The wealth of society is represented as a vast accumulation of commodities, and an incessant struggle obtains between the two class divisions over the share each shall possess.
But we live in a political society in which the diverse economic groups strive to achieve their ambitions through the control of the state power.
This contest for policical supremacy is the ground on which is fought the battle for economic mastery.
Whichever group succeeds in capturing the state imposes its economic will on the rest of society.
They dictate the policies of state and directly control the functions of the state, ie., the police, judiciary, armed forces, primary education, etc., and indirectly, by reason of wealth and influence, the prevailing ideology (this word means, roughly, reflected ideas from a system or social order) of the people.
Writers, preachers, scientists, educators, philosophers, dance to the tune called by the Casars of commerce and industry.
The ruling class permits the dissemination only of those ideas which tend to perpetuate the existing order.
This viewpoini is class biased and serves to vitiate the teachings of history, science and pnilosophy and bend them to the support of entrenched privilege.
And this interest, as we have shown, is contrary to the true interests of the working class.
Consequently the enlightened, class-conscious element among them, the Socialist, must, to achieve its economic and political emancipation, correct the distortion in the world of ideas and supplant error and prejudice with true proletarian knowledge.
FROM HEGEL TO MARX HEGEL WAS IN ADVANCE of his times by reason of the enormous historical sense that underlay his system.
The current of his thought always proceeded in line with world development.
But the process of world development was regarded as a test of the unfolding of the concept, that is, the Concept was the ultimate Reality and the uncoiling of physical events over time evidence of the logicalness of his postulated concept.
Hegel regarded phenomenal change,e., manifestations of social and natural law, as the selfdevelopment of the Absolute Concept.
Not his concept or that of any man, but a universal concept that existed independently of time and space—an all-embracing world-soul.
The dialectic development in nature and history struggled along after the self-developing concept, which moved itself, how or why, nobody knew.
Now, if the universal concept be selfmoving, governed by laws inscrutable, or no laws at all, and the process of natural change be but a reflection of the evolution of the cosmic concept, then what purports to be an explanation, being itself explained, is no explanation.
SOCIALIST STANDARD, NOVEMBER 1961 The only wisdom such a philosophy can impart is that whatever is in the world is in the world and that it changes because it does change.
Four thousand years ago the chroniclers of Hebrew myths had explained as much—or as little—and ‘in language simple and direct.
The cosmology of Genesis, the gropings of primitive speculation, had said as much and left the rationale of the universe as enigmatic as before; and similarly tne ponderous intellectual machinery of Hegel, milling the same metaphysical grist, could grind out no more logic than what was already in the world.
But the great value in Hegel's system was his sense of historical continuity.
The principle of evolutionary progression pervaded his entire work, its content was historical and there was a real relationship between the thought process and the world.
But the true relationship between the concept and the universe was inverted.
If it coutd be turned upright on its feet the real content which everywhere entered the philosophy would be in alignment witli the true sequence of causality.
Before Marx could satisfactorily apply the dialectic he had to make his ideological reversal.
Marx applied the dialectic primarily to history and human society and showed that all problems, all knowledge and the purposes of all knowledge are always set in a concrete historical context.
Here was discovered a guiding thread running through the mazes of the social process.
By its guidance not only were the apparent anomalies and inconsistencies of the past reconciled and explained, but a course of action was suggested that would rid society of its major ills, Nowhere in Marx is the dialectic expounded as a formal philosophical system.
But the method is bone and ‘sinew of his entire work and its detailed application is to be found in all of Marx’s economic theories.
It is practically applied in the materialistic conception of history and is woven warp and woof in the socialist theory of the state and the class struggle.
Socialists do not claim that Society is SOCIALIST STANDARD, NOVEMBER 1961, an organic mechanism which can be entirely explained by one invariable rule.
They admit the existence of relatively independent factors which effect the course of history in varying degrees, The influence of the exceptional intellect on the state of general culture, the inimical or benign influences of religious movements, the accidents of technological and scientific discovery, or the caprices of fashion — all are recognized as real, active subsidiary influences on the body social and politic.
The multivariety of causes, the incalculable complexity of social reactions do not admit of strict scientific prediction.
But again. the point to remember is—all the causes and all the effects operative within the body of society are to be explained in terms of nature and society itself.
Or in other words nature and society generate the forces under which new forms and expressions arise.
This explanation of social motivation completely eliminates the idealist’s soul-concept.
A philosophy of social change must admit of empirical verifications of its theories, that is it should be submissible to proof; and the conditions under which change is possible must be indicated as at any given time.
Furthermore, it must recognize the consciousness of human beings; that they actively participate in shaping the course of their own histories, Dialectics provides a nexus between ene culture and another.
But as the conditions become unstable the form uf the institution either effects a change in the conditions or perpetuates itself as a new thing, the product of the altered conditions and its antecedent form.
The new combination in turn giving rise to a continuous modification of conditions, reacting reciprocally on them and itself.
On the contrary, he showed that social change resulted from the interactions of nature, society and human intelligence.
That the conventionally accepted “effect,” consciousness, was itself as much a cause as the laws of nature and society, and that vice versa, the assigned causes were in turn effects.
Marx applied the dialectics of social change to all stages of development.
For the first time in the history of human thought a law was discovered with which to explain local and universal social evolution.
The process of change from situation to situation and social system to social system exhibits certain inevitable features; there is unity between both phases in that certain features of the old afe preserved and carried over into the new; ¢.g., the technically developed processes of production and highly specialized division of labour under capitalism will be carried over into the new society, Socialism.
Secondly, there is a difference in that certain features of the old do,not appear in the new;g., the slave status of labour and private ownership of the means of social existence along with the coercive state will fall into desuetud> under Socialism.
New forms, activities and purposes arise out of the new combination; and these further change the meaning of whatever is retained of the old.
The process of social change, interchange and development goes on forever.
The only law that never varies is the eternal, immutable law of change itself.
And contrary to anti-Marxists who wilfully or ignorantly misrepresent Socialists as ignoring the factor of consciousness and human nature, Marx never wearied reiterating that the characteristic mark of social development, as opposed to biological or natural development, was the increasingly greater part played by human consciousness.
Michael WEMBLEY LECTURE Barham Old Court, Barham Park Harrow Road Monday 13th November. pm CRISES Speaker: E Hardy Monday 27th November. pm RECENT SCIENTIFIC DEVELOPMENTS Speaker: H Young SOCIALIST STANDARD, ~ Branch News The Delegate Meeting held at Head Office on Saturday and Sunday, October 7th and . 8th. was well attended and proved to be one of the most interesting for some time.
Many interesting ideas were exchanged and there is no doubt that comrades Icft the meeting with renewed enthusiasm to make even greater efforts to spread the word of Socialism.
Our energetic and resourceful new Literature Sales Committee hired a caravan and sped up to Blackpool, where they bombarded the delegation there with literature of the Socialist case.
The Committee made these arrangements quickly and efficiently and obtained the E.C.’s blessing while the work was actually in progress.
This Committee is doing excellent work, attending rallies and meetings of other political organisations, apart from seeing that our own meetings are well supplied with literature with well organised sales.
Details of sales will be given in our next issue, together with the Blackpool report.
These meetings will carry on thraughout the winter, and Glaswegians should hasten to get in at the start and so benefit from the continuity of the ~ series dealing with the Sixties.
Head Office films are being well attended and debates have been arranged.
The meetings list in every issue should be one of the first items for perusal, so that members can tell friends and sympathisers in plenty of time.
Ealing Branch’s programme of winter activities really gets under way this month with two lectures, one general and the other theoretical, as well as a film showing.
The new meeting room is much more comfortable than the old and is a first-rate place for these activities.
Members are asked to make a special effort to be prompt and to note especially the time of the film show made necessary because the film lasts almost an hour-and-ahalf.
Two new members have been made in recent months as well as several other contacts.
Branch members are looking forward to a really successful winter stason.
London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 NOVEMBER 1961 GLASGOW MEETINGS St.
Jon Keys Friday 17th November, 7.45 pm FILM: THE GERMAN STORY Speaker: H Weaver Friday 24th November. pm MARXIAN ECONOMIC THEORIES Speaker: S Goldstein Please note that as “The German Story” is a full length film the showing will begin at 7.45 pm prompt.
Ona chequer board of political tactics the Old Bolshevik moved, mated and slayed, until the assumption of power rested in one man— Stalin.
It was Stalin who completed the work begun by Lenin, the turning of Marxism a revolutionary doctrine into its opposite, an authoritarian ideology of state capitalism on a par and at times competing with other state ideologies,e.
COVENTRY Ist and 3rd Mond-ys (3rd & 17th Dec) 7.30 pm, The Coffee Room, Cra.en Arms, High Screet.
NOTTINGHAM Alternate Wednesdays (6th & 20th December) 7.30 pm, Peoples Hall, Heathcoat Street.
SWANSEA Ist and 3rd Monday (4th & 18th Dec) in month 8 pm, The Crypt, St.
MITCHAM & DISTRICT Thursday 2st Dec 8 pm, ‘White Hart,”’ Mitcham Cricket Green.
LETTERS containing postal orders, etc., should be sent to E LAKE, SPGR, at the above address.
Postal orders and cheques should be crossed and made payable to the spos.
SOCIALIST STANDARD OFFICIAL JOURNAL OF THE SOCIALIST PARTY OF GREAT BRITAIN 52 Clapham High Street.
Telephone Macaulay 3811 Stalin-the God who fell For Stalin, the final disgrace.
His simple grave now mocks the memory of the days when he was the great dictator, who could make Krushchev caper like court jester.
It mocks, too, the memory of the fulsome praise that was heaped upon him when his pitiless rule was at its height.
Long live the towe:ing genius of all humanity, the teacher and the guide who is leading us victoriously to Communism, our beloved comrade Stalin.
Now that the truth about the “ beloved comrade” is officially acknowledged in Moscow, we can expect some more rewriting of history, just as it was when Stalin wanted to eliminate the memory of his enemies.
Always taking their line from Moscow, they were emong Stalin’s worshippers, and disregarded the facts about the Russian dictator which Socialists, and others. put before them.
Perhaps Molotov and Voroshilov will go as others have gone before them.
Perhaps the Soviet government will gratify the historians who see similarities between twentieth century Russia and seventeenth century England by treating Stalin’s corpse as Cromwell's was. after the Restoration.
The Russian workers will probably accept this, in the manner of workers all over the world.
How much more hopeful if they turned the belated denunciation of Stalin to good account.
None whatsoever. Yet the whole argument for having leaders must be in the assumption that they are beneficial to society.
If they can turn out as Stalin did. the urgument for them is destroyed.
There is a lesson here for Russian workers and for those in other countries.
It is useless t¢ change one set of leaders for another, The real necd is for the working class to gain enough knowledge te bring about Socialism.
This wrecked the pre-war mirage of a glorious prosperity based on high wages.
For this reason, among others, the Tories came back in triumph to Westminster.
A lot has happened since then and a lot has been forgotten; especially promises about reducing prices.
So the Financial Secretary to the Treasury had no need to tremble when he recently informed the House of Commons that, taking the purchasing power of the £1 as twenty shillings when the Tories got back in October, 1951, that same £1 note was now worth only I4s.d.
Naturally, the government have any number of excuses for their failure to keep their election promises.
Most ot them amount to the argument that they have been helpless in economic condilions outside their control.
The workers have forgotten the rosy promises of 1951 and are now being bemused by the prospect of the £1,000 a year dustman.
Capitalism will really start shaking when the workers despise all promises as worthless.
Strike at Margam We might have expected some juicy headlines about the striker at Margam Steel Works, who turned up at the labour exchange in his Jaguar and parked it-in amongst the smart cars of his fellow-strikers.
The pictures and the stories in the press were presumably intended to undermine the strikers’ case by suggesting that men who can afford to run a car have no need to strike.
The bricklayers at Margam were engaged in unpleasant and dangerous work which put their health in great hazard.
The Steel Company of Wales had agreed to the bricklayers doing this work under the “job and finish” rule and had allowed this rule to spread to men on a few other types of work.
W. decided that they were losing out on the deal and tried to change the rules.
Workers must always fight for their interests under Capitalism—even under what is called Affluent Capitalism.
Nothing makes any difference to this —not even tiie ownership of a car.
It is an absorbing, if chilling, occupation to speculate upon the reasons for the thirty and fifty megation explosions.
The bombs could have beer let off as a move in any, or all, of these conflicts.
The conflicts are typical of Capitalism in the ‘Sixties—and so are the bombs.
And this could mean more bombs, more radioactivity, perhaps even bombs dropped in anger.
But Capitalism nas also always had its workers who are willing to support the system, although they may bemoan the horrors which it continually produces, It is no getaway for them now to say that the bomb tests are a great, inhuman mistake, or the work of a callous government.
And this will go on until the people realise it and do something about it.
The bright lights of Earls Court are dimmed and the hectic publicity is over, Now come the harsh realities of trying to sell all the cars that were so enthusiastically praised.
As at all Motor Shows, there was the usual optimistic talk of large orders and encouraging sales.
The big car-hire firms carefully saved their orders to coincide with the Show, as they do every year, and all the manufacturers expressed satisfaction with the Show.
Of the Big Five, BMC and Ford are probably the least affected, but they also have their troubles.
BMC’s best seller is the Mini-minor, but they themselves have admitted that the ratio of profit on these is small.
They have to sell a Lot to make the balance-sheet look reasonable. let alone brilliant.
Yet in overseas marOkets, at least those in which there is no favourable tariff to helo. them, Miniminors are too dear to compete effectively with the home products of similar size.
And Abroad All the other big national producers have also held their Shows and are faced with the same problems.
France had no less than three completely new small cars at the Paris Show which can only mean tremendous competition within the country and added threats to those outside.
Volkswagen had their new larger car on show at Frankfurt, but are nevertheless continuing to turn out the old model at the fantastic rate of 4,200 a day.
In yearly terms this is something like 800900 thousand, about the same as the whole of British production will be this year.
Italian car production is also rising rapidly, whilst at the same time they are thinking oi steps to keep out steadily mounting imports.
All these countries have plans similar to those of the British To the Ea (ND and SPGB I note the news item on page 96 of the June issue and am glad, but not surprised, that CND members figured prominently at the St.
However, Mr Gaitskell and Mr George Brown have yet to apply for membership.
CND members are always trying to persuade people that a nuclear war would be the final chapter in the world’s history.
We are trying to restore sanity to a divided world in which even the USSR finds it necessary to stockpile nuclear weapons.
Before long, many smaller nations, regardless of their political systems, will possess the secret of thermo-nuclear mass destruction.
All sensible people realise that an international Socialist society, democratically elected in the true sense, is the main political hope for the future, but in order to allow and encourage the forces of the Left, we must ensure that there is a world left in manufacturers to expand output.
One thing they must all be wondering is how they are going to dispose of this output.
It will be interesting to see how things develop during the next few months.
Yet only 15 years ago European Capilalism had almost been written off by the United States Even the vast quantities of dollar aid that were poured into Europe were given more as an emergency stopv which to preach our propaganda, create a Socialist society; to fulfil basic human rights and thereby do the countless things that are still ignored by various political systems.
No organisation which concerns itself with putting right the problems now confronting us, could be justified in maintaining this sort of opposition.
J must assume, therefore, that the author of a “Lesson In Futility ” is not representative of his fellow members.
A Soclalist wants a new social system based upon the common ownership of the means of wealth production and distribution.
He is not in favour of capitalism of any sort because he knows London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 gap against Russia than in any expectation of a revival.
One hundred and fifty years’ experience of exploiting the working class was still there to form the basis for revival.
Now the countries of the Common Market are a threat to American Capitalism and, if Britain also joins, this threat will really be formidable.
The United States is in fact in a-very similar position to that of the.
Mr Radford, when he writes that he suspects the organisation contains some Liberals, confirms that a member of CND may hold any sort of political views provided he is agreed that wars should not be fought with nuclear weapons.
Because of this, CND can only be another organisation which stands for a reformed capitalism; in its case, capitalism in which wars are conducted with what have come to be called * conventional ” weapons, No Socialist could belong to such an organisation.
There may be many CND members who sincerely think that they are Socialists, but they are not the first to get themselves involved in that particular bit of muddle-headedness.
It is rather late in the day for CND, with its Labour and Liberal members, to tell us that time is getting short.
Whilst we have been explaining and opposing capitalism’s wars our opponents have been busily fighting them and working to make them more destructive.
But our correspondent has to offer only the old plea that we should drop our work for Socialism until we have sorted out one more of capitalism's problems.
One of the comfortable assumplions which this Industry uses to oil jts wheels is that the present time (whenever that may be) is one of enlightened civilisation.
The advertisement may not be intended for a wide readership, but the point it tries to make is pretty general.
The past is rather doubtful —mistakes were made, foolish things were done, or foolishly left undone.
The ""Twenties were certainly a classical period of cynicism and disillusionment.
Strangely the boys in Fleet Street and Tin Pan Alley, who are good at such things, have always found it difficult to revive any popular nostalgia for the period.
Both Labour and Communist governments have built up massive armed forces for their capitalist class and they have made sure that those forces were equipped with enormous stocks of powerful weapons.
They. have also played their part in keeping the divisions of the capitalist world which Mr Radford mentions, by their export drives, patriotic propaganda and so on.
Here is. evidence enough to support the Socialist claim that reformist policies are futile.
Russia is as much a capitalist nation as any other and cannot be expected to seact any differently in face of international competition.
It is the reformist organisations which, in their support of capitalism, uphold what what they called the “new morality ”— although goodness knows there was nothing new about it—were the reactions of a generation bewildered by one of the most dreadful wars in history.
The tiniest village in England can show its memorial to a shockingly long list of young men who died in that war.
They drowned in the mud at Paschendaele, they were slaughtered by the Turkish infantry at Gallipoli.
It was so different {ram what everybody had been expecting wren the British workers swarmed cheering into the streets on August 4th, 1914.
During the war there was no lack of well-kept ministers to assure the people who were actually doing the dying that they did not suffer for nothing.
Some of the emptiest of the promises and the silliest of the blather have gone down in history and are still remembered with sardonic smiles.
For there are still plenty of men who can recall coming home from the trenches to join the long queues at the labour exchanges.
For any social system is inseparable from its values ; to support one is to uphold the other.
The SPGB has always stood for the social revolution which will sweep away capitalism and all its false social values.
This will be the complete, only and oncefor-all cure for the problems of capitalism. To stand for anything less could mean that we would end up by supporting the very thing which we originally professed to oppose.
That is why a one-time pacifist could serve as a Minister of War and why old opponents of the peerage system somelimes end their days in the House of Lords.
It is why people who are now members of CND will, if capitalism requires them to, fight in 4 nuclear war just as the pacifists of the nineteen thirties took part in the last war.
Seeking Work” clause which were meant to deprive the unemployed of even the pitifully small dole.
As the years turned into the ‘Thirties, there opened the long list of international conflicts—the invasion of China, the attack on Abyssinia, the German ex pansion in Europe—which led up to the Second World War.
It is difficult adequately to explain why Fascism was so popular in Germany and not in other countries in which conditions were broadly the same.
Whatever the explanation for this, there is one thing which can be said.
Fascism, with its reliance upon the strong man leader theory and its extreme racialism, is the desperate product of despair.
An unemployed man, or a man who cannot find a home for this family, is easy prey for the first rabble rouser who will point a finger at the Negro and say that he is filling all the jobs and living in all the houses, Or perhaps the Jew comes under the lash because, says the racialist, he owns the country and so controls what goes on in it.
This is so obviously a doctrine of ignorance and despair that simply to state it is to expose its weaknesses.
But when ignorant workers are having Capitalism’s problems thrown in their faces, and when they are shocked and bewildered and desperate, it is just the sort of theory that can find favour with them.
That is part, at any rate, of the explanation for the rise of Fascism in Europe and of the astounding, dreadful things that it did there.
It is not wonderful, then, that some people recall the years between the wars with a shudder, as rather like a bad illness which came to its crisis in 1939.
Baldwin was certainly an unflappable Prime Minister, a long time before the word got pinned on 10 Supermac.
He was an astute politician who played the game as dirtily as he had to.
But to blame him for a whole period of brutality is to side step the facts.
There has, for example, recently been published the details of the great wartime bombing controversy between Tizard and Lindemann.
These men were highly trained scientists who hardly seemed able -to avoid arguing.
One of their bitterest clashes was over the question of whether the Royal Air Force should have bombed German civilians.
Neither of them argued that it would be callous, even by their lights, to deliberately attack 4a civilian population.
They fought over -whether the air force was capable of doing the job and whether, if it was done, it wouid have any considerable effect on the German war effort.
There is no need to suppose that either man had an emotional case; both of them went into it armed with cold calculations in terror and destruction.
While this was going on, the politicians were soothing us with their promises, some of yah are supposed to have been fulfilled in the so-called Affluent Society.
They can take on the lifetime burden of a mortgage on a house—because they have given up hope of getting one by any other method.
And do not let us forget the shadow under which the Affluent Society has . grown up.
Almost since the end of the last war, the world has been split into two great armed camps in dispute over the exploitation of markets and the possession of raw materials.
The Russ.ans have let off the'r massive bombs and promised us that we have only seen a half of it.
The American Secretary of Defence has replied that his country’s military power is virtually irresistible.
The Affluent Society eats ifs food and breathes its air only after they have been soiled by the fallout.
At a recent conference of the World Parliament Association, the organisution’s szcretarygeneral drew some tempting pictures of the-benefits which he thinks would result if some of the £1,600 million a year being spent on armaments by the British government were diverted to other uses, For £150 million every family in the country could be decently housed within twenty years.
For £200 million the roads could be improved, possibly to save 20,000 lives a year.
Nothing would please us more if we could pack up making all those beastly guns and bombs and build houses instead.
The trouble is we have got to live with the Russians (or the Americans, depending upon who is answering the question) and they've got a big army.
If we don’t watch out, they'll start moving into parts of the world where we are boss at the moment.
What this means is that Capitalism is bound to throw up its disputes because it splits the world into competing economic groups.
The armies, the guns, the aircraft and the bombs are there to influence the dispute and if need be to fight it out.
Such a vote, he said, would mean that if he were to become Foreign Secretary he would have © go “naked” into the conference chamber, The nations of Capitalism must arm themselves. must coldly work out the damage and death potential of their weapons, must perpetrate some of the most barbaric acts the human race has ever experienced, Sometimes human credulity breaks under the strain of it all and we are swept into the crazy, hardboiled ‘Twenties.
Or bewilderment fertilises ignorance and breeds the maniacal savagery of racialism.
The desperate, bloody story goes on, period after period, changing perhaps its form, but never its miserable content.
The ""Twenties and ‘Thirties may have been bad times, but nothing that has happened since has made them look worse by comparison.
TRUST BUSTING IN AMERICA Many worthy people have fondly cherished the notion that Roosevelt and his fellow Republicans meant * doing for” the trusts.
Our Liberal advertisement sheets have praised him for his “great fight” and accepted him as the enemy of monopoly.
But, true to capitalist methods, when something more than mere words and rhetoric is required, he turns round and defends the trusts and ridicules the idea of destroying them.
In the current issue of the Outlook, Mr Roosevelt says ; “The big business has come to stay and it is futile to expect to return to the old days of Jaissezfaire.
In the course of his article he denounces the government for interfering with the Steel Trust and calls President Taft's policy a “ chaotic” one, So much for capitalist politicians.
When they seek office they tell their poor followers that trusts can be smashed by anti-trust laws.
But in the calm of other days the truth so often driven home by Socialists emerges—that combination and concentration of capital is an inevitable result of economic laws.
Always the same pattern of one interest trying to form a monopoly and other interests trying to break it; and always both sides saying that their only motive is to help the poor.
In another column a paragraph is reproduced from our issue of December, 1911. about the foolishness of expecting the politicians to carry out their promise to bust the trusts and destroy monopoly.
Many laws have been passed since then to cut the giants down in size and enforce competition, but all that has happened is that the giants have grown fatter and stronger, and still the rerormists are promising to do sometning avout it.
Now it was the turn of the Labour M.Ps. to complain that it was not enough, but none of them seem to know quite what to do.
How farcical it all is can be seen ‘fom the fact that the first Fabian Essays dublished 80 years ago were already discussing what to do about monopolies.
One of Mr, Hutber’s proposals is that the Restrictive Practices Court should have power to threaten an offending company, that if it persiv~1 in its evil ways, the government wou... take it over.
Far from being new, it was an idea well known to the early Fabians and was ancient cven then.
It was Gladstone, then a Tory, who in 1844 was responsible for the first Act of Parliament giving the Government power to take over the railways.
Manufacturers and traders who were being bled by the monopolistic railways had got Gladstone to pass the Act so that he could use it as a threat against the Companies unless they reduced their charges.
Since the purpose of the restrictive practices by manufacturers and traders is to force up prices to get more profit the simple test of the effect of the Act is to see to what extent it has succeeded in bringing prices down.
Mr Heath has concluded that the effect of the Act on the general level of prices has so far been very small, To date, the visible effect of the Act on retail prices has been almost nil.
What happens is that as soon as the law makes some practice illegal the lawyers get to work to discover ways of getting round it.
One new and perfectly legal device is for manufacturers to agree not to fix prices , but to make what are called “open price” agreements under which they set up a control agency to exchange information about the prices each manufacturer is charging, about the terms and conditions of sale, costs, the state of demand and level of output.
Another result of the activities under the Monopolies Act has been to stimulate mergers by rival firms; if it is illegal for rivals to agree on price maintenance it is quite legal for them to merge.
It is claimed by some critics of the Monopolies Acts in Britain that things are different in America; and indeed the battle there has been going on longer and SOCIALIST STANDARD, DECEMBER 1961 THE PASSING SHOW inore ruthlessly.
In April of this year the American electrical manufacturing industry was convicted for breaches of the anti-trust laws.
Seven directors were sent to prison and fines of two million dollars were imposed.
But those who started waging war against the Standard Oil Trust in the eighteen eighties were not promising that after eighty years the battle would be going on.
In USA, as in Britain in Gladstone's day, the fight is in internal capitalist one, between the trust formers and their trade victims.
A large number of government agencies, private utilities and Municipal authorities, all of which have been. among the industry’s biggest customers, have been preparing to claim damages from their suppliers on the grounds that the price-fixing conspiracies kept prices too high.
If all the claims were upheld by the courts, the manufacturers might be obliged to pay out as much as a hundred million dollars in damages.
In the meantime, as Marxists have always held, the progress of Capitalism has involved the inevitable trend towards concentration into bigger and more costly enterprises.
There is a natural tendency to extol the virtues of the small man, and many seem to deplore the growth of big business, but it cannot be forgotten... that we live in a world where all units are increasing in size and importance.
It would be almost unthinkable for a trade union Labour M.P. ‘to make such a declaration today.
The possibility of a Socialist world in which you do not have to curb market seeking, profit making industries because you have production solely for use, is still beyond their grasp, H Ghana Visit It has finally been decided, after many comings and goings, that the Queen's visit to Ghana is still on.
Mr Duncan Sandys, the British diplomats in Ghana, the Prime Minister himself—all have been called on lo take some part of the responsibility, all have had a hand in the final decision along with the other members of the Cabinet.
The only person who doesn't scem to have been consulted is the person whose safety, after all, is at stake-—the Queen herself.
There could hardly have been a more striking illustration of the position the monarchy now holds as against the ruling class.
The Capitalists having taken over the state and the machinery of government, they have either converted the governmental instruments of the old landowner-ruled society to their own uses, or have allowed them to survive merely as powerless ceremonial appendages.
Even though at the beginning of the visit it seemed not improbable, after several recent antiNkrumah bomb explosions, that there would be some attempt at violence as the Queen and Nkrumah rode together through the towns of Ghana, the Queen had no choice in the matter.
The Government, the Capitalists’ executive committee, had decided that she was to go.
And since the monarch in Capitalist society is no more than a pupp2t, she was constitutionally bound to “take her minister's advice ""—i.e., do as she was told.
Criticism Recently Nkrumah, as the chosen righi hand of the Ghana ruling class, has been revealing more and more clearly what kind of society the Ghana rulers have decided on.
It is now an offence punishable with jail to * defame ™ the President. which seems in practice to cover any kind’ of criticism of him.
Only a decade ago, when there was just as much of a dictatorship in Ghana as there is now—the only difference being that the dictatorship was then run by the British ruling class instead of the Ghanaian ruling class—the Daily Express had no objection to the dictatorship at all.
The record of the Daily Express on the matter deprives it of the right to criticise.
Only those who criticised the British dictatorship of the past can logically now criticise the Nkrumah dictatorship of the present.
The people who will suffer most from the fall-out from this bomb are the Russian working class.
Which is another demonstration that the Russian rulers, for all their pretence that their State Capitalism is a form of “ Socialism,” in fact show as much contempt for the interests of their own workers as any Western ruling class could.
It is horrible to think that an appreciable number of human beings will be crippled either mentally or physically over ensuing generations in order that Mr Krushchev should attempt to terrorise the world in this way.
EEKKKREKKKK KKK KS For a socialist analysis of war read SOCIALIST PARTY AND WAR 1/3 post paid, from SPGB 52 Clapham High Street, London, SW4 Twenty Five Years After The Spanish Civil War jane Thomas, Eyre & Spottiswood. 42s.
He has made a very good job of collecting and presenting information on the complex and fast-moving events of the three-year Civil War.
Yet when that war ended and the United Nations inherited the shabby mantle of the League, Spanish Republican Exiles had still learned so little that they were hoping that the new organisation would dispose of Franco.
It might have been expected that the world war and all that has happened since would have destroyed interest in the Spanish Civil War, but the steady stream of books proves otherwise.
It is not the size and destructiveness of the war, but the passions aroused in participants and onlookers alike that make it still memorable.
There is also the inevitable speculation about what would have happened if only some politician or party had turned in a different direction at the crucial moment.
From the start, the wilder volunteers had got into trouble with the authorities, if only for drunkenness.
Those who wished to return home were not permitted to do so when they wished, Some complained that they had volunteered on the assumption that they could go home in three months’ time.
Mr Thomas dismisses as unreal the charge that the Russians “ cheated” the Republicans of the money, but concedes “ that Russia drove a hard bargain for her goods.
No arms or food were sent to Spain before the end of October—three months after Franco had rebelled.
Immediate payment in gold was insisted upon by Stalin for such arms as were sent.
He was quite wrong; German Capitalism might bait the hook with long-term credits, but not out of charity; only because a really big fish was to be caught, Spanish mineral wealth.
It was German aid that was finally decisive in the autumn of 1938, but the price — exacted for the arms “ was German participation in all the important iron ore projects in Spain.
There is no evidence to show that Germany considered supplying the planes.
One excuse might be that all. the parties felt so strongly about their own policies that defeat itself seemed preferable to a surrender of the purity of their individual views.
Failing to get aid from the West th Spanish Government had to rely more and more on Russia and the Communists -~-which only increased the division in its own ranks.
In April, 1939, the National Committee representing the Spanish Confederation of Labour , the Anarchists and some other bodies published a statement, Three Years of Socialist Standard 1961 Struggle in Spain, giving their version of events and the reason for failure.
The virulence of their charges against Russia and the Russian-directed Spanish Communists shows that Mr Thomas has understated the impossibility of Republican Unity.
Thzy accused the Communists of almost every crime that they had charged against Franco, plus cowardice.
They still half-beligved that, but for the Communists, they would have won against Franco and his allies.
Along with evidence on which the reader can base an opinion, Mr Thomas sums up his own by saying that most of the governments were using the oppor. tunity of the Spanish conflict to test out weapons and study tactics for future us2 in larger wars.
Of course, Germany, Russia and Italy were exploiting the same opportunity, though it is one of the ironies of the situation that most of the Observers appear to have drawn the wrong lessons or failed to profit by the right ones.
Each government, however, seems to have been hesitant about pushing intervention so far as to provoke that war immediately.
If any Republicans still held this illusion in the Spring of 1939 when the Republican armies collapsed they had only to wait six months to see Germans and Russians who had desertion and _ been warring in Spain for three years, hobnobbing together to celebrate the Stalin-Hitler pact of friendship.
But though all the other Powers were sooner or later caught up in World War Il, Franco reversed the roles—he was willing to give aid to Germany, at a price, but he was not drawn into the war as a combatant Power.
This did not save the Spanish Blue Division from sharing the horrors of the war in Russia, fighting alongside the German armies.
In the Epilogue in which Mr Thomas briefly notes the subsequent fate of those who came to prominence in Spain, he tells of the Republican general El Campesino who as an exile was welcomed to Russia, but fell foul of the authorities.
He escaped and in appalling difficulties made his way to Persia; only to be handed back by the British.
Mr Thomas’s material shows how heavily the scales were weighted against the Republicans in the international field.
A vital help for Franco was that of the Texas Oil Co. was at once willing to supply oil on longterm credit, without guarantee.
Those who, for whatever reasons, hold the view that the workers should support war can say that in 1936 that risk was worth taking.
It is not merely being wise after the event to say that the Republicans’ position was impossible and that civil war could not solve their problems.
The Popular Front which, by a bare majority of votes, won the 1936 election, was composed of such divergent elements that the aim of some of them, a sort of LabourLiberal Parliamentary democracy, was at that time as much out of the question as the establishment of Socialism.
There were the Communists, aiming to establish dictatorship on the Russian model; the Basque and Cathalonian separatists inspired by hatred of central government; and the very large body of AnarchoSyndicalists who repudiated politics and parliamentary methods, which they called “ empty phrasemongering,” and who beHeved in direct action, violence, and armed revolt, as much against a Republican Government as any other.
Their support for the Popular Front and the Popular Front Government was a denial of all their principles, regretted almost as soon as it was given.
THE WORD “ LEVELLER” was first heard in 1606 when a band of men roamed the Warwickshire countryside, uprooting or levelling fences and hedges enclosing the once-common lands, These detested barriers had been going up all over England for eighty years.
Enclosing the “ waste-land” that from time immemorial had been common. property brought increasing misery to the poor and greater wealth to the rich.
Large areas were turned into sheep walks to satisfy the growing demand abroad for superior English wool.
Fresh ideas on farming and improved methods of stockbreeding made squires land-greedy.
Enclosing was the polite name for stealing; people were driven from their homes to give pasture to sheep.
Their only hope of survival lay in the towns; where they were fleeced even more closely than their woolly competitors.
Inventions and the necessity for larger ships meant bigger outlay and brought a demand for more money in the form of capital.
The land lost much of its aristocratic value; the traditional obligations to tenant and labourer tended to disappear.
The old tyrant with titles was often supz2rseded by a new tyrant with money, Farmworkers were tricked out of Tights of tenure.
Though freed from the old bondage they were enslaved in a new and often terrifying system.
Throughout these tremendous changes Charles I remained obstinately feudal in outlook.
By 1628 the House of Commons was three times richer than the House of Lords.
This gave its members confidence to resist the king’s demands for money.
So in 1629 he closed Parliament for eleven years, hoping to show his recalcitrant M.Ps, that he alone held power, But in 1639 a rebellion broke out in Scotland, and by 1640 he had been forced to recall Parliament to vote the necessary money to quell the rising.
They knew that archaic notions of kingship must give way to a governmental system favourable to the merchants.
As a warm-up for their startling policy they executed the king’s chief minister, the Earl of Strafford, who had been raising an army in Ireland to crush Parliament.
At the same time John Lilburne, leader of a “left-wing” group—the Levellers—was released from prison, where he had resided two years for issuing anti-State Church pamphlets, Now free, he got an Army command.
With this widespread opposition came a taste for democratic expression.
The popularity of Cromwell's rising faction gave the Levellers a chance to speak out.
On the right were the Anglican Royalists, conservative and pro-Charlcs, On the left were theIndependents, radical but not united.
They were divided into a right-wing called Gentlemen Independents headed by Cromwell, Ireton, and Fairfax, and a leftwing known as the Levellers.
The latter reflected the aspirations-of small farmers, humbler-tradesmen, woik people and soldiers.
They advocated greater political equality than the Independents and had a widespread popular support.
In addition to political demands the civilian arm of the movement (the Diggers) urged greater cconomic equality; and in recognising that all political organisations and freedoms spring from or are crushed by the particular mode of land-ownership, they earned for themselves the undying hatred of Cromwell.
All through the struggle the Levellers did best in the army, perhaps because there they were better organised than the Diggers.
Both issued a considerable mass of literature, the Levellers maintaining that economic freedom followed from political freedom, and the Diggers seeing it rather the other way.
Stripped of its Biblical overtones it stated a view that is still a staggering novelty to millions today.
The paper was suppressed after September, 1649, by “democratic” Cromwell.
The Levellers just as clearly saw that religion with its mirage of a happy future life was the carrot that encouraged the poor donkey of a labourer to stagger on.
Richard Overton, too, wrote in Man's Mortality that the idea of the soul was ridiculous, The New Model Army was Parliament’s striking force, its job to overthrow the king.
But because its ranks were filled with many pro-Leveller men the Levellers saw in it a means of getting better conditions for the poor.
On May 20th, 1647, “a great petition” was sent to the Commons demanding political reforms and the re-organisation of the Constitution.
When the re-imprisoned Lilburne (he was in and out of gaol between 1646-1648 for various attacks on authority) heard that the common hangman had been instructed to burn it, he looked to the army for support.
He declared the power of the land vested in the army, and at this point Cromwell agreed.
Next, a manifesto, The Case of the Army Truly Stated, was presented to General Fairfax on October 15th, 1647, and later An Agreement of the Pople, which dealt more with civil matters, Fearing the support gained by the Levellers, the Presbyterians compromised with Charles.
Enraged, the Independents with the Levellers marched to London, entered the House and passed a measure to thwart any attempt to corrupt the army; the Presbyterians were crushed.
Though Cromwell had been aided by ‘the Levellers, he refused to free Lilburne.
Law reform to enable laymen to three were found guilty and one of these was shot.
It was a serious defeat for the Levellers, They tried resistence again, but were imprisoned and Lilburne remained in the Tower.
All the contesting elements of Parliament sank their differences again in preparation for the fray.
The artful Presbyterians released Lilburne, hoping he would stir the army to mutiny.
But he supported Cromwell, presumably regarding him as the lesser of two evils.
Pensions for disabled widows and children. soldiers, The stir that these programmes made. forced Fairfax, Cromwell and the others Grandees (as they were somewhat derisively called) to allow their discussion in a series of debates held in Putney.
Cromwell reasoned that if these fiery demands could be proved too extreme or impractical, Leveller influence would diminish and the threat to his supremacy would disappear.
The main point was that the vote was the birthright of all men, and to this Ireton replied, “. . . voting was a property right.
Only those who owned a house worth 40s a year in rent or who had a frechold interest in land should vote.
The protection of private property was of the utmost importance, now that freedom had been won.
Rainborough for the Levellers retorted that what was required in voting was reason not property.
Next, he set Out to quell his army and persuade the least influenced to sign a pledge of loyalty at Corkbush Field, Ware, in Hertfordshire.
There the Agreement of the People was presented to Fairfax, He accepted it, but told the men to go on signing and they did.
But then up rode two dissenting regiments singing and wearing the Leveller colours, Immediately Cromwell drew his sword and rode angrily among them, tearing away their colours.
London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 inent, but lay in abeyance while the king's fate was decided.
On January 30th, 1649, Charles, king by the grace of God, died by the grace of the merchants.
Both were quite good one lasted nearly a quarter of an hour and J have brought the tape of it back with me.
Arising out of something 1 had said (nothing to do with the tour) there was an excellent discussion relating to war and the H-Bomb, in which there were contrasting views expressed.
There is a great deal | have missed out of this report on account of the limitations of space, and many members and sympathisers who gave me a warm greeting, but whose names [ have had to leave out.
I would like them all to know how much I appreciate what they did for me.
During the last two weeks in America I stayed with the Rabs, and I have to thank them for the warmth of their hospitality and the way they put themselves out to see that | had rest and recreation, including some lovely trips to see the magnificent autumn plumage —I have never seen anything like it before.
Owing to the vast distances between branches and groups over there the delegation present was of necessity not large.
At the outset taped and written grectings from all over the world were heard and read, Then various reports of the year's work were given.
The sending out of letters to Libraries and Colleges during the year had brought excellent results.
A proposal to produce two new Pamphlets, one on the Materialist Conception of History and the other on The WSP What it Stands For, was referred to the Editorial Committee for attention.
A Conference Social was held at a member’s house on the evening of the first day of conference.
It was a very pleasant, comradely and lively affair, attended by about fifty members and friends.
On September Sth I left for Detroit, accompanied by comrades Rab and Orner, and we held three meetings there.
They were small but interesting with plenty of questions, On the fourth evening there was a meeting at which a proposal to form a discussion group was agreed to.
I have since learnt that the discussion group has made a very good start, at a place that has been rented, and a large number of interested people arc attending it.
The members concerned have put in a lot of time and energy lo ensure its success, It appears to me that it is a method that could be widely copied.
On September 9th | left for Vancouver and Victoria~-Comrades Rab and Orner going on to Chicago.
On the morning of the Ith | was given a long newspaper interview in Victoria and a brief TV interview—it was cut short because of mechanical difficulties during the recording.
The next day there was a good meeting in Victoria with plenty of questions and some opposition.
There was -a short disturbance at this meeting on account of the interruptions of a local celebrity.
However this resulted in some considerable newspaper publicity, After the Victoria meeting | went up the coast of Vancouver Island to Nanaimo, about 80 or so miles. | had an interview with the editor of the local paper and spoke at a mecting in the evening—-not very well as I was feeling very tired.
However there were interesting questions, particularly from Some young people, and discussion.
Comrade Stafford, a man 84 years old, proposes to run classes there—he writes regularly to local papers.
After the meeting we had a hectic drive back to Victoria, arriving at 2m.
The next meeting I spoke at was in Port Alberni, about 40 miles beyond Nanaimo.
Before finishing with Vancouver Island ] must express my appreciation of the excellent work being done there by Comrades Luff, Jenkins, Tickner and Poirier.
The last three just swept me off my feet with their cnergy—they travelled to Nanaimo and Port Alberni to post bills and distribute leaflets advertising the meetings, as well as arranging for newspaper interviews and attending the meetings, They also received considerable help from sympathisers.
Comrades J and M Ahrens, Watkins and Cannon had been busy with Radio, TV, and the newspapers.
I appeared with three others—budding MP's —and we each had to supply a copy of the script which we read at the meeting.
Mine lasted about nine minutes, Then we were given a short time to answer each other.
After a short break in the radio whilst questions were collected from the audience, we cach answered questions put to us by the audience, and then were given a short time to sum up.
At the end of the Vancouver visit, Comrades J, and M Ahrens took me for a long week-end to a bungalow they had built in the mountains where I was re-vitalised for the rest of the tour.
I should add that the members are making strenuous efforts to get an open air meeting place in Stanley Park, On September 26th I left for Winnipeg.
There. were two meetings there but the attendance was not good—possibly because the weather was perishing cold, about 20 degrees.
Winnipeg has changed over the years, Old members have died or moved west and south-west, leaving the others to carry on under great. difficulties.
They are very\much isolated there, but are doing a very good job stirring things up.
An open discussion group has been formed not connected with any political party in which every week one of the members reads a paper, which is then discussed.
After | had opened up, questions «were addressed to me for about 1} hours, and then there was discussion.
Comrades George and Karla Ellenbogen have recently gone to live there and started stirring things up.
The meeting in Montreal wis excellent with plenty of questions and discussion.
There again 1] was glad to renew acquaintance with old members I had met on previous visits—including Comrade Orner, who is endowed with superlative energy.
I met a number of sympathisers, including a seaman who had met our comrades in London at the Russian Exhibition, and now wanted {to join the WSP which shows how sceds sown at a venture can flower in distant places.
The detailed story of our comrades activities makes interesting reading, but unfortunately space limits us to this very brief report.
What must be said is that the trip was most successful, and the propaganda value was probably much greater than can be assessed at the moment.
Next year it is intended to repeat ventures like this, and their growing success will be in no small measure due to the hard (though pleasurable) work done by our comrades this Autumn.
Mr Headicar, the CND representative, “ sat down” the previous Saturday and got himself two months imprisonment.
The SPGB were out of contact with the real world, and death would overtake us all, notwithstanding the propagation of Socialist ideas, unless nuclear weapons were abandoned.
Melvin Harris for the SPGB showed that CND was similar to many other bodies, which had sprung up in the past, attempting to tackle one or other evil Of the capitalist system.
These organisalions had failed, and CND would fail for the same reason.
The films are followed by brief comments by a party speaker, and then the meeting is open for questions and discussion, which can be coatinued in the Social Room afterwards (where light refreshments will be ov sale.
Visitors particularly are welcome, ——————EE EE ee -_ HACKNEY LECTURE Bethnal Green Town Hall, E2.
Branch News Here is a way of increasing sales of the Socialist Standard.
For eight shillings a year a copy will be sent to any address in the British Isles.
The greater its circulation the greater will be the impact of Socialist propaganda, and incidentally, the more economic will be the “ Standards” cost of production.
Resolve in 1962 to increase your sales of the Socialist Standard, and redouble your energy in spreading the case for Socialism.
The Branch’s winter lectures are in full swing with a wide range of subjects, every other week.
All those who attend will find the meetings stimulating und worthwhile.
Wembley is holding their Xmas Social on December 16th at the Ealing Park Tavern.
J Ealing Branch is continuing its winter activities with a showing of Eisenstein’s film “Strike” on December 8th.
Owing to the length of the film, please note that the showing will begin at 7.45m. prompt.
Further Jectures and film shows are being planned for January, February and March 1962. s Blackpool Lights.
Room 2, Door G Every Sunday at 7.30 pm prompt throughout the winter until April 29th.
WHAT'S AT STAKE IN GERMANY January 28th, STRUGGLE FOR THE CARIBBEAN ee EALING FILM * Memorial Hall, Windsor Road, Ealing Broadway.
Published by the Socialiet varty vf Great Brstutn, 52 Clapham High Stvect, London, S.W 4.
