Ex-Officials Meet in Moscow To Match Notes on Cuba Crisis By Michael Dobbs Washington Post Foreign Service MOSCOW, Jan. — Many of the top-level participants in the Cuban missile crisis confronted each other eyeball to eyeball across a conference table today for the first time since they stepped back from the edge of nuclear apocalypse in October 1962.
In messages to an unprecedented U.S.-Soviet-Cuban conference that opened here today, both Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev and President Bush said that the missile crisis contained important and enduring lessons.
Today marked the first time that ranking Soviet and Cuban officials have agreed to discuss their roles in the crisis with United States officials.
Soviet participants include longtime foreign minister Andrei Gromyko, former ambassador to Washington Anatoliy Dobrynin and Sergei Khrushchev, whose father, Nikita, ordered the stationing of nuclear missiles on Cuba and later agreed to withdraw them under intense American pressure.
Edward M Kennedy, but he and John F Kennedy Jr. both backed out at a late date.
American participants include former defense secretary Robert S McNamara, former national security adviser McGeorge Bundy and former White House special counsel Theodore C Sorensen.
American participants in today's opening session said that they got a much stronger sense than ever before of Cuban and Soviet fears of an imminent United States invasion of Cuba.
In his memoirs, Khrushchev insisted that his primary motivation for deploying missiles in Cuba was to deter a United States invasion.
McNamara was reported by other participants to have acknowledged that if he had been in the shoes of the Soviet and Cuban officials across the room, he would See CRISIS, A22, Col.
He continued to insist, however, that the Kennedy administration had no intention of invading Cuba prior to the missile crisis.
The documents make clear that, while encouraging a revolt by disaffected Cubans was the preferred means of deposing Castro, some administration officials favored direct military intervention.
Soviet officials did, however, reveal that Washington's nuclear superiority in 1962 was even greater than the 15:1 ratio previously thought.
At the time of the crisis, two-thirds of the Soviets' entire missile stock of about 60 launchers was deployed in Cuba.
In his message to the conference, Gorbachev said that the lesson of the crisis was that “the sharpest conflict could be extinguished thanks to the responsible approach and good sense” exhibited by Khrushchev, Kennedy and Castro.
