The retary of Defense Robert McNamara in the Cabinet Room of the White House counts were well organized.
MANAGERS striking shift in conservative percepbombs ever dropped in the history Defense Robert McNamara told Now we learn that our State Department has broken with the administion.
At the time of the Cuban misof war,” according to one account of Gary L Wood Kennedy at the beginning of the critration and says it never believed the Benghazi attack was a film protest. sile crisis, Republicans expected the crisis.
And the United States already had Michele Schievelbein generations as a moment when a hit with 1 megaton of explosive force missiles based in Turkey, closer to sword to provide cover for the utter stupidity demonstrated by its adminAdvertising Director Democratic president squandered a — about 80 times more powerful istration. ... the Soviet Union than the missiles Americans over a certain age remember the seizure of the United States embassy Tonya Schild historic opportunity.
Even if in Cuba were to the U.S., so we had Business Manager ter, Ronald Reagan and William F the targeting were off, the city probin Iran during the presidency of Jimmy Carter. set the precedent for moving misBuckley all suggested at the time ably would have been destroyed. siles up to our enemy’s border.
That brings to mind a bumper sticker we saw that suggests that David Jeffcoat that Kennedy’s handling of the crisis But the Soviets might not have The Cuban missile crisis exhibit Obama’s presidency represents Carter’s second term.
Circulation Director represented a capitulation to the Soattacked cities on the East Coast; at the JFK museum in Boston, of It certainly appears in the aftermath of Benghazi that the sticker is on Tera Schmidt viets; that the president had bowed they might have retaliated by course, celebrates Kennedy’s steely target.
Classified Manager to Soviet threats when he promised launching their short-range tactical resolve and tactical flexibility, and not to invade Cuba.
Open-Mindedness Editor James D Cimburek that a communist the left and right.
If you listen carefully, you ocoutpost would recasionally will hear a reasoned, calm voice within all of the unreasoned, redBeth Rye main, 90 miles from loser.
Kennedy’s prestige soared while Castro the 13 days in October, it fails to exfaced shouting so common to national discourse today.
New Media Manager our shores, and Such was the case on Oct 8 when former Florida Gov.
Jeb Bush spoke that the president was humiliated and shown to be irrelevant, even plain the big Kathy Larson should have taken to his Soviet overlords.
But the conventional wispicture, the larger about immigration at the annual Siouxland Chamber of Commerce dinner.
It avoids As part of his blueprint for economic growth, Bush — who is considered Bernard Metivier liberate the Cubans dom doesn’t survive scrutiny.
The next year, asking a big quesa potential future presidential candidate — includes immigration reform.
Why did mented immigrants who already live within our borders for economic rea* * * These days, tivist, and soon after that, Khrushchev was deKhrushchev move sons.
Due to declining birth rates and the retirement of Baby Boomers, he most conservatives posed by hard-liners opposed to his loss of face. missiles to Cuba in said, America will need more immigrants to help fill future jobs.
The answer is the shadows rather than maximizing their potential,” Bush said.
We will withhold an opinion on Bush’s full immigration plan until we read all the details, but we appreciate his contribution to the debate over this Derek Bartos brary in Simi Valley, The United States had sponCalif., gave no hint of the views ReaGuantanamo Bay, Cuba, which could sored an invasion of Cuba by CIAvexing issue.
In our view, he offers valuable food for thought and asks for the Cassandra Brockmoller gan once held on the matter in a have killed all the Americans there. trained Cuban exiles at the Bay of kind of open-mindedness so crucial to a comprehensive solution.
Randy Dockendorf Cold War exhibit it had up until a Then Kennedy would have had to rePigs just two years earlier, attemptIllegal immigration is a complicated subject with legal, social, security Jeannine Economy few months ago.
There was a single taliate — by attacking a military ing to overthrow Fidel Castro by and, yes, economic ramifications.
Unfortunately, as we see all too often on Jeremy Hoeck panel of text about those 13 days in base or a major city in the Soviet force.
And they got that agreement Cathy Sudbeck But at the time, it wasn’t just Realenged instead from the left, by from Kennedy. gan, Goldwater and Buckley who fathose who question whether the That raises the question of winTO DAY I N H I S TO RY Kelsey Thomas vored United States intervention; inside the Brenda Willcuts missile crisis was necessary.
The conventional By The Associated Press for their roles in the deadly 1998 bombings circle of Kennedy’s advisers, advowisdom these days is that Kennedy Jackie Williams Kennedy advocates have held that Today is Thursday, Oct., the 292nd of two United States embassies in Africa. cates of an attack on Cuba were led the successful resolution of the criwas the big winner, Castro the big day of 2012.
On Oct. vise their hard-line crackdown policy on * * * 1,000 sites in Cuba, to be followed 18, 1962, James D Watson, Francis Crick sexually abusive priests, saying that elestruck the perfect balance between shown to be irrelevant, even to his and Maurice Wilkins were honored with the ments conflicted with universal church law.
Published Daily seven days later by a ground invasteely determination and strategic Soviet overlords.
As a result, they say, he tional wisdom doesn’t survive for determining the double-helix molecular whelmingly to stick with the main points of Periodicals postage risen in power in World War II for deprevented nuclear war while rescrutiny.
Yankton Daily have retaliated as the first bombers clear war was an irresponsible and still there.
Press and Dakotian unnecessary risk, and that the criThe conservatives, who argued the Virginia coast by the crew of the USS William Crowe died in Bethesda, Md., at approached Cuba.
Fifty wild animals were Postmaster: Send charge of a missile base in Cuba normal diplomacy and negotiation. of Castro’s regime, turned out to be possession of Alaska from Russia. released by the owner of an eastern Ohio address changes to could have ordered a launch.
He wrote this for with his white girlfriend, Lucille Cameron. the person to beat, even as he was called MEMBERSHIPS change the strategic balance of the Los Angeles Times.
Israeli soldier Gilad The Yankton Daily plosive force equivalent to all the power — that’s what Secretary of re-arrested and convicted on the testimony Shalit emerged from five years in captivity Press & Dakotan is a of a former mistress, Belle Schreiber.) as Hamas militants hand him over to member of the AssociIn 1922, the British Broadcasting Co., Egyptian mediators in an exchange for ated Press, the Inland YO U R L E T T E R S Ltd.,000 Palestinian prisoners.
Since moving to a Dakota Newspaper Open House A Success Wednesday night open house, we have seen increasIn 1931, inventor Thomas Alva Edison died in West Orange, N.J., at age 84. former Chuck Berry is 86.
The AssoLarry Nickles, Yankton In 1944, Soviet troops invaded Czecho74.
Singer-musician Russ exclusively to use of all Deputy Fire Chief, Yankton Fire Department We are able to contact a good number of the kids In 1961, the movie musical “West Side Giguere is 69.
Acthe local news printed Yankton Fire Department open house was held at the schools before Wednesday night and the teachStory,” starring Natalie Wood and Richard tress Pam Dawber is 62.
Writer-producer Chuck started at 5:30m. with hotdogs, balloons, fire safety We appreciate the schools allowing the firefighters setting.
Gospel singer Vickie Winans is * * * kits and fire hats for future junior firefighters as well In 1969, the federal government 59.
International Tennis Hall of Famer Marthe time to come to the schools during Fire Prevenbanned artificial sweeteners known as cytina Navratilova is 56.
There was tion Week to present fire safety information to stuclamates because of evidence they caused Hearns is 54.
Actor Jean-Claude Van also an antique toy fire truck display presented by RATES* dents from preschool to third grade.
Paul Goetsch of Yankton featuring toys from early training is matched with the age group starting with In 1971, the Knapp Commission began Jazz musician Wynton Marsalis is 51.
The training inpublic hearings into allegations of corrupVincent Spano is 50.
Country singer Josh stormed a hijacked Lufthansa jetliner on Gracin is 32.
Country musician Jesse Litthe ground in Mogadishu, Somalia, freeing tleton is 31.
