It all started when a communist revolution took place in Cuba, an island ninety miles away from the United States of America.
This was a great blow to the United States as many American businesses were dependent on Cuba.
In April 1961, the C.I.A organised an attack on Cuba led by Cuban exiles in an attempt to restore American control.
They landed in a place called the Bay of Pigs and set up a base for guerrilla war against the Cuban government.
They expected other Cubans to rise up and join the rebellion, but they misunderstood the popularity of the communist dictator, Fidel Castro.
The struggle for control of Cuba was part of a worldwide Cold War. ...read more.
On October 14, a U-2 spy plane flew over Cuba and took photographs of the missile site.
President Kennedy of the United States was shown the photographs proving that Soviet missile were on Cuba.
At this stage, the Americans spent six days secretly discussing and planning how to respond.
They did not even consult their closest ally, the government of Britain until the 21st of October.
This was shortly before Kennedy made an announcement to the American people about the crisis and the likelihood of a war.
On 22nd October, he issued a quarantine of all ships headed to Cuba. ...read more.
They had already considered taking their missiles out of Turkey but Kennedy did not want to lose his pride and be seen backing down in the face of the Soviets.
American military leaders recommended an immediate air attack on Cuba that would consequently mean an outbreak of war.
A letter was about to be sent to the Soviets refusing to do a deal over the missiles in Turkey but fortunately, at this point Kennedy changed his mind.
He decided to first letter and sent another letter to Khrushchev accepting the Soviet proposal that the missiles should be withdrawn in return for an American commitment not to invade Cuba.
In conclusion, there was an immense possibility of a nuclear war over the Cuban missile crisis which had accumulated over the space of two and a half years and thankfully to both Kennedy's than finally Khrushchev's careful judgement the war was avoided. ...read more.
Source A5 shows a meeting between Castro and Khrushchev, it may be noted they look very comfortable together as they discuss the state of Cuba.
WOMEN These women then became instructors to nearly 29,000 peasant women, greatly expanding the traditional role of the Cuban women and greatly enlarging their options outside of the home.
First aid training was given to 11,000 women and the FMC managed over one hundred day care centers.
This suggests that perestroika was initiated under Andropov's premiership, not Gorbachev's.
One of the main arguments against the deployment of NMD is, following the events of 11th September 2001, is that the main threat faced by the USA and other 'western' nations is the threat of terrorism and not that of missile attacks from other states.
However, at the mention of leaving the Warsaw Pact Khrushchev realised that if one country left the Warsaw Pact others would soon follow as part of the domino effect which would lead to the collapse in soviet control over the satellite states.
Decided to withdraw from the Warsaw Pact Kruschev saw this as a sign of embarrassment for the Soviet Union and, as a result, sent 200,000 troops and 6000 tanks into Hungary on November 4th 1956.
