My preliminary statement on the newly created brink-of-war situation as a result of President John F Kennedy’s blockade of Cuba, Nikita Khrushchev’s missile bases there, and the impotence of the UN the minute the two nuclear titans decide to unleash a war holocaust, correctly stressed the following: “In opposing war, we make it clear that we are opposed to both nuclear giants: Russia and the United States Under no circumstances do we get ourselves maneuvered into a position where we, for a single moment, sound so much against either one of them that we appear to be for the other.
Before the Blockade A good deal of illumination on both these factors can be gained if we take it out of the present moment of crisis and see that which was inherent in it the day before.
In opposing any invasion or war against the Cuban people, we cannot, however, let Khrushchev get away with playing ‘the champion of peace’ just because he defends Castro, who has taken away the rights and freedoms of the Cuban people as Khrushchev has of the Russian people and Kennedy of the American people.
At that same meeting–and it is necessary to keep in mind that this was held four days before the announcement of the blockade of Cuba–I stressed that what was wrong with people who pretend that Russia is not in Cuba is that they thereby cover up the fact that Russia is the greatest exporter of counter-revolution.
It is easy to see counter-revolution when it is as direct as it is in the outright squashing of a revolution, as the Russian destruction of the Hungarian Revolution.
It is not easy to see counter-revolution when it is a question of planned exploitation of the proletarian in his daily life.
Finally, those who can’t get away from the spurious ground for argument established by Communists for the special benefit of the liberals, to the effect that if the United States has a “right” to bases in Europe, Russia has a “right” to one in Cuba, fail to see that the Russian arms imported into Cuba are not one-tenth of the threat to the U.S. that they are to the Cuban people.
Small Cuba, even when armed by Russia, is no match for United States might, but it is a power against the unarmed revolutionary underground, and it is for this purpose precisely that they are intended.
Kennedy made the shocking, unilateral, warlike pronouncement of blockade.
Outside of Khrushchev’s break-up of the summit as a result of the U-2 plane spy incident, when the two nuclear giants were pitted against each other with no intermediaries, the people of the world were never closer to the brink of nuclear holocaust.
The present confrontation is not limited to verbal threats and busted summits.
It is now clear beyond peradventure of doubt that both Kennedy and Khrushchev are mad enough to plunge the world into thermonuclear war.
If a summit meeting should result and stave off the day, it clearly will be only a delaying action.
It is likewise clear that Cuba has become the possible locale of the outburst, as Berlin has been and remains to this day another focal point, but that what is involved is the United States-Russian competition for domination of the world.
It is at this point that the movements opposing war show their own negative character.
The falling into a trap is inevitable when one does not view positively what they are fighting for, instead of only what they are fighting against.
Thus though the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament are supposed to be for banning the bomb, they had not a word to say against its spread to yet another country, in this case Cuba.
Even without a bomb, he has moved so far away from the revolution he led that it is hard to see what he is making of Cuba other than a satellite of Russia, and I don’t mean it only as a storer of missile bases, but as an outpost of single-party state-capitalism.
In the misnamed speech, “Marxism-Leninism,” delivered on Dec., 1961–nearly a year ago, that is–Fidel expounded his conception of why an “integrated revolutionary organization,” that is to say, a single party in which the Communists and what was left of the July 26th Movement merged.
Anyone can–though it must be admitted that Fidel doesn’t do it very well–repeat generalizations of Marxism on the role of the working class.
The proof, the only proof, that it is a way of life, not a mere weapon of propaganda, is its realization in life.
No such thing is true in Fidel’s Cuba, where not a single organ–from the trades unions to the peasant unions, from the state to the party–is any longer controlled by the working people.
On this life-and-death question, at this life-and-death moment, we can under no circumstances allow ourselves to be swallowed up by this curious movement.
If nothing else can be left unsullied, let’s at least make sure that our Marxist-Humanist ideas remain the beacon for future generations as they are for ours.
Therefore we must unfurl our banner, and proceed with our opposition to both poles of world capital, putting in their rightly subordinate place those who “follow the leader,” be that Khrushchev or Kennedy.
The Testing Point At the same time, we cannot minimize the totality of the crisis by considering that, Kennedy having finally exposed himself as no different from the Republicans who had urged blockade before and now urge invasion, things will be in any way easier for the building of a Marxist-Humanist movement.
The hysteria created by the administration is much more ominous than that created by a Sen.
Whenever a political position was proven wrong, there were those among the Marxists who tried to misuse a Marxist statement about the whip of the counter-revolution helping the revolutionary development.
First, the statement about the whip of the counter-revolution referred to it urging the revolution on when it is already in process but has not yet reached full fruition, as, say, between February and before October 1917, when the Kornilov episode exposed Kerensky and allowed the full development of the Russian Revolution.
In a non-revolutionary period, the problems confronting Marxist-Humanism are made harder, not lessened, by the blockade, for the man who has the means to start a nuclear holocaust does not forget for a moment his power to press down upon the opposition to his war-provoking policy.
Take even the minor question of Kennedy’s timing his announcement of nuclear bases in Cuba to when it would be most useful to the Democrats running for election.
Two percent one way or the other may win him the election of a Governor or a Congressman.
Once won–or lost–however, he has to be concerned not with a 2% margin but with the fact that over 60% of the American people are opposed to invasion of Cuba.
As the capitalist ruler he is, he then turns the power against his own people.
Of course, we know the universal opposition to war and can build on that.
Of course, we build our organization along with developing our ideas comprehensively, but we can do so only by being fully conscious of all the obstacles in the way.
Therefore it would be folly to act as if by opposition we mean the kind of arms that only the bourgeoisie has.
They–both Kennedy and Khrushchev–have arms and ships and missiles and prisons and jet bombers.
They can afford to play games as to who is the ‘aggressor’ and ‘deceiver’ and who is the violated and deceived while they jockey for best position to attack.
Johnny put it succinctly enough when he said that we must learn to express our ideas clearly “in 25 words or less,” that is to say, with full consciousness that our time is not unlimited.
While we are under no illusion that times of such heightened crises are propitious for building a mass organization, we are sure that the new sense of urgency is just the impulse needed to intensify our activity in a way that the meeting of the movement from theory with that from practice will not be left to chance.
Dunayevskaya refused to call the state-capitalist Russian empire “USSR” , because it was neither socialist nor run by actual soviets, and was dominated by Russia.
On May 1, 1960, a United States U-2 spy plane piloted by Francis Gary Powers was shot down over Russian air space, causing the breakup of a U.S.-Russia summit on disarmament.
The July 26th Movement was a revolutionary group organized to overthrow Cuban dictator Fulgencio Batista.
Manolo Fernández was a Cuban labor union leader who was ousted by the government shortly after Castro took power.
The extremist right-wing John Birch Society, still active today, claimed that labor unions and the civil rights movement were Communist conspiracies.
Alexander Kerensky, a socialist opportunist, headed the Provisional government set up following the February 1917 Russian Revolution.
General Lavr Kornilov led a failed counter-revolution against Kerensky in August.
Lenin’s Bolsheviks helped defeat Kornilov, opening the way for the October Revolution.
Top PostsReading Marx’s Critique of the Gotha ProgramMarxism and the United States Civil War Email Subscription Enter your email address to subscribe to this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email.
