Russian leader Nikita Khrushchev sent missiles to Cuba in response to the installation of missiles by the United States in Turkey.
Once the United States was aware of this there were a few courses of action that could be taken.
The chosen action was to blockade any further weapons coming into Cuba.
This started negotiations that would eventually end with the removal of missiles from Cuba and Turkey and a promise from the U.S. that they would not invade Cuba.
These negotiations were very tense, and the threat of war was felt by all involved parties.
Although the negotiations only last a short time in October of 1962, the impact of this crisis is important today.
Rational An important skill in history and social studies is to be able to draw conclusions from multiple sources.
The United States and U.S.S.R. were on the brink of war, but the efforts of John F Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev brought a more peaceful end to the conflict.
Looking into the negotiations will allow students to decide which side showed more willingness to put an end to the issue.
Analyze primary and secondary sources related to a historical question to evaluate their relevance, make comparisons, integrate new information with prior knowledge, and come to a reasoned conclusion.
Recall, select, and explain the significance of important people, their work, and their ideas in the areas of political and intellectual leadership, inventions, discoveries, and the arts, within each era of Wisconsin, United States, and world history.
Compare examples and analyze why governments of various countries have sometimes sought peaceful resolutions to conflicts and sometimes gone to war.
Identify a historical or contemporary event in which a person was forced to take and ethical position, such as a decision to go to war, the impeachment of a president, or a presidential pardon, and explain the issues involved.
Communicate ideas and opinions with others and develop tentative hypotheses based on the historical evidence.
Be able to compose a well‐organized essay considering all of the information that will be presented.
This lesson is aimed at student in a 12th grade United States History class.
Due to the difficulty in the language of some of the primary documents used, younger students may have a harder time understanding them.
In order to make this lesson more accessible one could summarize documents using age appropriate vocabulary.
In addition, students could work in groups or as a class to evaluate the first sources and gradually work more independently.
This lesson should take about three and a half hours or roughly three or four class period.
This is all dependent on the level of participation and understanding displayed by the students during the lesson.
It could be adapted to be used in a Political Science course when dealing with foreign policy or diplomacy.
The students will learn about the history of the Cold War and how it ended.
This is important to students because this crisis had a big impact on how the United States handled other crisis during the Cold War and had a part in shaping future diplomacy tactics.
Enough copies of the hypothesis/evidence sheet 3. 6 copies of the data sets 4.
Engagement Engagement in the inquiry lesson will be done through a description of the events leading up to the crisis.
Students will be told about the situation in Berlin and how hostilities with the Soviet Union have been going on for some time.
Students will be informed about the arms race and the fear of nuclear that accompanied it.
This should engage the students because it does not give clues to the end of the crisis.
Elicit Hypotheses The hypothesis worksheet will be distributed throughout the class.
The question will remain up on the board or the projector screen while students consider the possibilities.
After the students have had a chance to come up with one or two hypotheses, then the students will be broken into groups of about five or six.
They will compare their hypotheses, and then be instructed to come up with a few more as a group.
After all of the hypotheses are up on the board the teacher will ask the students to come back together to come up with one more hypothesis per group.
This hypothesis does not have to be completely rational, but should remain somewhat relevant.
It will help to establish the process of creating and evaluating hypotheses.
Data Gathering and Data Processing The students will then be given the first data set, and a volunteer will read it out loud.
They will go back to their groups to discuss the data set and how it either supports the hypotheses or undermines them.
The students will record their evidence on the worksheet handed out earlier in class.
As a class we will discuss the data set and how it tries to answer the question.
Interpreting meaning from primary sources can sometimes be a struggle for students early in the lesson, so it is very important that the teacher closely monitors students as they interpret the first few data sets.
Looking at the first data set as a class might work great for younger grades.
Then the teacher will ask if there are any new hypotheses that have come about due to the evidence in the first data set.
Once this is complete, the second data set will be handed out, and the pattern will be repeated until the data sets are finished.
The students should be able to use the later data sets more efficiently on their own, so less instruction and facilitation is needed from the teacher.
Data set three is a video and could be used to re‐engage students on the second day of the lesson.
Likewise, set seven is another political cartoon that is to be used at the beginning of the period to re‐engage the students.
The teacher should emphasize that this cartoon is merely presenting a perception of the President from the Cuban perspective.
Conclusion After all of the data sets have been discussed and the hypotheses revised, the students will pick the one or two that they feel are most valid.
The students will then write a persuasive paper as to why they feel this hypothesis is right.
They should include the data sets as evidence to support their hypothesis.
They will be required to state their thesis or hypothesis in the first paragraph and then restated it in the conclusion.
Students must use a certain number of sources, and they must cite correctly.
To ensure that this happens, the teacher must show the students what is expected.
For this exercised a parenthetical reference to which data set is sufficient.
The students will be given class time to work on their draft of this essay.
At the end of the hour, they will get in groups and critique each other’s arguments and writing according to the evidence and the rubric.
The students will then take these drafts and revise them to hand in the next day.
This data provides information that is not in the other data sets and may change the perception of some of the students.
This document states that Kennedy possibly did not care too much about the missiles in Turkey because they were obsolete anyway.
They will have the opportunity to take this new data into consideration and change their essay if need be.
They will find out that theories can change even though it may seem very well supported.
The informal portion of the assessment will be with regards to participation both in the large group and in small groups.
Students will not be penalized for participation that adds ideas that are not correct.
The goal for participation is that students are able to use higher order thinking skills.
This could be seen when students put ethics or values in their answers.
Adding dispositions to an argument will enhance a student’s experience within the lesson.
This is an opportunity for the students that may not have participated fully to get their ideas across.
Both portions of the assessment will be taken into consideration while assessing this lesson.
Students will receive the rubric back for their written work, and on the bottom of the rubric the student will get their participation grade and a total grade.
Reflection and Self‐Assessment This lesson is geared for an 12th grade classroom.
If some of the text seems difficult, it will be easy for the teacher to create summaries for the data sets that can be read to supplement the data set.
Higher Order Thinking Students are required to take the data sets and construct a hypothesis from them.
The meaning that they take away from the sources will not always be a literal one.
Since the data sets take up most of the lesson and students will have to manipulate them in order to show support for or contradict hypotheses, this lesson receives a 4 for this standard.
Students must be aware of the events that are surrounding the Missile Crisis in order to create a reasoned hypothesis.
They must also take the knowledge given at the beginning of the lesson and combine it with the data sets to show support for their argument.
Students are also asked to work in groups to discuss the data sets and possible hypotheses.
This sustained conversation and construction of a reasoned conclusion gives this lesson a score of 4 for this standard.
Substantive Conversation When students break into groups, they are asked to discuss the data in terms of the focus question.
They are to use the data to either show support for or contradict the hypotheses that they came up with.
When coming back to the larger group the discussion may be more teacher led, but there is still the opportunity for students to comment on the remarks of others; therefore, the score for this standard would be either a 4 or a 5 depending of the work of the individual groups.
Connections to the World Beyond the Classroom The students will be given information that will consider different points of view.
Students will learn tools that will help them read sources and decipher meaning from them.
This is a skill that will transcend the classroom if the students find value in it.
This lesson should receive either a 3 or a 4 depending on the connections that the students are able to make between this lesson and the necessity of using these skills when considering a newspaper article.
Ethical Valuing There is an underlying ethical value at the heart of this lesson and it is in regards to the avoidance of war.
Kennedy and Khrushchev try different tactics in order to resolve the conflict without the use of weapons.
This issue is something that leaders are faced with when something as severe as this conflict was.
Student will look at the ways in which war was avoided through diplomacy.
It was used effectively in this instance to ensure the security of the countries involved as well as the rest of the world.
These considerations would allow for students to interject values and beliefs as well as critique the values of others during this lesson.
Because certain issues in this lesson are debatable, this lesson receives a 4 on this standard.
Interdisciplinary integration comes in because this is primarily a history lesson, but political science is also a focus due to diplomacy.
Students are also required to know some geography in order to realize the threat that the missiles in Cuba and Turkey presented.
The knowledge and skills that are integrated into this lesson will allow for students to read a passage from either a newspaper or another source and evaluate its meaning.
This is something that will help them become better citizens when considering such things like a voting.
Students will relying that relying on one source for information will not allow them to get the full story.
This lesson receives a 4 for this standard because the interdisciplinary integration focuses more on a social understanding while the knowledge and skills learned will make them better citizens.
General Improvements and Changes This lesson is constructed in such a way that students will be able to look at primary and secondary documents to make conclusions.
If more sources could be found from the Cuban or Soviet point of view, it would strengthen the pool of data.
One of the data sets is especially long, but the information within the document all seemed important, so it was not cut down.
This is by far the longest, so students should not be too overwhelmed by the data.
Also, the beginning of each new class period will include either a video segment or a political cartoon which will hopefully be successful in re‐ engaging the interest and attention of the students.
The documents used in this data set are somewhat difficult, so the use of them for younger students may not be appropriate.
If this were to be used in middle school, it would be necessary to supplement them with a summary or a discussion before the students were broken into smaller groups.
Overall this lesson is tailored in a way that it should effectively reach its intended audience.
This lesson displays this very well because it asks students to look at primary and secondary documents in order to determine a cause.
It also is set up in a way that students may interpret the data in different ways.
Two people do not have to come away with the same meaning from a document.
Creating this lesson was a challenge, but when working as a teacher it will only be more difficult.
The amount of possible data sets that could be used in this lesson are uncountable.
Picking the right sources for this lesson was probably the hardest part.
Once the data sets were in place, the rest of the lesson just fell into place.
All that said, this lesson is something that is worthwhile for both the teacher and the student because the skills and knowledge involved will be used in many other areas.
The ability to look at a document and come to a conclusion is a very important skill to have in order to be a well informed citizen.
Letter From President Kennedy to Chairman Khrushchev Washington, October 22, 1962.
I hope that your Government will refrain from any action which would widen or deepen this already grave crisis and that we can agree to resume the path of peaceful negotiations.
I should say frankly that measures outlined in your statement represent a serious threat to peace and security of peoples.
I hope that Government of United States will show prudence and renounce actions pursued by you, which could lead to catastrophic consequences for peace throughout world.
Students should see throughout the data sets that Castro is sort of left out of the discussions.
Cuba’s location plays an important role in the issue, but Cuban leaders have little if any say in the matter.
This clip voices Castro’s concerns about invasion during the conflict, and offers another point of view.
The President instructed McNamara to review all details of instructions to the Fleet Commanders regarding procedures to be followed in the blockade.
There was an extended discussion of actions to be taken under various assumed Soviet resistance activities such as failing to stop, refusing right to board, ships turning around, heading in another direction, etc.
Discussion of the effect on United States industry by chartering and preempting the use of 20 or 30 American ships.
Gilpatric reported that this would have little or no effect on the American economy.
McCone questioned these findings; however Gilpatric said that this had been thoroughly studied and McCone's concerns as expressed at the morning meeting were unfounded.
The Attorney General stated that it was within the law to use foreign bottoms, however decision was made to preempt United States bottoms and not worry about the consequences because they would not be serious.
The President urged that Norstad be retained at SHAPE during the period of crisis, perhaps until 1 February 63.
Bundy stated that this is complicated as the two posts are so co-mingled that they really must be held by one man.
Taylor raised question that if this was done it would hurt Lemnitzer's prestige.
The President said that he felt that Norstad was so experienced and so capable and his judgment so sound, as evidenced by today's cable,/1/ copy of which I have not seen, that he would take the risk of NATO country criticisms, he did not think that Lemnitzer would be hurt, and he wished Norstad to remain.
In the prolonged discussion of report on Civil Defense problems, the President seemed particularly concerned over the situation if we should launch attacks which might result in four or five missiles being delivered on the United States.
DOD spokesmen stated that the area covered by the 1100-mile missiles involved 92 million people.
They felt that fall-out space was available though not equipped for about 40 million.
Replied that many arrangements could be made without too much publicity, such as repositioning food, actually obtaining space, putting up shelter signs, etc.
I got the conclusion that not very much could or would be done; that whatever was done would involve a great deal of publicity and public alarm.
Prior to the departure of Secretary McNamara at approximately 7:00 o'clock, McCone (who had not been called upon for an intelligence appraisal) stated to the President that he felt certain intelligence should be reported to the meeting prior to the departure of Secretary McNamara as some items observed by the Intelligence Community might prove of great significance.
John A McCone/2/ Director /2/Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.
You should deliver following letter addressed by the President to Chairman Khrushchev immediately.
We firmly adhere to the principles of international law and observe strictly the norms which regulate navigation on the high seas, in international waters.
I think it would be possible to end the controversy quickly and normalize the situation, and then the people could breathe more easily, considering that statesmen charged with responsibility are of sober mind and have an awareness of their responsibility combined with the ability to solve complex questions and not bring things to a military catastrophe.
Of course, the permission of the Governments of Cuba and Turkey is necessary for the entry into those countries of these representatives and for the inspection of the fulfillment of the pledge made by each side.
The clip signifies the end of the crisis and gives and interesting view to its conclusion.
Hypotheses Supporting Evidence Contradicting Evidence Things to keep in mind when looking at the data sets.
Support Includes 5 or Includes 4 pieces Includes 3 pieces of Includes 2 or for more pieces of of evidence that evidence that support fewer pieces of Position evidence that support the the hypothesis. evidence that support the hypothesis. support the hypothesis. hypothesis.
Closing The conclusion is The conclusion is The writer's position is There is no paragraph strong and leaves recognizable.
The restated within the conclusion ‐ the the reader solidly writer's position closing paragraph, but paper just ends. understanding is restated within not near the beginning. the writer's the first two position. sentences of the Effective closing restatement of paragraph. the position statement begins the closing paragraph.
