It is also the first time that the setting up of United Nations inspection machinery has toen invoked in a crisis directly confronting the United States and the Soviet Union.
This is in itself a most significant development, -' Moreover, if as a result of the initiative of the Secretary-General the acute tension in the Caribbean is removed, there is hope that the United States and the Soviet Union, together with the other countries, will renew their efforts to achieve a disarmament agreement in a spirit of greater mutual comprehension, especially in. light of the messag . exchanged between Mr Khrushchev and Mr Kennedy.
In their urgent call for cessation cf tests, Khrushchev and Kennedy have been joined by Macmillan.
Sr The Prime Minister wrote to Mr Khrushchev on 28 October 1/ The situation after Mr"" Castro's speech of 1 November as it affects problems of inspection will be considered in a separate paper.
Reportedly, the Soviet Union is locking for a technical solution and may, in the near future, make new proposals on control which envisage the use of automatic sealed seismic stations.
The 28 October messages by Khrushchev and Kenned:/ did not raise explicitly the general question of military bases, 1 ,t in the wake of the Cuban events thi3 question is likely to come up time and again* 3.
Already before the recent Cuban events some observers felt that attempts on the part of the Soviet Union to increase and diversify her own deterrent capacity were to be expected.
Because, according to reputable estimates, although she possessed a huge capacity to threaten Europe with a large army and seme 7C0 medium-range balli stic missiles of ranges up to 2, COO miles , in the -3field of ICBM's she was believed to be outclassed.
Obviously, it is not easy for governments to rake military developments coincide with the long-term interests of political stability.
World security would, nevertheless, gain if the great Powers were to undertake not to establish any new bases outside their territories.
During the past few years, the stability of the military balance has had the effect of reducing the apprehension over bases.
As Mr Aiker fvxii last week in t e Security Council, ""for several years no new foreign military bases have been established throughout the world.
In the Security Council debate, it was logical for Mr Zorin to raise the question of United States overseas bases.
In his reply, Mr, Stevenson described the United States position thus; ""The fact is that there are missiles, comparable to those being placed in Cv a, v/ith the forces of only three of our Allies.
The United States has nearly 70 bases in West Europe and North Africa but only three, as already noted, are for intermediate range ballistic missiles.
The remainder are conventional depots for naval, army and air forces and for supplies.
It is reported that there are 8 nuclear submarines, each equipped with 16 Polaris missiles, deployed in "".lest European waters and that number will have grown to about 40 by the end / of 1963.
October, Mr Khrushchev suggested to Mr Kennedy that Soviet nuclear missiles could be removed from Cuba in return for similar action by t he United States in Turkey, the official reply from the White House was that ""concerning the security of natiens outside this hemisphere, the United States and its Allies have long taken the lead in seeking properly inspected ares limitation on both sides.
This has been interpreted to mean that the United States and its allies would be prepared to consider this question if it were brought up in a different context at a later date. *;o one can say whether in the future the Soviet Union will raise the question of nuclear missile bases in Turkey in connexion with the general question of the elimination cf overseas bases, as she has often dene in the past, or whether she will prefer tc present it in a more limited context.
Certainly, che case of Cuba tends to give force to a demand for the elimination cf nuclear missile bases overseas.
The Soviet military base in Cuba is defenceless and the base in Turkey is all but obsolete.
The removal of any bases from Russian perimeter ^rould immensely strengthen America's stand on behalf of peace and would bring •comparable Soviet response. n 7.
The Presiding Bishop of the Episcopal Church in the United States stated that the elimination of Soviet bases in C iba and the United States in Turkey would be a step towards reducing tensions and might help the course of general disarmament.
