To commemorate the 50th anniversary new books, articles and reminiscences will no doubt be forthcoming.
One contribution to the vast literature would be a full accounting of the numbers and types of United States and Soviet nuclear weapons that were operational during the period from mid-October through November 1962, a nuclear order of battle.
Most accounts of the crisis mention certain weapon types but leave others out and the tally is incomplete.
The crisis began in mid-October 1962 when the United States discovered that the Soviet Union was secretly deploying medium-range ballistic missiles into Cuba.
The United States had been aware that the Soviet Union was providing increased military assistance to Cuba since late July, but ballistic missiles crossed the line.
On October 14, a Strategic Air Command U-2 aircraft overflying western Cuba took photos that revealed that bases were being readied and missiles prepared.
These conclusive facts were provided to the president’s advisers and President Kennedy was shown the “hard photographic evidence” at 8:45 am on Tuesday October 16.
In the days that followed committees were formed, plans proposed, and United States military forces were put on higher stages of alert.
On Monday October 22, in an address to the nation, President Kennedy described his course of action.
This included a “strict quarantine on all offensive military equipment” under shipment to Cuba, to go into effect on October 24.
At the same time diplomatic communications and an exchange of letters between Premier Khrushchev and President Kennedy ensued eventually leading to a resolution of the crisis.
On Sunday October 28, Premier Khrushchev agreed to dismantle the offensive weapons in Cuba and return them to the Soviet Union subject to United Nations verification.
The United States agreed not to invade Cuba and in a secret agreement said it would remove its Jupiter missiles from Turkey.
The crisis did not end suddenly after the thirteen-day period from October 16th to 28th when Khrushchev agreed to withdraw the missiles.
A new phase of the crisis ensued, virtually out of sight, with a great deal unknown to the Americans.
Though less tense the month of November saw its share of concerns, (the issue of removing the IL-28 bombers being among the most serious), and U.S. forces were only gradually wound down.
For example, the Strategic Air Command remained at DEFCON II until November 21 and only returned to DEFCON IV, its normal readiness condition, on November 27.
On October 22 Pacific Command Quick Reaction Alert aircraft were loaded with nuclear weapons and readied for immediate launch.
On November 21 the USSR announced seven measures to reduce military readiness, effective immediately.
Impending mid-term elections were days away and were definitely on Kennedy’s mind.
How to respond to the presses’ voracious appetite and control the narrative was a constant problem.
Castro and the tactical nuclear weapons The role of the tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba was a key topic in a tense four hour exchange on November 22d among Fidel Castro, his associates and Soviet Deputy Prime Minister Anastas Mikoyan.
The original plan was to leave the tactical nuclear weapon in Cuba as part of a Soviet presence.
There was a second part of the plan that the Soviets would transfer the FKRs and Lunas to Cuba, thus making it the first nuclear power in Latin America.
But it became clear to Khrushchev that Castro might not be as responsible a custodian of Soviet nuclear weapons as one would have liked and that the original plan would have to be reversed.
At the same time the issue of removal of the 42 Il-28s had to be faced.
To deal with the delicate diplomatic matters of informing Castro about, why the ballistic missiles were being removed, why the Il-28s had to be withdrawn and, as negotiations revealed, why the tactical nuclear weapons had to be removed, as well, Khrushchev sent Anastas Mikoyan who arrived in Havana on November 2.
The Soviet Deputy Prime Minister accomplished his difficult tasks while maintaining friendship with its socialist ally in the Western Hemisphere.
For this, as Svetlana Savranskaya argues, Mikoyan should be given credit for helping to end the Cuban crisis.
Castro, Mikoyan, Kennedy, Khrushchev and the Missile of November by Sergo Mikoyan and Svetlana Sarranskaya.
This is clearly the most important new information to come out about the Cuban crisis and demonstrates that there is still much to be known about it.
On November 30 the tactical nuclear weapons were loaded aboard the Arkangel’sk and the ship sailed for home on December 1st, 7 arriving in the USSR on December 20th.
Earlier on November 5, the Aleksandrovsk departed Cuba with the 24 warheads for the SS-5 IRBMs , and the 36 SS-4 warheads.
There was continuing concern by the Defense Intelligence Agency about the quantitative and qualitative increase of Soviet conventional weapons to Cuba that left Castro with a formidable military capability.
The nuclear order of battle includes available/operational weapons, some on high levels of alert, which were ready to be used if authoritative orders had been given.
The nuclear weapons were of many different types depending on their range, yield, location and delivery mode.
While it is evident that Kennedy and Khrushchev had no intention of starting a nuclear war, and did everything they could to prevent one, events occurred that they and their advisers did not know about or control.
As the crisis unfolded there was the possibility of weapons being launched by mistake, miscalculation or misjudgment.
Once one nuclear weapon had been used it is difficult to say where it might have ended.
On both sides there was incomplete intelligence leading to mistaken analysis and/or false conclusions.
There have been a series of conferences attended by US, Russian, and Cuban participants.
These exchanges, coupled with additional disclosures of authoritative documents, revealed unsettling dimensions of the crisis.
For example, American officials, including Secretary of Defense, Robert McNamara, did not believe that the nuclear warheads for the Soviet weapons had arrived.
In fact, by the time of the quarantine most had arrived and were already in Cuba.
After a 19-day trip from Severomorsk the cargo ship, Indigirka arrived on October 4th at Mariel and unloaded 90 warheads for four weapon systems.
Thirty-six of the warheads were for the SS-4 MRBMs and were kept in vans parked near the missile sites.
Had there been verification of the presence of dozens of warheads for the tactical systems it may have complicated the outcome of the crisis.
One of the more likely scenarios involves Soviet use of one or several nuclear weapons to attack American armed forces invading Cuba.
In a 1992 conference, and later in a 1994 book, it was revealed that there were tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba.
While there is a difference of opinion about whether Khrushchev delegated authority to the local General to use them or not, 11 the fact is that they were there, the Americans did not know about them and if pressured desperate Soviet soldiers might have fired them had an invasion ensued.
The Soviets divulged that the Soviet general in Cuba had been delegated authority by Moscow to use tactical nuclear weapons if the United States were to conduct an amphibious invasion of the island and contact was lost with Moscow.
American officials up until then knew nothing about the presence of tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba, much less about any pre-delegation orders to use them.
Premier Khrushchev rescinded the pre-delegation order after President Kennedy went on TV on the evening of October 22 to announce the presence of offensive missiles in Cuba.
On the U.S side prior to public disclosure of the missiles in Cuba there were invasion plans being prepared and promoted by various generals.
Later more concrete invasion plans were prepared to be undertaken on October 28 if Khrushchev did not reply positively by then.
If those plans had gone forward there would have likely been a very different outcome to the crisis, possibly the use of nuclear weapons in and around Cuba, which could have rapidly escalated to further exchanges, perhaps even to global nuclear war using strategic weapons.
The crisis occurred at an early stage of the arms race when each side’s forces were still relatively immature.
The forces on the American side were configured for deterrence or war fighting with safety a secondary objective.
There was not yet the inherent coupling that would occur when United States and Soviet forces attained rough levels of parity.
At this later, more dangerous stage, when forces were tightly coupled, something may have triggered higher stages of alert and a cascading effect may have overwhelmed the system.
Logical, prudent and conservative measures taken by officials in response to the actions of each other may have resulted in the outbreak of war.
On the same day Marshall Grechko ordered representatives of the Warsaw Pact to “carry out several measures in increasing the military preparedness” of Pact forces.
On October 25, Red Star carried portions of a speech by Marshall Rodion Malinovsky emphasizing the power of Soviet missiles.
Those United States weapons in Europe that could hit targets in the Soviet Union and Soviet weapons in the western USSR aimed at European targets that would have been involved a regional nuclear war.
Those Soviet and United States nuclear weapons in and around Cuba that would have been involved a local nuclear war.
What follows is an Order of Battle of nuclear forces that were available to military and civilian officials on both sides from mid-October through November 1962 and some scenarios of how they might have been used and with what consequences.
United States and Soviet Strategic Forces and Global Nuclear War If nuclear weapons had been used in or around Cuba or launched from Cuba the possibility of escalation was high with regional use likely and the use of strategic weapons a serious possibility.
President Kennedy said as much in his October 22 address to the nation.
At one point former Secretary of State Dean Acheson advised that we should knock out the Soviet missiles in Cuba.
I know what they are required to do in the light of their history and their posture around the world.
Khrushchev’s letter to President Kennedy of October 26 revealed his fears about the “calamitous nature of modern warfare.
He warned the American president that ‘should war indeed break out, it would not be in our power to contain or stop it, for such is the logic of war.
As detailed below, a large scale attack by the United States against the Soviet Union in October 1962 would have been with over 3500 nuclear weapons, with a combined yield of approximately 6300 megatons.
This was about half of the number of warheads with United States strategic forces, most of which were bomber weapons for long-range bombers.
The total number of nuclear weapons in the United States Stockpile in October 1962 was approximately 26,400 and the Soviet Union approximately 3300.
If we extrapolate, to estimate what the forces might be in SIOP-63, it is reasonable to conclude that 3500 fully generated weapons have a combined yield of some 6300 megatons.
A Regional Nuclear War in the European Theater Nuclear weapon systems on both sides were available in and around Europe and could have been employed if escalation had occurred.
Nevertheless, it is instructive to estimate Europe’s possible role in the crisis and the destruction that might have ensued.
Medium-range and intermediate-range missiles and fighter bombers made up US/NATO and Soviet regional forces in the European theater.
In 1962 the United States had approximately 4375 nuclear weapons deployed in Europe.
The United States and NATO fighter bombers had a supply of nuclear bombs deployed at bases in Germany, Italy, Greece, Turkey, the United Kingdom and the Netherlands and aboard for United States Sixth Fleet aircraft carriers.
The Air Force and Navy planes would have had to contend with a formidable Soviet air defense system on their way to targets in the Soviet Union.
Many were likely aimed at European targets with a portion targeted on United States bases and United States allies in the Pacific region.
Soviet fighter bombers based near the western border of the Soviet Union may have had missions to hit targets in Western Europe.
A Local Nuclear War in and around Cuba Initial use of a nuclear weapon might have begun in and around Cuba.
The most likely scenario would have been use of Soviet tactical nuclear weapons to attack and repel American forces during an invasion of Cuba.
If American soldiers were killed, as they surely would have been, the United States would have had to retaliate and more than likely the Soviets would have responded.
A most dire situation for the United States would have been the launching of SS-4 MRBMs to American cities within its range of 1300 statute miles.
According to Major General Igor Stastenko, commander of the Soviet missile troops on Cuba, there were only six to eight missiles operational on October 28, when the dismantlement order from Moscow arrived.
We do not know precisely how ready they were or whether they were specifically targeted at American cities.
Cities along the eastern seaboard as far north as Washington, DC were within range as were New Orleans, Houston, and Dallas to the west and Cincinnati to the northwest.
Even with its poor accuracy a one megaton detonation in or around those American cities would have caused hundreds of thousands of deaths.
We do not know what role nuclear weapons played in various OPLANS that were outlines to be used to invade Cuba.
The majority view within the American military was that conventional forces were probably adequate to attack and destroy Soviet forces on Cuba without the use of nuclear weapons.
Included are the nine ICBMs at Vandenberg AFB, deployed in test/training facilities, which attained an emergency launch capability and were added to the SIOP force, targeted at the “Sino-Soviet Bloc.” a.
Six Atlas Fs at Walker AFB, NM and ten at Plattsburgh AFB, NY were at the time under Air Force Systems Command control but were designated under the AFSC/SAC Agreement to be transferred to SAC and readied for EWO firing.
The number of ICBMs being placed on alert increased daily and by 20 December 1962 SAC declared the 556th SMS at Plattsburgh operational competing deployment of the Atlas ICBM force.
On October 24, SAC invoked the Air Force Systems Command AFSC/SAC Agreement for Emergency Combat Capability of Ballistic Missile Launch Complexes.
This meant placing the test missiles at Vandenberg in a war ready posture and turning them over to SAC control.
Of the twenty ICBM launchers at Vandenberg, AFB eleven were for Atlas missiles, three were for Titan missiles and six were for Minuteman missiles.
Titan 1 ICBM 31 Between 18 April and 28 September 1962, 54 Titan 1 ICBMs were placed on alert, in six squadrons at five Air Force Bases.
Range: 7,250 miles Warhead: W59Y1 Launcher: hardened silo At the peak of the crisis on October 27, 1962 the first two Minuteman 1A ICBMs were placed on alert at Malmstrom AFB, Montana.
By the next day four were on alert at Malmstrom and two days later there were nine.
They continued to be fielded over the next days and weeks and by December 11 twenty were on alert at Malmstrom.
On October 23 SAC combat crews replaced AFSC and civilian contractor personnel, targets were programmed into the systems and nuclear warheads replaced test reentry vehicles.
Because of maintenance required on the guidance and control section the Minuteman in LF-2 was taken off strategic alert on November 1 and the Minuteman in LF-3 on November 2.
On October 24 the AFSC/SAC Agreement for Emergency Combat Capability of Ballistic Missile Launch Complexes was executed for the first time.
Over the next month Thirty-six AFSC missiles were turned over to SAC and placed on alert. ii.
United States Ballistic Missile Submarines Less is known about the availability of United States SSBNs during the months of October and November 1962.
The eighth, the USS Thomas A Edison , departed Charleston, SC on November 7, 1962 to go on operational patrol with 16 Polaris A2 missiles.
Holy Loch In order to be within range of the Soviet Union the United States established a submarine base in Holy Loch, Scotland for a squadron of ballistic missile submarines.
The likely patrol areas were the Norwegian Sea and the eastern Mediterranean.
The first five George Washington class submarines arrived at Holy Loch between March and October 1961 and began their patrols of approximately 65 days.
Both were undergoing repairs to pumps, motors, electronics and weapons, as well as loading of supplies.
In the case of USS Abraham Lincoln a load out of several torpedoes was involved.
Of the seven SSBNs five carried Polaris A-1 SLBMs and two carried Polaris A-2 SLBMs.
Clearly the Soviets took notice of this event and the flurry of tests conducted by the United States from April to June in the Pacific.
The Ethan Allen returned to Charleston via the Panama Canal, and departed on patrol on June 26, 1962 with 16 Polaris A-2 missiles arriving at Holy Loch at the end of August 1962.
Once again Commander Griffiths, “The Soviets kept a trawler , equipped for electronics and communications surveillance, stationed close enough to the Holy Loch to keep track of traffic in and out of the port.
Most certainly the Soviet High Command knew there were five SSBNs within range of targets in the Soviet Union with 80 nuclear weapons on board.
The submarines needed to surface to launch their missiles and thus were far more vulnerable than the ballistic missile submarines that soon replaced them.
Normally one or two submarines were continuously on patrol in the North Pacific within range of targets in the Soviet Far East.
Installations on the Kamchatka Peninsula, notably the Soviet Pacific Fleet were priority targets.
Depending upon which submarines were on station between two and nine missiles were available to be fired at any given time.
The order to “Surface” to launch her missiles never came and she returned from patrol on 29 October 1962.
The three submarines on station had a total of eight Regulus missiles within striking distance of the Soviet Union.
When ordered to DEFCON 2 they prepared the nuclear warheads for arming and, if necessary, for launching the missiles.
It was briefed to the President on September 14, 1962 one month before the start of the Cuban missile crisis.
SIOP-62 had come into effect April 15, 1961 and had been briefed to the President on September 13, 1961.
SIOP-62 was the first nuclear war plan under the new arrangement of coordinating all commands through the Joint Strategic Target Planning Staff to have a Single Integrated Operational Plan and coordinate the nuclear targeting plans of all commands so as to avoid duplicative attacks.
Much about the SIOP remains classified, but significant information about SIOP-62 is available.
SIOP-62 has been declassified and provides details of what forces would have been employed at the time, the kinds of targets they would have destroyed, and presumably what knowledge President Kennedy had of the war plan as a result of the briefing.
Because of complaints about the rigidity and overkill of SIOP-62, the successor plan included five instead of just one basic option, and there were attempts to distinguish between civilian and military targets.
Nevertheless, if the President faced “the moment of thermonuclear truth,” to use McGeorge Bundy’s phase, his only options were, in effect, massive nuclear strikes.
SIOP-63 allowed for several “withhold” options and made some attempt to distinguish between civilian and military targets.
But in general SIOP-63 was quite similar to SIOP-62 in unleashing massive strikes with even more weapons available.
According to the JCS United States strategic nuclear forces on July 15, 1961, fully generated, numbered 3,267 weapons, 54 vastly more that the fledgling Soviet strategic forces.
A memo drafted for General Maxwell Taylor some seven weeks later describes SIOP-62.
The plan had 14 to 16 attack options, all based on the amount of alert time available.
The combined yield was 12,825 megatons down from the 1960 peak of over 20,000 megatons. iii.
United States Bombers On October 22, United States military forces worldwide went on DEFCON 3 at 7:00 pm the precise time that President Kennedy went on television and delivered a 17-minute speech announcing “unmistakable evidence” of the presence of missiles and bombers in Cuba and that a “strict quarantine on all offensive military equipment“ is being put into effect.
CINCSAC General Thomas Power ordered his forces to DEFCON 2 at 10:00 am Washington time on 24 October 1962 as the Naval quarantine was coming into effect.
An hour later General Power used the Primary Alerting System to address his forces on the seriousness of the situation.
He felt it was important for the Soviets to know of SAC’s readiness and they surely heard the message.
Airborne alert 57 In the late 1950s Strategic Air Command implemented airborne alert missions with the codename, Chrome Dome.
The Thule Ballistic Missile Early Warning System, located in Greenland, began operations in 1960 to warn of Soviet missile launches.
If the Thule radar went dead the B-52 could communicate with SAC that the BMEWS had been struck and a Soviet attack had begun.
On October 22 at 1700 EDT (two hours prior to President Kennedy’s address to the nation) SAC went to a one-eighth airborne alert force.
The airborne alert operation increased to sixty-six daily launches (28 southern, 36 northern and 2 Thule monitor) and by November 5th, with more B-52Hs available, to seventyfive.
Thus each airborne alert bomber carried bombs with a combined yield of between 4.
At the direction of the JCS General Power terminated the 1/8 airborne alert posture effective 0600Z November 21 and returned to its normal level.
During the one-month operation 2,088 B-52 aircraft were launched; airborne alert flying hours totaled 47,168.
While SAC was at DEFCON 2, 92. percent of its weapon systems were ready to launch within one hour.
Between 23 October and 26 November, SAC bombers made 2,511 flights (with a total of 8,101 weapons aboard without an accident.
The targets ranged from missile complexes and military bases to ‘command and control centers’ like the Kremlin, in the heart of Moscow, and ‘urban industrial targets,’ such as steel mills, electrical grids, and petroleum facilities.
They were deployed to Germany with the 1st Pilotless Bomber Squadron at the end of 1955 and were withdrawn in June 1969.
Appendix B Soviet Strategic Forces 71 Over the course of the crisis there were various estimates by U.S. intelligence about the number and types of Soviet forces in Cuba, facing Europe and in the Soviet Union.
Soviet ICBMs74 The most authoritative figures on ICBM availability come from Strategic Rocket Forces historian Lt.
Four of the SS-6s were on open launch pads at Plesetsk and two were reserve missiles at Baikonur that were not on permanent duty as they were intended for space exploration.
During the crisis the two Baikonur SS-6s were made ready by being fueled and attaching a warhead.
A topic for further research is to understand the alert procedures of the Strategic Rocket Forces in particular the Soviet military in general.
They were too large to fit in silos and were fired from reinforced concrete launch pads.
It took twenty hours to prepare for launch and could not be kept on alert for more than a day.
The liquid fuel for the missiles was corrosive and toxic, could leak, and was potentially dangerous.
The majority of the Soviet ICBM force during the crisis was the 36 SS-7s (R16), 26 in silos and 10 on open launch pads.
The SS-7 Saddler was a two-stage storable, liquid-propellant ICBM capable of delivering 3500 lb reentry vehicle to a range of 12,000 kilometers with a CEP of 1.0-1.25 nm.
Reaction time under normal conditions was three hours for soft sites and five to fifteen minutes for hard sites.
Later assessments reduced the number to 44 operational with six training launchers with some operational capability, close to Karlov’s figure. ii.
Soviet Ballistic Missile Submarines The original Soviet plan was to deploy seven Golf I diesel submarines to Cuba, each carrying three SS-N-4 Sark ballistic missiles with a single 1.45 Mt warhead and nuclear torpedoes.
There were no missile facilities in Cuba able to service the liquid fueled missiles.
The fuel could only be left in the missiles for thirty days after which it became a safety concern.
A diesel submarine on patrol had to change its batteries every one or two days and had to surface making it vulnerable to anti-submarine warfare systems.
The cruise missile submarines probably had an anti-carrier mission rather than a land-attack mission and after 1962 were dropped from United States intelligence estimates.
Although the Soviets had many ballistic missile submarines none played a role in the Cuban crisis. iii.
If war had broken out and Soviet Bear and Bison bombers attempted to fly over the North Pole to attack North American targets they would have been met by formidable United States and Canadian air defenses.
Air defense interceptor aircraft, many armed with nuclear Genie or Falcon air-to-air missiles would likely have prevented any Soviet bomber from reaching its target.
As noted above the United States had over 3,500 fully generated weapons at the ready to use against the Soviet Union.
While that is a ratio of about dozen-to-one, given the difficulty of Soviet bombers to carry out their missions, the actual ratio is probably higher.
The question of whether nuclear superiority played a role in resolving the crisis has been studied at length and is not part of the purpose of this paper but it is worth reviewing the issues.
Thors in the United Kingdom The formal agreement to deploy Thors in Great Britain was signed on February 22, 1958.
The Thor had a range of 1,740 miles and carried one W49Y2 warhead with a yield of 1.
On June 22, 1959 SAC transferred the first Thor squadron to the 77th RAF Strategic Missile Squadron.
From June 1960 until late November 1962 there were 60 Thors deployed in Great Britain.
On November 29, 1962 the first Thor IRBM was removed from alert under the phase out program and on August 15, 1963 the last missile came off alert. ii.
Jupiters in Italy and Turkey While President Kennedy inherited the Jupiter agreements from the previous administration, he, and not Eisenhower, would deploy the missiles to Turkey and later secretly agree to remove them as part of the settlement of the crisis.
The first Jupiter agreement was signed between the United States and Italy on March 26, 1959 to deploy two squadrons of Jupiter IRBMs on Italian soil.
The Jupiter was a single-stage, liquid fueled rocket with all inertial guidance.
It had a range of 1,750 miles and carried a W49Y2 warhead with a yield of 1.
The Italian base was located at Gioia del Colle in the Puglia , where each squadron was organized into five flights of three missiles each.
The missiles were highly vulnerable, standing vertically in the open countryside on launch pads; a sniper’s bullet could piece their thin skin of the missile rendering them inoperable.
The two squadrons of Jupiter missiles in Italy became operational between February and July 1961.
By April 23, all of the missiles and equipment from Italy were disassembled.
By the time Kennedy became president, and for six months afterwards, the missiles had not yet been delivered.
An Air Force historian says, “The first launch positions became operational as scheduled on November 6, 1961.
The squadron’s warheads, however, remained in SAC’s custody and possession until such time they might be released for launch by an American warhead release order.
Zaloga adds that, the Soviet Army had responded to the American deployments in Turkey by deploying their own MRBM sites at Krasnovodsk and Kirovabad.
President Kennedy had asked the Pentagon to look into having the obsolete missiles removed, most recently in August, only to have the bureaucracy fail to implement his decision.
One scholar concludes, “He certainly would have liked to remove them, for he believed that keeping them deployed entailed serious risks – but risks less serious than those he associated with removal.
On 17 January 1963, the United States announced the phase out of the one Jupiter squadron in Turkey and six days later, on 23 January, the Turkish government announced the phase out as well.
The missiles were removed from alert in April 1963 and the last IRBM was shipped in July.
Quick Reaction Alert was a higher state of readiness whereby planes were on the runway, fueled and armed with weapons, with their pilot or pilots nearby able to be airborne in 15 minutes or less.
They were responsible for attacking thirtyseven “high priority” targets, mainly airfields in East Germany.
Earlier that year, in April, President Kennedy had ordered that loading bombs onto the F-100s be prohibited because the weapons did not have electronic locking systems.
On October 27 the Generals were successful getting Kennedy to reverse his decision.
The issue of custody and control had been raised during a December 1960 visit to NATO bases by members of the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy accompanied by Harold Agnew, Director of Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory.5 They witnessed on their visits to several NATO air bases four QRA aircraft which sat at the end of the runway, loaded with a nuclear bomb.
The pilots were nearby ready to take off, day or night, in fifteen minutes.
At a base in Germany the delegation noticed the plane was lightly guarded and there was little to stop a pilot from taking off on a bombing mission of his own.
In addition safety concerns were raised about certain bombs, specifically the Mk 7 and Mk 12.
This led to recommendations to use coded arming control devices that could be incorporated as part of the weapon.
Upon proper authorization from the President the United States custodian would enter a code to arm the weapon.
These included F-84, F-100 F101, F-105 and B-57 aircraft.8 Mace cruise missiles Mace missiles served alongside the Matador before the latter was phased out in 1962.
They were first deployed to Hahn AB, Germany with the 1st Pilotless Bomber Squadron in 1954; in 1956 the newly activated 701st Tactical Missile Wing.st Tactical Missile Squadron.
The MGM-13A variant used a mobile launcher and was phased out of USAFE by 1 September 1966.
One squadron of the CGM-13B variant used a zerolength launcher at a hardened site until it was inactivated in April 1969.
The SS-4 constituted the bulk of the Soviet offensive missile threat to Europe.
Initial operational capability of the SS-5 at soft sites occurred in late 1961.
As of June 30, 1962 there were 28 deployed.0 There is no public information about whether the Soviets may have had Tu16 Badger or Tu-22 Blinder bombers, or strike fighters such as the MiG-21 Fishbed, on alert, at bases in the western USSR ready to attack European targets.
These would be at the center of the crisis as the rest of the missiles, six (6 SS-4s and 32 SS-5s) and launchers never arrived.
These included 36 SS-4 warheads, 36 FKR-1 warheads, 12 FROG warheads, and 6 bombs for the Il-28 bombers.
The SS-4 warheads were stored at Bejucal and the FROG warheads went to Managua.
On October 23 sixty-eight warheads arrived at La Isabela aboard the Alexandrovsk.
As there were no SS-5 missiles in Cuba the SS-5 warheads were never unloaded.
The original plan called for four nuclear naval mines to arrive with Soviet naval forces in October , but these never arrived.
Soviet troop strength on Cuba on October 24 was 41,902 (of a planned 45,000), four times what the United States intelligence had estimated.
SS-4 Sandal Thirty-six SS-4 Sandal MRBMs plus six training missies (a total of 42 missiles), with 24 launchers and supporting equipment arrived in Cuba aboard the Omsk on September 7th or 8th and aboard the Poltava on September 15th.
The original table of organization/order of battle called for 48 MRBMs, two missiles for each launcher.
There is some uncertainty about whether the original number was reduced or whether six additional SS-4 missiles and twelve additional SS-4 warheads were ever shipped but never arrived due to the quarantine which began on Wednesday, October 24.
We now know that Dean Rusk’s often quoted remark that, “We’re eyeball to eyeball, and the other fellow just blinked”, that supposedly occurred on October 24, is a myth.
This dramatic moment has been included in many books about the missile crisis but careful research by Michael Dobbs proves that this showdown never happened.
On October 22, the date of President Kennedy’s speech to the nation, no missile had yet been fueled, targeted or mated with a warhead.
SS-5 Skean The original plan was to deploy two regiments with 32 R-14 IRBM missiles with 16 launchers.
The two missile regiments on two ships with 16 SS-5 launchers and 32 SS-5 missiles were ordered to turn back.
The Alexandrovsk carried 24 SS-5 one-megaton warheads and dropped anchor at La Isabela on October 23 hours before the quarantine went into effect in the early hours of the 24th.
There is some uncertainty about whether the original number was reduced or whether eight addition warheads for the SS-5s were ever shipped and never arrived due to the quarantine which began on Wednesday, October 24.
There is no record of a third ship carrying nuclear warheads to Cuba besides the Indigirka and the Alexandrovsk.
Each regiment had eight launchers and five rockets per launcher for a total of 80 missiles equipped with 80 fourteen-kiloton warheads.
Thirty-six warheads arrived in Cuba on October 4th and forty-four on October 23. iv.
The Luna battalion had three batteries attached to three regiments deployed near Artemisa, Havana and Santa Clara.
Overall there were 36 FROG missiles in Cuba, 12 nuclear and 24 conventional.
The Il-28s became an issue and their removal was essential to a final resolution of the crisis.
Some were stationed at San Julian under control of the Soviet Navy and equipped with torpedoes and mines and were intended for attacks on United States naval invasion forces.
The nuclear capable Il-28s were at an airfield outside the city of Holguin but remained in their crates.
There were no known plans to disclose the presence of these units, and their existence was not revealed until the early 1990s, after the collapse of the Soviet Union.
Shipping by air was ruled out and an armada of naval vessels would have drawn too much attention; thus merchant ships were chosen.
The first ship to arrive in Cuba, the Maria Ulyanova, was on July 26, 1962.
The last ship to remove the strategic missile warheads left on November 7.
The last tactical nuclear weapons were not shipped from Cuba until December 1st.
Guantanamo Little is known about the United States nuclear weapons deployed on Cuba during the missile crisis.
From December 1961 until July-September 1963 there were a number of “non-nuclear depth bombs” deployed at Guantanamo Naval Base in Cuba.
The fission cores for the Guantanamo weapons were stored elsewhere, either aboard ships or at naval bases, most likely in Florida.
In either event the cores could have been rushed to Cuba, inserted into the bomb casings and put aboard antisubmarine aircraft.
The weapon type was probably the Betty nuclear depth bomb using a B7/Mk7 warhead, deployed from 1955-1963, later replaced by the B57 depth bomb.
Both depth bombs could be carried by all contemporary Navy ASW aircraft.
These included the P2V-3C Neptune , the S2F/S-2 Tracker aircraft, and the SH-34G/J Seabat carrier-based helicopter.
None of the accounts of the crisis have mentioned these weapons and whether there were any contingency plans to use them.
Over 2800 dependents of Navy and Marine Corps families were evacuated from Guantanamo on October 22d.
It is unclear how many Navy and Marine Corps personnel may have remained and what their role was in the crisis.
While dependents were leaving the garrison was reinforced with three Marine Battalion Landing teams numbering 5000 Marines and two naval construction battalions.
We now know that the FKR cruise missiles were targeted at the United States base at Guantanamo Bay.
One regiment, near Mariel was intended to defeat an amphibious landing.
A second regiment, located in the Sierra de Micaro hills, overlooked Guantanamo Bay.
Its purpose was to defeat any amphibious landing and destroy any United States forces operating from Guantanamo Bay.
According to Michael Dobbs, around October 24 the Russians moved a convoy of FKR cruise missiles to a pre-launch position at the village of Vilorio and two days later moved to the village of Filipinas, 15 miles from Guantanamo.
Air Defense Soon after the Soviet missile sites were discovered United States air defense forces were mobilized.
All dispersed ADC aircraft were armed with nuclear weapons for the first time.
Four USAF interceptors operated from Homestead AFB, FL, two from Tyndall AFB, FL and eight Navy planes from Key West Naval Air Station.
On October 19 Air Defense Command increased the number of interceptors standing alert and by October 22 the Air Force had 12 RC-121s and some 82 interceptors, for which nuclear weapons were available, on guard in Florida.
On November 18 CONAD returned its dispersed aircraft to their home bases and re-established the normal one-third alert.
During the period October 22 to November 26, ADC flew a total of 13,047 sorties, 2,800 of them from Florida bases.
The planes were F-102A Delta Daggers armed with the nuclear AIM-26A Falcon air-to-air missile and F-106A/B Delta Darts armed with one nuclear AIR-2A Genie air-to-air missile.
If war had broken out and Soviet Beagle bombers had attempted to fly to attack the United States they would have been met by formidable United States air defenses.
Tactical Air Forces On October 19 Tactical Air Command began a major deployment into the Florida area.
Many of these planes were equipped with nuclear bombs and they were in invasion plans until the JCS rescinded the decision to use tactical nuclear weapons on October 31. iv.
United States Naval Forces One hundred and eighty-three ships took an active part in Cuban operations during the quarantine.
Each carrier had some forty nuclear bombs available for its aircraft.5 v.
On the 26th TAC began low-level reconnaissance over Cuba which disclosed additional targets and resulted in air offensive planning for three massive airstrikes a day until Cuban air capability was destroyed.
On October 28 all alert crews were on standby status in the operations ready rooms, and external power plants were connected to the aircraft.
From October 29 through the end of November, Air Force contingency actions were devoted primarily to maintaining the alert force, and preserving simultaneously the overall capability of USAF’s combat commands.
Continual reevaluation of the Oplans, in anticipation of a possible invasion of Cuba, led to a JCS decision on October 31 against the earlier planned use of tactical nuclear weapons in invasion operations.6 After the discovery of Ilyushin bombers and FROG missiles United States invasion plans were revised to include use of tactical nuclear weapons such as Honest John missiles.
Wild Cards and Business as Usual A Atmospheric Testing While the crisis unfolded according to its own timetable the U.S. atmospheric test program continued unabated, with business as usual.
Three tests were conducted near Johnston Island in the Pacific during the days of the crisis.
The Vandenberg Missile Launch “When DEFCON 3 was declared at the beginning of the crisis, one Atlas ICBM was ready for a test launch that had been previously scheduled for later that week.
Although nuclear warheads were being placed on the ICBMs in surrounding launch facilities, the test reentry vehicle was maintained on this single missile.
Despite the severity of the crisis and the emergency alert operations taking place, this Atlas ICBM was actually launched, without further orders from Washington political authorities, at 4:00 A.M. on October 26th.
The four submarines had left their base on the Kola Peninsula on October 1.
Their diesel engines were easy to detect and their daily communication with Moscow was intercepted.
It was the first time Soviet submarines had sailed so close to the East Coast of the United States and it alarmed CINCLANT Admiral Robert L Dennison.
The squadron would be comprised of seven Golf 1 dieselelectric submarines , each carrying three R-13 ballistic missiles, and four Foxtrot submarines with a compliment of torpedoes.
Plans to send the cruisers, destroyers and Golf 1s were cancelled but the B-4, B-36, B-59 and B-130 Foxtrot submarines left their Northern Fleet base on October 1st.
The United States Navy tracked the submarines but were ordered not to attack them.
Rather the Navy was instructed to signal the submarines to surface first by dropping grenades and then practice depth charges.
The communication, “Submarine Surfacing and Identification Procedures” was sent by the Pentagon to Moscow so that they could inform the submarines that they were not under attack.
The messages to the submarines never got through and the captains and crew, under great stress and physical discomfort from weeks under sea, believed that perhaps war had broken out.
On October 27, probably the most dangerous day of the crisis, the firing of a nuclear torpedo almost occurred.
The incident is one more example of a nuclear weapon almost being used that would likely have led to a far different outcome.
A United States U-2 and Soviet Air Space On October 27, a U-2 on an air sampling mission to the North Pole inadvertently crossed the Soviet border as the pilot lost track of his location.
At least six Soviet interceptors took off with orders to shoot down the intruder.
After finally overcoming his disorientation the pilot turned the U-2 to the east.
SAC asked Alaskan Air Command to scramble a pair of F-102 interceptors to provide protection for the U-2.
Fortunately they never encountered the MiGs and escorted the U-2 back to an Alaskan airstrip.
Had the F-102s come within range and fired their Falcons to protect the U-2 the nuclear threshold was crossed and a different scenario would have unfolded.
Endnotes * I would like to thank Timothy McDonnell, William Burr and Michael Dobbs for reading earlier drafts of this report.
The report should be considered a work in progress and I welcome corrections.
July November 1962 (Washington DC: National Indications Center, June 18, 1963), 113.
The Soviets believed they could secretly introduce their missiles and when their presence was disclosed the United States would not respond.
Some advisers who urged JFK to destroy the missiles by an air attack and follow up with an invasion thought the Soviets would not respond with military action.
At the time the United States thought there were 10,000 Soviet troops in Cuba.
Proceedings from the first two conferences were published in Blight and Welch, On the Brink.
January 3-7, 1991 – on Antigua, attended by American, Soviet, and Cuban officials.
Eisenhower, Kennedy, and Nuclear Weapons (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc., 1997), 303.
The Nuclear War Plan Briefing to President Kennedy,” International Security , 25.
The Rise and Fall of Russia’s Strategic Nuclear Forces, 1945-2000 , 243.
Assessment of increased Conventional Military Capabilities of Cuban and Soviet Units in Cuba, 14 November 1962, 1.
See also Bernard C Nalty, USAF Ballistic Missile Programs, 1962-1964 , 2.
The status of the 12 Atlas Fs at Walker AFB, NM during the October period is unclear.
On 20 December SAC declared the 556th SMS at Plattsburgh operational competing deployment of the Atlas ICBM force.
SIOP war plan targets were assigned and programmed into the systems, and munitions maintenance personnel replaced the test reentry vehicles with nuclear warheads.
The first missile, an Atlas F ICBM, was placed on full alert on October 23 and the AFSC and civilian contractor personnel working in the launch control facility were replaced by a SAC combat crew.
The three squadrons achieved operational status between June and December 1963 in six squadrons at three Air Force bases.
The USS Sam Houston , first Polaris submarine assigned to Mediterranean patrol, visited Izmir, Turkey on 14 April 1963.
This was the first foreign port, other than Holy Loch, visited by an SSBN and was surely sent to fill the void of the withdrawn Jupiters.
Over the next seven weeks they continued to be emplaced and made operational.
On December 11, 1962 SAC headquarters declared two flights to be operational.
A Discussion of Readiness Measures (Washington, DC: National Indications Center, July 15, 1963), 21.
The first test of the R-13 missile with a nuclear warhead was conducted on 20 October 1961 at the Novaya Zemlya test range with an estimated yield of 1.45 Mt.
The Nuclear War Plan Briefing to President Kennedy,” International Security , fn 16, 27.
Jacob Neufeld, The Development of Ballistic Missiles in the United States Air Force, 1945-1960 , 223.
Charles DeGaulle assumed power in June 1958 he refused to accept the Jupiters.
The Eisenhower administration and the Air Force considered sites in Greece, Spain, West Germany, Okinawa and Alaska with the number of squadrons fluctuating.
See also Jacob Neufeld, The Development of Ballistic Missiles in the United States Air Force, 1945-1960 , 186.
United States Air Forces in Europe, 1945-1973 (Office of History, USAFE, 10 May 1974), 55.
Soviet Ballistic Missile Forces During the Cuban Crisis,” Journal of Soviet Military Studies, June 1990, 321, citing Penkovskiy.
Starbird, January 5, 1961, with Attachment I, The NATO Custody Control Problem.
On October 28 orders were given to increase the number from nine to twenty-one.
Soviet Ballistic Missile Forces During the Cuban Crisis,” Journal of Soviet Military Studies, June 1990, 317.
Also aboard were thirty-six warheads for re FKR-1 cruise missiles, twelve warheads for the FROG tactical ballistic missiles and six gravity bombs for the Il-28 Beagle bombers.
William Kaufmann calculated that thirty-four out of seventy-six SAC bomber bases were within range of the SS-4s and most of the other bases were within range of the SS-5s.
After the discovery of Ilyushin bombers and FROG missiles on October 25 United States invasion plans were revised to include use of tactical nuclear weapons such as Honest John missiles.
