But half a century ago it was the epicenter of the 1962 Missile Crisis.
During that time it served as a Soviet base for middlerange nuclear missiles, and the United States air reconnaissance photos of it were spread through media all around the world.
The crisis was solved through negotiations without Cuban involvement, and as a result of this neglect the Missile Crisis has been an under-communicated part of history in Cuba.
A Swedish–Cuban research project has now investigated what kinds of memories of the crisis remain today at the former missile base – in the ground as well as in people’s minds.
KEY WORDS Cuba • material remains • memory • Missile Crisis • missile site • remembering process • reuse • under-communicated history T he 1962 Missile Crisis is a well-known episode of the Cold War and twentieth-century history.
It is well documented in a rich variety of sources, and has been the subject of extensive historical research.
The story of the Missile Crisis has actually been told so many times that it almost writes itself.
In an attempt to find and give voice to stories other than those dominating ‘big history’ we have studied the crisis from an archaeological perspective.
We want to find out what material remains the Missile Crisis has generated and explore whether archaeology can be used to begin a remembering process and attract interest to a past that otherwise would not be discussed.
Our point of departure is one of the former Soviet nuclear missile bases in Cuba.
Our results strongly suggest that doing archaeology is in many ways as important, if not more important, than what actually emerges from the ground.
The project is a cooperation between a group of Swedish archaeologists and Cuban anthropologists, archaeologists, and historians.
Let us briefly recount the main themes in the ‘big history’ of the Missile Crisis.
An important part of the prelude to the crisis was the Bay of Pigs invasion in south-west Cuba in April 1961.
A group of approximately 1400 US-supported exile Cubans attempted to land there and start a counterrevolution in order to overthrow the revolutionary government.
The invaders were quickly defeated and the operation was a military and political fiasco.
The need to defend the Cuban revolution against new United States attacks and to maintain Soviet prestige in Latin America were the reasons given by the Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev for suggesting the installation of missiles with nuclear warheads in Cuba.
If Cuba fell, other Latin American countries would reject us, claiming that for all our might the Soviet Union hadn’t been able to do anything for Cuba except to make empty protests to the United Nations.
The Soviet proposal to install missiles with nuclear warheads in Cuba was presented to the Cuban leadership in May 1962, and they agreed to accept the offer without any hesitation.
The top-secret move of missiles and Soviet forces to Cuba – Operation Anadyr – was initiated and the first units arrived in early August.
On 14 October 1962, United States air reconnaissance discovered what the following day was interpreted as Soviet launching sites for nuclear missiles.
Kennedy excluded this solution and a week later he gave his famous speech to the nation where he announced the establishment of a naval blockade against Cuba.
Each missile contained a nuclear warhead 70 times more powerful than the Hiroshima bomb.
At the same time intensive negotiations were taking place between Washington and Moscow.
All over the world people anxiously awaited news about the development of the crisis.
After 13 days ‘when the world stood still’ the crisis finally came to an end.
But the solution of the crisis created great political tension in the relationship between Cuba and the Soviet Union.
The reason was that all the important negotiations during the crisis had taken place directly between Washington and Moscow, without involving Havana.
Although they were the epicenter of the conflict, they had no say in the matter.
Not only was this decision taken without consulting us, several steps were taken without informing us.
The Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev, on the other hand, chose to see the crisis as a victory.
The objective to defend the Cuban revolution by preventing a United States invasion had been achieved.
The Caribbean crisis was a triumph of Soviet foreign policy and a personal triumph in my own career as a statesman and as a member of the collective leadership.
The national humiliation felt by the Cuban leadership has led to the Missile Crisis being an under-communicated part of Cuban history.
So, while it is one of the most well-known episodes in modern Cuban history to most people outside Cuba, it is given paradoxically little attention in Cuba.
The exhibition at the Museum of the Revolution in Havana is a good example of this.
Although the museum contains a seemingly endless number of exhibition cases, there is only one that briefly touches on the Missile Crisis.
Most archaeological research on the materiality of the Cold War highlights questions concerning technical and military aspects of the remains, their heritage value, and how they can be preserved.
We believe this is a mistake; local people have much to add to our archaeological understanding of the sites, and their participation is also important for democratic reasons.
They have a right to make their voices heard about a past that affected them, and in which they also played a part.
In this project we combine the study of material remains with studies of memories and stories told by local people in order to gain new knowledge about the Missile Crisis and its human dimensions.
Remains of the recent past have a remarkable potential to affect people; they make history a concern and awaken memories.
People remember differently, and the multi-vocality of the recent past brings the democratic dimensions in writing history to the fore; history is constructed for different reasons in different contexts.
An important aspect of the project is to interact with the local community and talk about how the Missile Crisis history is constructed.
In view of the official Cuban attitude towards the Missile Crisis, you would expect difficulties in getting permission to visit the former Soviet missile bases and conduct archaeological research there.
But even though our interest probably seemed strange to many, we were granted the necessary permission without considerable trouble.
Permitting us to conduct archaeology at the former missile sites may actually be a way to disarm a politically loaded history.
Since archaeology is generally associated with deep time, it can be used to transform a recent and problematic history into a seemingly distant past.
This transformation makes it possible to look at the crisis with new eyes.
This is the first example of recognizing some historical interest in these sites.
The missile sites have until now, however, not been the objects of more thorough study.
These were situated in El Purio and Sitiecito, both close to the town of Santa Clara in central Cuba.
In an otherwise very stretched Cuban economy this quarry does quite well.
Unfortunately this means that the material remains from the Soviet base are in danger of destruction.
It was on this pad that the missiles were to be erected into firing position.
There is no obvious functional reason for this destruction, and it contradicts statements made by local officials acknowledging the historical value of the site.
Nevertheless, it is difficult to disregard that the destruction could be due to a worry that if the site were protected as a cultural heritage site it would threaten economic interests.
The air is filled with vultures looking for creatures that have fallen victim to the heat.
People in the area used to move away from the hot sun into the coolness of a small cave in order to take a break.
This graffiti is the only known example where the names of individual Soviet soldiers belonging to the missile forces in Cuba have been immortalized in this way.
This unique example is now very much in danger of being destroyed by the quarrying.
The possibility of cutting out the part of the cave wall with Soviet graffiti in order to save it for the future has been suggested.
The hangars served as a kind of assembly hall where the missile bodies and nuclear warheads were put together.
The concrete components for the hangar were transported by ship all the way from the Soviet Union.
In a high-level photo of the site taken on 17 October, erectors, a missile hangar and buildings under construction, missile trailers, and a tent area can be identified.
Despite the fact that almost half a century has passed since these photos were taken, the overall use of the landscape and the spread of vegetation at the site are quite similar today.
Local people who lived in the area in 1962 had never seen the aerial photos taken during the crisis.
Image 93 from Secretary McNamara's Special Cuba Briefing, United States Dept of Defense.
Photograph in the John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum, Boston objects seen there in the present landscape engaged people and formed a good starting point for conversations about their memories of the crisis.
Today there are few visible signs that there once was a missile base in Santa Cruz de los Pinos.
They lie helter-skelter and look like the bleached ribs of some long-extinct giant animal.
Another material testimony, which is easier to miss, is that parts of the road network in and around the village are constructed or modified in connection with the construction of the Soviet base.
The mound was obviously manmade and probably consisted of material that was bulldozed away from what was to become the hangar floor.
The only finds were some rubber straps, probably made from inner tubes of car tires.
In a scrap heap belonging to the farmer living closest to the hangar we found another artifact.
It was a grenade tube that he or his father had originally found somewhere in the close surroundings; he did not remember where or when, but it clearly derives from the Soviets.
We also did some metal detecting at the site of a former farmhouse, which the local people said had been used by Soviet officers during the time of the base.
The idea was to try to locate rubbish pits and lost objects connected with the house.
A number of minor test pits were made where the metal detector gave response, but with the exception of some pieces of barbed wire of Soviet type it is not clear whether the objects (batteries, bottles, aluminum fragments, etc.) can be linked to the missile base.
This was close to the ‘tent area’, and we assumed that a lot of activity would have taken place there.
We also surveyed other parts of the ‘open storage area’ and its surroundings with a metal detector.
One of the few finds that match stories told by local people about the Soviet soldiers are splinters from a bottle with measure marks in the glass.
This type of bottle was used for a special kind of extra strong rum called Alcoholitis, which was sold only at pharmacies.
According to our informants, the Cubans considered it too strong to drink but the Russians appreciated it.
These were embarrassingly difficult to locate, partly because of fields with tall sugar cane.
Eventually we discovered, however, that the barracks reveal themselves as a shift in color in a roadway.
With the assistance of a bulldozer we uncovered two of the barracks down to the floor level and beyond.
We also dug a trench in front of the entrances of four of the former eight barracks.
This area, as well as the whole barracks area, was surveyed with a metal detector.
We found very few artifacts and none that could be linked to the time of the Missile Crisis with certainty.
There was actually no clear evidence that people had ever moved into and lived in the barracks, which would make sense since they were still under construction in the aerial photograph from 27 October, and the Soviet decision to withdraw all offensive weapons from Cuba was taken on 28 October.
We also wanted to create an arena where we could meet with local people and arouse their interest to talk about their experiences of the former Soviet base in particular and their memories of the Missile Crisis in general.
Whether they are historically correct is not of vital importance to us in this specific context; what we are interested in is how the Missile Crisis is remembered.
The Soviet base area was forbidden territory for all Cubans, civilians as well as military personnel, unless they had special permission to visit it.
This means that most of the stories told by the local people deal with occurrences outside the base.
In general, it seems that people living in the village did not know what was going on, and only a few refer to fear in connection with the Soviet military activities.
Several said that they did not learn about the true character of the base until after the Missile Crisis.
Some people refer to the lowaltitude United States flights, which gave them the impression that war could break out at any time.
Quite a lot of stories revolve around the construction phase of the base.
A number of farmers were forced to leave their homes with short notice and move away to make room for the missile base.
They did not always get the time to collect all their livestock and other belongings before being relocated to new houses.
Speaking about this today, many were eager to express to us, and to the officials accompanying us, their loyalty to the Cuban revolution.
But there were also those who had never forgotten or forgiven what they experienced as an injustice.
Another story concerns a street corner in the center of the small town of Santa Cruz de los Pinos.
We heard several different versions of this story, but the common theme is that there used to be a house which stood on the right side of the street corner, which today is partly empty.
When the missile trailers reached this corner they discovered that the curve was too narrow.
All missile transports took place in the dark in an attempt to make them more difficult to discover from the air.
The family that lived in the house at the right side of the street corner had to be wakened in the middle of the night by a high-ranking officer.
He told them that they immediately had to evacuate their house since it was going to be pulled down to enable missile transports to make the turn.
In another version of the story it was a shoe shop that was pulled down, not a family home.
To us it is not vitally important which version – if any – is the historically correct one.
What is interesting is that the physical environment, in this case actually the lack of material culture – the emptiness where you would normally expect a house – draws people’s attention and demands an explanation.
The explanations given recall and recast the memories of the Missile Crisis.
Many local residents still have personal memories of the Russians, and there seem to have been good relations between the groups.
Only a few of them understood Spanish, and as none of the local people we met understood Russian they had difficulties communicating with each other.
Despite this, there are memories of meetings and places where the young soldiers met with young people, mostly girls, from the village.
In some cases this led to an exchange of letters that continued for many years after the crisis.
The villagers who befriended the Soviet soldiers seemed sorry that the Russians had disappeared so quickly and that there had not been time for a proper goodbye.
Although there are a lot of stories about watches received through exchange or as gifts, no one had any preserved evidence to show us.
It is almost as if they have become a metaphor for the passing and changing of time; the Missile Crisis is remembered through instruments for showing time but the instruments themselves are gone.
The Swedish part of the team has experienced how the project generates a remembering process even back in Sweden.
When we talked with friends and colleagues about our work in Cuba, many of them suddenly started to remember how they themselves or people they know lived through the Missile Crisis.
Many Swedes were convinced that there would be a nuclear world war and acted accordingly.
One of the stories we were told was about a man (Oloph Odenius, 1923–87) whose doctoral thesis was thwarted as a consequence of the Missile Crisis.
He was a specialist in medieval art, and by 1962 he had spent at least 10 years collecting a great amount of material for his thesis at the National Library of Sweden.
Since it was not easy back then to make copies of old documents and books, all the original sources were kept in a special room at the library that only he had access to.
He had put slips of paper at those passages he was going to refer to in his thesis.
All his slips had been thrown in a wastepaper basket and all documents and books had been returned to their storage.
What had happened was that the chief librarian had listened to the news and heard about the Soviet missiles in Cuba and the United States ultimatum.
He was, like many others, convinced that a new world war could break out at any time and he had accordingly sounded the emergency alarm.
This meant that all valuable documents were immediately brought to safety.
As an academic it is easy to understand the despair he must have felt, and it is an illustrative example of how the Missile Crisis affected people on a personal level all over the world.
We are happy to note that Odenius eventually was awarded an honorary doctorate.
Another story about the Missile Crisis is told by Petter Ljunggren, who at the time was a 12-year-old boy living with his family in the city of Halmstad in south-west Sweden.
The threat that the Cold War could change into a real one was very obvious even before the crisis.
Every household in Sweden had received a leaflet with information on what to do if there was war, and in all the gateways in Halmstad there were maps of how to evacuate the city.
Petter used to fantasize about how he saved the prettiest girl in his class from the biggest threat of all – the nuclear bomb.
The Missile Crisis made the fear of evacuation and war feel closer than ever before.
After barely two weeks the crisis was over and all the equipment ended up in the attic.
But the children had now received more new things than they had wished for at Christmastime.
These stories about the Missile Crisis as experienced from a Swedish perspective can, of course, be viewed as anecdotes, just like the stories told by local people in Santa Cruz de los Pinos.
But an anecdotal mapping of the past is, as the American literature scholar Joel Fineman has suggested, an alternative to the ‘big history’ that has occupied historians for such a long time.
It is a way to connect the big and the small history, and to give the recent past a human face.
The lack of artifacts surprised us and admittedly was somewhat of a disappointment.
When the excavations were finished, local people told us that as soon as the Soviet military left the base in early November 1962 the farmers and the people from the village went to the site to look for things that remained.
Local farmers also told us that they had cleared the area in the 1960s and 1970s so that cattle would not be injured when trampling on cans, bottles and scrap iron.
We soon discovered, however, that there are material remains from the missile site present almost everywhere in the nearby surroundings.
People in the Cuban countryside live in very modest circumstances, and they have made use of the material left by the Russians in many different ways.
One component from the missile base that now appears in new contexts is a kind of perforated iron mat that originally was laid on the ground to improve passability.
The mats have been reused in many different ways; for example, as a footbridge to a dwelling house, a barn wall, a bottle holder, and components in a pigsty.
This means that the physical space for this shop and its components are both a direct consequence of the crisis that threatened world peace half a century ago.
The reinforcement bars extracted from the concrete arches have been reused as building material.
The remains of the arch, from which the iron had been taken, consist of small pieces of concrete left lying on the ground.
Many of them have imprints from the reinforcement bars and they resemble fossils from creatures living millions of years ago in some distant geological epoch.
Mats Burström they are a reminder that, faced with the threat of Armageddon, the world came to its senses.
It is tempting to think that the battering of the concrete arch to pieces and the many reuses of material from the Soviet missile base are symbolically motivated.
Pieces of concrete from a missile hangar arch with imprints from reinforcement bars.
Christer Åhlin/Museum of National Antiquities, Stockholm the wrongs that people feel they suffered in 1962.
On a local level some people had to leave and abandon their homes, and on a national level Cuba was neglected in the negotiations between the superpowers.
The main reason for the extensive reuse of material from the missile base is, to all appearances, instead a shortage of goods in the Cuban countryside.
Still, to us as archaeologists the symbolic dimension of the reuse seems obvious.
Our view has probably influenced locals and they may now actually look at the old Soviet material in a different way than before.
In the history of the recent past, well-documented large-scale happenings and meta-narratives dominate over small-scale and more specific histories.
This means that something is lost, since the latter histories are usually more tangible and give a human dimension to the past.
We have also explored how archaeology can initiate a remembering process.
It is obvious that material remains from the missile site – both the ones found during excavation and the ones that are being reused in different ways at farmsteads and other places – bring forth memories.
To dig in the ground is also to dig in the memories of the recent past.
Working together with local inhabitants creates new thoughts, focusing the specific historical happening and its aftermath as well as general questions concerning the writing of history.
In this context, archaeology is as much an arena for dialogue and reflection as it is a search for material remains.
This also means that the rather low number of artifacts found at the site that can be directly associated with the Missile Crisis is not a problem.
It is the low-voiced, from-below histories that are called forth, and the human dimension these give to the history of the Missile Crisis, that are most important.
When we started our fieldwork in Santa Cruz de los Pinos there was no local interest in the missile site as an historical place.
This was well in line with the Missile Crisis being a kind of under-communicated part of Cuban history.
This has now changed and the former Soviet base is locally recognized as a resource of historical interest as well as a place of economic potential.
The local museum has been renovated and was re-opened in May 2008 with the history of the missile site as an important part of the exhibition.
A collection of material about the site has begun; one example is photographs showing Cubans on a picnic at the deserted base in 1963.
Since Cubans were not allowed to visit the base when it was in use they were curious to see what the site looked like when the Russians had left.
Later, the site was gradually forgotten as people were busy coping with everyday life.
The local government has now discovered the economic potential of the missile site.
It lies within range for a one-day visit from Havana and could therefore be of interest to tourists.
People all over the world have memories of the Missile Crisis and may want to see one of the sites of focus back then.
The authorities have started to educate some of the small farmers living closest to the site in how to guide visitors and keep watch over the area.
Our archaeological interest in the former Soviet nuclear missile site initially aroused some surprise and skepticism among academic colleagues and local people in Santa Cruz de los Pinos.
At the local level this was probably strengthened by the fact that some of us are foreigners and we were all accompanied by officials.
However, to excavate in the intense heat is hard work and this actually helped us to convince people of the sincerity of our interest in how the Missile Crisis was experienced from a local perspective.
The presence of officials convinced people that they were allowed to talk about the Missile Crisis.
As a result of our digging in the ground, stories of a silenced past have begun to surface.
These stories are, of course, influenced by the present context and we may very well have created an interest that was not there before.
Undoubtedly, more material remains need to be uncovered and more voices need to be heard in order to get a more fully down-to-earth perspective on the Missile Crisis.
These histories from below give a new and human dimension to the history of the crisis.
It has also generated important discussions about the writing of history in general.
Thanks also to the local residents and officials who made it possible for us to visit and explore the missile sites in El Purio, Sitiecito, and Santa Cruz de los Pinos.
We also thank National Swedish Television and the Museum of National Antiquities in Stockholm for cooperation and financial support.
Diez Acosta, T Informe sobre las regions de emplazamiento de las unidades coheteriles estrategicas Sovieticas desplegadas en el territorio de la República de Cuba en el periodo de la Crisis de Octubre.
His major focus of research is the archaeology of the contemporary past and the relation between material culture and memory.
TOMÁS DIEZ ACOSTA has a PhD in history and is professor and senior researcher at the Cuban Institute of History in Havana.
He is a distinguished expert on the history of the Cuban revolution as well as the Missile Crisis.
Lic. in anthropology and is a researcher at the Cuban Centre of Anthropology in Havana.
Her major focus of research is traditional popular culture, anthropology of food, and ethnic relations.
His major focus of research is archaeological historiography and knowledge production, and the ideology and theory of archaeological heritage management.
Lic. in geography and is a specialist at the Institute of Scientific and Technological Information in Havana, Cuba.
His major focus of research is computer science and the application of GIS within geoscience and archaeology.
His major focus of research is the epistemology and ontology of archaeology, and the political dimensions of archaeology and heritage management.
JESÚS M PAJÓN has a PhD in paleoclimate and geochemistry and is researcher at the Cuban Centre of Anthropology in Havana.
His major focus of research is paleoclimatic and paleoenvironmental reconstruction.
JESÚS RAFAEL ROBAINA JARAMILLO has an MA in anthropology and is director of the Cuban Centre of Anthropology in Havana.
His major focus of research is the religion of ancestry of Africans in Cuba.
BENGT WESTERGAARD has a BA in archaeology and is a field archaeologist and specialist in digital field documentation systems including GIS and database management at the National Heritage Board in Mölndal, Sweden.
