Both sides realized that they had come very close to war over the issue, and they realized that such a war had to be avoided.
Download PDF PDF Page Citation Cite Share Link Share Expert Answers Hover for more information.
Our certified Educators are real professors, teachers, and scholars who use their academic expertise to tackle your toughest questions.
Educators go through a rigorous application process, and every answer they submit is reviewed by our in-house editorial team.
Although they had fought as allies, when the war was over, the two countries were hostile towards each other.
See This Answer Now Start your subscription to unlock this answer and thousands more.
The United States feared worldwide communist domination, and the USSR resented the United States approach to foreign relations, which it perceived as interventionist.
In the years following World War II, especially after 1949 when the Soviets first tested an atomic bomb, it turned into an arms race.
Each feared the other might initiate nuclear warfare, and so each developed larger and larger arsenals of nuclear weapons.
In 1959, Fidel Castro became the leader of Cuba and aligned the Caribbean island nation with the Soviet Union.
The Americans had already installed nuclear weapons with the ability to reach the Soviet Union in Western Europe and in Turkey, so Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev decided to counter this move by installing nuclear missiles in Cuba.
The United States had already launched one failed invasion of Cuba, and Khrushchev reasoned that missiles on the island would deter future attacks.
An American spy plane flying over Cuba on October 14, 1962, took a photograph of the construction of a ballistic missile installation, and President John F Kennedy and his advisors went on high alert.
However, Kennedy took the more moderate approach of a naval blockade or quarantine of the island.
On October 22, 1962, he informed the American people about what was happening.
He warned that the United States would use military force to prevent any ships bearing weapons from reaching Cuba.
Kennedy and Khrushchev sent messages back and forth trying to put an end to the crisis.
Khrushchev finally agreed to withdraw the missiles from Cuba in exchange for Kennedy's promise that the United States would not attack Cuba.
Kennedy also secretly agreed to remove the United States missiles from Turkey.
A telephone communication link that became known as the Hot Line was installed between the White House and the Kremlin.
The two countries initiated negotiations that eventually resulted in nuclear test ban treaties.
On the downside, the Soviets increased their research into intercontinental ballistic missiles that would be capable of reaching the United States from the Soviet Union.
Keep in mind, strategically speaking, that the positions of the United States and the Soviet Union were not actually equal.
Quite on the contrary, from the Soviet perspective, they were at a very real disadvantage vis-a-vis the United States.
From the perspective of the Soviet Union, basing missiles in Cuba would allow the Soviets to apply counter-pressure, as they would be able to similarly threaten the American population centers on the East Coast.
Naturally, given the stakes, the United States could not afford to stand by passively and allow the Soviet Union to proceed unchallenged.
What resulted was an incident that came frighteningly close to starting Nuclear War.
It served as a wake-up call to both sides, who acted decisively to ensure that a similar incident would not occur in the future.
The main effect of the crisis was to make the two countries more cautious about coming into conflict.
During the Cold War, the United States and the USSR were in competition to dominate the world.
The United States was capitalistic and democratic and thought that communism was evil and aggressive.
The USSR was communist and thought that A) communism would inevitably take over the world and B) the United States was out to destroy it.
Because the United States feared the USSR, it placed nuclear missiles in Europe that could hit the Soviet Union.
Because the Soviets feared the US, they tried to put nuclear missiles in Cuba so that they could threaten the United States as well.
Because the Americans feared and distrusted the Soviets, they worried that the USSR would actually use the missiles in Cuba.
Because the United States feared the Soviets and though they were out to take over the world, they felt that the USSR would start to try to take more and more if the United States did not stop them in Cuba.
This encouraged them to compromise with each other, to set up direct communications for use in times of crisis, and to be somewhat less aggressive so that they did not come into direct conflict.
Approved by eNotes Editorial Team Ask a tutor Ask a tutor Assignment Type Choose a reasonHomework assignmentExam preparationEssay/thesis outline Hover for more information.
The United States feared worldwide communist domination, and the USSR resented the United States approach to foreign relations, which it perceived as interventionist.\n \nThis conflict became known as the Cold War.
Each feared the other might initiate nuclear warfare, and so each developed larger and larger arsenals of nuclear weapons.\n \nIn 1959, Fidel Castro became the leader of Cuba and aligned the Caribbean island nation with the Soviet Union.
The United States had already launched one failed invasion of Cuba, and Khrushchev reasoned that missiles on the island would deter future attacks.\n \nAn American spy plane flying over Cuba on October 14, 1962, took a photograph of the construction of a ballistic missile installation, and President John F Kennedy and his advisors went on high alert.
He warned that the United States would use military force to prevent any ships bearing weapons from reaching Cuba.\n \nThe subsequent days were filled with apprehension.
Naturally, given the stakes, the United States could not afford to stand by passively and allow the Soviet Union to proceed unchallenged.\nWhat resulted was an incident that came frighteningly close to starting Nuclear War.
