Unclassified Case S tudies Appendix E of the Report of the President's Special Review Board refers to 14 case studies that were prepared for the Board.
The 4-5 page draft memoranda were prepared by scholars who were contacted by members of the Board's staff.
The shorter 2-page memoranda on the same case studies were prepared by the Board staff as summary memoranda of the 4-5 page drafts.
These case studies should be viewed in the context in which they were requested by the President's Special Review Board and its staff.
In order to examine more fully the working of the National Security Council system over time, the Board determined that it would be useful to examine the operation of the NSC system in a variety of real-world situations.
The Board members identified a number of issues and incidents from the Truman Administration through the Reagan Administration that they believed might be instructive, and asked that case studies on those issues and incidents be drafted quickly to refresh their memories of _ the events, to serve as background material for their discussions with participants in these events, and to assist their deliberations.
The Board's staff contacted several scholars about these issues and incidents and requested that they produce draft memoranda of 4-5 pages in length summarizing the relevant facts and highlighting certain areas of interest to the Board.
The_ memoranda were supported by relevant extracts from books, articles, and other unclassified primary and secondary source material.
As requested by the Board's staff, these memoranda were prepared by their respective authors as drafts under the severest of time constraints.
President Kennedy chose a path of action that in his judgment entailed a l-in-3 chance of nuclear war.
This crisis began in October of 1962 when a United States U-2 flying over Cuba discovered the Soviet Union in the midst of a secret attempt to introduce strategic nuclear missiles (MRBM's and IRBM's) into Cuba -contrary to all public and private assurances by Soviet leader Krushchev to the contrary.
President Kennedy immediately concluded that this Soviet action was unacceptable.
Assembling the EXCOM, he weighed the issues and options, the pros and cons.
He changed his own mind several times during the course of these deliberations.
Having initially favored an air strike on the missiles, he chose instead a naval blockade of Soviet shipments of arms to Cuba as a first step and announced this to the world.
The brother, the It was denied y such n our European dge was ynin -wi thou t or even members in the treatment their ""20th a t tached as Kennedy's last card worked.
Krushchev announced on Sunday, October 28 that the missiles would we be withdrawn, and the crisis subsided.
This is generally regarded as the ""finest hour"" of the Kennedy Presidency.
Most f the EXCOM f deliberation The President rise air strike jority favored rations, the Se issi le ; it make issile from the led reserve.
He therefore he National Security Advisor, McGeorge Bundy approaching Krushchev without provoking a Robert Kennedy was impressed with the Tojo dead set against any surprise attack.
Ha he wo tialiy uld hav between on the the in the curi ty uld e lead 3.
Post Vietnam, the War Powers Act sought to assure a greater congressional role in war-making.
The issue of war making, and the decision to take actions that might trigger war,_poses dramatic questions the Commission faces in a way that toucJie_s a central Constitutional issue; namely, the respective roles of President and Congress in making war.
In spite of the Constitution's clear intent, Presidents have from the beginning sent troops into battle without declarations of war and shied away from Congress in making decisions about war.
For the first time in the mi< clear age. the two superpowers found themselves in a sort of moral road test of their apocalyptic powers. j The crisis blew up suddenly.
The crisis served some purposes The United States and the Soviet Union have had no comparable collision since then.
On the other hand, the humiliation that Khrushchev suffered may have hastened his fall.
The experience may be partly responsible for both the Soviet military buildup in the past two decades and whatever enthusiasm the Soviets have displayed for nuclear disarmament. j Now. on the 20th anniversary of the cri— *is. six of Kennedy's men have collaborated • a remarkable joint statement on the testis of that October.
Theodore Sorensen. special counsel to the President: and McCeorge Bundy. special assistant to the President for national security affairs.
In the years since the Cuban missile crisis, many commentators have examined the affakand offered a wide variety of conclusions.
It seems fitting now that some of us who worked particularly closely with President Kennedy during that crisis should offer a few comments, with the advantages both of participation and f hindsight.
The importance of accurate •uual assessment of interests between the two superpowers is evit and coniinuou ognition of the need for thorough overflight, not without its hazards, that produced the decisive photographs.
The usefulness and scope of inspection from above, also employed in monitoring the Soviet missile withdrawal, should never be underestimated.
The President wisely took his time in choosing a course of action A quick decision would certainly have been less carefully designed and could well have produced a much higher nsk of catastrophe.
The fact that the crisis did not become public in its first week obviously made it easier for President Kennedy toconsider his options with a maximum of care and a minimum of outside pressure.
Not every future crisis will be so quiet in its first phase, but Americans should always respect the need for a pe■■ riod of confidential and careful deliberation in dealing with a major international crisis.
United States naval forces, quickly deployable for the blockade of offensive weapons that was sensibly termed a quarantine, and the availability of United States ground and air forces sufficient toexecute an invasion if necessary, made the difference.
American nuclear superiority was not in our view a critical factor, for the fundamental and controlling | reason that nuclear war. already in 1962.
No i one of us ever reviewed the nuclear balance for comfort in those j hard weeks.
The political and military pressure created by the j quarantine was matched by a diplomatic effort that ignored no | relevant means of communication with both our friends and our adversary.
Communication to and from our allies in Europe was ■ intense, and their support sturdy.
The Organization of American , States gave the moral and legal authority of its regional backing ; to the quarantine, making it plain that Soviet nuclear weapons I were profoundly unwelcome in the Americas.
Am; bassador Adlai Stevenson drove home with angry eloquence and i unanswerable photographic evidence the facts of the Soviet deployment and deception.
Effective communication is never more important than when ' such intelligence unavailable sooner.
Robert Kennedy made it plain to ■ Ambassador Dobrynin that any attempt to treat the Presidents unilateral assurance as part of a deal would simply make that assurance inoperative.
In the successful resolution of the crisis, restraint was as important as strength.
The decision that the missiles in Turkey should be removed was one that the President had full and unquestioned authority to make and execute.
He recognized that an invasion by United States forces would ■ be bitter and bloody, and that it would leave festering wounds in j the body politic of the Western Hemisphere.
Riak had te«.n ,h^L in lhesprm « of l%1 Secretary < our own President, whose cautious determination Me .dv comi SSi.
If the Russians held their course for a mere seventy-two hours, we would have to escalate a step, probably by bombing Cuban sites.
If Khrushchev's capability to calculate and to control was something like his own, then neither s might suffice to guide them both through that third step without holocaust.
NEW CHECKS AND BALANCES In warmaking, the Constitution contemplated enforced collaboration between the President and his fellow politicians on Capitol Hill.
In practice, as the missile crisis illustrates, a strong role for Congress is by no means assured.
Any modern President stands at the center of a watchful circle with whose members he cannot help but consult.
Today, indeed, he is more dependent on Executive officials for advice as well as execution than our Constitution makers could have anticipated two centuries ago.
Political accountability conferred on each, firsthand, legitimacy as an agent of the people.
Indeed, our Constitution's democratic element consisted mainly in reserving to these men the great decisions on the use of force.
But neither are they colleagues in the sense of sharing either his legitimacy or accountability.
Consider again the group that made fundamental choices for the United States during the missile crisis.
First, there was the President as constitutional Commander in Chief, nationally elected.
No member of the Senate or House stands astride the action channel for decisions on nuclear war.
None is consulted unless the President so chooses as a matter of discretion.
In October 1962, Congress remained ignorant of the Soviet missiles in Cuba during the first week of Ex Comm deliberations.
Only on October 22, two hours before his broadcast to the world, did the President assemble the leaders of both houses, advise them of the missiles, and inform them that he had decided to respond with a naval quarantine.
The Congressional leaders disagreed strongly with the course the President had chosen.
Senator Fulbright in particular urged that the United States respond more forcefully.
The Senators insisted that the record show they had been informed, not consulted.
Nor was any member of Congress deeply involved in subsequent decisions during the week that followed.
Agency, the Chairmdn of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the White House Assistant for National Security Affairs.
When the President chose blockade, no one but the Secretary of Defense had both the authority and the information to oversee its implementation.
Bundy learned about the missiles from the CIA; the Director of the CIA, John McCone, and the machine under him served as the ""eyes and ears"" of the United States government in keeping abreast of developments in Cuba.
The need for information, analysis, and assistance in implementation meant that Deputy Secretaries and even the relevant Assistant Secretaries also were included, as, for example, Paul Nitze of Defense.
Sorensen had joined JFK when he went to the Senate in 1953 and ever since had been among his closest personal and programmatic advisers as well as his principal speechwriter.
Sorensen, and even more Robert Kennedy, helped John AfivlWOT(l Kennedy assess the full spectrum of his responsibilities as President.
Having depended on the national security apparatus alone in making the fateful choice about the Bay of Tigs, Kennedy insisted thereafter that no major national security decision be made without including RFK and Sorensen in the process.
Fourth, there were the surrogates, some of them officials, some from private life.
Dean Acheson was a former Secretary of State; Robert I,ovett, a former Secretary of Defense.
They were involved because the President happened to value their judgment and also because he knew that others valued their judgment — especially in the ""bipartisan foreign policy establishment""— on Capitol Hill and off.
Adlai Stevenson, Ambassador to the United Nations, can be counted of their number since his position as a former Democratic presidential candidate and liberal outweighed the importance of his official role.
The presence of the Secretary of the Treasury, Douglas Dillon, attests not only to the weight accorded his department in matters of foreign affairs — a vital if half-hidden feature of our government — but also to his representative character as Eisenhower's former Undersecretary of State.
The importance of the individuals in the circle becomes clear as one reflects on the extraordinary role they played.
Decisions passed through the President's hand but were not simply the product of his mind alone.
Both the definition of the issue and the choice of the United States response emerged from deliberations of the group.
Robert Kennedy's account is suggestive, both about individual perceptions and preferences, and about the process by which the group came to the blockade.
Usually one suffers as th, „,hn henchts^ The missile crisis seems a rarity in just this m,,m, week"" WO "" 0t M<m S ° ,Md il ,as,r<l f ° r ;mot,u '' Since World W II our government has often tried to square the circle oJF this incompatibility by tinkering with structure.
Alternately, efforts have been made to tighten up procedures for official consultation and to loosen their constraints upon the White If ,sc.
Sometimes efforts of both sorts have been made at once, with contraelicte.ry consequences.
Each Administration has begun by altering the structure it inherited to cure a ""weakness"" in its nrc^ deccsors practice as observed from the outside or from beiow.
The National Security Council, created by act of Congress in -947, has been called Secretary of Defense James Forrestals revenge on Franklin Roosevelt for the latter s quite incurable and sometimes costly tendency to keep all threads in his own hands, or anyway in no one elses.
The subordinate committee structure Eisenhower later sponsored— the Planning Board and Operations Coordinating Board-was said to be a cure-all for alleged disorder under Truman.
Nixon now restores"" a somewhat comparable structure, ending the excesses"" of the Johnson White House, but he ties it to a presidential staff more formidable in numbers and in jurisdiction than his predecessors ever had employed.
Reportedly he saw it as an indispensable piece of machinery for a crisis-time, indispensable because so flexible and so removed from vested rights or interests.
Thus he ordered it disbanded, to the dismay of some members, and the very term ""Ex Cotiim"" was barred from current use.
In this, although not consciously, he followed Truman's practice at the outbreak of the Korean War.
Kennedy's decision to disband the Ex Comm is expressive of the underlying dilemma.
There appear to be no ways whereby a President can be assured routinely, at all times and places, of the information and control he needs while simultaneously assuring to officials the hearings, the due process, the appeals, and the forbearance they require of the White House.
Even at the farthest remove from routine, the missile crisis above all, these two assurances seem barely, temporarily compatible.
Yet risks of rule lie quite as much in bureaucratic momentum as in presidential misjudgment.
Frustrated, uncomprehending bureaucrats can be as much a danger to us all, and to a President, as faults in his own knowledge, or his judgment, or his temperament.
The check and balance system we encounter in the Missile Age does not appear to check or balance its destructive hazards.
For this there is no help in sight from any source except the human qualities of prudence, luck r and fortitude displayed in 1962 by fourteen men for thirteen days.
They were intensely conscious of the paradox of rulership as manifested by the course of Jiiltory up to their time.
On the one hand, the common goqd required that political power be placed in some human hands.
Only by yielding considerable discretion to a central public authority could citizens secure the common defense, law, order, or personal liberties.
But on the other hand, to establish a powerful public authority was to create enormous risks of the misuse of power.
As so often before, the rulers, being human and thus fallible, might choose unwisely, or might implement their choices clumsily, at awful cost.
Our Constitution makers aimed at an ciiectivc central government, else they would not have come to Philadelphia.
No m;m was entrusted with unlimited prerogatives; neither 13* Aft*nd)ord was the mob.
Instead, a goodly group of men, each with a piece of power, backed by a constituency, would scrutinize each other, balancing each other, as they tried to fit their pieces into governance.
Then as now the ultimate expression of authority was war, and there this general pattern was applied with special care.
The model evidently was the English royal prerogative as modified by Parliaments control over the purse.
The Senate as a parliamentary body was to share in making treaties of alliance or of peace.
Our President, as substitute for King, had no prerogative to do these things alone.
What he retained, alone, was actual command of such armed forces as Congressional enactments gave him leave to raise and keep.
It thus was the intention that recourse to war required a collaborative judgment by the whole body of men in national elective office.
Presidents could not declare war, congressmen could not deploy the troops.
On this as on all lesser issues, these men were to check and balance one another.
Yet from the start of our development under the Constitution, Presidents have sent troops into battle without declarations of war.
This has occurred quite regularly since Thomas Jefferson dispatched marines against the Barbary pirates.
For a partial listing, see U.S., Department of State, Right to Protect Citizens in Foreign Countries by iMiuling Force, memorandum of the Solicitor for the Department of State, 3rd rev. ed., 1934.
T J ,,,cy usc '' ,h,ir own «"""" m"" tiority to send forces into war without a declaration So •So wo.dd Kennedy have done, it seems, had there heen •, third week of crisis over Cuba.
Thirteen Oa,js affords us many clues as to why modem Presents have shied away from Co^ss fa 1 |T„ <lec,s,„n s about war.
As i, turned out, this was pell he best kept secret in American history.
In that process, he could not commit himself to anyone without forfeiting maneuver room in dealing with Khrushchev.
These did not declare themselves with any blinding light like the Japanese attack in 1941.
Everything had to be done almost at once, under the relentless pressure of contemporary technology.
Dispatch was of the essence Taken to;hcr, these factors—above all, time— limit the number of men with whom the constitutional Commander in Chief can engage in meaningful consultation.
To maximize the; prospect of a wise and viable choice, some interests cannot be excluded.
In the missile crisis the issue was pre-eminently a matter of defense and diplomacy; it depended throughout on the capability of our intelligence and posed the possibility of military action.
Natural parochialism, stemming from the governmental positions of these men, guaranteed that consideraions of defense, diplomacy, intelligence, and military action would be voiced.
Congressional action of that sort had last been taken in December 1941 against the Axis Powers.
Nine years later it implied, both publicly and internationally, not limited hostilities, but rather total war pursued to enemy surrender.
Also it implied no other termination than by peace treaty, with Senate ratification, or by resolution of the two houses of Congress.
Truman was endeavoring to limit warfare, not to spread it, and to end it expeditiously.
In these terms there could be no role for Congress as a partner in decision.
On the fifth day or the sixth he might have sought a resolution of support.
He chose not to do so, lest it blur for his successors the command authority at their disposal.
Instead he pointed to the United Nations under Senate-approved treaty, justified his action by a United Nations resolution, and asked Congress for the money and controls to prosecute the war.
As the fighting dragged on after Chinese intervention, however, Truman paid a heavy political price for failing to make Congress share his June decision.
To it can be attributed the defeat of Truman's party in the 1952 elections and the Presidency of Dwight D, Eisenhower.
As pioneered by Eisenhower, this formula required first such tension in the area that patriotic congressmen could not refuse, and second such good fortune that the future use of force, if any, was short-lived.
Eisenhower twice employed the formula, meeting both requirements, once off the China coast, once in the Middle East.
A naval incident off North Vietnam sufficed for the Tonkin Culf Ik-solution, but the use of force proved not to be short-lived.
After Americanization of the Vietnam War in the first seven months of 1965, Johnson could have had Congress ratify his decision.
To do so would have meant public acknowledgment that we had entered upon large-scale hostilities likely to last several years.
This would have precluded a low-posture, low-visibility approach; it would have precipitated sharp divisions between ""hawks"" and ""doves,"" subjecting the war effort to intense pressures from each.
As months of war turned into years, however, the President stood alone, a lightning rod for dissent.
Formally, the Tonkin Culf Resolution of 1964 may have covered the President's course.
Thereafter, once the war had expanded, Congressional disillusion was fueled by a feeling of having been duped.
When senators became President Johnson's critics,;' they tended to attack him sharply and bitterly.
Attacks by congressmen helped to legitimate dissent in the country, encouraging others, especially in universities and the media.
Moreover, the character of Congressional criticism gave some credibility to eharges that the war was not only senseless and immoral, but alSo illegal.
For a nuclear crisis it is hard to fault the balance struck in 1962, tipped all the way toward the President in an Ex Coinm.
Secrecy, flexibility, uncertainty, and urgency — each alone makes a strong argument.
Together these impel the view that when a nuclear exchange impends, formal Congressional participation is not only inconvenient, but impracticable.
In the missile crisis, if presidential decision had escalated to nuclear war, Congressional ratification would have been a mockery, or moot.
Here the President. is, and probably remains, the nation's Final Arbiter.
Indeed their reasons resemble those affecting President Kennedy in October 1962.
In limited warfare the geography, the weaponry, the scale, and the intensity are all subject to bargaining, overt or tacit.
A war declared by Congress cannot formally be ended without further act of Congress.
And while Americans are more accustomed now than in Korean days to draw distinctions among ""wars,"" the fear of 1950 that an invocation of formalities associated last with World War II might signal an unlimited intent to citizens at home— or governments abroad — still weighed upon the White House as recently as 1965.
Arguments like these led President Johnson to prosecute the Vietnam War at a substantial price, the price of foregoing ""war powers,"" constitutional and statutory.
These confer on the White House vast authority in home-front spheres like economic mobilization, public order, news management.
But during the Korean War the Supreme Court decided that these powers flowed only from wars declared by Congress.
This suggests how strong the case appears, at least from the perspective of two Presidents.
Yet Vietnam's cost, both human and material, and its duration, coupled with the absence of agreed success or even agreed purpose, has brought into being an opposed perspective, strongly espoused in the Senate, the more so as White House legitimacy has been subject to sustained attack from a variety of sources in the country.
Not since Korea has there been so much discussion of the need, and of assorted means, to limit presidential freedom on the i 4 6 Afteru* military side of foreign policy.
The; current counterargument, opposing White House logic, is least of all a matter of form, much more a matter of substance.
The issue is not literal adherence to the Constitution's terms but rather functional equivalence for their intent, namely that the l>ody of elected men on Capitol 1 1 ill share in White House decisions at the time warfare begins.
The power of the purse dews not suffice; withholding funds from forces in the field is not a practicable course for most elective politicians.
What is wanted is a voice before those forees get committed beyond recall.
A number of devices aimed at ""redressing the constitutional balance"" have been proposed in Congress.
These span a spectrum from requiring formal action to regularizing informal consultation.
Other proposals are sure to be forthcoming as the Vietnam War drags on.
From the perspective of the last twenty years, even the least of these proposals places an extraordinary constraint upon the President.
Right up until Pearl Harbor, Franklin Roosevelt was more constrained than any recent President.
Witness the tortuous process by which he transferred fifty overage American H7 Afterword destroyers to Great Britain after the fall of France.
Whether President* should now be so constrained, and if so how, are inajters for judgment.
The closer one looks at these proposals ^he more complicated are the issues to be judgc-d.
Americana* dalfrr on this issue, some favoring World War II, Korea, and Vietnam alike, some wishing .we had stayed out of all three, and many drawing distinctions among them.
It as well to recall that in 1812, and again in 1898, ensures* rather than the President took the lead in forcing war upon the country.
Indeed, the Spanish-American War mi#hl have been fought five years earlier had not Presi■ih-nt Cleveland made plain that he would not wage it even ii Gungrcss declared it.
Again, there is obvious disagreement among Amerk-iam, on what may he. appropriate.
For those involved in making choices about these proposals, the importance of this consideration is clear.
For those of us who watch from a distance, the effect of realignments on the influence of our political champions— and their opponents — is important.
Legislation calls for successive majorities starting with subcommittees.
Short of a tidal wave of public sentiment, one cannot count on legislative action without counting heads.
These are the bane of constitutional reforms adopted to keep some contemporary problem from ever occurring again.
In order to avoid, forevermore, the crisis that ensued in the four months from FDR's election to inaugural, we so shortened the learning time for Presidents-elect as to invite fiascos like the Ray of Pigs.
Politically these issues are alive as products of Vietnam, once ""Johnson's war,"" now Nixon's.
