Suddenly you’re at home again, the ship is gone, and you’re just standing in a mountain of old pillows, realizing that this maybe was, in fact, a bit dangerous and you could’ve maybe hurt your brother.
Except it really was the Caribbean and it was nuclear missiles and it was, in fact, extremely dangerous.
I’m Indy Neidell Yesterday, President Kennedy announced to the world that there are Soviet Medium Range Ballistic Missiles on Cuba, and announced a blockade to stop any further weapons arriving on the island.
He claimed that there was no desire from the United States to take unilateral action and start a war, but the actual plan that he has set in motion includes an invasion of Cuba and possibly even the total annihilation of Cubaif the Soviets do not remove the missiles and warheads immediately.
Until now, it has been Operation Anadyr a bold, secret adventure to even the odds a bit with the Americans in the nuclear arms race.
When it became apparent that the American announcement was coming, they convened their version of EXCOMM, that’s American’s executive Committee of the National Security Councilwho deal with the crisis from their endwith the crisis on the other end.
Premier Nikita Khrushchev, who is under increasing political pressure as his economic reinvigoration plans are failing, his de-Stalinising reforms stalling, and now his grand foreign relations adventure is on the brink of failure.
Chairman of the Supreme Soviet, Leonid Brezhnev formally the head of state, but in practice the second most powerful Russian politician.
Brezhnev is a longtime faithful Khrushchev friend and ally, but has secretly started moving away from his failing leader.
First Deputy Chairman Alexei Kosygin, another Khrushchev friend and ally.
He is also drifting away from his failing friend and will eventually lead the coup against him and become the next Premier in 1964.
As we already know, he’s the only member of the Politburo that opposed Operation Anadyr.
He was the first to visit Cuba after the revolution and knows the Cuban situation better than anyone else in the room.
Mikoyan also favors a rapprochement with the United States and liberal reforms.
On a side note, his brother Artem Mikoyan is the airplane designer that partnered with Mikhail Gurevich, to create the MiG aircraft designs.
He leads Khrushchev’s main opposition and favors a hard line against the West.
Shelepin is a serious Communist hardliner and the architect of communist rebellions and revolutions in other parts of the world.
As such, he was instrumental in helping Castro take control of Cuba and believes in an aggressive militarist foreign policy.
Defense Minister Marshal Rodion Malinovsky as we know from the last few days, Malinowski is a traditional military man that opposes the use of nuclear arms in any conflict.
Although he was a co-creator and early supporter of Operation Anadyr, he now questions the operation as having gotten out of hand.
He’s a career military man and doesn’t get involved in the political side of things.
With the time difference, this is two hours before Kennedy’s address, and they have received neither a letter from Kennedy, nor a transcript of his coming statement, but they have been informed that they are on their way.
Most ships are too far away from Cuba to make it across the blockade line before it takes effect, but one very important ship with a four-ship escort is close enough to maybe make it into port before the blockade takes effect.
It is the Aleksandrovsk, a large, Swedish-built cargo ship, carrying 24 1-megaton nuclear warheads and 44 14-kiloton warheads for tactical cruise missiles.
Malinowski opines that the United States will not go to war over the situation, if not further provoked.
He believes that Kennedy’s statement is a stunt for the upcoming elections, but he also believes that further provocation could worsen the situation quickly.
See, just like the Americans were a few days ago, Khrushchev is concerned with the legality of their actions.
They do have a defense treaty with the Cubans, but it is secret, so this revelation makes them look bad and weakens its legality.
They argue about announcing the treaty immediately via radio but don’t do it since it’s unclear if this would help, or worsen the situation.
The hardliners advocate allowing the forces on Cuba the discretion to use their tactical arms in case of United States aggression.
Malinowski points out that if such an order became known it would give the United States justification to strike back with atomic force.
Especially if it came out that the order was given before Kennedy’s addressremember we’re still ahead of Kennedy’s TV speech.
Obviously, there’s also a risk that actions resulting from the blockade could escalate into a nuclear exchange.
For now, they decide to order the Cuban forces not to use the nukes, and decide to revisit the subject in the morning, after they have read Kennedy’s note and transcript.
They will, however, inform Agricultural Specialist Pavlov, aka General Pliev, on Cuba to make his troops combat ready.
They order all ships still in the Mediterranean to turn back to Soviet ports.
The ships that are in the Atlantic, but have no chance of reaching Cuba before the blockade takes effect are ordered to hold for now.
The Aleksandrovsk, with her deadly cargo of warheads totaling over 30 megatons of explosive power is to proceed to the closest Cuban port.
They create a laundry list of actions, including informing their allies and the public about the situation, they draft a resolution for the UN Security council, and they write a strongly worded protest note to President Kennedy.
They will also immediately inform USSR Ambassador to the UN, Valerian Zorin, so that he can start preparing for a face off with his American counterpart, Adlai Stevenson.
The most significant decisions they take, though, are military or about legality of action.
Codenamed Operation Kama, this is a response to the permanent placement of United States subs armed with ballistic nukes in the port of Holy Loch, Scotland.
Now, the four submarines are still far away from the blockade line, but are to proceed as ordered and try to run the line.
This decision will eventually prove central to the chaotic escalation of the crisis.
Last, but not least they decide to not officially announce the defense treaty with Cuba; this too will prove central to the outcome of the crisis.
So... the Soviets have decided to stay their course, but will try to avoid a direct confrontation on the blockade line.
He meets with all of the members of the OAS, the Organization of American States the continental organization of cooperation between the countries in South and North America.
Moreover, under the Rio Treaty on mutual assistance between the OAS states in case of aggression, several other nations will participate actively in the blockade.
Argentina, Colombia, the Dominican Republic, and Venezuela will provide ships, air support, or even ground forces.
Trinidad and Tobago offers the use of Chaguaramas Naval Base to warships of any OAS nation for the duration of the blockade.
Kennedy then spend the rest of the day in a series of meetings dealing with the details and minutiae of how to enforce the blockade and still minimize the risk for outbreak of general war.
At 6 PM, he signs the Proclamation for Interdiction of the Delivery of Offensive Weapons to Cuba at the Oval Office.
The blockade will go into effect at 1400 hours Greenwich time tomorrow, October 24, 1962.
When the last meeting with EXCOMM ends, The Kennedy brothers are alone in the room with the recorder still on.
The President is on the Phone with the First Lady and then returns to his brother.
If they get this mean on this one, it’s just a question of where they go about it next.
Bobby Kennedy expresses frustration about not having direct communication with the Soviets, and the President asks about the spy Georgi Bolshakov, who has been Robert’s liaison with them.
In any event, it’s the sickening thing that to be getting very mad about . . . they revealed about this horror that would embarrass me in the election.
Bobby Kennedy now goes to an off the record meeting with the USSR’s Ambassador to the US, Anatoly Dobrynin.
Dobrynin repeats his statement from previous meetings that there are no missiles on Cuba.
Kennedy advises him to check his facts with his government and returns to the White House.
There he joins the President, who has split from his dinner party, and is now taking drinks with British ambassador David Ormsby-Gore.
Kennedy immediately calls Defense Secretary McNamara and has the line moved.
So, on opposite sides of the iron curtain that night, the two most powerful men in the world go to bed fretting and worrying about their political future, while the rest of the world sleeps restlessly in fear of the nuclear world war that those two leaders may have just launched.
Join us tomorrow on Day 9 when the blockade goes into effect, and it looks like Soviet ships might try to pass after all.
We are planning to do an even more ambitious project than this one, covering Pearl Harbor minute by minute in real time on December 7th.
If you’d like to see that the please support os on patreon at patreon.co or tg.tv, we are nowhere near close to having the funding for that, and it is your support on patreon that will make it happen.
Don’t forget to subscribe, and ring that bell to never miss the TG action.
