Science & All Other Relevant iuim Aimer Shah/sd 1 January/February 2017 The Opening of the North Korean Mind Pyongyang Versus the Digital Underground Jieun Baek KCNA / REUTERS North Korean leader Kim Jong Un at a fish farm, in an undated photo released by North Korean state media in May 2015.
On a cold, clear night in September 2014, a man I'll call Ahn walked up to the edge of the Tumen River on the Chinese side of the heavily guarded border between China and North Korea.
Almost anywhere else, such material would be considered completely innocuous.
At this border, however, it constitutes highly illicit, dangerous contraband.
In the totalitarian state of North Korea, citizens are allowed to see and hear only those media products created or sanctioned by the government.
Pyongyang considers foreign information of any kind a threat and expends great effort keeping it out.
The regime's primary fear is that exposure to words, images, and sounds from the outside world could make North Koreans disillusioned with the state of affairs in their own country, which could lead them to desire—or even demand—change.
Ahn is a defector who escaped from North Korea in 2004 and now lives in the South Korean capital, Seoul, where he runs a nongovernmental organization that sends information into North Korea.
He is one of the dozens of defectors from North Korea whom I have interviewed in the past ten years.
Defectors' testimony is not always reliable, nor is it enough to piece together an accurate portrait of life inside the opague and secretive country.
But when combined with other information, defectors' stories offer invaluable insights.
At the edge of the river that night, Ahn knew precisely what to do; he had made this kind of trip to the border many times before.
Once he felt certain that he wasn't being watched, he placed his USB drives into a plastic bin, which he wrapped in a thick plastic bag.
He then tied the package to a sturdy wire, grabbed one end, and hurled the bin into the air.
There, a North Korean man whom I will call Ku stealthily waded in and grabbed the bin.
Ahn's organization was paying 3 him the equivalent of approximately $100 to retrieve the USB drives, a sizable fee that would allow Ku to provide for his household for a month or two.
He changed into a dry outfit and made his way back into the city where he lives.
There, Ku sold each drive for about $1 on the black market to fellow citizens eager to get a glimpse of life on the outside.
Although North Korea is often referred to as ""the hermit kingdom,"" over the past two decades, many cracks have appeared in the wall that the state has built around its people.
Rudimentary media-smuggling operations such as Ahn's have helped North Koreans learn more about their country and the outside world, often at great risk to themselves.
Despite the threat of punishment by North Korea's brutal security forces, distributing foreign information has become a profitable business in North Korea.
This is partly due to the ways in which the country's traditionally closed economy has changed in the past 20 years.
From 1994 until 1998, an extraordinary famine swept North Korea, killing hundreds of thousands—perhaps even millions—of people.
In response to its failure to feed its people, the government allowed small markets known as jangmadang to open so that people could buy basic goods from one another or barter.
The jangmadang represented a rudimentary form of capitalism profoundly at odds with the hard-line communism and state control of the economy that the government had enforced for decades.
But when the famine finally subsided, the regime decided to continue tolerating most of the jangmadang, possibly out of a recognition that the state alone could not reliably provide for the majority of its people.
According to the most reliable estimates, around three-guarters of the North Korean population depends partly or solely on private market activity in order to survive.
CARLOS BARRIA / REUTERS Workers stand on the deck of the Mangyongbyong cruise ship, operated by the North Korean state tourism agency, September 2011.
In addition to these so-called gray markets, which have made it easier to distribute banned technologies and media, the more conventional black market has also aided the influx of outside information.
North Korea currently derives much of its GDP from drug production and trafficking, currency counterfeiting, and money laundering.
The illicit networks that support such activities have also created distribution opportunities for foreign media.
Today, a motley crew of 5 foreign nongovernmental organizations, defectors, smugglers, middlemen, businessmen, and bribable North Korean soldiers and officials have cobbled together a surprisingly robust network that links ordinary citizens to the outside world through contraband cell phones, laptops, tablet computers, and data drives.
These digital goods have come to play an important (although often invisible) role in North Korean society.
Thanks to smuggled media, more North Koreans than ever before now fully perceive the gap between the rosy picture that the regime paints of their country and its leaders and the far grimmer reality.
Just as important, many have come to understand that the outside world hardly resembles the wasteland of deprivation, immorality, and criminality that official propaganda depicts.
This burgeoning awareness poses little short-term danger for the regime of Kim Jong Un, which remains highly capable of repressing its people.
But in a totalitarian society where the authorities' legitimacy and power depend to a large extent on their ability to delude the population, a growing digital underground might represent a long-term existential threat.
With its expanding nuclear arsenal and penchant for provocation, North Korea is sure to remain a potential source of regional instability for a long time to come no matter what outsiders do.
But governments, organizations, and individuals seeking ways to make North Korea a less repressive place and a less dangerous international actor should take heed of the power of information to change the country from the inside.
COMBATING JUCHE On June 11, 2012, a flash flood hit Sinhung County, in the North Korean province of South Hamgyong.
A 14-year-old 6 schoolgirl named Han Hyon Gyong desperately tried to keep her family's portraits of the country's founder, Kim II Sung, and his son and successor, Kim Jong II, above the floodwaters.
For her efforts, the government posthumously granted her the Kim Jong II Youth Prize.
Her parents, teacher, and Youth League leaders also received awards, for helping foster her patriotism.
Such extreme devotion to the regime reflects the power of juche, North Korean's official ideology, which emphasizes the country's self-sufficiency and venerates the rulers of the Kim dynasty as guasi deities whose judgment and wisdom may never be guestioned.
In 1974, Kim Jong II sought to systematize juche by issuing a list called ""Ten Principles for the Establishment of the One-Ideology System""; most of the principles involved acknowledging the absolute authority of the supreme leader and pledging total obedience to the state.
Kim demanded that all North Korean citizens memorize the principles and adhere to them in their daily lives, an order enforced through weekly ""self-criticism"" sessions and peer surveillance.
During weekly meetings in classrooms, offices, and factories, citizens recite the ten principles and are called on to criticize themselves and one another for failing to live in perfect accordance with juche.
North Koreans begin participating in these sessions around the time they enter first grade.
Having inculcated juche into its citizens from a very young age, the state does everything it can to ensure that as they grow older, they are exposed to as little contradictory information as possible.
One of the most serious crimes that a North Korean can commit is to consume banned media.
On a single day in 2013, according to JoongAng Ilbo, a major South Korean newspaper, the government executed 80 people in seven cities for violating such laws. * ; it if Jason Lee / Reuters Portraits of former North Korean leaders Kim II Sung and Kim Jong II hang in Pyongyang, July 2013.
Every North Korean household has a statesanctioned radio that broadcasts official propaganda throughout the day.
The volume of these radios can be adjusted, but they cannot be turned off entirely.
All news reports and broadcasts go through several rounds of internal censorship before they appear.
Kim Jong Il's book Guidance for Journalists instructs reporters and editors ""to carry articles in which they unfailingly hold the president in high esteem, adore him and praise him as the great revolutionary leader""—instructions that they faithfully follow.
With the exception of a few hundred or perhaps a few thousand elites, North Koreans have no Internet access.
Trusted officials are tasked with scouring the Internet for material that they deem safe enough to add to the closed network, such as select scientific articles and health-related information.
All households have to register their electronic media eguipment with local authorities.
Occasionally, inspectors go door-to-door to see what's inside people's media players.
If they find illegal content, they make arrests and seize the contraband, which they send to their superiors in Pyongyang.
Prior to the spread of USB drives, forbidden movies and TV shows were often smuggled into the country on DVDs.
To prevent people from guickly ejecting and hiding banned DVDs when a raid began, inspectors would shut off the electricity for an entire apartment building before entering it, trapping discs inside players.
The inspectors would then confiscate all the DVD players, turn the electricity back on, plug them in, and press the eject buttons to find out what the residents had been watching.
Such efforts highlight just how nervous digital technologies make the regime.
But they are a double-edged sword that also gives the government a tool to better surveil its people and inundate them with still more propaganda.
North Korea, with an estimated population of around 25 million, now has around three million cell phone users.
Almost all of them are limited to the state-run Koryolink provider and network and can make only domestic calls, which are subject to freguent monitoring.
But some people now have illegal phones that have been smuggled into North Korea for use near the border, where they can connect to Chinese cellular networks.
The security services use detectors that can track down illicit calls that last longer than five minutes.
So to avoid detection, one must make a brief call, relocate, then call again to continue the conversation.
Cell phones can carry content that authorities don't want people to see, but they are also easier to track than other conduits of illegal information.
Data transfers are monitored tightly and can alert authorities to anyone who might be accessing banned material.
Police officers often stop mobile phone users on the street to inspect their devices for sensitive content; the officers sometimes seize phones and mete out punishments on the spot.
Koryolink has incrementally added features such as cameras to its devices and has slowly rolled out services such as text messaging and video calling.
More problematic from the regime's perspective are portable media players, since they are harder to track than cell phones.
Many North Koreans can now purchase black-market Chinese-made MP4 devices that play videos stored on smuggled memory cards.
MP4 players are small, and their rechargeable batteries last for about two hours at a time, allowing people to watch movies without needing to plug in—a crucial feature, since most North Korean households lack uninterrupted access to electricity.
North Koreans have also embraced the Notetel, a portable device that can access media like a computer does—via USB drives, memory cards, and DVDs—but also functions like a television and a radio.
These Chinese-made devices began appearing on the black market around 2005 and cost the eguivalent of $30-$50, depending on the model.
The regime cracked down on them at first but then legalized the popular devices in 2014 after reguiring that all Notetels be registered with local authorities.
Since last summer, however, defector10 led news organizations have reported that the regime has reversed course and is back to prohibiting the possession of these devices.
Inspectors sometimes burst into a home and check to see if any media players are warm from use.
To prepare for that event, many Notetel users keep a legal North Korean DVD in their device at all times so that during a raid they can pull out the USB drive holding the illegal media that they've actually been watching, conceal it, and pretend they'd been using the legal DVD all along.
The power, and danger, of Notetels is that they overcome ""the twin barriers to foreign media consumption—surveillance and power outages,"" Sokeel Park of Liberty in North Korea, a nongovernmental organization based in California, told Reuters in March 2015.
THOMAS PETER / REUTERS North Korea viewed from the Chinese side of the Yalu River, September 2016.
So North Koreans have developed various security protocols for watching banned media.
Families huddle close together to watch illicit movies and TV shows, sometimes sharing earbud headphones—which, if held in just the right position, produce enough sound for a few people to hear but not enough to leak through the walls.
THE JANGMADANG GENERATION The North Koreans most affected by the influx of digital technology are young people.
They enjoy historically unprecedented access to foreign information—which, according to many defectors, is undermining the grip that juche has traditionally held on young North Korean minds.
Every young defector I have met had watched foreign films and shows, had read foreign books, and knew a decent amount about the world outside North Korea before escaping the country.
Defectors say that they are not unrepresentative in this respect and that many young North Koreans with no interest in leaving their country nevertheless take the risk of obtaining and consuming foreign media.
As Min Jun, a recent defector in his early 20s, told me, ""In our generation, young people get together guietly in each other's homes, put on South Korean K-pop, and have a little dance party.
On its own, such exposure to foreign culture probably wouldn't mean much.
But a number of other factors also set young North Koreans apart from older generations and increase the salience of their access to outside media and 12 digital technology.
First, those younger than 35—about a guarter of the population—are known as the jangmadang generation because they came of age buying food and other goods at those small, semilegal markets.
They have rarely, if ever, stood in lines to collect state-allotted rations, as their parents and grandparents did for decades.
As a result, they are more capitalistic, more individualistic, and more likely to take risks.
Second, younger North Koreans see themselves as more selfreliant than their parents, because they don't feel as though they've received much of value from their government.
Although young North Koreans continue to obey the laws and publicly respect the regime, young defectors freguently claim that behind closed doors, their friends back home freguently mock the country's leadership.
SMUGGLING IN THE TRUTH As North Koreans have developed a more accurate perception of their country and the world, many have begun to feel a profound sense of betrayal.
That feeling, in turn, has fed a sense of distrust—one that could prove corrosive in a totalitarian state built around a fanatical cult of personality.
The regime forbids the formation of unofficial student groups and sports teams.
Without express permission, North Koreans are not allowed to host a social gathering late at night or stay overnight away from their hometown in another person's home.
The regime has also made it extremely difficult for North Koreans to trust one another by developing a massive network of neighborhood-level informants and offering rewards for exposing anyone who criticizes the government.
Finally, the authorities have vastly improved their ability to monitor digital communications, making it extraordinarily difficult to send sensitive messages, much less organize.
Despite these challenges, anyone with an interest in reducing the threat that the Kim regime poses to its own people and to the rest of the world should find ways to support the distribution of foreign information and media in North Korea.
Traditional diplomacy and sanctions have failed to push Kim toward political and economic reform and away from saber rattling and defiance.
For decades, some of the world's most persistent and skilled negotiators have sought to engage, entice, and coerce him, his father, and his grandfather.
If major powers have undertaken covert actions to encourage a coup, those too have failed.
Meanwhile, Pyongyang's nuclear weapons now deter any overt attempts at regime change and the use of major military force.
Boosting the flow of outside information and cultural products may well be the single most sustainable and costeffective way to encourage that.
Governments, philanthropic groups, and individual donors interested in the future of North Korea should consider funding nongovernmental 14 organizations in South Korea, the United States, and elsewhere that work to get digital technology and foreign media into the country.
Especially important are efforts to get outside information into the hands of North Korean military officers, intellectuals, and political elites.
Also of great value are projects by nongovernmental organizations to train North Korean defectors—who know the target audience guite well—to assist in collecting media products and getting them across the border.
Critics of such efforts claim that North Korean authorities will have little trouble cracking down if they come to believe that a line has been crossed and that too much illicit information is reaching the public.
But this position is too dismissive of the intense thirst for foreign media that North Koreans have displayed.
North Koreans have tasted forbidden fruit and have made it clear that they want more, risking severe punishment just to steal a glimpse of the outside world while hiding under the covers in a dark, locked room, hoping no one will find out.
How the Information Underground Is Transforming a Closed Society , from which this essay is adapted.
As it became clear that the attacks had been carried out by jihadist terrorists, I came to feel a new sense of responsibility toward my son, beyond the already intense demands of parenthood.
Today, I am the ambassador of the United Arab Emirates to Russia, and I try to bring to my work an attitude of openness to ideas and possibilities.
In that spirit, I have written a series of letters to Saif, with the intention of opening his eyes to some of the guestions he is likely to face as he grows up, and to a range of possible answers.
I want my sons and their generation of Muslims to understand how to be faithful to Islam and its deepest values while charting a course through a complex world.
I want them to discover through observation and thought that there need be no conflict between Islam and the rest of the world.
I want them to understand that even in matters of religion, there are many choices that we must make.
I want my sons' generation of Muslims to realize that they have the right—and the obligation—to think about and to decide what is right and what is wrong, what is Islamic and what is peripheral to the faith.
Others say that the violent extremists who belong to groups such as the Islamic State are not true Muslims.
Although I loathe what the terrorists do, I realize that according to the minimal entry reguirements for Islam, they are Muslims.
Islam demands only that a believer affirm that there is no God but Allah and that Muhammad is his messenger.
That is why major religious institutions in the Islamic world have rightly refused to label them as non-Muslims, even while condemning their actions.
It is too easy to say that jihadist extremists have nothing to do with us.
Even if their readings of Islamic Scripture seem warped and out of date, they have gained traction.
What worries me is that as the extremists' ideas have spread, the circle of Muslims clinging to other conceptions of Islam has begun to shrink.
And as it has shrunk, it has become guieter and guieter, until only the extremists seem to speak and act in the name of Islam.
We need to speak out, but it is not enough to declare in public that Islam is not violent or radical or angry, that Islam is a religion of peace.
We need to demonstrate how it is expressed in our lives and the lives of those in our community.
I am not saying that Muslims such as you and I should accept blame for what terrorists do.
I am saying that we can take responsibility by demanding a different understanding of Islam.
We can make clear, to Muslims and non-Muslims, that another reading of Islam is possible and necessary.
And we need to act in ways that make clear how we understand Islam and its operation in our lives.
I believe we owe that to all the innocent people, both Muslim and non-Muslim, who have suffered at the hands of our coreligionists in their misguided extremism.
Taking that sort of responsibility is hard, especially when many people outside the Muslim world have become committed Islamophobes. fearing and even hating people like you and me, sometimes with the encouragement of political leaders.
When you feel unjustly singled out and attacked, it is not easy to look at your beliefs and think them through, 19 especially in a public way.
You may be certain of your beliefs about something today, only to wake up with doubts tomorrow.
To admit this in today's environment is risky; many Muslims are leery of acknowledging any gualms about their own beliefs.
Some of the greatest scholars of Islam went through periods of confusion and doubt.
Consider the philosopher and theologian Abu Hamid al-Ghazali, who was born in Persia in the eleventh century and has been hugely influential in Islamic thought.
His works are treasured today, but during his own lifetime, he was so doubtful about many things that he withdrew from society for a decade.
Although we don't know much about what troubled him, it's clear that he was unsure and even fearful.
Ghazali, who until then had been esteemed as a scholar of orthodox Islam, brought Sufism, a spiritual strain of Islam, into the mainstream.
He opened up Islamic religious experience to spiritualism and poetry, which at that time many considered foreign to the faith.
Today, some of our fellow Muslims demand that we accept only ideas that are Muslim in origin—namely, ideas that appear in the Koran, the early dictionaries of the Arabic language, the sayings of the Prophet, and the biographies of the Prophet and his Companions.
Meanwhile, we must reject foreign ideas such as democracy, they maintain.
Confronted with more liberal views, which present discussion, debate, and consensus building as ancient Islamic traditions, they contend that democracy is a sin against Allah's power, against his will, and against his sovereignty.
In fact, from reading many of their statements, it is clear that they have little understanding of how people can come together to make communal decisions.
The government that I represent is a monarchy, but I feel no need to condemn proponents of democratic reform as heretics.
I might not always agree with them, but their ideas are not necessarily un-Islamic.
As extremist ideas have spread , the circle of Muslims clinging to other conceptions of Islam has begun to shrink.
Another ""foreign"" practice that causes a great deal of concern to Muslims is the mixing of the sexes.
Some Muslim-majority countries mandate the separation of the sexes in schools, universities, and the workplace.
Authorities in these countries present such rules as being ""truly Islamic"" and argue that they solve the problem of illicit relationships outside of marriage.
But research and study of such issues—which is often forbidden—might show that no such effect exists.
Governments in much of the Muslim world have no satisfactory answers to those guestions, because they often don't bother to ask them.
MEN AND WOMEN Dear Saif, 21 You have been brought up in a household where women—including your mother—are strong, educated, focused, and hard-working.
If someone suggested to you that men are somehow more valuable or more talented than women, you would scratch your head.
But when I was your age, the sermons that I heard at mosgue taught that women were inherently inferior.
Men were strong, intelligent, and emotionally stable—natural breadwinners.
That view of women persists in parts of the Muslim world—and, in fairness, in many other places, as well.
It is certainly not the only possible view of women afforded by Islam, but it is a powerful belief, and one that enjoys a great deal of political, legal, and financial support.
I am proud that your mother and your aunts are all educated and work in professions that they chose.
Doing so has hardly stopped any of them from raising families and taking care of their husbands—the roles demanded by conservative readings of Islamic texts.
The women in your life defy the strict traditionalist view, which presents women as fundamentally passive creatures whom men must protect from the ravages of the world.
Other traditionalists base their position on women on a different argument, one that is rarely discussed openly, especially in front of non-Muslims, because it is a bit of a taboo.
But such relationships also develop when a woman lives in a home 22 where she is given little love and self-respect.
And all too often, women are punished for such relationships, whereas the men involved escape censure—an unacceptable inconsistency.
This traditionalist position is based, ultimately, on a desire to control women.
But women do not need to be controlled; they need to be trusted and respected.
We trust and respect our sisters, our mothers, our daughters, and our aunts; we must provide the same trust and respect to other women.
If we did, perhaps we would not witness so many cases of sexual harassment and exploitation in the Muslim world.
Saif, I want you to see that there is nothing written in stone that places Muslim women below Muslim men.
Treating women as inferior is not a religious duty; it is simply a practice of patriarchal societies.
Within the Islamic tradition, there are many models of how Muslim women can live and be true to their faith.
There are Muslim women, for example, who have looked into the origins of the hijab (the traditional veil that covers the head and hair) and have concluded that there is no hard-and-fast rule reguiring them to wear it—let alone a rule reguiring them to wear a burga or a nigab, which both cover far more.
Islam calls on women to be modest in their appearance, but veiling is actually a pre-Islamic tradition.
The limits placed on women in conservative Muslim societies, such as mandatory veiling, or rules limiting their mobility, or restrictions on work and education, have their roots not in Islamic doctrine but rather in men's fear that they will not be able to control women—and their fear that women, if left uncontrolled, will overtake men by being more disciplined, more focused, more hard-working.
People say it when criticizing official corruption in Muslim countries and when pointing out the alleged spread of immorality.
The most famous iteration of this expression is the slogan ""Islam Is the Solution,"" which has been used by the Muslim Brotherhood and many other Islamist groups.
The slogan is a shorthand for the argument that all the most glorious achievements in Islamic history—the conguests, the empires. 24 the knowledge production, the wealth—occurred under some system of religious rule.
Therefore, if we want to revive this past glory in the modern era, we must reimpose such a system.
This argument holds that if a little Islam is good, then more Islam must be even better.
The most influential proponent of that position today is ISIS, with its unbridled enthusiasm for an all-encompassing religious state, or caliphate.
The genius of this proposition—whether it is articulated by the fanatical jihadists of ISIS or the more subtle theocrats of the Muslim Brotherhood—is that any difficulties or failures can be attributed to the people's lack of faith and piety.
Leaders need not fault themselves or their policies; citizens need not guestion their values or customs.
But piety will take us only so far, and relying entirely on Allah to provide for us, to solve our problems, to feed and educate and clothe our children, is to take Allah for granted.
THE MUSLIM INDIVIDUAL Dear Saif, 25 At school, at the mosque, and in the news, you have probably heard a lot about the Arab nation, the Arab street, the rightly guided people, and the Islamic ummah.
Out of nothing, Muhammad had built a large group of followers; at some stage, it became big enough to be referred to as a distinct entity.
But the concept of the ummah has allowed self-appointed religious authorities to speak in the name of all Muslims without ever asking the rest of us what we think.
The idea of an ummah also makes it easier for extremists to depict Islam—and all of the world's Muslims—as standing in opposition to the West, or to capitalism, or to any number of other things.
In that conception of the Muslim world, the individual's voice comes second to the group's voice.
We have been trained over the years to put community ahead of individuality.
The phrase itself sounds almost unnatural to me, as though it refers to a category that doesn't exist—at least in the worldview that Muslims have long been encouraged to embrace.
There is no need to return to a glorious past in order to build a glorious future.
Dialogue and public debate about what it means to be an individual in the Muslim world would allow us to think more clearly about personal responsibility, ethical choices, and the respect and dignity that attaches to people rather than to families, tribes, or sects.
It might lead us to stop insisting solely on our responsibilities to the ummah and start 26 considering our responsibilities to ourselves and to others, whom we might come to see not as members of groups allegedly opposed to Islam but rather as individuals.
Instead of asking one another about family names and bloodlines and sects, we might decide to respect one another as individuals regardless of our backgrounds.
We might begin to more deeply acknowledge the outrageous number of people killed in the Muslim world in civil wars and in terrorist attacks carried out not by outsiders but by other Muslims.
We might memorialize these people not as a group but as individuals with names and faces and life stories—not to deify the dead but rather to recognize our responsibility to preserve their honor and dignity, and the honor and dignity of those who survive them.
In this way, the idea of the Muslim individual might help us improve how we discuss politics, economics, and security.
If you and other members of your generation start looking at yourselves as individuals first and foremost, perhaps you will build better societies.
You might take hold of your fates and take hold of your lives in the here and now, recognizing that there is no need to return to a glorious past in order to build a glorious future.
Our personal, individual interests might not align with those of the patriarch, the family, the tribe, the community, or the state.
But the embrace of each Muslim's individuality will lead to a rebalancing in the Islamic world in favor of more compassion, more understanding, and more empathy.
If you accept the individual diversity of your fellow Muslims, you are more likely to do the same for those of other faiths, as well.
Muslims can and should live in harmony with the diversity of humanity that exists outside of our faith.
But we will struggle to do so until we truly embrace ourselves as individuals.
He is the author of Letters to a Young Muslim , from which this essay is adapted.
No one knows how the foreign policy of the Trump administration will take shape, or how the new president's priorities and preferences will shift as he encounters the torrent of events and crises ahead.
But not since Franklin Roosevelt's 29 administration has United States foreign policy witnessed debates this fundamental.
United States grand strategy has been shaped by two major schools of thought, both focused on achieving a stable international system with the United States at the center.
Hamiltonians believed that it was in the American interest for the United States to replace the United Kingdom as ""the gyroscope of world order,"" in the words of President Woodrow Wilson's adviser Edward House during World War I, putting the financial and security architecture in place for a reviving global economy after World War II—something that would both contain the Soviet Union and advance United States interests.
When the Soviet Union fell, Hamiltonians responded by doubling down on the creation of a global liberal order, understood primarily in economic terms.
Wilsonians, meanwhile, also believed that the creation of a global liberal order was a vital United States interest, but they conceived of it in terms of values rather than economics.
Seeing corrupt and authoritarian regimes abroad as a leading cause of conflict and violence, Wilsonians sought peace through the promotion of human rights, democratic governance, and the rule of law.
The disputes between and among these factions were intense and conseguential, but they took place within a common commitment to a common project of global order.
As that project came under increasing strain in recent decades, however, the unguestioned grip of the globalists on United States foreign policy thinking began to loosen.
More nationalist, less 30 globally minded voices began to be heard, and a public increasingly disenchanted with what it saw as the costly failures the global order-building project began to challenge what the foreign policy establishment was preaching.
The Jeffersonian and Jacksonian schools of thought, prominent before World War II but out of favor during the heyday of the liberal order, have come back with a vengeance.
Jeffersonians, including today's so-called realists, argue that reducing the United States' global profile would reduce the costs and risks of foreign policy.
They seek to define United States interests narrowly and advance them in the safest and most economical ways.
Libertarians take this proposition to its limits and find allies among many on the left who oppose interventionism, want to cut military spending, and favor redeploying the government's efforts and resources at home.
Both Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky and Senator Ted Cruz of Texas seemed to think that they could surf the rising tide of Jeffersonian thinking during the Republican presidential primary.
For Jacksonians—who formed the core of Trump's passionately supportive base—the United States is not a political entity created and defined by a set of intellectual propositions rooted in the Enlightenment and oriented toward the fulfillment of a universal mission.
Rather, it is the nation-state of the American people, and its chief business lies at home.
Jacksonians see American exceptionalism not as a function of the universal appeal of American ideas, or even as a function of a unigue American vocation to transform the world, but rather as rooted in the country's singular commitment to the eguality and dignity of individual American citizens.
The role of the United States government, Jacksonians believe, is to fulfill the country's destiny by looking after the physical security and economic well-being of the American people in their national home—and to do that while interfering as little as possible with the individual freedom that makes the country unigue.
It took a particular combination of forces and trends to mobilize it this election cycle, and most of those were domestically focused.
In seeking to explain the Jacksonian surge, commentators have looked to factors such as wage stagnation, the loss of good jobs for unskilled workers, the hollowing out of civic life, a rise in drug use—conditions many associate with life in blighted inner cities that have spread across much of the country.
Identity and culture have historically played a major role in American politics, and 2016 was no exception.
Jacksonian America felt itself to be under siege, with its values under attack and its future under threat.
Trump—flawed as many Jacksonians themselves believed him to be—seemed the only candidate willing to help fight for its survival.
Not since Franklin Roosevelt's administration has United States foreign policy witnessed debates this fundamental.
For Jacksonian America, certain events galvanize intense interest and political engagement, however brief.
One of these is war; when an enemy attacks, Jacksonians spring to the country's defense.
The most powerful driver of Jacksonian political engagement in domestic politics, similarly, is the perception that Jacksonians are being attacked by internal enemies, such as an elite cabal or immigrants from different backgrounds.
Jacksonians worry about the United States government being taken over by malevolent forces bent on transforming the United States' essential character.
They are not obsessed with corruption, seeing it as an ineradicable part of politics.
But they care deeply about what they see as perversion—when politicians try to use the government to oppress the people rather than protect them.
And that is what many Jacksonians came to feel was happening in recent 33 years, with powerful forces in the American elite, including the political establishments of both major parties, in cahoots against them.
Many Jacksonians came to believe that the American establishment was no longer reliably patriotic, with ""patriotism"" defined as an instinctive loyalty to the well-being and values of Jacksonian America.
Many Americans with cosmopolitan sympathies see their main ethical imperative as working for the betterment of humanity in general.
Jacksonians locate their moral community closer to home, in fellow citizens who share a common national bond.
If the cosmopolitans see Jacksonians as backward and chauvinistic, Jacksonians return the favor by seeing the cosmopolitan elite as near treasonous—people who think it is morally guestionable to put their own country, and its citizens, first.
Jacksonian distrust of elite patriotism has been increased by the country's selective embrace of identity politics in recent decades.
The contemporary American scene is filled with civic, political, and academic movements celebrating various ethnic, racial, gender, and religious identities.
Elites have gradually welcomed demands for cultural recognition by African Americans, Hispanics, women, the LGBTQ community, Native Americans, Muslim Americans.
Yet the situation is more complex for most Jacksonians, who don't see themselves as fitting neatly into any of those categories.
Whites who organize around their specific European ethnic roots can do so with little pushback; Italian Americans and Irish Americans, for example, have long and storied traditions in the parade of American identity groups.
But increasingly, those older ethnic identities have faded, and there are taboos against claiming a generic European American or white identity.
Many white Americans thus find themselves in a society that talks constantly about the importance of identity, 34 that values ethnic authenticity, that offers economic benefits and social advantages based on identity—for everybody but them.
For Americans of mixed European background or for the millions who think of themselves simply as American, there are few acceptable ways to celebrate or even connect with one's heritage.
Jacksonians see American exceptionalism not as a function of the universal appeal of American ideas, but as rooted in the country's singular commitment to the equality and dignity of individual American citizens.
There are many reasons for this, rooted in a complex process of intellectual reflection over United States history, but the reasons don't necessarily make intuitive sense to unemployed former factory workers and their families.
The growing resistance among many white voters to what they call ""political correctness"" and a growing willingness to articulate their own sense of group identity can sometimes reflect racism, but they need not always do so.
People constantly told that they are racist for thinking in positive terms about what they see as their identity, however, may decide that racist is what they are, and that they might as well make the best of it.
The rise of the so-called alt-right is at least partly rooted in this dynamic.
The emergence of the Black Lives Matter movement and the scattered, sometimes violent expressions of anti-police sentiment displayed in recent years compounded the Jacksonians' sense of cultural alienation, and again, not simply because of race.
Jacksonians instinctively support the police, just as they instinctively support the military.
Those on the frontlines protecting society sometimes make mistakes, in this view, but mistakes are inevitable in the heat of combat, or in the face of crime.
It is unfair and even immoral, many Jacksonians believe, to ask soldiers or police officers to put 35 their lives on the line and face great risks and stress, only to have their choices second-guessed by armchair critics.
Protests that many Americans saw as a guest for justice, therefore, often struck Jacksonians as attacks on law enforcement and public order.
Gun control and immigration were two other issues that crystallized the perception among many voters that the political establishments of both parties had grown hostile to core national values.
Non-Jacksonians often find it difficult to grasp the depth of the feelings these issues stir up and how proposals for gun control and immigration reform reinforce suspicions about elite control and cosmopolitanism.
The right to bear arms plays a unigue and hallowed role in Jacksonian political culture, and many Jacksonians consider the Second Amendment to be the most important in the Constitution.
These Americans see the right of revolution, enshrined in the Declaration of Independence, as the last resort of a free people to defend themselves against tyranny—and see that right as unenforceable without the possibility of bearing arms.
They regard a family's right to protect itself without reliance on the state, meanwhile, as not just a hypothetical ideal but a potential practical necessity—and something that elites don't care about or even actively oppose.
As for immigration, here, too, most non-Jacksonians misread the source and nature of Jacksonian concern.
There has been much discussion about the impact of immigration on the wages of low-skilled workers and some talk about xenophobia and Islamophobia.
But Jacksonians in 2016 saw immigration as part of a deliberate and conscious attempt to marginalize 36 them in their own country.
Hopeful talk among Democrats about an ""emerging Democratic majority"" based on a secular decline in the percentage of the voting population that is white was heard in Jacksonian America as support for a deliberate transformation of American demographics.
When Jacksonians hear elites' strong support for high levels of immigration and their seeming lack of concern about illegal immigration, they do not immediately think of their pocketbooks.
They see an elite out to banish them from power—politically, culturally, demographically.
The recent spate of dramatic random terrorist attacks, finally, fused the immigration and personal security issues into a single toxic whole.
In short, in November, many Americans voted their lack of confidence—not in a particular party but in the governing classes more generally and their associated global cosmopolitan ideology.
Many Trump voters were less concerned with pushing a specific program than with stopping what appeared to be the inexorable movement of their country toward catastrophe.
Many previous presidents have had to revise their ideas substantially after reaching the Oval Office; Trump may be no exception.
Nor is it clear just what the results would be of trying to put his unorthodox policies into practice.
At the moment, Jacksonians are skeptical about the United States' policy of global engagement and liberal order building—but more from a lack of trust in the people shaping foreign policy than from a desire for a specific alternative vision.
They oppose recent trade agreements not because they understand the details and conseguences of those 38 extremely complex agreements' terms but because they have come to believe that the negotiators of those agreements did not necessarily have the United States' interests at heart.
Most Jacksonians are not foreign policy experts and do not ever expect to become experts.
If they believe in a leader or a political movement, they are prepared to accept policies that seem counter-intuitive and difficult.
They no longer have such trust in the American establishment, and unless and until it can be restored, they will keep Washington on a short leash.
To paraphrase what the neoconservative intellectual Irving Kristol wrote about Senator Joseph McCarthy in 1952, there is one thing that Jacksonians know about Trump—that he is uneguivocally on their side.
And their concerns are not all illegitimate, for the United States' global order-building project is hardly flourishing.
The right to bear arms plays a unique and hallowed role in Jacksonian political culture.
Western policymakers became infatuated with some dangerously oversimplified ideas.
They believed capitalism had been tamed and would no longer generate economic, social, or political upheavals.
They felt that illiberal ideologies and political emotions had been left in the historical dustbin and were believed only by ""bitter"" losers—people who ""cling to guns or religion or antipathy toward people who aren't like them ... as a way to explain their frustrations,"" as Barack Obama famously put it in 2008.
Time and the normal processes of history would solve the problem; constructing a liberal world order was simply a matter of working out the details.
It is increasingly clear that globalization and automation have helped break up the socioeconomic model that undergirded postwar prosperity and domestic social peace, and that the next stage of capitalist development will challenge the very foundations of both the global liberal order and many of its national pillars.
In this new world disorder, the power of identity politics can no longer be denied.
Western elites believed that in the twenty-first century, cosmopolitanism and globalism would triumph over atavism and tribal loyalties.
They failed to understand the deep roots of identity politics in the human psyche and the necessity for those roots to find political expression in both foreign and domestic policy arenas.
And they failed to understand that the very forces of economic and social development that cosmopolitanism and globalization fostered would generate turbulence and eventually resistance, as Gemeinschaft fought back against the onrushing Gesellschaft , in the classic terms sociologists favored a century ago.
The challenge for international politics in the days ahead is therefore less to complete the task of liberal world order building along conventional lines than to find a way to stop the liberal order's erosion and reground the global system on a more sustainable basis.
International order needs to rest not just on elite consensus and balances of power and policy but also on the free choices of national communities—communities that need to feel protected from the outside world as much as they want to benefit from engaging with it.
WALTER RUSSELL MEAD is James Clarke Chace Professor of Foreign Affairs and 40 Humanities at Bard College and a Distinguished Scholar at the Hudson Institute.
In 2014, following the Russian invasion of Crimea, The Washington Post published the results of a poll that asked Americans about whether the United States should intervene militarily in Ukraine.
Only one in six could identify Ukraine on a map; the median response was off by about 1,800 miles.
But this lack of knowledge did not stop people from expressing pointed views.
In fact, the respondents favored intervention in 42 direct proportion to their ignorance.
Put another way, the people who thought Ukraine was located in Latin America or Australia were the most enthusiastic about using military force there.
The following year, Public Policy Polling asked a broad sample of Democratic and Republican primary voters whether they would support bombing Agrabah.
Nearly a third of Republican respondents said they would, versus 13 percent who opposed the idea.
Democratic preferences were roughly reversed; 36 percent were opposed, and 19 percent were in favor.
Liberals crowed that the poll showed Republicans' aggressive tendencies.
Experts in national security couldn't fail to notice that 43 percent of Republicans and 55 percent of Democrats polled had an actual, defined view on bombing a place in a cartoon.
Increasingly, incidents like this are the norm rather than the exception.
It's not just that people don't know a lot about science or politics or geography.
The bigger concern today is that Americans have reached a point where ignorance—at least regarding what is generally considered established knowledge in public policy—is seen as an actual virtue.
To reject the advice of experts is to assert autonomy, a way for Americans to demonstrate their independence from nefarious elites—and insulate their increasingly fragile egos from ever being told they're wrong.
This isn't the same thing as the traditional American distaste for intellectuals and know-it-alls.
Principled, informed arguments are a sign of intellectual health and vitality in a democracy.
I'm worried because we no longer have those 43 kinds of arguments, just angry shouting matches.
When I started working in Washington in the 1980s, I guickly learned that random people I met would instruct me in what the government should do about any number of things, particularly my own specialties of arms control and foreign policy.
At first I was surprised, but I came to realize that this was understandable and even to some extent desirable.
We live in a democracy, and many people have strong opinions about public life.
Over time, I found that other policy specialists had similar experiences, with laypeople subjecting them to lengthy disguisitions on taxes, budgets, immigration, the environment, and many other subjects.
If you work on public policy, such interactions go with the job, and at their best, they help keep you intellectually honest.
In later years, however, I started hearing the same stories from doctors and lawyers and teachers and many other professionals.
These were stories not about patients or clients or students raising informed guestions but about them telling the professionals why their professional advice was actually misguided or even wrong.
The idea that the expert was giving considered, experienced advice worth taking seriously was simply dismissed.
By the death of expertise, I do not mean the death of actual expert abilities, the knowledge of specific things that sets some people apart from others in various areas.
There will always be doctors and lawyers and engineers and other specialists.
And most sane people go straight to them if they break a bone or get arrested or need to build a bridge.
But 44 that represents a kind of reliance on experts as technicians, the use of established knowledge as an off-the-shelf convenience as desired.
REBECCA COOK / REUTERS Supporters ofBernie Sanders, then a candidate for the Democratic presidential nomination, outside a rally in Flint, Michigan, April 2016.
The larger discussions, from what constitutes a nutritious diet to what actions will best further United States interests, reguire conversations between ordinary citizens and experts.
We prosper because we specialize, developing formal and informal mechanisms and practices that allow us to trust one another in those specializations and gain the collective benefit of our individual expertise.
If that trust dissipates, eventually both democracy and expertise will be fatally corrupted, because neither democratic leaders nor their expert advisers want to tangle with an ignorant electorate.
At that point, expertise will no longer serve the public interest; it will serve the interest of whatever cligue is paying its bills or taking the popular temperature at any given moment.
In the original American populistic dream, the omnicompetence of the common man was fundamental and indispensable.
It was believed that he could, without much special preparation, pursue the professions and run the government.
Today he knows that he cannot even make his breakfast without using devices, more or less mysterious to him, which expertise has put at his disposal; and when he sits down to breakfast and looks at his morning newspaper, he reads 46 about a whole range of vital and intricate issues and acknowledges, if he is candid with himself that he has not acquired competence to judge most of them.
Hofstadter argued that this overwhelming complexity produced feelings of helplessness and anger among a citizenry that knew itself to be increasingly at the mercy of more sophisticated elites.
In 2015, the law professor Ilya Somin observed that the problem had persisted and even metastasized over time.
The ""size and complexity of government,"" he wrote, have made it ""more difficult for voters with limited knowledge to monitor and evaluate the government's many activities.
Despite decades of advances in education, technology, and life opportunities, voters now are no better able to guide public policy than they were in Hofstadter's day, and in many respects, they are even less capable of doing so.
Today, campaigns against established knowledge are often led by people who have all the tools they need to know better.
For example, the anti-vaccine movement—one of the classic contemporary examples of this phenomenon—has gained its greatest reach among people such as the educated suburbanites in Marin County, outside San Francisco, where at the peak of the craze, in 2012, almost eight percent of parents reguested a personal belief exemption from the obligation to vaccinate their children before enrolling them in 47 school.
These parents were not medical professionals, but they had just enough education to believe that they could challenge established medical science, and they felt empowered to do so—even at the cost of the health of their own and everybody else's children.
DON'T KNOW MUCH Experts can be defined loosely as people who have mastered the specialized skills and bodies of knowledge relevant to a particular occupation and who routinely rely on them in their daily work.
Put another way, experts are the people who know considerably more about a given subject than the rest of us, and to whom we usually turn for education or advice on that topic.
They don't know everything, and they're not always right, but they constitute an authoritative minority whose views on a topic are more likely to be right than those of the public at large.
In part, by formal training, education, and professional experience, applied over the course of a career.
Teachers, nurses, and plumbers all have to acguire certification of some kind to exercise their skills, as a signal to others that their abilities have been reviewed by their peers and met a basic standard of competence.
Credentialism can run amok, and guilds can use it cynically to generate revenue or protect their fiefdoms with unnecessary barriers to entry.
But it can also reflect actual learning and professional competence, helping separate real experts from amateurs or charlatans.
Beyond credentials lies talent, an immutable but real guality that creates differences in status even within expert communities.
And beyond both lies a mindset, an acceptance of membership in a broader community of specialists devoted to ever-greater understanding of a particular subject.
Every 48 professional group and expert community has watchdogs, boards, accreditors, and certification authorities whose job is to police its own members and ensure that they are competent and live up to the standards of their own specialty.
Experts are often wrong, and the good ones among them are the first to admit it—because their own professional disciplines are based not on some ideal of perfect knowledge and competence but on a constant process of identifying errors and correcting them, which ultimately drives intellectual progress.
Yet these days, members of the public search for expert errors and revel in finding them—not to improve understanding but rather to give themselves license to disregard all expert advice they don't like.
We've all been trapped at a party where one of the least informed people in the room holds court, confidently lecturing the other guests with a cascade of banalities and misinformation.
It's real, and it's called ""the Dunning-Kruger effect,"" after the research psychologists David Dunning and Justin Kruger.
The essence of the effect is that the less skilled or competent you are, the more confident you are that you're actually very good at what you do.
We are moving toward a Coogle-fueled, Wikipedia-based collapse of any division between professionals and laypeople.
To some extent, this is true of everybody, in the same way that few people are willing to accept that they have a lousy sense of humor or a grating personality.
As it turns out, most people rate themselves higher than others would regarding a 49 variety of skills.
But it turns out that less competent people overestimate themselves more than others do.
As Dunning wrote in 2014, A whole battery of studies . . . have confirmed that people who don't know much about a given set of cognitive, technical, or social skills tend to grossly overestimate their prowess and performance, whether it's grammar, emotional intelligence, logical reasoning, firearm care and safety, debating, or financial knowledge.
College students who hand in exams that will earn them Ds and Fs tend to think their efforts will be worthy of far higher grades; low-performing chess players, bridge players, and medical students, and elderly people applying for a renewed driver's license, similarly overestimate their competence by a long shot.
The reason turns out to be the absence of a guality called ""metacognition,"" the ability to step back and see your own cognitive processes in perspective.
Good singers know when they've hit a sour note, good directors know when a scene in a play isn't working, and intellectually self-aware people know when they're out of their depth.
Their less successful counterparts can't tell—which can lead to a lot of bad music, boring drama, and maddening conversations.
Worse, it's very hard to educate or inform people who, when in doubt, just make stuff up.
The least competent people turn out to be the ones least likely to realize they are wrong and others are right, the most likely to respond to their own ignorance by trying to fake it, and the least able to learn anything.
SURREALITY-BASED COMMUNITY 50 The problems for democracy posed by the least competent are serious.
But even competent and highly intelligent people encounter problems in trying to comprehend complicated issues of public policy with which they are not professionally conversant.
Most prominent of those problems is confirmation bias, the tendency to look for information that corroborates what we already believe.
This peer-review process is generally invisible to laypeople, however, because the checking and adjustments take place before the final product is released.
Outside the academy, in contrast, arguments and debates usually have no external review or accountability at all.
Facts come and go as people find convenient at the moment, making arguments unfalsifiable and intellectual progress impossible.
And unfortunately, because common sense is not enough to understand or judge plausible alternative policy options, the gap between informed specialists and uninformed laypeople often gets filled with crude simplifications or conspiracy theories.
Conspiracy theories are attractive to people who have a hard time making sense of a complicated world and little patience for boring, detailed explanations.
They are also a way for people to give context and meaning to events that frighten them.
Without a coherent explanation for why terrible things happen to innocent people, they would have to accept such occurrences as nothing more than the random cruelty of either an uncaring universe or an incomprehensible deity.
And just as individuals facing grief and confusion look for meaning where none may exist, so, too, will entire societies gravitate toward outlandish theories when collectively 51 subjected to a terrible national experience.
This is why they spiked in popularity after World War I, the Russian Revolution, the Kennedy assassination, the 9/11 attacks, and other major disasters—and are growing now in response to destabilizing contemporary trends, such as the economic and social dislocations of globalization and persistent terrorism.
T_R U M P Mike Segar / Reuters Donald Trump, then a candidate for president of the United States, at a campaign rally in Miami, September 2016.
At their worst, conspiracy theories can produce a moral panic in which innocent people get hurt.
But even when they seem trivial, their prevalence undermines the sort of reasoned interpersonal discourse on which liberal democracy depends.
Political beliefs among both laypeople and 52 experts are subject to the same confirmation bias that plagues thinking about other issues.
But misguided beliefs about politics and other subjective matters are even harder to shake, because political views are deeply rooted in a person's self-image and most cherished beliefs.
Put another way, what we believe says something important about how we see ourselves, making disconfirmation of such beliefs a wrenching process that our minds stubbornly resist.
As a result, unable to see their own biases, most people simply drive one another crazy arguing rather than accept answers that contradict what they already think about the subject—and shoot the messenger, to boot.
Even more disturbing, the study found that when exposed to scientific research that challenged their views, both liberals and conservatives reacted by doubting the science rather than themselves.
WELCOME TO THE IDIOCRACY Ask an expert about the death of expertise, and you will probably get a rant about the influence of the Internet.
The digital age has simply accelerated the collapse of communication between experts and laypeople by offering an apparent shortcut to erudition.
It has allowed people to mimic intellectual accomplishment by indulging in an illusion of expertise provided by a limitless supply of facts.
The countless dumpsters of nonsense parked on the Internet are an expert's nightmare.
Some of the smartest people on earth have a significant presence on the Internet.
Ordinary people who already had to make hard choices about where to get their information when there were a few dozen newspapers, magazines, and television channels now face endless webpages produced by anyone willing to pay for an online presence.
Of course, this is no more and no less than an updated version of the basic paradox of the printing press.
The convenience of the Internet is a tremendous boon, but mostly for people already trained in research and who have some idea what they're looking for.
It does little good, unfortunately, for a student or an untrained layperson who has never been taught how to judge the provenance of information or the reputability of a writer.
Libraries, or at least their reference and academic sections, once served as a kind of first cut through the noise of the marketplace.
The Internet, however, is less a library than a giant repository where anyone can dump anything.
In practice, this means that a search for information will rely on algorithms usually developed by for-profit companies using opague criteria.
It reguires the ability to find authentic information, sort through it, analyze it, and apply it.
Technological optimists will argue that these objections are just so much old-think, a relic of how things used to be done, and unnecessary now because people can tap directly into the so-called wisdom of crowds.
It is true that the aggregated judgments of large groups of ordinary people sometimes produce better results than the judgments of any individual, even a specialist.
This is because the aggregation process helps wash out a lot of random misperception, confirmation bias, and the like.
Understanding how a virus is transmitted from one human being to another is not the same thing as guessing the number of jellybeans in a glass jar.
Moreover, the whole point of the wisdom of crowds is that the members of the crowd supposedly bring to bear various independent opinions on any given topic.
In fact, however, the Internet tends to generate communities of the like-minded, groups dedicated to confirming their own preexisting beliefs rather than challenging them.
And social media only amplifies this echo chamber, miring millions of Americans in their own political and intellectual biases.
The most innocent and most common are what we might think of as the ordinary failures of science.
Individuals, or even entire professions, observe a phenomenon or examine a problem, come up with theories about it or solutions for it, and then test them.
Sometimes they're right, and sometimes they're wrong, but most errors are eventually corrected.
Intellectual progress includes a lot of blind alleys and wrong turns along the way.
Experts can go wrong, for example, when they try to stretch their expertise from one area to another.
This is less a failure of expertise than a sort of minor fraud—somebody claiming the general mantle of authority even though he or she is not a real expert in the specific area under discussion—and it is freguent and pernicious and can undermine the credibility of an entire field.
When they do fail, experts must own their mistakes, air them publicly, and show the steps they are taking to correct them.
This happens less than it should in the world of public policy, because the standards forjudging policy work tend to be more subjective and politicized than the academic norm.
Still, for their own credibility, policy professionals should be more transparent, honest, and self-critical about their far-fromperfect track records.
Laypeople, for their part, must educate themselves about the difference between errors and incompetence, corruption, or outright fraud and cut the professionals some slack regarding the former while insisting on punishment for the latter.
The skepticism that I advocate amounts only to this: that when the experts are agreed, the opposite opinion cannot be held to be certain; that when they are not agreed, no opinion can be regarded as certain by a nonexpert; and that when they all hold that no sufficient grounds for a positive opinion exist, the ordinary man would do well to suspend his judgment.
As Russell noted, ""These propositions may seem mild, yet, if accepted, they would absolutely revolutionize human life”—because the results would challenge so much of what so many people feel most strongly.
Government and expertise rely on each other, especially in a democracy.
The technological and economic progress that ensures the well-being of a population reguires a division of labor, which in turn leads to the creation of professions.
MICHELLE MCLOUGHLIN / REUTERS A statue of Theodore Dwight Woolsey, former president of Yale, on Yale's campus in New Haven, Connecticut, November 2012.
Dictatorships, too, demand this same service of experts, but they extract it by threat and direct its use by command.
In a democracy, the expert's service to the public is part of the social contract.
Citizens delegate the power of decision on myriad issues to elected representatives and their expert advisers, while experts, for their part, ask that their efforts be received in good faith by a public that has informed itself enough—a key reguirement—to make reasoned judgments.
When that foundation erodes, experts and laypeople become warring factions and democracy itself can become a casualty, decaying into mob rule or elitist technocracy.
Living in a world awash in gadgets and once unimaginable conveniences and entertainments, Americans have become almost childlike in their refusal to learn enough to govern themselves or to guide the policies that affect their lives.
This is a collapse of functional citizenship, and it enables a cascade of other baleful conseguences.
In the absence of informed citizens, for example, more knowledgeable administrative and intellectual elites do in fact take over the daily direction of the state and society.
Unelected bureaucrats and policy specialists in many spheres exert tremendous influence on the daily lives of Americans.
And populism actually reinforces this elitism, because the celebration of ignorance cannot launch communications satellites, negotiate the rights of United States citizens overseas, or provide effective medications.
Faced with a public that has no idea how most things work, experts disengage, choosing to speak mostly to one another.
Like anti-vaccine parents , ignorant voters end up punishing society at large for their own mistakes.
Meanwhile, Americans have developed increasingly unrealistic expectations of what their political and economic 59 systems can provide, and this sense of entitlement fuels continual disappointment and anger.
When people are told that ending poverty or preventing terrorism or stimulating economic growth is a lot harder than it looks, they roll their eyes.
Unable to comprehend all the complexity around them, they choose instead to comprehend almost none of it and then sullenly blame elites for seizing control of their lives.
And politicians are very rarely experts on any of the innumerable subjects that come before them for a decision.
By definition, nobody can be an expert on China policy and health care and climate change and immigration and taxation, all at the same time—which is why during, say, congressional hearings on a subject, actual experts are usually brought in to advise the elected laypeople charged with making authoritative decisions.
In 1787, Benjamin Franklin was supposedly asked what would emerge from the Constitutional Convention being held in Philadelphia.
Americans too easily forget that the form of government under which they live was not designed for mass decisions about complicated issues.
Neither, of course, was it designed for rule by a tiny group of technocrats or experts.
Rather, it was meant to be the vehicle by which an informed electorate could choose other people to represent them, come up to speed on important guestions, and make decisions on the public's behalf.
The workings of such a representative democracy, however, are exponentially more difficult when the electorate is not competent to judge the matters at hand.
As Somin has written, ""When we elect government officials based on ignorance, they rule over not only those who voted for them but all of society.
Too few citizens today understand democracy to mean a condition of political eguality in which all get the franchise and are egual in the eyes of the law.
Rather, they think of it as a state of actual eguality, in which every opinion is as good as any other, regardless of the logic or evidentiary base behind it.
But that is not how a republic is meant to work, and the sooner American society establishes new ground rules for productive engagement between educated elites and the society around them, the better.
Experts need to remember, always, that they are the servants of a democratic society and a republican government.
Their citizen masters, however, must eguip themselves not just with education but also with the kind of civic virtue that keeps them involved in the running of their own country.
Laypeople cannot do without experts, and they must accept this reality without rancor.
Experts, likewise, must accept that they get a hearing, not a veto, and that their advice will not always be taken.
At this point, the bonds tying the system together are dangerously frayed.
Unless some sort of trust and mutual respect can be restored, public discourse will be polluted by unearned respect for unfounded opinions.
And in such an environment, anything and everything becomes possible, including the end of democracy and republican government itself.
The Campaign Against Established Knowledge and Why It Matters , from which this essay is adapted.
Donald Trump's election as United States president threatens to upend the world's most important bilateral relationship.
As president-elect, he reversed four decades of United States policy when he spoke by telephone with Taiwanese President Tsai Ing-wen and declared that the United States was not bound by the ""one China"" policy, the diplomatic understanding that has 63 underpinned Washington's approach to Beijing since 1979.
Trump's actions, however, have only compounded deeper problems in the Sino-American relationship.
Recent Chinese policies have fueled concerns that the country seeks to overturn the post-Cold War geopolitical order.
President Xi Jinping has begun to modernize China's military, gradually transforming the regional balance of power.
Many observers now believe that efforts to integrate China into the international system have failed and that East Asia will have to contend with a dangerous, revisionist power.
But China is not the only revisionist power in the U.S.-Chinese relationship.
Since the end of World War II, the United States has pursued a strategy aimed at overturning the status guo by spreading liberalism, free markets, and United States influence around the world.
Just as Chinese revisionism alarms Washington, the United States' posture stokes fear in Beijing and beyond.
As Trump begins his presidency, he would do well to understand this fear.
The risk of crises, and even war, will grow if Trump introduces instability into areas of the relationship that posed few problems under previous United States administrations.
But Trump could ease tensions if he pursues a less revisionist strategy than his predecessors.
SEA CHANGE Chinese policymakers deny that their country is a revisionist power.
They claim that China seeks merely to defend a regional status guo that the United States is threatening.
After all, they argue, China's claims to many of the region's disputed islands date back centuries.
Chinese policymakers point out that the ""ninedash line/' a demarcation of Chinese claims that runs along the edge of the South China Sea, has appeared on Chinese maps since the 1940s.
According to Beijing, the South China Sea has always been, and will always be, Chinese territory; China, in other words, remains a status guo power, not a revisionist one.
But even if its territorial claims are not new, China rarely sought to enforce them until recently.
For the past few years, however, China has grown increasingly assertive in its territorial disputes.
In 2012, to the dismay of Tokyo and Washington, Beijing declared an ""air defense identification zone"" over the Senkaku Islands (known in China as the Diaoyu Islands), which are currently controlled by Japan but which China also claims, reguiring aircraft flying through the zone to identify themselves to Chinese authorities.
Today, its navy, coast guard, and ""maritime militia"" of fishing boats deny Philippine vessels access to the area.
Meanwhile, China has presided over an extraordinary construction project in the South China Sea, building a string of artificial islands.
China has drilled for oil in the waters of the contested Paracel Islands, ignoring Vietnamese protests and keeping Vietnamese ships away from the area.
China is not the only revisionist power in the U.S.-Chinese relationship.
What's more, over the past few years, China has modernized its military.
According to Captain James Fanell, the former chief of intelligence for the United States Pacific Fleet, China is building coast guard vessels ""at an astonishing rate,"" some of which are among the largest coast guard ships in the world.
China is also improving its conventional ballistic missiles, which threaten United States air bases and ports in the region, including Andersen Air Force Base, on Guam, a crucial United States military hub.
These moves jeopardize the entire United States strategy for projecting power in East Asia.
In the eyes of all but Beijing, this clearly counts as revisionist behavior.
And it has touched off a flurry of activity among countries that feel threatened.
Australia has strengthened its military and deepened its alliance with the United States.
Singapore, not a United States treaty ally but a longtime United States partner, has increased its defense spending and has begun to work more closely with the United States Navy.
Despite the legacy of the Vietnam War, Hanoi and Washington have begun to move toward closer security cooperation.
Japanese leaders have rejected military statecraft for more than half a century.
But under Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, Japan has reinterpreted its constitution to permit more military activism and is forging closer ties with other countries worried about Chinese revisionism, including Australia and India.
J.R WU / REUTERS A Taiwanese Coast Guard patrol ship near the coast of Itu Aba, which the Taiwanese call Taiping, in the South China Sea, November 2016.
Although changes in the Japanese defense posture often generate alarmist headlines, Japan's actions to date have been modest, especially when compared with how great powers normally behave when confronted by a rising power in their neighborhood.
The Japanese public is preoccupied with a lagging economy and an aging society; it has no interest in 67 military statecraft and has disapproved of the security reforms pushed by Abe and other conservatives.
But as the world's third-largest economy, Japan has tremendous latent power; a sufficiently alarmed Tokyo could decide to increase its military spending from the current one percent of GDP to two or three percent—an undesirable outcome for Beijing.
Chinese officials argue that United States interference has caused its neighbors to respond with alarm, but China's own revisionism is to blame.
Consider that for the past 60 years, even as Washington constantly entreated Japan to play a more active military role in the U.S.-Japanese alliance, Tokyo stepped up only when it felt threatened, as it did in the late 1970s when the Soviet Union launched a military buildup in Asia.
Today, Japan is responding not to United States pressure but to Chinese assertiveness.
Beijing must understand how threatening its actions appear if it wishes to successfully manage its relations with its neighbors and with Washington.
POT, MEET KETTLE Like their Chinese counterparts, United States foreign policy officials argue that the United States seeks merely to uphold the status guo in East Asia.
They want to maintain military predominance in the region through the policy of a ""rebalance"" to Asia, prevent a return to an era when countries settled disputes unilaterally and by force, and support freedom of navigation and the law of the sea.
In its desire to preserve the current global economic system and its network of military alliances, the United States does favor the status guo.
But at its heart, United States grand strategy seeks to spread liberalism and United States influence.
After World War II, the United States formed a network of partners, supported by military alliances and international 68 institutions, and sought to expand it.
Prosperity and peace, created through trade and institutions, would prevail among the members of the liberal zone.
As democracy and economic interdependence deepened, and as the zone widened, war would become less likely and respect for human rights would spread.
Washington sought to pull countries into its orbit, regardless of whether they accepted its values.
In time, perhaps engagement with the United States and with the liberal order would encourage the spread of liberalism to those countries, too.
The United States has pursued this transformational grand strategy all over the world.
In Europe, after the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, the United States and its allies did not preserve the status guo.
Instead, they pushed eastward, enlarging NATO to absorb all of the Soviet Union's former Warsaw Pact allies and some former Soviet territories, such as the Baltic states.
In Ukraine, United States and European policymakers encouraged the overthrow of a pro-Russian government in 2014 and helped install a Western-leaning one.
In the Middle East, United States policymakers saw the 2003 invasion of Irag as an opportunity to advance democracy in the region.
During the Arab Spring, they viewed the uprising in Libya as another chance to replace an anti-American dictator, and they encouraged the spread of democracy elsewhere as well.
Underlying the United States' recent engagement with Iran is 69 a desire to promote liberalization there, too.
The United States can encourage liberalism while acknowledging that its grand strategy appears deeply threatening to outsiders.
In East Asia, the United States has not only maintained and strengthened its longtime alliances with Australia, Japan, and the Philippines but also courted new partners, such as Malaysia and Singapore.
And with its policy toward Vietnam, the United States may encourage a dramatic change in the regional status guo.
Historically, Vietnam, which borders China, has fallen within its larger neighbor's sphere of influence, and since the Vietnam War, its relations with the United States have been bitter.
In the past few years, however, Vietnam and the United States have deepened their economic ties, resolved previous disputes, and even explored greater security cooperation.
Vietnam is also expanding its military ties with United States allies—namely, Australia, Japan, and the Philippines.
In each of these regions, United States diplomatic, economic, and military policies are aimed not at preserving but at transforming the status guo.
United States foreign policy elites might object to Akita's blunt assessment and often dismiss the notion of ""spheres of influence"" as outdated, Cold War-era thinking.
But the United States goal is to replace the old-fashioned competition for spheres of influence with a single liberal sphere led by the United States.
And China has gained greater influence in institutions such as the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.
The country both profits from and—increasingly, by virtue of its wealth, talent, and expertise—contributes to the liberal order.
Its military modernization and regional assertiveness challenge United States primacy in Asia and the principle that countries should resolve territorial disputes through peaceful adjudication.
Although China has introduced significant economic reforms, many observers guestion its support for liberal economic development.
Beijing argues that the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, a Chinese-led international development bank, will uphold good governance and environmental protection.
It harasses, arrests, and tortures political activists and suspected enemies, and it represses secessionist groups, such as the Mongolians, the Tibetans, and the Uighurs.
China also obstructs its liberal partners' efforts to promote 71 human rights across the globe.
In the 1990s, for example, China opposed UN intervention in Bosnia and Kosovo, arguing that the West should respect national sovereignty.
And regarding Syria, China has vetoed multiple UN Security Council resolutions calling for a political solution.
President Barack Obama smiles as he attends a town hall meeting in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam, May 2016.
For illiberal countries, the inherently transformational nature of United States grand strategy appears deeply threatening—something United States foreign policy elites too often fail to recognize.
United States and European efforts to encourage Ukraine to join NATO and the EU menaced Russia, and Russian President Vladimir Putin lashed out.
This is not to excuse Putin's military aggression; he had other choices.
But NATO members' inability to see how the expansion of their alliance threatened Russia represented a serious failure of strategic empathy.
In East Asia, adding Vietnam to the list of United States regional partners—or even allies—would seem to follow naturally from a strategy of spreading democracy and free markets and might insulate a liberalizing Vietnam from the coercive influence of its powerful neighbor.
But a United States alliance with Vietnam would represent a dramatic departure from the status guo, and China would see it as such.
United States foreign policy analysts sometimes invoke the benefits of closer United States relations with Hanoi without mentioning how threatening this development would appear to Beijing, which could react in a similar way toward Vietnam as Russia did toward Ukraine.
United States policymakers should not automatically defer to China and Russia.
But to understand the real tradeoffs of a given policy, they need to take into account how these great powers will likely react.
One can argue that the United States' transformational strategy has had, and will continue to have, a profoundly positive effect on the world.
Or one can argue that it is simply a manifestation of self-interested United States expansionism.
It's hard to argue, however, that United States policy has sought to support the status guo.
Proponents of the post-World War II United States grand strategy might argue that there is no reason to adjust it now.
They might insist that challenges from China and Russia demand, if 73 anything, a stronger United States commitment to spreading liberalism.
According to this view, the United States should strengthen its security commitments in eastern Europe and extend new ones there.
In Asia, the United States should strengthen its existing alliances, align itself more closely with Vietnam, and clarify its commitment to defend Taiwan.
China , unlike the Soviet Union, does not have a revolutionary ideology.
By contrast, realist critics might caution that as the global balance of power changes, so must United States grand strategy.
Today, however, China's rise and Russia's resurgence make this strategy too provocative.
In this view, Washington must be wary of a growing risk of great-power conflict and, because all three countries possess nuclear weapons, potentially catastrophic escalation.
These critics would have Washington prioritize great-power stability over its transformational goals.
The best way forward is a compromise between the approach of the liberal internationalists and that of the realists.
Washington should continue to look for opportunities to promote liberalism, but it should do so through less threatening policies and in regions where its actions are less likely to have strategic repercussions for United States relationships with some of the world's most powerful countries.
For example, the United States can support the building of institutions and civil society in Africa, Latin America, and parts of Asia and the Middle East without threatening the core interests of other great powers.
United States policymakers should be wary of extending alliances to the borders of China or Russia or attempting to advance democracy within those 74 countries.
If Hillary Clinton, the Democratic nominee, had won the presidential election, the United States would probably have continued to pursue its transformational strategy.
It is much less clear, however, how Trump's presidency will shape United States grand strategy and U.S.-Chinese relations.
On the one hand, the Trump administration could prove deeply destabilizing.
Trump's phone call with the Taiwanese president, for example, has introduced real uncertainty about United States policy toward Taiwan, potentially shattering a delicate compromise that has held for four decades.
If the Trump administration pokes sticks into more areas where previous United States and Chinese governments have forged compromises, it will preside over a deterioration of an already troubled relationship.
But Trump could also reduce tensions if he proves less assertive about promoting liberalism than the liberal internationalists who have presided over United States foreign policy since the end of the Cold War.
Although Trump has not outlined his views on grand strategy, he seems less concerned with transforming the world's political system and more interested in making good bilateral deals for the United States.
So Trump, caring little about promoting further liberalization in Asia, might dismiss an alliance with Vietnam, a weak nation embroiled in a territorial dispute with a great power, as a bad deal.
If Trump's pragmatism makes him more willing than liberal internationalists to compromise, his leadership could prove stabilizing in this respect.
In attempting to transform anarchy into liberal order, the United States has pursued an idealistic, visionary, and in many ways laudable goal.
The United States and its partners need not necessarily defer to that fear—but they must understand it.
JENNIFER LIND is Associate Professor of Government at Dartmouth College.
What is clear, however, is that the impulsiveness, combativeness, and recklessness that characterized Donald Trump's election campaign have survived the transition into the presidency.
Trump has continued to challenge accepted norms, break with diplomatic traditions, and respond to perceived slights or provocations with insults or threats of his own.
The core of his foreign policy message is that the United States 77 will no longer allow itself to be taken advantage of by friends or foes abroad.
After decades of ""losing"" to other countries, he says he is going to put ""America first"" and start winning again.
President Richard Nixon long ago developed the ""madman theory,"" the idea that he could frighten his adversaries into believing he was so volatile he might do something crazy if they failed to meet his demands—a tactic that Trump, whose reputation for volatility is firmly established, seems particularly well suited to employ.
The problem, however, is that negotiations sometimes fail, and adversaries are themselves often brazen and unpredictable.
After all, Nixon's madman theory —designed to force the North Vietnamese to compromise—did not work.
Moreover, putting the theory into practice reguires the capacity to act judiciously at the appropriate moment, something that Trump, as president, has yet to demonstrate.
And whereas a failed business deal allows both parties to walk away unscathed if disappointed, a failed diplomatic gambit can lead to political instability, costly trade disputes, the proliferation of dangerous weapons, or even war.
History is littered with examples of leaders who, like Trump, came to power fueled by a sense of national grievance and promises to force adversaries into submission, only to end up mired in a military, diplomatic, or economic conflict they would come to regret.
But there is a real risk that events will turn out far worse—a future in which Trump's erratic style and confrontational policies destroy an already fragile world order and lead to open conflict—in the most likely cases, with Iran, China, or North Korea.
In the narratives that follow, everything described as having taken place before mid-March 2017 actually happened.
That which takes place after that date is—at least at the time of publication—fiction.
STUMBLING INTO WAR WITH IRAN It is September 2017, and the White House is consumed with a debate about options for escalation with Iran.
Another dozen Americans have been killed in an Iranian-sponsored attack on United States soldiers in Irag, and the president is frustrated that previous air strikes in Iran failed to deter this sort of deadly aggression.
He is tempted to retaliate much more aggressively this time but also knows that doing so risks involving United States troops even further in what is already a costly and unpopular war—the very sort of ""mess"" he had promised to avoid.
Looking back, he now sees that this conflict probably became inevitable when he named his foreign policy team and first started to implement his new approach toward Iran.
Well before his election, of course, Trump had criticized the Iran nuclear agreement as ""the worst deal ever negotiated"" and promised to put a stop to Iran's ""aggressive push to destabilize and dominate"" the Middle East.
Some of his top 79 advisers were deeply hostile to Iran and known to favor a more confrontational approach, including his first national security adviser, Michael Flynn; his CIA director, Mike Pompeo; his chief strategist, Steve Bannon; and his defense secretary, James Mattis.
Trump whipped up anti-Iranian feelings and consistently misled the public about what the nuclear deal entailed.
Critics claimed that the rhetoric was reminiscent of the Bush administration's exaggerations of Irag's weapons of mass destruction programs in the run-up to the Irag war.
Two days later, the administration announced a range of new sanctions on 25 Iranian individuals and companies involved in the ballistic missile program.
Perhaps just as predictably, Iran dismissed the administration's tough talk.
It continued to test its missiles, insisting that neither the nuclear deal nor UN Security Council resolutions prohibited it from doing so.
Ali Khamenei, Iran's supreme leader, even taunted Trump for his controversial immigration and travel ban, thanking him on Twitter for revealing the ""true face"" of the United States.
United States efforts to get Russia to limit Iran's role in Syria were ignored, adding to the White House's frustration.
To the surprise of many, growing United States pressure on Iran did not immediately lead to the collapse of the nuclear deal.
Trump ended the Obama administration's practice of encouraging banks and international companies to ensure that Iran benefited economically from the deal.
And he expressed support for congressional plans to sanction additional Iranian entities for terrorism or human rights violations, as top officials insisted was permitted by the nuclear deal.
Iran complained that these ""backdoor"" sanctions would violate the agreement yet took no action.
By March 2017, United States officials were concluding internally—and some of the administration's supporters began to gloat—that Trump's tougher approach was succeeding.
FARS NEWS / REUTERS Iranian ships take part in naval war game in the Persian Gulf and the Strait of 81 Hormuz in April 2010.
Different behavior on either side could have prevented relations from deteriorating.
Under pressure from hardline factions within Iran, which had their own interest in spiking the deal, Tehran had continued its provocative behavior, including the unjustified detention of dual U.S.-Iranian citizens, throughout the spring.
Its new president, a hard-liner who had defeated Hassan Rouhani in the May 2017 election, declared that in the face of United States ""noncompliance,"" Iran would resume certain prohibited nuclear activities, including testing advanced centrifuges and expanding its stockpile of low-enriched uranium.
Washington was suddenly abuzz with talk of the need for a new effort to choke off Iran economically or even a preventive military strike.
The Trump administration had been confident that other countries would back its tougher approach and had warned allies and adversaries alike that they must choose between doing business with Iran and doing business with the United States.
China, France, Germany, India, Japan, Russia, South Korea, and the United Kingdom all said that the deal had been working before the United States sought to renegotiate it, and they blamed Washington for precipitating the crisis.
The EU even 82 passed legislation making it illegal for European companies to cooperate with United States secondary sanctions.
As the United States feuded with its closest partners, tensions with Iran escalated further.
Frustrated by continued Iranian support for the Houthi rebels in Yemen, the Pentagon stepped up patrols in the Strait of Hormuz and loosened the rules of engagement for United States forces.
When an Iranian patrol boat aggressively approached a United States cruiser, in circumstances that are still disputed, the United States ship responded with deadly defensive force, killing 25 Iranian sailors.
The outrage in Iran bolstered support for the regime and led to widespread calls for revenge, which the country's new president could not resist.
Less than a week later, the Iranianbacked militia group Kataib Hezbollah killed six United States soldiers in Irag.
With the American public demanding retaliation, some called for diplomacy, recalling how, in January 2016, United States Secretary of State John Kerry and Iranian Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad Zarif spoke directly to defuse the situation after United States sailors drifted into Iranian waters.
But the administration wanted nothing to do with what it considered the Obama administration's humiliating appeasement of Iran.
Instead, to teach Iran a lesson, Trump authorized a cruise missile strike on a known Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps intelligence headguarters, destroying three buildings and killing a dozen officers and an unknown number of civilians.
Trump's advisers predicted that Iran would back down, but as nationalist fervor grew in Iran, Tehran escalated the conflict, calculating that the American public had no desire to spend more blood or treasure in the Middle East.
Kataib Hezbollah and other Shiite militias in Irag, some directed by Iran and 83 others acting independently, launched further attacks on United States personnel.
As Washington reimposed the sanctions that had been suspended by the nuclear deal, Iran abandoned the limits on its enrichment of uranium, expelled the UN monitors, and announced that it was no longer bound by the agreement.
With the CIA concluding that Iran was now back on the path to a nuclear weapons capability, Trump's top advisers briefed the president in the Oval Office.
Some counseled restraint, but others, led by Bannon and Mattis, insisted that the only credible option was to destroy the Iranian nuclear infrastructure with a massive preventive strike, while reinforcing the United States presence in Irag to deal with the likely Iranian retaliation.
Pompeo, a longstanding advocate of regime change in Iran, argued that such a strike might also lead to a popular uprising and the ousting of the supreme leader, an encouraging notion that Trump himself had heard think-tank experts endorse on television.
Once again, nervous allies stepped in and tried to broker a diplomatic solution.
They tried to put the 2015 nuclear deal back in place, arguing that it now looked attractive by comparison.
United States strikes on Iran's nuclear facilities in Arak, Fordow, Isfahan, Natanz, and Parchin led to retaliatory counterstrikes against United States forces in Irag, United States retaliation against targets in Iran, terrorist attacks against Americans in Europe and the Middle East, and vows from Tehran to rebuild its nuclear program bigger and better than before.
The president who had vowed to stop sguandering American lives and resources in the Middle East now found himself wondering how he had ended up at war there.
FIGHTING CHINA 84 JERRY LAMPEN / REUTERS China's national flag is raised during the opening ceremony of the Beijing 2008 Olympic Games at the Bird's Nest Stadium, August 2008.
It is October 2017, and experts are calling it the most dangerous confrontation between nuclear powers since the Cuban missile crisis.
After a U.S.-Chinese trade war escalated well beyond what either side had predicted, a clash in the South China Sea has led to casualties on both sides and heavy exchanges of fire between the United States and Chinese navies.
There are rumors that China has placed its nuclear forces on high alert.
Of the many foreign targets of Trump's withering criticism during the campaign and the early months of his presidency, China topped the list.
As a candidate, Trump repeatedly accused the country of destroying American jobs and stealing United States secrets.
Not long after the election, Trump took a congratulatory phone call from Taiwanese President Tsai Ing-wen, breaking with decades of diplomatic tradition and suggesting a potential change in the United States' ""one China"" policy.
It wasn't clear whether the move was inadvertent or deliberate, but either way, Trump defended his approach and insisted that the policy was up for negotiation unless China made concessions on trade.
In February 2017, after a call with Chinese President Xi Jinping, Trump announced that the United States would honor the ""one China"" policy after all.
Asia experts were relieved, but it must have infuriated the president that so many thought he had backed down.
Some dismissed the statement as overblown rhetoric, but Beijing did not.
To head the new White House National Trade Council, Trump nominated Peter Navarro, the author of The Coming China Wars, Death by 86 China, and other provocative books that describe U.S.Chinese relations in zero-sum terms and argue for increased United States tariffs and trade sanctions.
Like Bannon, Navarro regularly invoked the specter of military conflict with Beijing, and he argued that tougher economic measures were necessary not only to rectify the LF.S.-Chinese trade balance but also to weaken China's military power, which he claimed would inevitably be used against the United States.
The early rhetoric worried many observers, but they took solace in the idea that neither side could afford a confrontation.
In June 2017, when North Korea tested yet another long-range missile, which brought it closer to having the ability to strike the United States, Trump demanded that China check its small ally and announced ""serious conseguences"" if it refused.
China had no interest in promoting North Korea's nuclear capacity, but it worried that completely isolating Pyongyang, as Trump was demanding, could cause the regime to collapse—sending millions of poor North Korean refugees streaming into China and leaving behind a united Korea ruled by Seoul, armed with North Korea's nuclear weapons, and allied with Washington.
China agreed to another UN Security Council statement condemning North Korea and extended a suspension of coal imports from the country but refused to take further action.
Angry about Trump's incessant criticism and confrontation over trade, Xi saw the United States as a greater danger to China than North Korea was and said he refused to be bullied by Washington.
At the same time, the United States current account deficit with China had swelled, driven in part by the growing United States budget deficits that resulted from Trump's massive tax cuts.
That, combined with Chinese intransigence over North Korea, convinced the White House that it was time to get tough.
Outside experts, along with Trump's own secretary of state 87 and secretary of the treasury, cautioned against the risks of a dangerous escalation, but the president dismissed their handwringing and said that the days of letting China take advantage of Americans were over.
In July, the administration formally branded China a ""currency manipulator"" (despite evidence that it had actually been spending its currency reserves to uphold the value of the yuan) and imposed a 45 percent tariff on Chinese imports.
To the delight of the crowd at a campaign-style rally in Florida, Trump announced that these new measures would remain in place until China boosted the value of its currency, bought more United States goods, and imposed tougher sanctions on North Korea.
The president's more hawkish advisers assured him that China's response would prove limited, given its dependence on exports and its massive holdings of United States Treasury bonds.
But they underestimated the intense nationalism that the United States actions had stoked.
Within days, Xi announced that China was taking the United States to the World Trade Organization over the import tariff and imposed a 45 percent countertariff on United States imports.
The Chinese believed that the reciprocal tariffs would hurt the United States more than China (since Americans bought far more Chinese goods than the other way around) and knew that the resulting inflation—especially for goods such as clothing, shoes, toys, and electronics—would hurt Trump's blue-collar constituency.
Even more important, they felt they were more willing to make sacrifices than the Americans were.
That China started using some of the cash resulting from the sales to buy large stakes in major United States companies at depressed prices only fueled a nationalist reaction in the United States.
Trump tapped into it, calling for a new law to block Chinese investment.
With personal insults flying back and forth across the Pacific, Trump announced that if China did not start treating the United States fairly, Washington might reconsider the ""one China"" policy after all.
Encouraged by Bannon, who argued privately that it was better to have the inevitable confrontation with China while the United States still enjoyed military superiority, Trump speculated publicly about inviting the president of Taiwan to the White House and selling new antimissile systems and submarines to the island.
China responded that any change in United States policy toward Taiwan would be met with an ""overwhelming response,"" which experts interpreted to mean at a minimum cutting off trade with Taiwan (which sends 30 percent of its exports to China) and at a maximum military strikes against targets on the island.
With over one billion Chinese on the mainland passionately committed to the country's nominal unity, few doubted that Beijing meant what it said.
On October 1, China's normally tepid National Day celebrations turned into a frightening display of anti-Americanism.
It was in this environment that an incident in the South China Sea led to the escalation so many had feared.
The details remain murky, but it was triggered when a United States surveillance ship operating in disputed waters in heavy fog accidentally rammed a Chinese trawler that was harassing it.
In the confusion that ensued, a People's Liberation Army Navy frigate fired on the unarmed United States ship, a United States destroyer sank the Chinese frigate, and a Chinese torpedo struck and badly damaged the destroyer, killing three Americans.
Tillerson is seeking to reach his Chinese counterpart, but officials in Beijing wonder whether he even speaks for the administration and fear Trump will accept nothing short of victory.
Leaked United States intelligence estimates suggest that a large-scale conflict could guickly lead to hundreds of thousands of casualties, draw in neighboring states, and destroy trillions of dollars' worth of economic output.
But with nationalism raging in both countries, neither capital sees a way to back down.
DAMIR SAGOLJ / REUTERS During the military parade marking the 70th anniversary of the end of World War // in Beijing, China, September 2015.
THE NEXT KOREAN WAR 90 It is December 2018, and North Korea has just launched a heavy artillery barrage against targets in Seoul, killing thousands, or perhaps tens of thousands; it is too soon to say.
United States and South Korean forces—now unified under United States command, according to the provisions of the Mutual Defense Treaty—have fired artillery and rockets at North Korea's military positions and launched air strikes against its advanced air defense network.
From a bunker somewhere near Pyongyang, the country's erratic dictator, Kim Jong Un, has issued a statement promising to ""burn Seoul and Tokyo to the ground""—a reference to North Korea's stockpile of nuclear and chemical weapons—if the ""imperialist"" forces do not immediately cease their attacks.
Even Trump's harshest critics acknowledge that the United States had no good choices in North Korea.
Washington had expected some sort of a North Korean response when it preemptively struck the test launch of an intercontinental ballistic missile capable of delivering a nuclear warhead to the continental United States, fulfilling Trump's pledge to prevent Pyongyang from acguiring that ability.
But few thought North Korea would go so far as to risk its own destruction by attacking South Korea.
Now, Trump must decide whether to continue with the war and risk nuclear escalation—or accept what will be seen as a humiliating retreat.
Some of his advisers are urging him to guickly finish the job, whereas others warn that doing so would cost the lives of too many of the 28,000 United States soldiers stationed on the peninsula, to say nothing of the ten million residents of Seoul.
Assembled in the White House Situation Room, Trump and his aides ponder their terrible options.
For more than 20 years, the paranoid, isolated 91 regime in Pyongyang had developed its nuclear and missile capabilities and seemed impervious to incentives and disincentives alike.
The so-called Agreed Framework, a 1994 deal to halt North Korea's nuclear program, fell apart in 2003 when Pyongyang was caught violating it, leading the George W Bush administration to abandon the deal in favor of tougher sanctions.
By 2017, experts estimated that North Korea possessed more than a dozen nuclear warheads and was stockpiling the material for more.
They also thought North Korea had missiles capable of delivering those warheads to targets throughout Asia and was testing missiles that could give it the capacity to strike the West Coast of the United States by 2023.
Early in the administration, numerous outside experts and former senior officials urged Trump to make North Korea a top priority.
Accepting that total dismantlement of the country's nuclear and missile programs was not a realistic nearterm goal, most called for negotiations that would offer a package of economic incentives and security assurances in exchange for a halt to further testing and development.
A critical component, they argued, would be outreach to China, the only country that might be able to influence North Korea.
Trump announced plans for a $54 billion increase in United States defense spending for 2018, with corresponding cuts in the budget for diplomacy.
And in March 2017, Tillerson traveled to Asia and declared that ""the political and diplomatic efforts of the past 20 years"" had failed and that a ""new approach"" was needed.
In the ensuing months, critics urged the administration to accompany its military buildup with regional diplomacy, but Trump chose otherwise.
Unlike what his predecessor had done with Iran, he said, he was not going to reward bad behavior.
Although the White House agreed with critics that the best way to pressure North Korea was through China, it proved impossible to cooperate with Beijing while erecting tariffs and attacking it for ""raping"" the United States economically.
It occasionally incited South Korea, launching shells across the demilitarized zone and provoking some near misses at sea.
The war of words between Pyongyang and Washington also escalated—advisers could not get the president to bite his tongue in response to Kim's outrageous taunts—and Trump repeated in even more colorful language his Twitter warning that he would not allow Pyongyang to test a nuclear-capable missile that could reach the United States.
When the intelligence community picked up signs that Pyongyang was about to do so, the National Security Council met, and the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff briefed the president on his options.
He could try to shoot down the test missile in flight, but shooting carried a high risk of missing, and even a successful intercept might provoke a military response.
He could do nothing, but that would mean losing 93 face and emboldening North Korea.
Or he could destroy the test missile on its launch pad with a barrage of cruise missiles, blocking Pyongyang's path to a nuclear deterrent, enforcing his redline, and sending a clear message to the rest of the world.
LEARNING FROM THE FUTURE These frightening futures are far from inevitable.
Indeed, for all the early bluster and promises of a dramatic break with the past, United States foreign policy may well turn out to be not as revolutionary or reckless as many fear.
Trump has already demonstrated his ability to reverse course without compunction on a multitude of issues, from abortion to the Irag war, and sound advice from some of his more seasoned advisers could moderate his potential for rash behavior.
Imagine if a ghost from the future could have given world leaders in 1914 a glimpse of the cataclysm their policies would produce.
Or if in 1965, United States President Lyndon Johnson could have seen what escalation in Vietnam would lead to a decade later.
Or if in 2003, United States President George W Bush could have been shown a preview of the results of the invasion of Irag.
In each case, unwise decisions, a flawed process, and wishful thinking did lead to a catastrophe that could have been, and often was, predicted in advance.
Maybe Trump is right that a massive military buildup, a reputation for unpredictability, a high-stakes negotiating style, and a refusal to compromise will convince other countries to make concessions that will make America safe, 94 prosperous, and great again.
CORRECTION APPENDED An earlier version of this article overstated the link between growing United States budget deficits and the value of the dollar when discussing United States tensions with China.
In fact, although growing budget deficits would likely lead to a growing current account deficit, they would not necessarily drive up the value of the dollar.
From 2013 to 2015, he was Special Assistant to the President and White House Coordinator for the Middle East, North Africa, and the Gulf Region.
The intelligence community's mission is to provide national leaders with the 96 best and most timely information available on global affairs and national security issues—information that, in turn, can help those leaders achieve their foreign policy objectives.
The president is the country's top intelligence consumer and the only person who can authorize a covert action, and the services he receives from the intelligence community can be invaluable—providing early warning of brewing trouble, identifying and disrupting threats before they materialize, gaining insight into foreign leaders, and discreetly affecting developments abroad.
For the relationship between intelligence producers and consumers to work effectively, however, each needs to understand and trust the other.
INFORMATION, NOT POLICY The most common misperception about the intelligence community is that it makes policy.
A new administration considers and articulates what it stands for and what it hopes to achieve; it develops policies and informational priorities, and then it deploys the resources of the intelligence community based on those priorities.
The intelligence community, in other words, cannot operate in a vacuum.
The White House must be disciplined in its tasking; if everything is a priority, then nothing is.
Without regular dialogue and guidance, the intelligence community will do what it can to respond appropriately to global changes and improvise ways to balance competing reguests.
But the tradeoffs will often go unnoticed by senior policymakers until a crisis exposes deficiencies in intelligence collection.
The intelligence community needs to have close and regular access to all senior national security policymakers, including the president, the vice president, the secretary of state, the secretary of defense, the secretary of homeland security, and the national security adviser.
If the producers of intelligence don't know the status of ongoing operations and negotiations, then their product will not be responsive to the consumers' needs and will be dismissed as irrelevant.
The reward for warning about something too early is to be ignored, and the reward for warning too late is to risk becoming the latest example of intelligence failure.
In order to work well together during a crisis, when the stakes are highest, intelligence producers and consumers need to have established a good working relationship long before the crisis hits.
Personal connections and regular briefings can help establish trust and mutual understanding.
Noncrisis periods are opportunities to work on the relationship and prepare for the future, because when a crisis does hit, there is no time for on-the-job training and coming up to speed on how to best utilize intelligence assets.
The intelligence community's relationship with senior policymakers must be close and trusted, or else neither party will be able to do its job well.
At the same time, intelligence professionals have to be careful not to get drawn into policy debates or partisan politics.
Should a president or a cabinet member ask intelligence officers for an opinion on policy, the officers should refuse to give it, because that is not their remit; they do not make policy.
The training and culture of intelligence officers underscore this ethos.
The American system of government reguires a new president to place his full trust in an intelligence community that loyally served his predecessor right up until the inauguration.
This is a lot to ask, especially if senior administration figures have little experience with the intelligence community.
The 99 potential for distrust is high, but intelligence officers are loyal, trustworthy, and committed to serving the presidency.
They serve without regard to political affiliation and are trained to present their findings without personal or political agendas.
Not only did the briefer not know, but as would most of his colleagues, he found the very premise of the guestion abhorrent.
The new administration should take care not to make assumptions about the political leanings of the intelligence community or infer that it knows how intelligence officers voted.
Unlike in other United States government departments, where there are many political appointees, in the intelligence community, most members are careerists who have served under both Democratic and Republican administrations.
The whole point of the National Security Act of 1947. which codified modern governmental arrangements, was to foster a professional national security community inoculated against partisan politics.
This is why public concerns were raised when a political adviser was added to the National Security Council's Principals Committee.
When intelligence officers brief senior policymakers, they are there to do a job, not to be loved or to score political points.
Senior administration officials are invested in the policies of their administration, but intelligence officers are not.
It is the essence of the intelligence community's creed to speak truth to power, and those who do so responsibly are considered heroes of the profession.
Many assume that the intelligence community tries to predict the future.
Intelligence officers present the intelligence that has been collected, assess it, and evaluate possible actions and outcomes.
They anticipate possible contingencies and warn about possible dangers, but they do not try to predict results.
The relationship between intelligence officers and policymakers resembles that of scouts and coaches.
A scout is responsible for studying the strengths, weaknesses, and tendencies of the other team.
Armed with that information, the coach can then decide how to deploy the team and what plays to execute.
The scout's goal is to help the coach win, but nobody expects the scout to correctly predict the final score before the game is played.
The importance of the intelligence community's relationship with the president himself cannot be overstated.
Policymakers new to government must understand that intelligence operates in a world of uncertainties and changing realities.
Intelligence officers are forced to deal with partial bits of information, some sources who faithfully report inaccurate information that they mistakenly believe is correct, and other sources who are deliberately trying to mislead and deceive.
Intelligence is cumulative, moreover, and earlier reports may prove less accurate than later ones.
As more intelligence is collected, analysts can dismiss some reports that they had once credited.
This natural and correct dynamic should not be seen as waffling or simply changing the story.
When the intelligence community gets it wrong, it must own its mistakes.
These professionals owe the country, the president, and themselves an understanding of what went wrong, why, and what measures have been taken to ensure the same mistakes are not repeated.
That is exactly what I believed the CIA needed in the aftermath of the invasion of Irag in 2003, when no stockpiles of weapons of mass destruction were found, completely contrary to our judgments.
I put together a special team to find out where we had gone wrong, and then, borrowing a practice from the United States Navy, I ordered a ""safety stand-down"" for all the analysts at the CIA to ensure that the lessons learned were conveyed to everybody, not just those who had worked on Irag.
In a culture of secrets, some may try to gloss over problems in hopes that the mistakes are never discovered.
It is incumbent on the leadership of the intelligence community to hold their officers accountable and demand that mistakes be acknowledged, analyzed, and rectified.
Policymakers should be able to aggressively guestion analytic judgments and raw reporting without being accused of politicizing intelligence.
Politicization can occur only when intelligence professionals alter their findings to meet policymakers' desires.
Aggressive guestioning should be welcomed, in fact, because it forces analysts to defend their reasoning and leads to deeper understanding of the raw reporting that underlies their judgments.
Policymakers need to understand not only what the intelligence community knows but also what it doesn't know.
Having learned from the mistakes made about Irag, the intelligence community now carefully conveys the level of confidence it places on the judgments it makes.
Policymakers sometimes go too far and try to intimidate analysts into changing or shading their judgments to fit a political objective.
When that doesn't work, some have gone so far as to set up their own intelligence shops, as Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld and Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul Wolfowitz did in establishing the Office of Special Plans at the Pentagon in the run-up to the Irag war to find politically desired linkages between Saddam Hussein and al Qaeda.
But policymakers cannot politicize intelligence professionals who refuse to go along.
RISKY BUSINESS To gain an edge over their targets, intelligence officers have to take risks.
They must face unimaginable dangers and overcome incredible obstacles just to collect small but critical fragments of an unknown story.
The essential national service they provide should not be dismissed, minimized, or overlooked by the president or senior policymakers.
Law enforcement officers, first responders, and members of the military and intelligence services are the only Americans who voluntarily agree to run mortal risks for their fellow citizens.
Their service and that of currently serving officers should be respected.
Policymakers cannot politicize intelligence professionals who refuse to go along.
When using intelligence, policymakers need to be risk takers of a different kind.
A presidentially approved covert operation may be blown, leading to death, embarrassment, or retaliation.
A foreign leader may learn that United States intelligence has been monitoring his or her phone calls.
Covert action can range from propaganda to coup plotting to paramilitary operations.
Used judiciously, it can be an effective foreign policy tool, but it cannot substitute for not having a policy in the first place.
Traditionally, covert action was the mandate solely of the CIA, with operations reguiring a finding personally signed by the president and timely notification of Congress.
New policymakers with appropriate clearances will need to fully understand the extent of this activity and the potential risks engendered by it.
Both policymakers and the intelligence community are accountable to the American people, yet ensuring such accountability can be difficult.
These days, it is not always clear where a foreign threat ends and a domestic threat begins, and government agencies need to share intelligence in order to prevent disasters.
However, given the power and reach of United States capabilities for intercepting communications, such sharing raises legitimate concerns about civil liberties and privacy.
A healthy conversation and debate on these issues are both necessary and wise.
The intelligence community does not ignore such concerns, but often, it wants to address the tension between collection and protection in classified venues such as the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court, the National Security Council, or the congressional intelligence oversight committees.
But those concerned with civil liberties want them addressed in the public domain.
However the balance is achieved, the American people must be confident that the internal controls are appropriate and that external oversight has sufficient visibility to be effective.
A new administration can bring a fresh perspective on how best to organize and modernize the community, and positive change should be embraced and welcomed by intelligence professionals.
The new national security team, however, needs to balance a desire for change against the potential disruption drastic change may cause in the intelligence mission.
Although disruption can be a positive force in technology and business, in the intelligence community, it could carry serious risks.
As the complexities of the international challenges facing the United States become clear, the value of intelligence in dealing with those challenges may lead senior administration officials to rely more heavily on the intelligence community.
Mike Pompeo, the director of the CIA; Gina Haspel, the deputy director; and Dan Coats, the director of national intelligence, are well positioned to lead the community into the future.
But the importance of the intelligence community's relationship with the president himself cannot be overstated.
If human sources don't believe that their intelligence will make a difference, they may not take the extra chance to meet with a case officer.
If friendly foreign intelligence services believe that their most sensitive information might be leaked to the public as part of political score-settling, they will hold back and be disinclined to share.
Leaders of the intelligence community must be able to walk into the president's office at any time and be received openly and professionally.
The members of the United States intelligence community serve their country proudly and help it remain strong.
Their professionalism is a bulwark of American democracy, and they should be respected for the work they do.
Unless guickly rectified, policymakers' misconceptions about intelligence professionals and their motivations could endanger United States national security.
The relationship needs to be recalibrated, with policymakers gaining a deeper understanding of and appreciation for the work of intelligence professionals—a mission in which ""alternative facts"" have no place.
Every new United States administration takes several months to staff itself properly, master new and often unfamiliar responsibilities, and develop a comprehensive strategy for American foreign policy.
But the administration has already executed a noticeable course shift on foreign policy and international affairs, exchanging some of its early outsider rhetoric and personnel for more conventional choices.
If it can continue to elaborate and professionalize its new approach, it could achieve a number of successes.
THE CHALLENGE IN ASIA President Donald Trump has properly concluded that the greatest threat to United States national security is North Korea's accelerating nuclear and missile programs, which may give Pyongyang the ability to launch nuclear-tipped missiles at the continental United States in a matter of months or at most years.
The president also seems to have concluded, correctly, that several decades of United States policy, mostly consisting of sanctions and on-again, off-again negotiations aimed at ridding North Korea of nuclear weapons, have failed.
A fourth possibility, that of regime change, does not gualify as a serious option, since it is impossible to assess its chances or conseguences.
In theory, the United States and other powers could accept a North Korean nuclear capability and rely on deterrence to lower the risk of an attack and missile defenses to reduce the damage should one occur.
The problem is that deterrence and defenses might not work perfectly—so the acceptance option means living with a perpetual risk of catastrophe.
Moreover, even if Pyongyang were deterred from using the weapons it developed, it would still be able to transfer them to other actors for the right price.
And even if its nuclear capability were never used or transferred, acguiescence to North Korea's continued possession of nuclear weapons would further dilute the nonproliferation regime and conceivably lead Japan and South Korea to rethink their nonnuclear postures.
The problem here is that any such strike would be a huge leap into the unknown with possibly devastating conseguences.
Officials could not know in advance just what a military operation would accomplish and how the North Koreans would react.
Given Pyongyang's ability to destroy large parts of Seoul using conventional, nonnuclear forces, the South Korean government is understandably leery of the intervention option, and so any moves along these lines would need to be planned and coordinated with extreme care.
The unattractiveness of both acceptance and intervention is what keeps bringing policymakers back to the third option, trying to cap and reverse the North Korean nuclear threat through negotiations.
So the challenge on this front is not just getting back to the table but also figuring out how to make rapid progress once there.
The interim deal could best be executed as a bilateral agreement between the United States and North Korea, with other governments kept involved and informed through consultations.
The negotiations should have a deadline for reaching agreement, to ensure that Pyongyang doesn't use the talks simply to buy time for further progress on its weapons programs.
The North would have to agree to pause its testing of warheads and missiles while the negotiations continued, and the United States and South Korea would have to agree not to strike North Korea during the same period.
In exchange for accepting a comprehensive, open-ended freeze on its nuclear and missile programs, intrusive inspections designed to ensure that the freeze was being honored, and a ban on any transfers of nuclear materials or missile technology to third parties, North Korea would get some sanctions relief and an agreement formally ending the Korean War, a form of de facto recognition.
Follow-on talks would deal with denuclearization and other concerns (such as human rights) in exchange for an end to the sanctions and the normalization of ties.
An interim agreement would not solve the North Korean nuclear problem, but it would keep it from getting any worse and lower the risks of war and instability—as positive a result as one could imagine in the current circumstances.
Since Chinese pressure on North Korea would be essential to achieve such a deal, this option would build logically on the administration's early investment in good relations with its counterpart in Beijing.
And even if diplomacy failed again, at least the United States would have demonstrated that it tried negotiations before turning to one of the other, more controversial options.
Ill Overtime, ""America First"" will lead others to put themselves first.
As for the United States relationship with China itself, the administration's primary goal should be to emphasize cooperation over North Korea, the most urgent item on the national security agenda.
The two countries' economic integration gives both Washington and Beijing a stake in keeping relations on course.
China's leaders are likely to focus for the foreseeable future on domestic concerns more than foreign policy ones, and the United States should let them do so.
That means leaving in place long-standing United States policies on bilateral issues such as Taiwan, trade, arms sales, and the South China Sea; the Trump administration should avoid adopting positions on these issues that could either trigger a distracting crisis or compromise United States interests.
The result would be a ""North Korea first,"" but not a ""North Korea only,"" United States policy toward China.
It would have made more sense for Washington to work with the other signatories to amend the TPP (as it appears to be doing in regard to the North American Free Trade Agreement) and join the modified pact.
The understanding would be codified and voted on at the same time as the trade agreement itself, as a binding package, to reassure the agreement's critics.
The EU is imperfect in many ways, but it remains a source of peace and prosperity on the continent.
Its continued erosion or breakup would represent a major setback not just for crucial United States allies but also for the United States itself, both strategically and materially.
The EU's next few years will already be tense thanks to the negotiations over Brexit and possible crises in Italy and elsewhere.
The United States has little leverage to bring to bear on the continent's immediate future, but at the very least, Washington should voice its support for the EU and stop signaling its sympathy for its opponents.
Russia has been aggressively supporting just such anti-EU forces in order to weaken and divide what it sees as a hostile foreign actor, and Russia's interference in Western elections needs to be thoroughly investigated and aggressively countered.
Washington's challenge will be figuring out how to support Europe and NATO and check Russia's political skullduggery while remaining open to cooperation with Moscow on making at least parts of Syria safe for residents, on counterterrorism, and on other issues of mutual concern.
The administration has made its point that NATO members ought to spend more on defense; going forward, it would be more useful to discuss how to get more defensive bang for the bucks being spent.
And although there is no case for bringing Ukraine into NATO, there is one for doing more to support its self-defense.
Consistent with this, the sanctions against Russia levied over its actions in Ukraine should continue until those actions stop or, in the case of Crimea, are reversed.
The strike reinforced the international norm against the use of weapons of mass destruction and sent a reassuring signal to local partners, who, during the Obama years, had become increasingly worried about Washington's willingness to back up its threats with actions.
The challenge now is to embed such actions in a broader strategy toward the Syrian conflict and the Middle East at large.
However desirable a change of regime in Syria may be, it is unlikely to come from within anytime soon, and it would be incredibly difficult and costly to accomplish from without.
Nor is the United States well positioned to ensure that a successor regime will be more desirable.
For the foreseeable future, therefore, Washington should concentrate its attention on attacking the Islamic State, or ISIS, and weakening the group's hold on territory in Iraq and Syria.
Turkey is a United States ally, but it can no longer be considered a true partner.
Under Recep Tayyip Erdogan's increasingly authoritarian rule, the chief goal of Turkish foreign policy seems to be the suppression of Kurdish nationalism, even at the price of undermining the anti-ISIS effort.
Washington correctly chose to increase its armed support for Syrian Kurds fighting ISIS—and because this will cause friction with Ankara, it should reduce United States dependence on access to Turkish military bases for these and other operations.
The Iran nuclear deal is imperfect, but the administration has been right not to tear it up and start over.
What the United States should do instead is insist on full compliance with the agreement's terms, counter Iran's regional push for influence where it can, and prepare for how to constrain Iran's nuclear might after the deal expires.
At the same time, Washington should resist being drawn in too deeply on the side of Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates in Yemen.
The conflict there is fast becoming a military disaster and a humanitarian tragedy, and the fact that the rebels are backed by Iran is insufficient justification for getting trapped in a guagmire.
The struggle against terrorism will be long, difficult, and never fully successful.
There is no reason to believe that the situation is ripe for resolution or ambitious diplomatic efforts.
The administration should concentrate instead on reducing the odds of violence around Jerusalem's holy sites (something that argues against moving the United States embassy to Jerusalem), strengthening the hand of Palestinian moderates, limiting settlement activity, and exploring unilateral but coordinated arrangements that would improve on the status guo and set the stage for more ambitious diplomacy should the parties decide they are prepared to make meaningful compromises for peace.
The struggle against terrorism, jihadist and otherwise, will inevitably be long, difficult, and never fully successful.
Terrorism cannot be eliminated, only combated, and such an effort will continue to reguire a mix of intelligence sharing and cooperation with friendly governments, persistent pressure on terrorist financing and recruitment, and occasional military action.
The number of United States forces deployed in Irag, Syria, and the region more generally will likely need to be maintained or selectively increased.
A TIME TO LEAD Back during the George W Bush administration, in trying to articulate what the United States really wanted from China, Robert Zoellick, the deputy secretary of state, framed the guestion as one of whether Beijing was prepared to act as ""a responsible stakeholder"" in the international system.
The concept is a useful one and applies now to the United States, the founder and dominant power within that system.
The Trump administration has shown a clear preference for not involving the United States in the internal affairs of other countries.
Such realism is often warranted, given Washington's multiple priorities and limited leverage in such matters.
But there is a danger in taking this approach too far, since prudent nonintervention can all too easily shade into active support for deeply problematic regimes.
Careless relationships with ""friendly tyrants,"" as such rulers used to be called, have burned the United States often in the past, and so it is worrying to see Washington take what look like the first steps down such a path again with Egypt, the Philippines, and Turkey.
Friends need to speak candidly to friends about the errors they may be making.
Such communications should normally take place privately and without sanction.
But they do need to occur, lest the United States tarnish its reputation, encourage even worse behavior, and set back efforts to promote more open societies and stability around the world.
The president should also understand that what he says about United States institutions, including the media, the judiciary, and Congress, is listened to closely around the world and has the potential to reduce respect for the United States while encouraging leaders elsewhere to weaken the checks and balances on their rule.
In recent memory, for example, Colombia was racked by civil war and served as a major source of drugs coming into the United States.
Since then, the provision of hundreds of millions of dollars in United States aid has helped stabilize the country and secure a delicate peace—saving countless lives and dollars as a result.
Similar stories play out when Washington helps foreign partners address terrorism, piracy, drug trafficking, poverty, deforestation, and epidemic disease.
When it gives aid wisely and conditionally, the United States is not a soft touch but a smart investor.
The administration would do well to tone down some of its rhetoric on trade.
Technological innovation has been a much more important source of domestic job losses than trade or offshoring, and embracing protectionism will only encourage others to do the same, in the process killing off more jobs.
The last, in particular, is a multipurpose tool that could at once create jobs, increase competitiveness, and build the country's resilience against natural disasters and terrorism.
Something similar holds for immigration, which should be treated as a practical more than a political issue.
However the American body politic ultimately decides to handle legal and illegal immigration policy, the danger to the country supposedly posed by immigrants and refugees has been exaggerated and is not a major national security threat.
The administration should cease gratuitously insulting its southern neighbor by insisting that Mexico pay for a border wall.
And singling out individuals from Muslim countries for special scrutiny and differential treatment risks radicalizing significant numbers of their coreligionists at home and abroad.
The administration needs to be careful not to set the country on a path of rapidly increasing debt.
The danger is that a combination of steep corporate and individual tax cuts, higher levels of defense spending and higher interest rates, and no reform of entitlements will do just that.
Financing the debt will come to crowd out other useful forms of spending and investment (reducing American competitiveness) and leave the United States more vulnerable to market forces and the politically motivated decisions of governments that are large holders and purchasers of United States Treasuries.
Russia's interference in Western elections needs to be thoroughly investigated and aggressively countered.
The agreement is a model of creative multilateralism, one totally consistent with sovereignty; the administration would be wise to embrace it.
The targets set for United States greenhouse gas emissions are goals the United States set for itself; as a result, the government retains the right to change them, when and how it sees fit.
The good news is that the availability of new technologies, state and local regulations, and the reguirements for access to many global markets will likely mean that the United States can meet its Paris goals without sacrificing economic growth.
As for personnel and process, the administration hurt itself at first by underestimating the complexity of running the government and taking a petulant and idiosyncratic approach to appointments.
As a result, most senior national security and foreign policy staff positions are being filled on a temporary basis by civil servants or have been left open entirely, hamstringing effective government operations.
Any thoughts of a major bureaucratic restructuring should be postponed until the administration is filled with the reguisite number of gualified officials.
Trump clearly prefers an informal decision-making process, with various voices included and many points of entry, and presidents get their way.
But such an approach has downsides as well as upsides, and if the administration wants to avoid the dangers that come with excessive improvisation, it needs to ensure that the formal National Security Council policy process dominates the informal one—and that significant informal deliberations are ultimately integrated into the formal process rather than carried on separately.
The less steady they judge those hands to be, the more they may decide to look out for themselves, ignoring Washington's reguests and considering side deals to protect their interests.
Freguent policy reversals, even those that are welcome, come at a substantial cost to the United States' credibility and to its reputation for reliability.
Down that route lies the unraveling of the postwar order that the United States has worked so hard to create and maintain.
It is important not to forget that the United States has been remarkably well served by this order.
Where things have gone the most wrong—in Korea, when United States forces marched north of the 38th parallel in what would become a costly and unsuccessful effort to reunify the peninsula by force, in Vietnam, in Irag—it was because of overreach by United States policymakers rather than a reguirement to act on behalf of the order.
Many of its components need to be modernized or supplemented, and new rules and arrangements are needed to deal with the various challenges of globalization.
New challenges may have arisen, but the old challenges have not gone away, so the old solutions to them are still necessary even if they are no longer sufficient.
The strategic focus for United States foreign policy should be preservation and adaptation, not disruption, so that the United States and those willing to work with it can better contend with the regional and, even more, the global challenges that increasingly define this era.
It has been interpreted abroad as suggesting that friends and allies now come second, at best.
Over time, ""America First"" will lead others to put themselves first, which in turn will make them less likely to take into account (much less give priority to) American interests and preferences.
The slogan also unfortunately reinforces the mistaken notion that there is a sharp tradeoff between money and effort spent on international affairs and those spent on domestic concerns.
In a global world, Americans will inevitably be affected by what happens beyond their country's borders.
The United States needs both guns and butter, and national security is determined by how well a country meets its external and internal challenges alike.
The good news is that the United States, which now spends only half the percentage of its wealth on defense that it did during the Cold War, can afford both.
If the administration does decide to retain the phrase, it should at least recognize its shortcomings and counteract them.
This means finding ways to make clear that although the United States does follow its own interests, it does not do so at its friends' and partners' expense.
American patriotism can be defined and operationalized in ways compatible with responsible global leadership.
And figuring out how to do that from here on in is the Trump administration's central challenge.
It is time for the United States government to admit that it has failed to prevent North Korea from acquiring nuclear weapons and intercontinental ballistic missiles that can reach the United States.
In 1962, the standoff included one volatile leader, Castro, who held radical misperceptions of the conseguences of a nuclear war and surrounded himself with yes men.
But then Secretary of Defense Robert Gates guickly added that ""because North Korea and Iran are not in compliance with the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, for them, all bets are off.
The history of unsuccessful United States decapitation attempts, including those launched against the Libyan leader Muammar al-Qaddafi in 1986 and the Iragi leader Saddam Hussein in 1991 and again in 2003, warns against such thinking.
Reducing the risk of war will therefore reguire an end to United States threats of first-strike regime change.
The United States should also continue to extend its nuclear umbrella to South Korea to reduce the incentive for Seoul to acguire its own nuclear arsenal.
Stephen Kotkin JOHANNES HAHLE German troops cross the Soviet border, 22 June 1941.
Through the first four decades of his life, Toseph Stalin achieved little.
He was born in 1878 to a poor family in Gori, Georgia, then part of the Russian empire.
Stalin's childhood, illnesses and mishaps included, was largely normal for the time.
He received good marks in school and, as a teenager, got his poems published in well-regarded Georgian periodicals.
But he did not sit for his final-year exams at the Tiflis Seminary and failed to graduate.
Suddenly, the 39-year-old Stalin was a leading member of the new Bolshevik regime.
He played a central role in the Russian Civil War and the creation of the Soviet Union.
A month later, Lenin was incapacitated by a stroke, and Stalin seized his chance to create his own personal dictatorship inside the larger Bolshevik one.
The vast shadow of Stalin the despot often hides Stalin the human being.
He smoked a pipe, using tobacco from cigarettes, which he would unroll and slide into the pipe—usually two cigarettes' worth—and then light with matches.
Stalin had a passion for books, which he marked up and filled with placeholders to find particular passages.
His personal library would ultimately grow to more than 20,000 volumes.
Among Russian authors, Stalin's favorite was probably Anton Chekhov, who portrayed villains, and not just heroes, with complexity.
Still, judging by the references scattered among his writings and speeches, he spent more time reading Sovietera literature.
JAMES E ABBE / GETTY IMAGES Stalin's manners were coarse, and his sense of humor perverse.
But he cultivated a statesmanlike appearance, editing out his jokes and foul language from the transcripts of official gatherings.
But one childhood chum had called him Geza, a Gori-dialect term for the unusual gait Stalin had developed after an accident.
A childhood bout with smallpox had left lifelong scars on his nose, lower lip, chin, and cheeks.
His pockmarks were airbrushed out of public photographs, and his awkward stride was hidden from public view.
But people who met him saw the facial disfigurement and odd movement; they also discovered that he had a limp handshake and was not as tall as he appeared in photographs.
He stood five feet seven inches, roughly the same as Napoleon and one inch shorter than Adolf Hitler.
And yet, despite their initial shock on seeing him for the first time—could this be Stalin?—most people found that they could not take their gaze off him, especially his expressive eyes.
THE DREAM PALACE Stalin saw himself and his country as menaced from every direction.
Triumph shadowed by treachery became the dynamic of both the revolution and his life.
His drive to build socialism would prove both successful and shattering, and deeply reinforcing of his hypersuspicious, vindictive disposition.
In the Marxist conception, capitalism had created great wealth by replacing feudalism, but then promoted only the interests of the exploiter class, at the expense of the rest of humanity.
Once capitalism was overcome, the thinking went, the forces of production would be unleashed as never before.
Exploitation, colonization, and imperialist war would give way to solidarity, emancipation, and peace.
Logically, socialism would be built by eradicating private property, the market, and ""bourgeois"" parliaments and putting in their place collective property, socialist planning, and people's power.
Of course, as Stalin and many other Marxists avowed, the capitalists would never allow themselves to be buried.
Rather, they would fight to the death against socialism, using every means—lies, espionage, murder—because this was a war in which only one class could emerge victorious.
The most terrible crimes became morally imperative acts in the name of creating paradise on earth.
The purported science of Marxism-Leninism ostensibly explained why the world had so many problems and how it could be made better , with a role for all.
People's otherwise insignificant lives became linked to building an entirely new world.
To collect grain or operate a lathe was to strike a hammer blow at world imperialism.
People under the age of 29 made up nearly half of the Soviet population, giving the country one of the youngest demographic profiles in the world, and the youth proved especially attracted to a vision that put them at the center of a struggle to build tomorrow today.
Whether Stalin's objections reflected false modesty or genuine embarrassment remains hard to say, but he indulged the prolonged ovations he received in public.
He could flash burning anger; he could glow with a soft, capacious smile.
He could be solicitous and charming; he latched on to perceived slights and compulsively sought revenge.
He prided himself on his voracious reading and his ability to guote the wisdom of Marx or Lenin; he resented fancy-pants intellectuals who he thought put on airs.
He possessed a phenomenal memory and a mind of scope; his intellectual horizons were severely circumscribed by primitive theories of class struggle and imperialism.
He developed a feel for the aspirations of the masses and incipient elites; he almost never visited factories or farms, or even state agencies, instead reading about the country he ruled in secret reports and newspapers.
His colossal authority was rooted in a dedicated party, a formidable governing apparatus, and Marxist-Leninist ideology.
But his power was magnified many times over by ordinary people, who projected onto him their ambitions for social justice, peace, abundance, and national greatness.
Dictators who amass great power often retreat into pet pursuits, expounding interminably on their obsessions and paralyzing the state.
But Stalin's obsession was a socialist great power, and he labored day and night to build one.
At age 20, Hitler found himself on a bread line in Vienna, his inheritance and savings nearly spent.
He had twice been rejected from Vienna's Academy of Fine Arts and was staying in a homeless shelter behind a railway station.
Soon, with a small loan from an aunt, Hitler got himself into a group home for men.
He managed to find odd jobs, such as painting picture postcards and drafting advertisements.
When the authorities finally caught up with him, they judged the undernourished and gloomy youth unfit for service.
He fled across the border to Munich, and in August 1914, he joined the German army as a private.
He ended World War I still a private, but the war's aftermath transformed his life.
He would be among the many who migrated from the political left to the right in the chaotic wake of imperial Germany's defeat.
Under Stalin , the most terrible crimes became morally imperative acts in the name of creating paradise on earth.
Film footage from 1918 shows Hitler marching in the funeral procession of provincial Bavaria's murdered leader, a Jewish Social Democrat; he is wearing two armbands, one black (for mourning) and the other red.
He had no profession to speak of but appears to have taken part in leftist indoctrination of the troops.
Ten days before Hitler's 30th birthday, the Bavarian Soviet Republic was guickly crushed by the so-called Freikorps, made up largely of war veterans.
Hitler remained in the military because a superior, the chief of the German army's ""information"" department, had the idea of sending him to an antileftist instructional course and then using him to infiltrate leftist groups.
Although he had begun to earn a reputation as a transfixing far-right agitator, Hitler remained a marginal figure.
During his first two weeks in prison, Hitler refused to eat, believing he deserved to die, but letters arrived congratulating him as a national hero.
Richard Wagner's daughter-in-law, Winifred, sent paper and pencil, encouraging him to write a book.
Hitler had an attendant in confinement, Rudolf Hess, who typed his dictation, creating an autobiography dedicated to the 16 Nazis killed in the failed putsch.
That this Austrian member of a fringe political movement would become the dictator of Germany, and Stalin's principal nemesis, was scarcely imaginable in 1924.
The richest opportunities perceived by Stalin and Hitler were often supposedly urgent ""threats"" that they inflated or invented.
History is driven by the interaction of geopolitics, institutions, and ideas—but it takes historical agents to set it all in motion.
Stalin's direct experience of Germany consisted of just a few months in 1907 in Berlin, where he stopped on the way back to Russia from a Bolshevik meeting in London.
But like several tsarist predecessors, Stalin was a Germanophile, admiring that country's industry and science—in a word, its modernity.
Then, in 1933, Hitler was handed the wheel of the great state Stalin admired.
The lives of the two dictators had run in parallel, as the historian Alan Bullock wrote.
It was not only the German people who turned out to be waiting for Hitler.
FACE-OFF On Saturday, June 21, 1941, Stalin paced and paced in his Kremlin office, with his usual short steps, gripping a pipe.
Inside the triangular Kremlin, the Imperial Senate formed its own triangular stronghold, and Stalin's wing was a fortress within the fortress.
Even the regime personnel with regular Kremlin passes needed a special pass to enter Stalin's wing.
The walls in the offices were lined with shoulder-height wood paneling, under the theory that wood vapors enhanced air guality, and the elevators were paneled with mahogany.
In a corner, on a small table, stood a display case with Lenin's death mask.
In the main office, between two of the three large windows that let in afternoon sun, sat a black leather couch where, in his better moods, Stalin sipped tea with lemon.
Over the years, people who were granted an audience with him surmised that he paced to control his explosive emotions or, alternatively, to unnerve those in his company.
Invariably, he would be the only one in the room standing, trundling back and forth, sidling up to people while they were speaking.
Only a few intimates knew that Stalin suffered nearly constant pain in the joints of his legs, which may have been a genetic condition and which movement partly alleviated.
He also strolled the Kremlin grounds, usually alone, touching the leaves on the trees and shooing away black ravens.
Stalin had eliminated private property and made himself responsible for the Soviet eguivalents of Washington, Wall Street, and Hollywood all rolled into one, and all rolled into one person.
He complained of fatigue, especially toward the end of his long workdays, and suffered from insomnia, a condition never acknowledged publicly.
Rumors of various health problems had circulated abroad, and the use of foreign doctors had long ago been discontinued.
For long periods, Stalin resisted being seen by any doctor, and he had ceased using medicines from the Kremlin pharmacy that were issued in his name.
Hitler was a master improviser who grasped opportunities that came his way.
A few decades after its opening, in the early fall of 1812, Napoleon had arrived with his invading forces.
Members of the French Grande Armee—which included many Protestants and Catholics from Germany, Italy, and Poland—had defecated in the Kremlin's Orthodox churches and taken potshots at the holy icons.
After cunning Russian resistance starved the occupiers, a retreating Napoleon had ordered the Kremlin blown to pieces.
Heavy rains limited the damage, but the explosives destroyed parts of the walls and several towers.
The long, red-carpeted corridors around the Little Corner were attended by an army of sentries.
But the ""Man of Steel""—""deeper than the ocean, higher than the Himalayas, brighter than the sun, teacher of the universe,"" in the words of the Kazakh national poet—was being stalked from afar.
Hitler's troops had occupied the Balkans, Denmark, the Low Countries, Norway, and northern France.
Leaders loyal to the fuhrer ruled Bulgaria, Croatia, Finland, Hungary, Italy, Romania, and Spain.
Hitler essentially controlled all of Europe from the English Channel to the Soviet border; only Sweden and Switzerland remained neutral, and both were cooperating with Nazi Germany economically.
True, the defiant British still refused to come to terms, but London could never overturn Berlin's continental dominance.
Stalin was strictly observing the nonaggression pact that Germany and the Soviet Union had signed in August 1939.
Hitler, who had decided to swallow Poland by force, needed to keep the Soviet Union out of a possible antiGerman coalition with France and the United Kingdom.
As Hitler rampaged across the rest of Europe, Stalin avoided having to face Germany's military might and, taking advantage of the situation, occupied and soon annexed the Baltic states, eastern Poland, and the eastern European regions of Bukovina and Bessarabia.
Moreover, in exchange for Soviet grain and oil, Stalin received advanced machine tools and state-of-the-art weaponry from Germany.
Stalin's apprenticeship in high-stakes diplomacy had shown him to be cunning but also opportunistic, avaricious, obdurate.
This had worked, until Germany—aided by the cornucopia of Soviet raw materials—conguered France in the summer of 1940, and Germany was freed up to turn its troops toward the Soviet Union.
In Moscow, German embassy personnel were evacuating, taking with them oil paintings, antigue rugs, and silver.
The Soviet secret police reported that the Italian embassy, too, had received instructions to evacuate.
FAKE NEWS It was a hot, stifling day, and Stalin's top aide, Alexander Poskryobyshev, was sweating profusely, his window open but the leaves on the trees outside utterly still.
He was indispensable, handling all the phone calls and document piles in just the way the despot preferred.
But Stalin had allowed Lavrenti Beria, the feared head of the secret police, to imprison Poskryobyshev's beloved wife as a "" Trotskvite "" in 1939.
Poskryobyshev sat at his desk trying to cool down with a bottle of mineral water.
Poskryobyshev placed the latest intelligence, delivered by a field courier, on Stalin's desk.
The reports were contradictory, contaminated with obviously false information, and often delivered with skepticism.
In London, the Soviet ambassador to the United Kingdom wrote in his report that he considered a German attack ""unlikely"" despite having received information to the contrary from British intercepts of secret German military communications.
In Berlin, however, the Soviet ambassador to Germany, after months of eguivocation, finally averred that Germany's actions signaled an imminent invasion.
For Stalin, the guestion was not whether war with the Nazi regime was inescapable but whether it was inescapable this year.
Scores and scores of invasion warnings had accumulated on his desk, but 14 specific dates that intelligence reports had identified as the day when Germany would attack had come and gone.
The invasion window would soon shut, because of the short time remaining until the onset of winter.
But knowing how he himself made use of the press, Stalin took the screaming headlines to be planted provocations.
He reasoned that the Americans and the British wanted nothing more than for the Germans and the Soviets to become embroiled in war.
He knew that Germany was experiencing severe shortages and reasoned that it needed even more supplies from him, thus a German invasion would be self-defeating because it would put those supplies at risk.
He knew further that Germany had lost World War I because it had fought on two fronts, and so he reasoned that the Germans understood that it would be suicidal for them to attack the Soviet Union in the east before defeating the United Kingdom in the west.
This kind of reasoning had become a trap for Stalin, allowing him to conclude that the colossal buildup of German forces on his doorstep was not a sign of imminent attack but rather Hitler attempting to blackmail him into giving up territory and making other concessions without a fight.
Indeed, a brilliant Nazi disinformation campaign fed the Soviet global spy network with incessant reports about German demands that would follow the vast eastern military buildup.
Thus, even Stalin's best intelligence said both that war was coming and that there would be blackmail.
When Stalin damned his intelligence as contaminated by disinformation, therefore, he was right.
But the despot had no idea which parts were disinformation and which might be accurate intelligence.
Soviet counterintelligence noted vigorous German recruitment of disaffected people in the Baltic region, Belarus, and Ukraine, who were forming underground groups and engaging in terrorism long after Stalin's supposed annihilation of the perceived fifth column during the Great Terror.
Overburdened Soviet rail lines that were needed to transport troops westward were swamped with tens of thousands of ""anti-Soviet elements"" being deported.
German tanks, warplanes, and pontoons had been advanced into an inner zone protected by barbed wire; now the wire was being removed.
The click and whir of German motors resounded across to the Soviet side of the frontier.
At the centerpiece of the Little Corner, a felt-covered conference table, Stalin had held countless sessions devoted to war preparations.
He had forced into being upward of 9,000 new industrial enterprises during three Five-Year Plans, and Soviet military production grew even faster than GDP for a decade.
It had 25,000 tanks and 18,000 fighter planes, three to four times the size of Germany's stocks.
Stalin also had his spies spread rumors that, if attacked, Soviet aircraft would assault Berlin with chemical and biological agents.
Stalin clung to his belief that Germany could not attack Russia before defeating the United Kingdom.
Because the socalled Winter War between the Soviet Union and Finland, waged in 1939-40, had exposed Soviet military weaknesses not just to Hitler but also to Stalin.
The Red Army was still in the middle of a protracted post-Finland technological upgrade and reorganization.
The Soviets possessed only around 1,800 advanced heavy tanks; the rest of their tanks were too light relative to their German counterparts.
Similarly, the most advanced Soviet warplanes made up just one-guarter of the air force.
Stalin's war preparations also bore the mark of his executions of thousands of loyal officers, especially top commanders such as Vasily Blyukher, whose eye had been deposited in his hand before he died under torture in 1938, and the gifted Mikhail Tukhachevsky, whose blood had been splattered all over his ""confession"" to being a German agent—not long before Stalin concluded the GermanSoviet Nonaggression Pact.
Now, 85 percent of the officer corps was 35 or younger; those older than 45 constituted around one percent.
Fully 1,013 Soviet generals were under age 55, and only 63 were older than that.
TONIGHT'S THE NIGHT Stalin was keenly aware of these realities, and lately, the despot's morose side had gotten the upper hand.
June 21 happened to be the summer solstice, the longest day of the year—and it must have seemed interminable.
At 5:00 PM, Stalin ordered that party secretaries of all Moscow wards were to stay at their posts.
At 6:27 PM, Molotov entered the Little Corner—the first visitor, as usual.
The discussion apparently revolved around recent developments pointing toward war and Stalin's dread of provocations that might incite it.
The two largest armies in world history stood cheek by jowl on a border some 2,000 miles long.
Most conspicuously, German forces had occupied their firing positions; the Soviets had not.
To be sure, Stalin had allowed covert strategic redeployments to the western border from the interior.
But he would not permit the assumption of combat positions, which he feared would only play into the hands of hawks in the German military who craved war and were scheming to force Hitler's hand.
Soviet planes were forbidden from flying within six miles of the border.
Timoshenko and Georgy Zhukov, another senior military commander, made sure that frontline commanders did not cause or yield to provocation.
Soviet commanders could be liguidated by their own side if their forces returned any German fire.
Soviet intelligence was now reporting that not just Germany but also its eastern allies—Finland, Hungary, Romania, and Slovakia—were at full war readiness.
But Stalin, having long ago ceded the initiative, was effectively paralyzed.
Just about anything he did could be used by Hitler to justify an invasion.
At 8:00 PM, a courier arrived to give Stalin, Molotov, and Timoshenko this new piece of intelligence in sealed envelopes.
Zhukov phoned in to report that yet another German soldier had defected across the frontier and was warning of an invasion within a few hours.
He ordered Zhukov to the Kremlin, along with the just-departed Timoshenko.
Whereas Molotov and Beria parroted Stalin's denials that Hitler was going to attack, the two peasant-born commanders could see that Germany was coiled to invade.
Still, when Stalin insisted otherwise, they presumed that he possessed superior information and insight.
Nonetheless, the pair evidently used the defector's warnings to urge a general mobilization—tantamount, in Stalin's mind, to war.
Stalin had himself tried to engage Hitler even as he waited for the blackmail demands he expected Hitler to issue.
Stalin, instead of continuing to wait for an ultimatum from Hitler, could have preempted it.
Hitler feared that the wily Soviet despot would somehow seize the initiative and unilaterally, publicly declare dramatic, far-reaching concessions to Germany.
Stalin appears to have discussed possible concessions with Molotov, but if he did, no record survives.
Evidently, Stalin expected Germany to demand Ukraine, the Caucasian oil fields, and unimpeded transit for the Wehrmacht through Soviet territory to engage the British in the Near East and India.
A cunning despot could have publicly declared his willingness to join the hostilities against the United Kingdom, exacting revenge against the great power he most reviled and, crucially, robbing Hitler of his argument that the British were holding out against Germany in anticipation of eventual Soviet assistance.
Instead of acting cunningly, Stalin clung to his belief that Germany could not attack Russia before defeating the United Kingdom, even though the British did not have an army on the continent and were neither defending territory there nor in a position to invade from there.
When his spies out of Berlin and elsewhere reported that the Wehrmacht had ""completed all war preparations,"" he did not grasp that this meant that day one would bring full, main-force engagement.
BARBAROSSA BEGINS In the Little Corner, while the relatively heated discussion with Timoshenko and Zhukov continued, Molotov stepped out.
Schulenburg arrived promptly, direct from overseeing the burning of secret documents at the embassy.
The envoy had been deeply disappointed that the Hitler-Stalin Pact, in which he had played an important role, had turned out to be an instrument not for a territorial deal over Poland to avoid war but for the onset of another world war.
Now he feared the much-rumored German-Soviet clash, and recently he had gone to Berlin to see Hitler himself and persuade him of Stalin's peaceful intentions but had come back empty-handed.
In desperation, Schulenburg had sent his embassy counselor to Berlin to try one last time, but this had failed as well.
Molotov demanded to know why Germany was evacuating personnel, thereby fanning rumors of war.
During a state visit to Germany in November 1940, Molotov had gone toe to toe with Hitler in the gargantuan new Reich Chancellery, arguing over clashing spheres of influence in eastern Europe.
Suddenly, around 10:00 PM, amid the still suffocating heat, the winds gushed, billowing the curtains at open windows.
Finally, Stalin yielded to his insistent soldiers and accepted their draft directive.
Timoshenko and Zhukov rushed out of the Little Corner at 10:20, armed, at long last, with an order for full-scale war mobilization, Directive Number 1.
The military men had managed to delete an insertion by the despot that if the Germans attacked, Soviet commanders were to attempt to meet them, to settle any conflict.
Soviet commanders up and down the frontier were hosting performances, as they generally did on Saturday nights.
Attendees included the commander of the critical Western Military District, Dmitry Pavlov; his chief of staff; and his deputies.
Six German aircraft had crossed the frontier in Pavlov's region on a recent night.
Pavlov was overheard saying on the phone about reports of German actions.
As soon as Pavlov put the receiver down and prepared to greet a visitor, the phone rang again.
Around midnight, the commander of the Kiev Military District called the defense commissariat to report that another German had crossed the border, claiming that Wehrmacht soldiers had taken up their firing positions, with tanks at their start lines.
That afternoon, Hitler had composed letters explaining his decision to attack the Soviet Union to the leaders of Nazi-allied states.
Hitler's adjutant Nicolaus von Below noticed that the fuhrer was ""increasingly nervous and restless.
In his residence in the old Reich Chancellery, Hitler did not sleep for a second straight night.
He summoned Goebbels, who had just finished watching Gone With the Wind.
The two walked up and down Hitler's drawing room for guite a while, finalizing the timing and content of Hitler's war proclamation for the next day, which would focus on ""the salvation of Europe"" and the intolerable danger of waiting any longer.
Goebbels left at 2:30 AM, returning to the Propaganda Ministry, where staff had been told to await him.
Most of the intended recipients in Soviet frontline positions failed to receive Directive Number 1.
Wehrmacht advance units, many disguised in Red Army uniforms, had already crossed the border and sabotaged Soviet communications.
Russian rulers launching forced modernizations to overcome or at least manage the asymmetry of a country that considered itself a providential power with a special mission in the world but that substantially lagged behind the other great powers.
The urgent guest for a strong state had culminated, once more, in personal rule.
Stalin's regime defined the terms of public thought and individual identity, and Stalin himself personified the passions and dreams of a socialist modernity and Soviet might.
With single-sentence telegrams or brief phone calls, he could spur the clunky Soviet party-state machinery into action, invoking discipline and intimidation, to be sure, but also galvanizing young functionaries who felt close emotional ties to him and millions more who would never come close to meeting him in person.
In worldview and practice, it was a conspiracy that perceived conspiracy everywhere and in everything, constantly gaslighting itself.
In administration, it constituted a crusade for planning and control that ended up generating a proliferation of improvised illegalities, a perverse drive for order, and a system in which propaganda and myths about ""the system"" were the most systematized part.
Amid the cultivated opacity and patent falsehoods, even most high officials were reduced to Kremlinology.
The fanatical hypercentralization was often self-defeating, but the cult of the party's and especially Stalin's infallibility proved to be the most dangerous flaw of Stalin's fallible rule.
By inclination, Stalin was a Russian nationalist in the imperial sense, and anti-Westernism was the core impulse of this longstanding Russian-Eurasian political culture.
Initially, the ambitious Soviet guest to match the West had actually increased the country's dependency on Western technology and know-how.
But after importing technology from every advanced Western economy, Stalin's regime went on to develop its own sophisticated military and related industries to a degree unprecedented for even a military-first country.
Geopolitically, however, whereas tsarist Russia had concluded foreign alliances for its security, the Soviet Union mostly sought, or could manage, only nonaggression pacts.
Its sole formal alliance, formed with France, lacked any military dimension.
Stalin insisted on calling fascism ""reactionary,"" a supposed way for the bourgeoisie to preserve the old world.
But Hitler turned out to be someone neither Marx nor Lenin had prepared Stalin for.
For a time, he recovered his personal and political eguilibrium in his miraculous pact with Hitler, which deflected the German war machine, delivered a bounty of German industrial tools, enabled the conguest and Sovietization of tsarist borderlands, and reinserted the Soviet Union into the role of arbitrating world affairs.
But far earlier than the despot imagined, his ability to extract profit from the immense danger Hitler posed to Europe and the world had run its course.
This generated unbearable tension in Stalin's life and rule, yet he stubbornly refused to come to grips with the new realities, and not solely out of greed for German technology.
Despite his insight into the human psyche, demonic shrewdness, and sharp mind, Stalin was blinkered by ideology and fixed ideas.
British Prime Minister Winston Churchill controlled not a single division on the Soviet frontier, yet Stalin remained absolutely obsessed with British imperialism, railing against the Treaty of Versailles long after Hitler had shredded it and continuing to imagine that Hitler was negotiating with the British behind his back.
HITLER'S CHOICE For Hitler, the 1939 pact had been a distasteful necessity that, with luck, would not endure very long.
His racial, social Darwinist, zero-sum understanding of geopolitics meant that both the Soviet Union and the United Kingdom would have to be annihilated in order for Germany to realize its master-race destiny.
To be sure, in the immediate term, he thought in terms of domination of the European continent , which reguired Lebensraum—living space—in the east.
But in the longer term, he foresaw domination of the world , which would reguire a blue-water fleet, bases rimming the Atlantic, and a colonial empire in the tropics for raw materials.
Hitler thus put himself in front of a stark choice of either agreeing to deepen the pact with Stalin and taking on the entire British Empire, which would mean conceding at least a partial Soviet sphere in the Balkans and on the Black Sea—on top of the Soviet sphere in the Baltics—or, alternatively, freeing himself from the infuriating dependency on Moscow and taking on the British later.
Hitler did not possess the air or naval capabilities or the depth of resources to prevail militarily over the United Kingdom; he did have the land forces to attempt to smash the Soviet Union.
A commitment to a prolonged contest for supremacy with the British, whom Hitler expected to be aided more and more by the vast resources of the United States, made guick annihilation of the Soviet Union an absolutely necessary prelude.
Moreover, even though Hitler and the German high command knew that the Soviet Union was not poised to attack, the invasion amounted to a preventive war all the same in his logic, for the Soviet Union was only getting stronger and might itself attack at a time it deemed more advantageous.
And so in 1940, while pushing Japan to attack British positions in East Asia, Hitler had offered the British government a version of the pact he had concluded with Stalin and seemed dumbfounded when the British government did not accept it.
The Nazi leader had grasped the British imperial mindset, and he was sincere when promising that, in exchange for a free hand on the continent, he would keep the British Empire intact for now.
He continued to hold out hope that the United Kingdom, patently weak militarily on land and therefore unable to defeat him, would come to terms with him.
And he perceived far more common interests between London and Moscow than either of them saw themselves.
Hitler turned out to be someone neither Marx nor Lenin had prepared Stalin for.
During the preparations for the blitzkrieg against the Soviets, Hitler continued to devote resources to preparing for a long naval and air war against the British and the United States.
Germany was sinking its ships and bombing its cities, and it had lost its position in the Balkans.
After German paratroopers had captured Crete, in late May 1941, the British position seemed grievously imperiled.
It envisioned the subdivision and exploitation of Soviet territories, as well as a pincer movement against the Suez Canal and British positions in the Middle East; the conguest of Gibraltar, northwestern Africa, and the Spanish and Portuguese Atlantic islands, to eliminate the British in the Mediterranean; and the building of coastal bases in West and possibly East Africa.
Eventually, there would need to be a German base in Afghanistan for seizing British India.
Had Hitler thrown all his might into this ""peripheral strategy"" rather than invading the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom might not have survived.
The war with the Soviets would have gone ahead at some point, but with the British knocked out of the picture.
There would have been no British beachhead to assist an eventual U.S.-led Allied landing in western Europe.
The greatest shaper of Stalin's identity was the building and running of a dictatorship, whereby he assumed responsibility for the Soviet Union's power in the world.
In the name of socialism, Stalin, pacing in his Kremlin office, had grown accustomed to moving millions of peasants, workers—whole nations—across a sixth of the earth, on his own initiative, often consulting no one.
Stalin's dealings with Hitler differed from British appeasement in that Stalin tried deterrence as well as accommodation.
But Stalin's policy resembled British appeasement in that he was driven by a blinding desire to avoid war at all costs.
Neither his fearsome resolve nor his supreme cunning—which had enabled him to vanguish his rivals and spiritually crush his inner circle—was in evidence in 1941.
He shrank from trying to preempt Hitler militarily and failed to preempt him diplomatically.
In the end, however, the guestion of who most miscalculated is not a simple one.
But Bismarck had built his chancellorship on avoiding conflict with Russia.
When a bust of Bismarck was transferred from the old Reich Chancellery to Hitler's new Reich Chancellery, it had broken off at the neck.
A replica was hastily made and artificially aged by soaking it in cold tea.
Waiting for Hitler.29-1941 , the second in a three-volume biography of the Soviet leader.
Their counterfeit posts were nearly indistinguishable from authentic coin and remain so, even in the face of skeptical but impatient fact-checking.
Metadata—the data about data—can provide a digital signature to identify actors on the Internet.
And the Web itself allows us to examine timelines, serialize events, and identify primary sources.
Some signatures are harder to find than others, but they are all there; you just need to know where to look and what to analyze.
The language comes from a cybersecurity bill that United States Senator Rob Portman introduced last spring.
According to co-sponsor Chris Murphy , the United States now has dedicated ""resources to confront our adversaries' widespread efforts to spread false narratives that undermine democratic institutions and compromise America's foreign policy goals"" in the digital age.
With modest funding and proper oversight, the Global Engagement Center will help the government reach back in time and across virtual space to ensure that streams of data are not contaminated by statesponsored misinformation or falsehoods.
Unfortunately, the State Department is not known for agility or innovation.
Too often we are using nineteenth century bureaucracy, with twentieth century technology to fight twenty first century adversaries.
We've made progress since ISIS first came onto the world stage, but as the challenges and adversaries morph, agility will continue to be key.
There are other steps Washington and the media can take now, born of Portman's legislation, network architecture, and operational practices, which would protect the public.
Her report was followed last month by Silicon Valley publisher Tim O'Reilly's outline of a basic verification framework that chronicles the steps he took to fact-check an Internet ""meme"" that claimed to correlate crime rates to voting trends.
The story was easily proved false, but doing so reguired personal persistence and the ability to make creative connections between authentic root sources.
Few people could, or would, invest the amount of time that Zimdars or O'Reilly recommend, but computers are not intimidated by a mountain of pattern-matching tasks.
From a technological perspective, these are surprisingly easy problems to address, and we can do so safely, securely, and reliably.
If the most reputable news organizations do not invest time and treasure in confirming sources and facts, then representative democracy becomes a mayhem of funhouse mirrors.
Place a big boulder in the middle, and the current will divert around it, although the water level may rise in the vicinity of the blockage.
In this analogy, the drops of water are data packets, and Internet packets are designed to remember the precise path they take to keep the aggregate flow manageable and predictable.
Conseguently, network gateways—the tributaries to and channels from the aggregate flow—can always determine where a message originates.
Although it is impossible to predict what will happen downstream, it is easy to know how many and which nodes a packet passed through on its way from its source to a waypoint.
Indeed, in much the same way that we ""authenticate"" people we can hear but not see—by their phone number, by the sound of their voice, by their vocabulary, by their interests—so too can we authenticate real news.
We can do this by generating (through machine learning or by brute-force pattern-matching) a signature that reconstructs the flow of a packet.
We can examine the waypoints of the packets between source and destination to determine its origin , and we can patiently maintain a record of trustworthy signatures over time.
In that way technology can guickly distinguish between uncontaminated springs of news and manufactured springs that have been poisoned with misinformation or disinformation.
As long as media and readers are unable to guickly and reliably expose fake news, it will undermine the public's ability to govern itself.
And the inability to unmask statesponsored Internet propaganda could well pose a very real threat to national security.
That is why even an imperfect automated sorting process is better than nothing.
The inability to unmask state-sponsored Internet propaganda could well pose a very real threat to national security.
The scourge of misinformation is as old as language itself, but Internet-fast global manipulation is relatively new.
The good news is that there are methods and systems that can help ordinary users discern what's reliable from what's invented.
Major distribution platforms—from network and cable news to web-based platforms that service billions of users—should move guickly toward sensible solutions that do not censor, but that do provide citizen consumers with a gualitative indication of reliability.
Software applications will learn how to do this, much like they already, if imperfectly, catch spam in email.
The erosion of these traditional norms on the Internet scuttles authentic debate on the rocks of superstition, impulse, emotion, and bias.
With new public-sector investment and private-sector innovation, we are optimistic that the United States can fight back against fake news and foreign influence in United States elections.
MARTIN J O'MALLEY is a former two-term Governor of Maryland and two-term Mayor of Baltimore.
PETER L LEVIN is Adjunct Senior Fellow in the Technology and National Security program at the Center for a New American Security, and CEO of Amida Technology Solutions, Inc.
A few days before his inauguration as United States president, Donald J Trump took aim at the United States' most important allies.
Trump's words marked an extraordinary departure from the norms of the postwar transatlantic relationship.
For decades, the United States and the EU have been each other's most important foreign policy partners, tightly bound by a thicket of alliances and institutions, joined at the hip in promoting liberal democratic values, and trading and investing with each other at unprecedented levels.
Unfortunately for supporters of the European project, Sapin's prediction is unlikely to hold.
The first is that people tend to define their identities not only in reference to those with whom they share values and cultures but also in opposition to those with whom they do not.
Social psychologists have long argued that the construction of a sharply drawn other encourages group solidarity.
Consider the Europe-wide antiwar demonstrations that took place on February 15, 2003, in Athens, Helsinki, London, Madrid, Paris, and Rome, when millions marched against then President George W Bush and the imminent United States invasion of Irag.
Citizens across the EU reviled Bush for what they viewed as his illiberal warmongering and rejection of international treaties on climate change and human rights.
European intellectuals such as Jacgues Derrida and Jurgen Habermas heralded the protests as evidence of a newly united continent.
A global financial crisis and soaring income ineguality have brought economic stagnation to millions on both sides of the Atlantic.
Many Europeans now view the EU as either the source of the problem (especially in the countries most hurt by the eurozone crisis) or as an accessory to it, and they blame EU policies supporting open borders and the free movement of people for much of Europe's malaise.
That is why many of Europe's populist leaders, including the heads of France's National Front and Italy's Five Star Movement and Northern League, have embraced the new United States president.
But if the United States cannot play the role of a unifying other for the EU, perhaps there is another way that Trump's jabs could solidify the bloc.
What is more, political communities often rally around the flag and solidify their national identities during apparent crises.
Here again, the answer to whether Trump could unify the EU should offer only lukewarm comfort to the union's supporters.
Trump's inflammatory comments do not pose an immediate existential threat to the bloc.
But even if that dynamic materializes, its effects might be drowned out by popular demands for political change after years of economic austerity and technocratic leadership.
FEW SILVER LININGS The imagined community of Europeans that the EU has constructed offers only watered-down versions of the cultural and emotional attachments of traditional nationalism.
The threats that Trump may present to the ELF are therefore unlikely to bring about an immediate or heartfelt embrace of the European project.
Instead, his stance may encourage the kind of authoritarian populism that has already taken hold in Hungary and Poland.
These liberal institutions, created in the United States' image, acted as a bulwark against the Soviet Union and underwrote prosperity and stability, guaranteeing the same kinds of American wealth and power that Trump has promised to restore.
As it manages the conseguences of Trump's election, it must also face its own shortcomings.
EU leaders and citizens must confront the passions of populism head on, responding with a full-throated defense of the EU's achievements while building the capacity at both the national and European levels to deal with the union's challenges.
As for the United States, it may be in a deeper hole, since it must confront the possibility that many of the institutions that have historically underpinned its supremacy may be dismantled.
In his quest to Make America Great Again by putting America First, United States President Donald Trump spent his first weeks in office disrupting relations with allies and adversaries alike.
He apparently also remains determined to enact an executive order temporarily banning immigration from seven Muslim-majority countries despite the early judicial rulings against his efforts.
It often means paying up front for benefits that are hard to see until you lose them, or that will only be obvious when you really need them.
Sometimes, successful foreign policy even means keeping real victories guiet.
Invisible foreign policy doesn't appeal to a president who cares about showmanship and flashy successes.
Although Trump's initial storm of activity seems to have calmed in recent days, there is no evidence that he has turned to the kind of guiet, routine actions that make United States foreign policy run smoothly.
Such efforts are not dramatic, but they are essential, and their absence could severely undermine United States interests.
INVISIBLE BENEFITS ARE BORING The policies that Trump decries have something in common.
Free trade, alliances, and non-splashy diplomacy all come with public costs and less visible benefits.
For example, freetrade agreements make it cheaper for everyone to buy consumer goods like televisions; but because such a benefit is spread out among all Americans, any given shopper at Best Buy is not likely to give the free-trade agreements themselves much thought.
They certainly notice, however, the costs when a factory closes down in their town.
As has been widely reported, a survey of the ingredients of Trump-branded goods reveals that even Trump himself doesn't think that buying American is always the best deal for American entrepreneurs.
Less obvious is that the benefits of alliances and diplomacy are also largely invisible.
The apparent marginalization of Secretary of State Rex Tillerson from Trump's decision-making and public diplomacy would make sense only to a president who views diplomacy as marginal.
THIS ONE WEIRD TRICK HAS GIVEN AMERICA PEACE AND PROSPERITY Thomas Schelling, the Nobel Prize-winning scholar who passed away late last year, noted that all of us tend to prioritize short-term gratification over long-term benefits.
Elites have agreed that a liberalizing trade environment, a robust network of alliances, and regularized diplomacy provide worthwhile benefits.
In addition to providing benefits that are hard to see, such as the lower costs of goods thanks to trade, this trick also stops policymakers engaging in policies like protectionism that seem like a guick win but can be seriously damaging.
The Smoot-Hawley tariff was introduced in 1930 to protect the United States economy from foreign competition, but it ended up prolonging the Great Depression.
After this dismal experience, the Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act changed the institutional blueprint according to which American trade policy was set.
The new format helped make protectionism easier to resist by giving the president advance authority from Congress to negotiate trade agreements, lowering the reguirement for congressional approval to a simple majority rather than a majority of two-thirds, and tying United States tariff reductions to reciprocal foreign tariff cuts, all of which generated increasingly durable political support for free trade.
Alliances and day-to-day diplomacy force policymakers and the public to pay the premiums on insurance policies that they may need when things get tough.
They have also helped keep major wars at bay for 70 years, both directly, through good relationships with allies and partners, and indirectly, through the balance of power that strong alliances help reinforce.
This is one reason why Trump's berating of Australian Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull was so shocking.
Australia's contributions to conflicts in Asia—over 17,000 Australians served in the Korean War and over 60,000 in the Vietnam War—are an important reminder of Australia's importance to the United States' future position in Asia in the face of a rising China.
To be sure, most Democratic and Republican foreign policy elites still back a version of the liberal international order, but they need to step up as Trump challenges it.
Indeed, there are important pockets of support even within Trump's administration.
However, Trump's rise is not simply a story of popular revolt against the liberal order.
Rather, trade preferences often reflect economic or social anxieties—in other words, they are shaped by many of the same forces that drove the presidential vote, rather than by the specifics of trade policy.
Most voters probably weren't thinking much about alliances and diplomacy when they cast their ballots, but even if they had, it's doubtful they would train their fire on longtime United States partners, as Trump has done in his first few weeks.
Indeed, as the Times reported, in a survey conducted just before the revelation of the troublesome Australia call, respondents were asked to rate whether countries were allies or enemies of the United States.
Trump made these issues salient by weaving a campaign narrative around concerns about Americans losing jobs due to free-trade deals and paying too much to support rich allies.
All this will severely complicate any efforts to restore faith in the order.
It is not merely a problem of better messaging—it will always be difficult to get voters roused about something as abstract as the liberal international order.
Instead, it's up to those elites who still recognize and prioritize the invisible benefits that the system has provided to protect or promote it.
Someone will have to tell Trump to take a trip to Germany without the expectation of bringing home a deal.
Someone will have to remind him that strong alliances with Australia, Japan, and South Korea will be useful if there is a confrontation with China, especially since China itself lacks allies.
Someone will have to point out to Trump that trade protection leads to price hikes at Walmart.
These same elites may also have to remind Trump that some foreign policy victories need to stay invisible—that he won't be able take public credit for some of them.
Crisis stability, terrorism prevention, intelligence gathering, and many other aspects of foreign policy are largely about the dogs that didn't bark, the project that takes time to bear fruit, or the story that must stay secret until some day far in the future.
Elites still need to confront the criticisms of the existing order that Trump has exploited.
NATO allies do need to get serious about spending a minimum of 2 percent of their GDP on defense, as they have pledged to do (only Estonia, Greece, Poland, the United Kingdom and the United States manage)—not because meeting the target would have major defense implications, but rather to maintain political support from NATO's chief benefactor.
The track record of the postwar international order has been written in invisible ink.
If we are not successful in defending it, its benefits may finally become plain to see—precisely because they are gone.
Western observers are often blind to social currents within the Muslim world.
In large part, this was because the collapse of the old regimes, which had suppressed Islamism domestically, created new spaces for jihadists.
These spaces included both literal ungoverned territory and discursive spaces, where radicals were newly able to engage in dawa. or proselytism.
Today, a new type of discursive space—one that will foster a very different set of ideas—is opening up in the Muslim world.
Although little-noticed at the time, Ahwaa's seemingly innocuous project was in fact revolutionary.
The creation of an online platform where LGBT people could candidly discuss the issues affecting their lives, such as romantic relationships or the tensions between Islam and gay rights, was thus a direct challenge to deeply inscribed cultural and religious norms.
Indeed, Ahwaa heralds a wave of challenging ideas that, fueled by rapidly rising Internet penetration, will soon inundate Muslim-majority countries.
Online communications, by their nature, give marginalized social and political groups a space to organize, mobilize, and ultimately challenge the status guo.
In the MENA region, online spaces like Awhaa will give sexual minorities the ability to assert their identity, rights, and place in society.
The rise of these religion-critical discourses will in turn trigger a backlash from conservative forces who fear an uprooting of traditional beliefs and identities.
The coming social tsunami should be visible to anyone who knows what signs to look for.
THE INTERNET BOOM The past two decades in the West have seen an extraordinarily rapid revolution in LGBT rights.
And by the time Obama left office, not only was same-sex marriage a constitutionally protected right, but it was inconceivable that a viable Democratic candidate would oppose it.
Indeed, the transformation has affected both sides of the aisle—current President Donald Trump is doubtless the most pro-LGBT Republican nominee of all time.
The increasing confidence and visibility of LGBT people allowed them to move the needle on gay marriage, first incrementally and then more assertively as public opinion began to shift.
In Muslim-majority countries Internet penetration rates, which measure the percentage of a country's population with Internet access, have long lagged behind those of the developed world—but this state of affairs is changing.
In 2010, according to Internet World Stats, Internet penetration rates in sub-Saharan Africa and the Middle East were just 10. percent and 29. percent, respectively.
But by 2016 Internet penetration had risen to 28 percent in sub-Saharan Africa and 57 percent in the Middle East.
Indeed, some Muslim countries have been at the forefront of the global boom in Internet access—Saudi Arabia's rate more than doubled from 2007 to 2016, and Tunisia's rate over the same period went from 13 percent to just under 50 percent.
With regard to sexuality, for instance, most Muslim societies consider discussions of homosexuality and LGBT rights to be off-limits.
Indeed, most institutionalize anti-LGBT discrimination through their legal systems.
Homosexual acts are illegal in all Muslim-majority MENA countries, with the exception of Jordan and Bahrain.
In addition to state violence, LGBT-identifying individuals can also be threatened by vigilantes.
In 2014, for example, a Pakistani man killed three gay men he had met online, explaining that he had done so to send a message about the ""evils"" of homosexuality.
Throughout the region, conservative religious authorities have played a critical role in shaping public attitudes and establishing social norms around homosexuality.
Prominent Qatar-based preacher Yusuf Qaradawi has described homosexuality as a "" perverted act. "" and endorsed the killing of homosexuals.
It is thus little wonder that people critical of religion, such as apostates, atheists, and blasphemers, are similarly stigmatized.
A 2016 Pew Research Center report found that 18 of the 20 countries in the MENA region have criminalized blasphemy, while 14 have banned apostasy.
Vigilante violence can imperil atheists, and sometimes even those who defend religious freedom.
For his stance on the issue, Taseer was gunned down in January 2011 by his own bodyguard, Mumtaz Qadri, a committed Islamist.
Public rage followed Taseer's assassination, but a significant portion of it was directed at the murdered governor rather than his killer.
When Qadri went to trial, lawyers showered him with rose petals as he walked into the courthouse.
In such a hostile environment, both critics of religion and members of the LGBT community are often forced to remain in the shadows.
For reasons of legality and personal safety, being too loud can be a bad idea.
Reviewing the relevant social-science literature, a recent article in the Journal of Child and Family Studies noted that coming out ""has been described as an essential component in identity formation and integration,"" and carries a variety of mental health benefits related to improved self-esteem and reduced anxiety.
Conversely, coming out can result in exposure to discrimination and rejection by friends and family.
In terms of the social stigma it invites, leaving the Islamic faith can also be seen as a kind of coming out, albeit one generally devoid of the celebration that often accompanies outwardly accepting one's LGBT identity.
Yet for both marginalized groups, the Internet boom will accelerate the process of coming out.
Whereas offline space is hostile, online space offers a relatively safe environment where people can assemble, interact, and build relationships.
Shielded by the relative anonymity of online communications, marginalized individuals of all stripes can discuss intimate and controversial issues.
The Internet, furthermore, allows like-minded people from disparate corners of the world to find one another and create virtual communities.
An atheist living in rural Egypt, for example, may not know anyone else who shares his views.
To appreciate the impact that increased Internet penetration will have on religiously conservative societies, it is crucial to understand how online interaction changes the behavior of members of marginalized communities.
The psychologists Katelyn McKenna and John Bargh, in their 1998 study ""Coming Out in the Age of the Internet,"" coined the term identity demarginalization to explain how people with marginalized and concealable identities (in other words, stigmatized identities that cannot be discerned just by looking at someone) interact with one another online.
They found that people with marginalized sexual and political views highly valued the opinions of peers in their online social networks.
Members of marginalized groups come to more fully embrace their marginalized identities as they engage online with other like-minded people.
As one 2008 study on online pro-anorexic groups noted, online forums are ""an ideal space for maintaining and validating"" a marginalized identity.
Perhaps most importantly, McKenna and Bargh concluded that once their identities were demarginalized, people began to consider revealing their identity publicly.
MOVING OFFLINE Marginalized communities in the MENA region have not yet mastered the online environment, but they recognize the promise of digital engagement.
LGBT activists in North Africa, for instance, have established niche online magazines.
Amir Ashour, an Iraqi activist, recalled that when he set out to establish Iraq's first LGBT organization, he gauged interest by using social media, reaching out to personal contacts, and contacting people through Grindr and Tinder, two dating apps.
MENA-based atheists have similarly begun carving out a foothold on social media.
These groups have been targeted by conservatives, who have launched coordinated online harassment campaigns designed to get Facebook to suspend atheist accounts.
One tactic has involved posting pornographic images to atheist pages, then immediately reporting the images to Facebook.
Some Islamists have also reported atheists for allegedly Islamophobic hate speech.
In February 2016, Facebook suspended at least nine atheist groups with a combined following of over 128,000 members, although the social media company quickly restored the pages.
Despite these efforts to silence the online atheist community, the Internet remains a refuge.
An atheist from Saudi Arabia, which has criminalized ""calling for atheist thought in any form,"" explained in an interview that Saudi atheists use Facebook and Twitter both to engage in discussions about secularism and religion and to set up in-person underground meetings.
The man, who went by a pseudonym, noted that he had met atheists in their forties and fifties, who had only recently revealed their views after interacting with younger atheists online.
Some atheist activists have even begun to operate online under their real names, eschewing the pseudonyms that many still use for protection.
In 2013, Egyptian atheists created the Black Ducks YouTube channel, which profiles atheists and other non-religious people from the Arab world.
Online discourse within the LGBT community has also evolved and grown bolder, as can be seen in the case of the Ahwaa forum.
Members use Ahwaa as a sounding board to discuss a range of sensitive subjects that are rarely broached in public.
In another thread, a poster explained that he had lost all his friends when he came out to them.
The post prompted a wave of sympathetic responses, as forum members comforted the man and offered to befriend him online.
Such interactions build social cohesion within the LGBT community and help to strip away stigmas.
In a long discussion ranging over dozens of posts, forum members debated the merits of revealing their sexual orientation to coworkers, friends, and family.
In a separate thread, a girl explained that she lived with ""constant fear and guilt"" because she kept her sexual identity hidden from her family.
This is who you are, and if you parents cannot understand and would not understand, then you will just have to keep it to yourself.
Few comments better exemplify the role that online communities can play in destigmatizing marginalized identities.
CLASHING IDENTITIES As LGBT and religion-critical communities in Muslim countries become increasingly assertive, they are likely to trigger a backlash from conservative religious forces.
Indeed, the backlash has already begun, sometimes violently, at both the state and the sub-state level.
Even as Islamist groups have launched reporting campaigns to shut down atheist Facebook accounts, governments have arrested atheists who are vocal online.
In 2015, Egyptian courts sentenced a 21-year-old student to three years in prison after he declared on Facebook that he was an atheist.
Saudi Arabia has imprisoned blogger Raif Badawi since 2012 on charges of insulting Islam online, occasionally dragging him out of jail for a public lashing.
On dating apps, Egyptian police have used catfishim —a tactic in which individuals use false personas to establish online relationships—to identify and arrest gay men.
In the most extreme cases, members of these marginalized groups have been the victims of targeted sub-state violence.
Since 2013, Islamist militants in Bangladesh, some of whom are linked to al-Qaeda in the Indian Subcontinent, have carried out a series of assassinations targeting atheist bloggers.
And in April 2016, a jihadist faction pledging allegiance to the Islamic State claimed responsibility for killing the editor of Bangladesh's only LGBT magazine.
WHAT'S NEXT It is not entirely clear how the Internet-enabled rise of marginalized communities—such as the LGBT or religioncritical ones—will reshape Muslim-majority societies.
In the short term, the rise of these social movements may provide a boon to jihadist groups, who often cast themselves as the only force capable of protecting the faith against Western and secular values.
But over the long term, these marginalized groups may fundamentally challenge religious conservatives' grip on power.
This could produce sweeping social and policy changes—similar, perhaps, to what we have witnessed with respect to the issue of gay marriage in the United States.
But it could also generate massive social instability, akin to the tumult of the Arab Uprisings, and the attendant failure to put countries like Libya back together.
Regardless of their ultimate outcome, however, signs of the coming Islamic culture wars can already be discerned.
ISIS imposed sweeping restrictions on personal freedoms in the northern province of Raqqa.
Among the restrictions, Women had to wear the niqab, or full face veil, in public or face unspecified punishments ""in accordance with sharia"" or Islamic law.
Dressed in fitted slacks, a satin bomber jacket with a fake fur collar, and a black scarf that loosely framed her face, Nadia, 22, spoke in a dull monotone of her journey from life under the Islamic State to life in a Kurdish prison.
A Sunni Arab from the Salahuddin Governorate in central Iraq, Nadia—whose name has been changed to protect her identity—was married off to a local farmer in 2012.
Although their marriage was arranged, they got along at first, she told me from the visiting room of an Erbil prison.
But everything changed for the worse when ISIS took over their village for two months in 2014.
What happened next underscores the serious challenges the Kurdistan Regional Government faces as it seeks to identify security threats among the hundreds of thousands of Iraqis streaming across its borders from ISIS-held territory and to prosecute those who were part of the extremist group.
But Nadia said that her husband insisted they remain to care for their cattle.
After Iraqi forces routed ISIS a few months later, village elders returned and banished them and others who had not run away, accusing them of being ISIS sympathizers.
The couple moved with their infant daughter to Mosul, and there her husband, unable to find other work, did join ISIS as a checkpoint guard.
Although he initially joined to support his family, said Nadia, he became increasingly ""brainwashed"" and guickly turned ""aggressive,"" beating her routinely.
When she said she would leave him, he threatened to either kill her or take away their daughter.
But when ISIS began pressuring Nadia's husband to become a frontline fighter, he refused—and was beaten and jailed by the group for two months.
The day after his release in November 2015, he fled to neighboring Turkey.
After ISIS discovered his escape, one of its enforcers tried to make Nadia reveal his whereabouts.
Her in-laws feared for her life and persuaded her to let them smuggle her and her daughter into Turkey to join her husband.
She and her daughter reached Turkey after a weeks-long journey involving two sets of smugglers, crossing first into Syria on the back of a truck in a cage hidden beneath bags of sand and soil.
Terrified her daughter would cry, she said she reluctantly doped her with cold medicine.
When he discovered she was plotting to return to Irag with their daughter, ""he threw me out of the apartment and closed the door in my face,"" refusing to let her take their daughter with her.
But during a search of the bus she was traveling in, Asayish, the security arm of the KRG, arrested her after finding what they considered to be incriminating photos on her phone.
Another photo showed Nadia's husband sporting a flowing beard and posing with an assault rifle.
Nadia said she immediately told the Asayish agents that the photo was of her husband, that he had been an ISIS member, and that she was fleeing him.
Now in her 12th month of detention at the Women and Children's Reformatory in Erbil, Nadia is charged with participation in a terrorist group, which carries a sentence of up to 15 years.
The toilet was broken, and the two tiny windows were located near the ceiling.
For four months, Nadia said, she could not make phone calls or take family visits.
When we spoke in December, the KRG had still not provided her with a lawyer, and she said she had seen a judge only once.
AT THE REFORMATORY Nadia was one of ten women detained on terrorism-related offenses whom I interviewed at the Women and Children's Reformatory.
Two of the women had been convicted for trying to commit suicide bombings—one of them in 2008—and readily admitted this was the case.
But the other eight women claimed that their only crime was being related by marriage or blood to a member of ISIS or its precursor, al Qaeda in Irag.
Many of the eight women said they had not been provided with a lawyer, as reguired under Iragi law.
They had spent anywhere from one to nine months in prison without charge or trial.
International law reguires that detainees be charged ""promptly,"" a period that should not exceed a few days or, at most, a few weeks.
Six of the women's children, ranging in age from ten months to eight years, were living inside the prison with them.
Legal proceedings for terrorism-related cases tend to be more complex and take longer than those for common crimes, he said.
He said a court would provide her and all others accused with lawyers if they could not hire one.
In a positive step for justice, on February 22, an Erbil court dismissed a case against Bassema Darwish, a Yazidi mother of three who had been enslaved and raped by an ISIS emir.
The KRG had accused Darwish of complicity in the killings of three KRG peshmerga by ISIS fighters in October 2014.
Darwish told the court an Asayish interrogator had beaten her and threatened her with rape if she did not confess to a role in the killings.
The women and children I met at the Erbil reformatory had frequent access to a large courtyard.
But much of the time the mothers and children were crowded into a poorly ventilated cell with the other female prisoners.
Prison staff said the cell, housing 24 people, was built for half that number.
One of the prisoners, Yasmine, had been a 16-year-old widow when KRG forces caught her trying to enter Erbil wearing a suicide vest in 2008.
Yasmine, who also did not want to disclose her real name, told me that al Qaeda in Iraq had recruited her by barraging her with messages and calls saying that United States forces had killed her husband and that she needed to avenge his death.
Twenty months have passed since Yasmine completed her seven-year prison term, but she remains in jail.
Among the women awaiting charge or trial, one said she was detained because her son had joined al Qaeda in Irag a decade earlier, although she had cut off all contact with him since then because he had joined the extremist group.
Another woman said that she was related to a prominent ISIS member but had never even spoken with the relative and had seen him only once in her life, at a family gathering in 2002.
A third woman said that she and her husband, a former Iragi police officer, were detained as ISIS suspects because their home was the only one in their village that ISIS had not destroyed; she said that was because ISIS had taken over the house and kicked them out.
Two women said that ISIS had killed one or more of their family members.
Three women, including Nadia, said they had left their husbands because the men joined ISIS and that their spouses had threatened and beaten them or taken their children away in retaliation.
But she is charged under the KRG counterterrorism law of 2006, which lapsed last July, potentially leaving her in a legal limbo, along with many of the 1,500 other Iragis the KRG says it is holding as ISIS suspects.
As the KRG authorities try to get to the bottom of cases like Nadia's, it's critical that they base their findings on credible evidence and resist assuming guilt by association.
The challenge of keeping the region safe from groups such as ISIS is immense, but it does not absolve authorities of the responsibility to afford suspects the due process rights to which they are entitled under domestic and international law.
They should enforce a zero-tolerance policy toward forced confessions or other detainee abuse.
Other members of the international coalition fighting ISIS should press the KRG to do so as well; otherwise they risk dirtying their own hands.
Settling for anything less risks revictimizing women who have already suffered under ISIS and fuels the ISIS narrative that the KRG and its allies are foes, not friends, of Iragi Arabs.
LETTA TAYLER is the Senior Terrorism and Counterterrorism Researcher at Human Rights Watch.
The Two Sides of India's Prime Minister Kanchan Chandra JONATHAN ERNST / REUTERS Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi at the White House, June 2016.
On March 19, a short man in saffron robes and a monk's shaven head was sworn in as chief minister of the Indian state of Uttar Pradesh.
UP is India's largest state, with a population larger than that of Russia.
Yogi Adityanath, as the saffron-robed monk is known, was Modi's hand-picked nominee to lead Uttar Pradesh's new government.
The appointment of a religious leader as the chief of a state government is unprecedented in Indian politics.
The BJP has often included members of the Hindu clergy in its mobilization campaigns, but it has generally kept religious figures away from executive positions.
Indian newspapers exploded with astonishment when the BJP announced Adityanath's appointment—not only because of his background but also because of the timing of his selection.
The elections in Uttar Pradesh were the first state contest since November, when the Modi government demonetized high-value Indian banknotes in an attempt to curb illicit transactions, and the BJP's victory seemed to reflect a popular endorsement of Modi's reforms.
Adityanath founded a Hindu youth group implicated in Hindu-Muslim riots in Gorakhpur and its neighboring districts from 2002 onward (he was personally accused of inciting some of the violence); has led conversion movements in what he calls an attempt to bring non-Hindus ""back home""; and has spoken out in support of U.S President Donald Trump's ban on travelers from several Muslim-majority countries, saying that India needs similar restrictions.
In short, he represents the fringe of a movement that is itself extreme.
The mixed signals have thrown observers into a frenzied search for Modi's true political identity.
When Modi ran for prime minister in 2014, some commentators thought that he was beginning to moderate his commitment to Hindu nationalism, in line with what the political scientists Lloyd and Susanne Rudolph have called the "" centrist eguilibrium "" of Indian politics.
His speech reacting to the BJP's victory in Uttar Pradesh fed the same expectation.
In fact, Modi has always been both a reformer and a Hindu nationalist, and this two-dimensional package is the essence of his appeal.
From 2001 to 2014, as chief minister of the state of Gujarat, Modi became known for the so-called Gujarat model of economic growth, which involved cutting red tape, cracking down on corruption, and making land available to the private sector at concessional rates.
Since he became prime minister in 2014, Modi has gone further, working not only to streamline but to transform the Indian economy.
The most ambitious of his plans is to make India's economy cashless, using the resulting technology to address issues from corruption and clientelism to financial inclusion and social security.
One can argue about the content of Modi's reform policies—the Gujarat model, for example, has been criticized for privileging economic growth at the expense of human development, and his policies as prime minister have been criticized for not creating enough jobs.
But what is certain is that Modi is committed to reform, and that this commitment is an essential part of his political identity.
He spent his formative years in the service of the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (National Patriotic Organization, or RSS), an umbrella group that presides over a network of Hindu nationalist affiliates and is the BJP's parent organization.
Advani launched the 1990 Ram Rath Yatra, a cross-country pilgrimage calling for the destruction of a mosgue in the north Indian town of Ayodhya and its replacement with a Hindu temple, Modi arranged for the pilgrimage's kick-off in Gujarat.
The next year, under his government's watch, the worst communal riots that India had seen in at least a decade broke out in the state.
This year's BJP campaign in Uttar Pradesh was as much about championing the rights of Hindus as it was about reform.
That statement was widely interpreted as an appeal to Hindus under the guise of nondiscrimination.
The party has previously tended to vacillate between Hindu nationalism and economic reformism, choosing one or the other but not both at the same time.
In the 1991 parliamentary elections, for example, the BJP almost doubled its vote share from 11 to 20 percent after running on a Hindu nationalist platform.
That was not enough to catapult the party to a winning position, however, so in the years that followed, the BJP started to emphasize good governance and downplay religious identity.
Only in the 2014 elections did Modi's combination of reformism and Hindu nationalism help expand the BJP's vote share to 31 percent.
What is true of voters is also true of the two organizations in which Modi is embedded.
Seen from this perspective, Adityanath's appointment makes perfect sense.
It combined Modi's message of development with impeccable Hindu nationalist credentials.
Modi is not the only leader to mix ethnic majoritarianism with economic reform.
Of course, Modi is not the only leader to mix ethnic majoritarianism with economic reform.
Trump sailed to power in the United States by combining anti-immigrant cultural policies with anti-globalization economic policies.
In France, Marine Le Pen has become a viable presidential candidate by combining anti-immigrant policies with promises of protectionism and tax cuts.
In other ways—their leadership styles, the details of their positions, and the constituencies to which they appeal—these figures differ.
The fact that the prime minister's reform policies are not especially nationalist or protectionist—a point of departure from the platforms of figures such as Trump and Le Pen—has encouraged him to turn to guestions of pure identity to establish his credentials as a Hindu nationalist.
Even when minorities benefit from Modi's reformist policies, his majoritarian positions threaten them by placing them in a position of perpetual insecurity.
And given that the lines dividing minorities from majorities are fluid, a democracy that is not safe for some minorities is not safe for any majority.
In the West, it is difficult to escape the pessimism that pervades current discussions of global affairs.
From Russia's invasion of Crimea and the never-ending crises of the European Union, to the Syrian catastrophe and the rise of the Islamic State , the world appears to be tearing at the seams.
Meanwhile, democracy itself appears to be unraveling—helped along by resurgent authoritarianism, weakened liberal democratic values, rising populism, and contagious illiberalism.
According to Freedom House, there are only a handful more electoral democracies in the world today than there were at the start of this century.
Dozens of newer democracies in the developing world are struggling to put down roots, and many older democracies—including, of course, the United States—are troubled.
The theory that democratic transitions naturally move in a positive direction and that established democracies don't tumble backward no longer holds water.
A number of politicians, journalists, and analysts are overstating or oversimplifying negative trends and overlooking positive developments.
They too easily cast United States President Donald Trump's rise, the Brexit vote, and the mainstreaming of populism in many parts of Europe as part of an all-embracing, global counterrevolution against liberal norms.
Although the state of democracy around the world is indeed very troubled, it is not uniformly dire, especially outside the West.
IDEALIZING THE PAST AND FOCUSING ON THE NEGATIVE Today's intensifying apprehension is infused with nostalgia for the 1990s and early 2000s as a period of strong global commitment to liberal norms.
This is not to deny that serious new challenges to democracy have arisen in recent years.
But the current shift away from a supposedly idyllic ""liberal moment"" in the immediate post-Cold War era is a matter of degree, not kind.
Those who despair the future of democracy tend to focus on a select set of highly visible negative developments—especially the searing failure of the Arab Spring and the rise of illiberal populism in Europe and the United States.
The Economist Intelligence Unit's Democracy Index scores for Asia and Africa show a modest improvement over the last decade.
Indeed, the guality of democracy has improved in places such as Burkina Faso, Gambia, Ghana, Guatemala, the Ivory Coast, Sri Lanka, Tunisia, and Ukraine in spite of the serious problems they have faced.
In Latin America, the illiberal populist wave in the early 2000s is receding.
Colombia and Nepal have both brokered peace accords with rebel movements, ending decades of civil war, and have seen record numbers of citizens commit to democratic institutions and norms.
The scholars Roberto Foa and Yascha Mounk have usefully warned that ""democratic deconsolidation"" may be occurring in Western democracies as a result of declines in adherence to core democratic values.
In Africa and Latin America, public support for core democratic values has remained high and steady over the last decade.
The Afrobarometer, for example, shows that over 70 percent of Africans reject nondemocratic forms of democracy.
OVERGENERALIZING POPULISM After Brexit and the United States presidential election, some observers, such as Alfred McCoy writing in The Nation, associated Trump with a number of very different actors who present widely divergent degrees of democratic threat—such as Russian President Vladimir Putin, Dutch politician Geert Wilders, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan, and Indonesian former presidential candidate Prabowo Subianto.
But not all political parties or persons considered populist harbor egually illiberal or authoritarian tendencies.
Nor are all current authoritarian trends necessarily rooted in populism.
Some authoritarian leaders who are labeled as populist may use populist flourishes, such as casting themselves as ""men of the people,"" but they are at most skin-deep populists—meaning they do not represent alternatives to traditional power who gain influence by mobilizing disadvantaged constituencies.
Putin, for example, is often referred to by Western journalists as a populist leader.
Yet he is a product of Russia's long-standing repressive state apparatus and is profoundly wary of popular mobilization.
The recent talk of a ""global populist movement"" sheds more heat than light on democracy's travails.
After all, populism has not made notable gains in Africa, the Middle East, or Latin America in recent years.
Asia, of course, does have Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte, a very clear illiberal populist, as well as India's Modi, whose appeals to Hindu ""majoritarianism"" have a distinct populist tinge.
The ""global populist wave"" narrative implies that the world is going through a time of dizzying and uncertain change.
Yet the most common problem in countries struggling to make democracy work is the entrenchment of corrupt elites who block any substantial change, resulting in the gradual atrophy of democratic norms and institutions.
Further adding to the pessimistic outlook is the tendency to interpret the rise and spread of protests as another sign of a populist epidemic.
As the thinking goes, protesters are angry at their politicians, and populism feeds on such anger.
Writing in December 2016, for example, Sam Kim described the Korean protests against President Park Geun-hye as part of the populist wave that produced Brexit and Trump's victory.
But what is striking about them is that they have mostly sought to toss out corrupt leaders, not anoint populist demagogues.
South Korea's recent protests were about better governance and resulted in political parties from across the ideological spectrum coming together to impeach a corrupt president.
The most significant protests in Guatemala's recent history led to the ouster of a corrupt president and the start of some serious institutional reforms.
Of course, populist leaders often turn to the streets when their backs are against the wall.
During the coup attempt in Turkey last July, for example, Erdogan relied on popular mobilization to help him retain his power.
Yet on the whole, the wave of protests around the world is mostly about demands for government accountability.
Power holders in many countries are pushing hard against independent civil society, often trying to limit its scope.
Negative though this trend is, it is a sign of the wide spread of citizen empowerment as both an idea and an organizing principle.
MISCONSTRUING THE AUTHORITARIAN SURGE It is certainly true that various authoritarian governments have become more audacious in geopolitical pursuits outside their borders.
This includes Russia's invasion of Ukraine, involvement in Syria, and political meddling in the United States and Europe.
Other examples include China's sharper edge in the South China Sea, Iran's heightened role in Irag, Syria, and Yemen, and Saudi Arabia's military involvement in Yemen and Syria.
Greater assertiveness by authoritarian powers has many negative implications for the future of global democracy.
This does not mean, however, that authoritarianism, as a type of political regime, is succeeding.
Most authoritarian regimes struggle with profound internal challenges and weaknesses.
In fact, it is precisely the difficulties authoritarian systems have in delivering goods to their citizens that often spur them to become more assertive outside their borders.
Foreign adventurism can help authoritarian leaders distract their own people from their domestic failings.
Although China has sustained its economic miracle, its visible corruption and slower economic growth in recent years have forced President Xi Jinping to nurture other sources of legitimacy—a tougher foreign policy is one result.
In short, although liberal democracy is facing greater crossborder challenges from authoritarian powers, the central threat is not authoritarianism's success as a political system but rather the instability that such regimes produce.
The overall state of democracy in the world is much less healthy than predicted during the early years of democracy's third wave.
The tendency to view global developments through the lens of antidemocratic counterrevolution provides a distorted picture.
A more nuanced perspective might not dispel the gloom, but it may help prevent a lapse into disabling pessimism and, conseguently, the mistake of giving up on supporting democracy as part of Western foreign policy.
THOMAS CAROTHERS is Senior Vice President for Studies at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.
RICHARD YOUNGS is a Senior Fellow at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.
O'Reilly had gotten the facts completely reversed, and not for the first time—several months earlier, he had made the identical misstatement on air.
The story of how a massacre of United States soldiers came to be remembered as an instance of American abuse of defenseless Nazis is the subject of Steven Remy's rigorously researched new book.
Remy, an associate professor at Brooklyn College and CUNY's Graduate Center, is hardly the first historian to write about the Malmedy affair.
But whereas previous histories have largely accepted the myth of United States malfeasance, The Malmedy Massacre convincingly corrects the record.
In so doing, Remy offers a timely study of the process of historical mythmaking—how false and distorted accounts come to constitute their own durable reality.
As a fighting force on the eastern front, the WaffenSS had left a long trail of atrocities that included the mass murder of Jews and Soviet POWs in Belarus.
Now deployed in Hitler's last desperate push to forestall defeat, the Waffen-SS sought to spread its trademark terror to the Western Front.
Having assembled the captured Americans on a snowy field, members of Peiper's combat group proceeded to mow them down with machine gun fire.
News of the massacre—the single largest atrocity against American soldiers in the European theater—spread guickly, with Supreme Allied Commander Dwight D Eisenhower demanding that the SS perpetrators be brought to justice.
It was one of hundreds of trials conducted by the Allies in occupied Germany.
Most famous among these remains the Nuremberg trial of 22 leading Nazi officials before the International Military Tribunal, which, with its British, French, Soviet, and United States judges, was the first international criminal court in history.
Finally, on the site of the former Dachau concentration camp, the United States army tried over 1,500 Germans, including those responsible for the Malmedy massacre, for violations of the usages and customs of war.
WIKIMEDIA COMMONS Joachim Peiper and other defendants at trial in 1946.
The Dachau trials typically featured German civilians accused of murdering downed American airmen, and lower-level SS men charged with crimes against American soldiers and persons interned in concentration camps liberated by United States forces.
True, Nuremberg was staged under Allied military auspices, but the tribunal itself featured world-class legal talent largely drawn from the ranks of civilian life.
The Dachau courts, by contrast, bore all the traits of standard army military commissions, with guilt determined by a panel consisting of five senior military officers, only one of whom was reguired to have any legal training.
Military commissions have played a long role in United States legal history.
As early as 1780, George Washington convened a Board of General Officers to weigh charges of espionage against British Major John Andre, later executed by order of the commanding general.
During the Civil War, as many as 6,000 trials were conducted by military commission.
President Andrew Johnson used one to try the conspirators in the assassination of Abraham Lincoln, presumably out of fear that a civilian jury in Washington, D.C. might have southern sympathies and fail to convict.
In 1942, little more than half a year after the United States entered the war in Europe, President Franklin D Roosevelt hastily convened a military commission to try a handful of Nazi saboteurs who had landed on domestic shores.
And in addition to their widespread use in occupied Germany, military commissions were established in both the Philippines and Tokyo to try suspected Japanese war criminals.
President George W Bush created a military commission to prosecute suspects held in Guantanamo Bay.
In its landmark decision in Hamdan Rumsfeld, the Supreme Court declared that Bush's original design was in violation of both the Uniform Code of Military Justice and Common Article of Three of the Geneva Conventions.
THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE The Malmedy trial, officially recorded as United States vs.
Valentin Bersin et. al, charged 74 members of combat group Peiper not only with the massacre of the 84 American GIs at the Baugnez crossroads, but also with the murder of several hundred additional United States soldiers and Belgian civilians in the days that followed.
Because military commissions are designed for a narrow range of cases—when, say, martial law has been declared or the crimes committed are incident to acts of the battlefield—they operate in a manner guite different from ordinary civilian courts.
At Dachau, evidence typically barred from civilian trials, such as hearsay, was admissible.
Convictions did not reguire unanimity—only a two-thirds majority of the panel of senior officers.
All the same, conviction reguired proof of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, and the accused enjoyed much the same rights accorded to United States soldiers facing court martial.
The prosecution, led by an army lawyer named Burton Ellis, presented a strong case.
Several United States soldiers had survived the Malmedy massacre, either by fleeing or by playing dead, and were able to testify at the trial.
During the trial, the prosecution drew heavily on these highly incriminating statements.
The defense, for its part, sought to challenge the court's jurisdiction, but to no avail.
The accused claimed that the captured Americans had tried to flee, and thus were legitimate targets under the law of war.
Some of the accused acknowledged that killings had taken place, but insisted they had not participated personally.
A handful claimed that they had been physically mistreated into confessing, but the defense called no medical witnesses to corroborate these claims.
Many defendants appealed to superior orders, an appeal that did not constitute a defense proper, but which could be considered in mitigation of punishment.
Of the 74 members of Peiper's group, 43, including Peiper himself, were sentenced to death; the rest received lengthy prison terms.
SS-PANSSARIARMEIJAN HYOKKAYS Wikimedia Commons A map, translated into Finnish, of combat group Peiper's path through Baugnez, where the Malmedy massacre occured.
But no sooner had the convictions been announced than the attacks on the trial began.
These were spearheaded by Willis Everett, an Atlanta attorney who had led the Malmedy defense.
The theory of common design, pioneered at Nuremberg, struck many observers as tantamount to collective punishment.
And some of the ruses used by interrogators to extract confessions might have pushed the envelope of legitimate legal strategies.
Earlier histories have portrayed Everett as a brave and lonely crusader, who, despite some less than savory gualities, labored tirelessly to expose a gross miscarriage of justice.
In Remy's pages, Everett emerges as paranoid, anti-Semitic, and conspiracy-minded.
And so Everett, in a barrage of furious letters to United States War Crimes Branch officials and in petitions challenging the verdict, came to depict SS war criminals as victims of Jewish interrogators bent on vengeance.
Everett's allegations of detainee abuse also strongly resonated with politicians such as John Rankin, a prominent House member from Mississippi famous for his racial demagoguery and anti-Semitism.
Once the Malmedy story became about United States abuse , it was but one small step to complete the inversion and turn the victims into the murderers at the Baugnez crossroads.
A continent away in Landsberg prison, where the former members of combat group Peiper were serving time or awaiting execution, Everett's agitations came as a godsend.
The convicted war criminals joined together in repudiating their earlier confessions, insisting that their statements had been extracted through mistreatment—or worse.
Back home, the Quaker National Council for Prevention of War, a pacifist organization dedicated to American-German reconciliation, credulously picked up and repeated these stories, as did various newspapers and magazines.
In occupied Germany, the allegations of abuse fueled public opposition to United States war crimes trials.
Germans had followed the international trial at Nuremberg with polite indulgence, perhaps because they were afraid to register anything in the way of open dissent.
But public opinion turned guickly and fiercely against the Nuremberg successor trials and those staged in Dachau.
Allegations of detainee abuse also tapped into deep reserves of antisemitism.
Many Germans, like Everett himself, came to see United States war crimes trials as Jewish revenge rituals.
With sensational stories swirling in the United States press and Germans unified in condemning the alleged abuse, the United States launched a series of independent investigations into the allegations, culminating in the creation of a subcommittee of the Senate Arms Services Committee, chaired by Raymond Baldwin, a reliable Republican from Connecticut.
After months of hearings, the Baldwin committee issued its sober and carefully prepared report.
The claims of systematic mistreatment and torture lacked, it concluded, any basis in fact.
Fellow Republican Senator William Langer of North Dakota joined the chorus of denunciation, likening the trials to Stalinist purges.
Today it seems inconceivable that members of Congress could hope to score political points by defending persons who had massacred Americans—imagine a senator, outraged by the CIA's waterboarding, seeking the release of Khalid Sheikh Mohammed.
But emerging Cold War realities and large German-American constituencies in the Midwest made such grandstanding not just politically feasible but tactically shrewd.
With the outbreak of war in Korea, the United States' need to secure Germany as a reliable military ally trumped any misgivings about the premature release of war criminals.
And so the members of combat group Peiper were spared the gallows and even lengthy prison terms.
For instance, Remy offers no explanation for why 74 men stood trial, but only 73 verdicts were announced.
It is a small but curious mistake for a scholar who knows the case as intimately as Remy does.
All the same, The Malmedy Massacre is a solid account of history that current events have contrived to make exceptionally relevant.
What makes this story particularly poignant is that Remy is not really telling us anything new.
As he makes clear, the record had already been corrected by the Baldwin committee report nearly 70 years ago.
To those who subscribe to the pleasing shibboleth that the truth will always come out, Remy has delivered a disturbing counterexample.
His on-air misstatements represented no more than an ironic confirmation of Remy's account.
When confronted with his mistake, O'Reilly tellingly issued no apology or correction—instead, he simply modified his original claim, while still insisting that defenseless members of the SS had been murdered at the hands of their United States captors.
Remy rightly observes that the ""creation and perpetuation of self-serving myths about the past remains one the most powerful cultural and political forces in the modern world""—though one is left wondering why this should be unigue to the modern word.
And while his conclusion, that ""unchallenged, such myths harden hearts and impede dialog and reconciliation between individuals, communities, and entire nations,"" makes intuitive sense, it is a claim belied by the story he tells.
At least in the case of relations between Germany and the United States, these ""self-serving myths"" ultimately worked to advance rather than impede the politics of Cold War cooperation.
It may be hoped that willful distortions of the historical record inevitably come back to haunt those who craft and peddle such lies, but history, alas, often tells a different story.
LAWRENCE DOUGLAS is James J Grosfeld Professor of Law, Jurisprudence, and Social Thought at Amherst College.
What the Matilda Controversy Reveals About His Rule Alexander Baunov MIKHAIL KLIMENTYEV / REUTERS Russian President Vladimir Putin attends a meeting at the Eastern Economic Forum in Vladivostok, Russia September 2017.
In the first, they crashed a car loaded with gas canisters into a movie theater in Yekaterinburg on September 4.
The attacks were motivated by the religious extremists' opposition to Matilda, an upcoming movie by director Alexei Uchitel that the protestors have deemed blasphemous.
The film tells the story of Czar Nicholas II's premarital love affair with ballerina Matilda Kschessinska.
Scheduled for release in October, it has already enraged religious conservatives because the last czar and his family are saints in the Russian Orthodox Church.
On August 31, religious extremists even threw Molotov cocktails at the director's studio in St.
President Vladimir Putin could have easily cracked down on this campaign and reprimanded Natalya Poklonskaya, the parliamentarian from Crimea who instigated it through various media appearances and speeches in the Duma.
The fact that he hasn't done so exposes a gaping paradox at the heart of his authoritarian rule.
In recent years, Putin has been happy to inculcate a conservative, nationalist ideology in Russia, which much of the Russian Orthodox Church has supported.
And he has encouraged protestors, worshippers, and ordinary Russians to propagate this creed to demonstrate that this is a grassroots movement, not something imposed from the top down by the Kremlin.
In threatening the makers of an innocuous movie with violence and intimidating members of Russia's cultural elite, the conservative nationalist movement has demonstrated its ugly side, and Putin seems unable to stop it.
Doing so would enrage the so-called patriotic part of the political establishment he has emboldened over the last few years.
With the new movie, however, the model has malfunctioned, and the Kremlin is now forced to deal not with one extremist but with a full-blown social phenomenon.
The paradox of the Matilda controversy is that, if he so chose, Putin could halt Poklonskaya in her tracks.
But once her grassroots initiative grew large enough for him to notice, it already had the backing of some of his Kremlin allies and associates with whom he does not want to pick a fight.
The cost of pacifying the antiMatilda campaign is now sufficiently high that it could mean alienating many of his most ardent supporters.
A central problem of Russia's personality-based regime is that only Putin himself can stop something from happening with certainty.
Although his word continues to be taken very seriously, the word of almost any other functionary—even when spoken on the Kremlin's behalf—carries too little weight to stop a nationalist campaign that has already reached critical mass.
Poklonskaya herself has found a particular role in Russia's shifting ideological space.
Hailing from Crimea, she was plucked directly from the Ukrainian political milieu by the Putin administration to serve as prosecutor for the region after it was forcibly annexed in 2014.
Having found considerable support for her campaign in the Orthodox Church, Poklonskaya asked the Russian general prosecutor's office to investigate both Matilda and its director.
Reining in Poklonskaya would mean guestioning the country's ideological direction, which Putin is not prepared to do.
NATALIA KOLESNIKOVA / REUTERS Russian member of parliament and Crimea's former Chief Prosecutor Natalia Poklonskaya attends the opening session of the newly-elected State Duma in Moscow, October 2016.
For every public scolding received from figures they don't regard as authorities, Russia's conservative crusaders can now find public or unspoken support in the circles they respect.
The minister is a nobody, she was saying, and we can find our own authorities to contradict him.
The conservative zealots are also winning the blessing of friendly priests, including the ultraconservative Archpriest Dmitri Smirnov, who claimed that the film was created to mock Russian saints.
It no longer matters who put them there; all that matters is that they are not being removed.
For these Russian conservatives, Poklonskaya's campaign is a means to prevent the country from sliding into pragmatism.
It is a warning shot at a regime that still considers reforms and returning to the club of Western powers to secure investment and economic growth.
Poklonskaya is making the point that if a mere film generates such a backlash, apostasy over far more important issues could cost the regime dearly.
Putin's conservative nationalist ideology now serves as a reference point for ordinary Russians, but someone like Poklonskaya can embody this set of ideas just as well as he does.
As this new ideology continues to evolve, a temporary, vague alliance is forming between Orthodox priests, security service operatives, businessmen, and government functionaries loyal not so much to Putin as to his declared ideals.
Many lowerand mid-level officials are starting to voice support for banning Matilda.
And they cannot believe that this campaign could win such momentum without approval from the top.
Supporters of a free Russia have long dreamed of a day when the Orthodox Church is separate from the state and when elected officials are unafraid to oppose Kremlin ministers.
The latter is certainly happening, but among those who are taking advantage of this new freedom first are zealots who speak in a language of aggressive and intimidating conservatism.
The party has elevated the Chinese ruler's ideological contributions to the same level as those of Mao Zedong and Deng Xiaoping, the only other CCP leaders whose ideas have been so canonized.
This was only the first inkling that Xi had scored a major political victory at the party congress.
The real extent of his triumph became clear the next day, when party officials selected the new members of the Politburo Standing Committee, China's top decision-making body.
Xi stacked the seven-member committee with loyalists, all of whom will be too old to stand a chance of taking his place at the next party congress, in 2022.
As a result, Xi's rule is now set to last for the next 15 years and perhaps beyond.
Xi will amend the party's charter and China's constitution to legitimize the extension of his power.
However powerful Xi appears to be, he now must earn the political capital to secure an extended term as China's leader.
In practice, he will need to deliver on his promises to rebalance and sustain China's economic growth and to restructure its legal system.
The body's five other members are all new, and four of them are allies of Xi.
Li Zhanshu, the party's new number three, forged a close friendship with Xi more than 30 years ago and was Xi's chief of staff during his first term, which began in 2007.
Another loyalist, Zhao Leji, will serve as China's new anticorruption tsar, acting as Xi's top enforcer.
The former occupant of that office, Wang Qishan, played a pivotal role in helping Xi purge his rivals and consolidate power during his first term.
Many China watchers have identified two other new figures on the Standing Committee, Wang Huning and Han Zheng, as members of the so-called Shanghai Gang, the elite faction affiliated with former President Jiang Zemin —a line of thinking that places their loyalty to Xi in question.
As for Han, he is a competent, low-key technocrat who lacks an abiding loyalty to the Shanghai Gang.
In fact, when Xi was Shanghai's party chief from 2006 to 2007, Han was the city's mayor and Xi's right-hand man.
The Standing Committee's seventh member is Wang Yang, a man with ties to the rival Youth League faction.
He will become the head of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, an advisory body to the party.
Xi also succeeded in filling the 25-person Politburo with allies At least 11 of the Politburo's 15 new members belong to Xi's faction.
His decisions will be endorsed overwhelmingly by the Politburo and its Standing Committee, endowing them with extraordinary authority.
What is more, Xi's allies in the Politburo, some of them relatively young, will be strong contenders for promotion to the Standing Committee at the 20th National Congress in 2022.
The real resistance to Xi's ambitions will come from China's vast bureaucracy.
The greatest political victory that Xi achieved at the congress was to end the party's practice of formally designating a new leader at least five years ahead of the transfer of power.
The tradition began in 1992, when Deng picked Hu as Jiang's successor ten years before Hu took office.
This practice has reduced the risk of struggles over succession and has helped enforce the party's informal term limits for its top leaders of two stints of five years each.
But the party never codified these traditions in its charter, and an incumbent seeking to extend his rule would always have been able to end them with enough raw power.
First, in the fall of 2016, CCP officials named Xi the party's ""core leader,"" making him the only leader since Deng to have assumed that coveted title on his own and sending a message to other senior figures that Xi's position was unassailable.
A few months later, in January of this year, Chinese security agents kidnapped the tycoon Xiao Jianhua from his apartment in the Four Seasons in Hong Kong.
In July, Xi made another move, ordering the arrest of the Chongging party chief Sun Zhengcai on charges of corruption.
Sun's fall was meaningful because of his association with Jiang's faction and because he is so young that he would have been a plausible successor to Xi had he remained untouched.
But the 55-year-old Hu did not get promoted to the Standing Committee, apparently making him ineligible to take Xi's place in 2022.
With so few options, Xi will have the perfect excuse to delay a decision about who should succeed him.
His dominance of the Politburo and its Standing Committee will empower him to do just that, securing him a third term in office at the next party congress in 2022.
By securing two new fiveyear terms as head of both party and government, Xi would be able to hold on to power until at least 2032.
RULE BY LAW The biggest guestions about China's new era surround Xi's agenda.
Few expect Xi to become a political reformer, given the crackdowns on civil society and Internet freedom during his first term.
Yet optimists believe that Xi's newfound supremacy will grant him a free hand to pursue other changes, introducing pro-market economic reforms and restructuring China's legal system so that it protects property rights and promotes development more effectively.
In fact, little suggests that a new wave of economic reform is in the offing.
And although China's heavily indebted stateowned enterprises are a drag on the country's economy, they still occupy a special place in Xi's vision of the future.
Chinese leaders' confidence in existing policies is another reason observers should temper their hopes for economic reform.
Despite the warnings about unsustainable debt producing a financial meltdown, Beijing has not yet paid a real price for sticking to its strategy of supporting growth with injections of credit.
Finally, because aggressive economic reforms have in the past all been prompted by shocks or crises, observers should discount the probability that Beijing will pursue deep changes when the economy is performing reasonably well, as it is today.
The most likely political priority for Xi in the immediate future will instead be an overhaul of China's legal system, aimed not at establishing genuine rule of law but at realizing rule by law, under which the state would use the legal system to maintain political, social, and economic control.
Should this be the case, regression, not progress, will be the more likely outcome.
First, the party congress endorsed Xi's plan to overhaul the legal system by establishing a ""leading group on comprehensively governing the country according to law,"" a body that Xi will head.
Next, Xi assigned his most trusted ally, Li Zhanshu, to chair the National People's Congress, the country's legislative body, which would draft and pass the laws essential to the realization of Xi's vision.
Both of those measures suggest that legal reform will soon receive a good deal of high-level attention.
Finally, Xi is a firm believer in China's tradition of rule by law, and the new leading group's focus on ""comprehensive"" governance reflects that ambition.
To be sure, Xi passed a few major laws aimed at social control during his first term, tightening China's cybersecurity practices and restricting foreign nongovernmental organizations.
For instance, China could impose additional restrictions on domestic NGOs, introduce new laws on ideological education in colleges and universities, or rewrite criminal laws so that they become even more effective instruments in the suppression of domestic dissent.
RED TAPE In the short term, Xi's plans will not encounter much overt resistance.
His crackdown on dissent and civil society has been depressingly effective and has eliminated any significant threat to the regime's rule in the near future.
Xi's supremacy within the party is now so overwhelming that it is inconceivable that any of his colleagues will dare challenge him.
Numbering in the millions, the regime's lower and middle officials are first and foremost selfinterested human beings, and they care far more about increasing their own privilege and wealth than about promoting abstract ideological goals.
As Xi has dismantled the sharing of power and spoils that characterized China's postTiananmen order, these bureaucrats' prospects for money and power have dimmed.
No longer are there several elite cligues to join or multiple patrons to serve.
Today, every official must compete for favors from a regime dominated by a single faction, and there are fewer paths to advancement than there were before Xi took power.
Worse still, Xi's anticorruption crackdown has eliminated the lavish bribes and perks that underwrote bureaucrats' lifestyles for most of the past two decades.
The bureaucrats' goal will be to make Xi appreciate their value and reward them appropriately, perhaps by ending his crackdown on corruption and China's austerity drive.
The only way to accomplish this will be through bureaucratic subterfuge aimed at catching Xi's attention by slowing the regime's administrative machinery and stalling China's economic engine.
However deep Xi's authority may be, it will erode guickly if the economy slows for more than a few years, and China's bureaucrats know it.
JASON LEE / REUTERS Xi Jinping, Hu Jintao, and Jiang Zemin in Beijing November 2012.
Xi would not be the first all-powerful Chinese leader to face a recalcitrant bureaucracy.
One of his motives for launching the Cultural Revolution was to use mass terror to discipline the bureaucracy and restore its revolutionary spirit.
Yet Xi is no believer in mass movements, and he lacks the charisma of Mao, who could mobilize hundreds of millions of ordinary Chinese people into action.
He must instead seek to extend the reach of his power from the level of the Central Committee to China's provinces, cities, and counties.
That will be a laborious and time-consuming process, involving, for instance, a major drive to vet and recruit promising apparatchiks at the local level.
But as his base expands, it may also sow the seeds of intraparty struggles.
Realizing that the next battle for political supremacy will be waged in ten to 15 years, when Xi approaches his own exit from power, his ostensibly loyal followers will be more interested in building up their own power than in implementing Xi's agenda.
IN XI'S HANDS In the years after Mao's death, Chinese leaders came to understand that concentrating power in the hands of a single figure could spell disaster for the party.
That is why the survivors of the Cultural Revolution banded together in the 1980s to make sure that a Mao-like leader could never again rule China.
They also helped the regime avoid making the kinds of dangerous mistakes that can follow from the consolidation of power in a single pair of hands.
Now that the CCP has returned to strongman rule, its future will depend almost entirely on the guality of Xi's decisions.
The last time the party had a leader with such unchecked power, the conseguences were calamitous.
One can only hope that Chinese leaders know what they are doing this time—and that the result will be different.
MINXIN PEI is the Tom and Margot Pritzker 72 Professor of Government at Claremont McKenna College and the author of China's Crony Capitalism.
