Conventional wisdom tells us that the legislature’s influence was minor or even nonexistent.
It was only after he had made his decision that Kennedy called in congressional leaders.
President Kennedy’s secretary of state, Dean Rusk, recalled in his memoirs that, during a key meeting with prominent members of Congress, “no one present questioned whether Kennedy had constitutional authority to initiate a quarantine.
Presidentialists have come to see the crisis as evidence of the need for a strong, independent commander in chief, while congressionalists bemoan the potentially dangerous precedent it created.
In a narrow sense, it is correct that Congress did not actively participate in decision-making during the acute crisis from Oct. to Oct., 1962.
Such analysis and policymaking was undertaken almost exclusively by the quickly formed Executive Committee of the National Security Council , which—while consisting of key Cabinet secretaries, military leaders and foreign policy advisers—notably omitted congressional representation in any form.
A meeting was held with congressional leadership shortly before a quarantine of the island was publicly announced on Oct., but this occured after EXCOMM and the president had already decided on the appropriate course of action.
Nonetheless, interpreting a lack of congressional involvement in EXCOMM discussions as evidence of Congress’s lack of influence in the crisis seems to be strongly against the weight of the evidence.
To the contrary, it seems that congressional opinion and the passage of the so-called Cuba Resolution figured prominently in the crisis as many decisions were taken with clear knowledge of congressional sentiment about the issue.
Specifically, EXCOMM made decisions that were heavily influenced by its knowledge of Congress’s unambiguous sentiment expressed in the few weeks prior.
Some scholars even argue that congressional pressure contributed heavily to the crisis arising in the first place.
Furthermore, Soviet and Cuban leaders were well aware of congressional sentiment and took it into account in their own decision-making.
Congress was not involved in substantive executive branch deliberations and negotiations, but this was because Congress’s position—a virtually unanimous demand for strong action—was already unambiguous to both the White House and United States adversaries immediately prior to the discovery of missiles.
In other words, there was little need to consult with Congress during the crisis because its position was already crystal clear to all sides.
In the few weeks prior to the discovery of missiles on the island, Congress debated the issue of Cuba numerous times while suspecting the presence of such weapons.
United States policy over the island was heavily debated in September and the beginning of October under the assumption that weapons would be soon arriving or were possibly already in place.
Furthermore, in these Cuba-related speeches, “blockade” was mentioned 72 times—all prior to Oct., the beginning of the “thirteen days” of acute crisis.
Thus, the idea of “quarantining” the island was discussed widely prior to missiles being discovered and prior to EXCOMM bringing up the idea.
Congressional pressure over Cuba was covered in the press and was widely recognized by both the White House and Soviet leaders.
Two months earlier, in August 1962, Republicans in Congress—led by Sen.
Republicans began drafting congressional resolutions stating such a firm position that the administration and its Democratic allies on the Hill felt it necessary to water down the proposals so as to not inadvertently escalate the situation.
Members of Congress explicitly sought to pass something similar to the Formosa Resolution of 1955 or the Middle East Resolution of 1957, but Kennedy knew that Cuba’s leader, Fidel Castro, and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev were paranoid about an American invasion of the island after the failed Bay of Pigs invasion only a year earlier.
If Khrushchev’s reason for deploying missiles to the island was merely to deter an invasion, then an overly aggressive statement from the United States risked causing the very action that it sought to avoid—the deployment of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba.
The White House—even Kennedy himself—was also involved in the drafting of the Cuba Resolution.
The concern that the United States would try to invade and overthrow Castro was a particularly sensitive issue in U.S.-Soviet relations at the time.
A lot of people are making a big fuss because we are giving aid to Cuba. … e give what he needs for defense.
Udall responded that “the President has made his position on Cuba clear.
Notably, when congressional leaders pushed instead for a joint resolution, Rusk clarified that he did not know the administration’s position on a joint versus a concurrent resolution.
Many policymakers at the time, however, seemed to consider the Cuba Resolution as more or less equivalent to the other so-called area resolutions from the period.
When passing the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution two years later, for example, legislators referred to the Formosa, Middle East and Cuba resolutions collectively as precedents.
Similarly, when Congress sought to repeal the other area resolutions along with the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution in 1970, the Cuba Resolution was included.
Likewise, international observers thought of the four “area resolutions” as similar instruments.
While the bill had originally been introduced as a not legally binding concurrent resolution in both houses, it was intentionally altered into a legally binding joint resolution before passage.
Furthermore, the use of a joint resolution makes it possible to avoid constitutional arguments over the relative powers of the President and the Congress respecting the use of American Armed Forces. … t is important in the current instance that they not obscure … the essential unity of purpose, not only of the Congress, but of the President and American people as well.
The contents of that resolution gives ground to draw a conclusion that the United States is evidently ready to assume responsibility for unleashing thermonuclear war.
We consider that if what is written in that resolution were actually carried out it would mean the beginning of war because no country can agree with such interpretation of rights, with such arbitrariness.
In his memoirs, Khrushchev focused on the reaction in the press and in Congress—among both Republicans and Democrats—when assessing American resolve upon learning of the missile deployments.
The United States administration, for its own part, seemed to value the resolution once the crisis began.
When internally planning for the possible use of sustained airstrikes against the island, Kennedy and his national security adviser, McGeorge Bundy, specifically noted the authority given by the resolution from Congress.
It also seems that Kennedy would not have ordered an invasion of the island without substantial congressional support.
Later, in one of the most dramatic meetings of the crisis, Attorney General Robert Kennedy met with Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin to reach a final settlement of the crisis before war broke out.
This meeting holds evidence of the American side trying to use the unambiguously hawkish sentiment of Congress as a bargaining advantage.
According to Khrushchev, Robert Kennedy stated, “You should take into account the particular features of our government system.
It is for this reason that Roseanne McManus argues that Congress’s firm stance in the crisis actually helped convince the Soviets that Kennedy’s threat was no bluff.
By publicly seeing the Congress demand a tough response—and, therefore, that the legislature would not be stymying Kennedy’s ability to “follow through” with his threat—Khrushchev and other Soviet decision-makers increased their estimation of United States resolve in the crisis.
While Congress may have not been represented in EXCOMM, its actions strongly influenced the crisis.
Congress had expressed itself clearly in the weeks prior to the discovery of missiles on the island, and the White House had little uncertainty about the action it would demand once unmistakable evidence of offensive missiles was discovered.
The Soviets, too, knew the pressure Kennedy faced from Congress and backed down rather quickly once its plans were discovered.
While many scholars have argued that the Cuban missile crisis illustrates the need for a strong, presidentialist reading of the Constitution—or that it serves as a dangerous precedent of enormous presidential war power—a better reading of the crisis is as an effective episode of crisis management between the political branches.
Congress gave a clear mandate for the president to follow during the crisis, and the White House more or less adhered to these preexisting congressional demands.
Instead of being seen as evidence of Congress’s lack of ability to direct national security in an era of intercontinental ballistic missiles and nuclear weapons, the episode can be seen as a confirmation of the legislature’s ability to speak clearly and effectively even in the most acute and dangerous of crises.
Congress Tags: Congress, Cuba Patrick Hulme is a Ph.D. student in political science at UCSD, where he focuses on congressional-executive relations in United States foreign policy, U.S.-China relations, and international security.
The Whos, Whats and Hows Laura Edelson Fri, Apr 29, 2022, 8:01 AM Why Steve Bannon’s Contempt Prosecution Revolves Around His Attorney, Robert J Costello Roger Parloff Wed, Apr 27, 2022, 2:21 PM Where Are the Jan.
