We [the Soviet journalists] need quick decision,” said the poet to justify the newspaper’s blunder.
This joke is mentioned in Lawrence J Vale, The Limits of Civil Defense in the USA, Switzerland, Britain and the Soviet Union , 175.
Interview with Evtushenko in the second DVD of the recent edition of I Am Cuba (dir.
But the Izvestiya incident involved more than just the effect of quickly unfolding events.
As this article demonstrates, the blunder Izvestiya made on the missile deployments was only the tip of the iceberg.
He refers to the 27 October 1962 issue of Izvestiya, which on its front page featured Khrushchev’s letter to Kennedy dated that very day offering an exchange of “means you consider offensive” in Cuba against “analogous means” deployed by the United States in Turkey.
Whether a “clear and present danger” of nuclear war really existed in October 1962 or was just “media hysteria” is still a matter of debate.
Mobilization is understood here as a strategy oriented toward preparing individuals for the tasks they might be called on to fulªll in the future.
The mobilization is ubiquitous, using all means necessary, including oral and written propaganda, simulations, and drills through all the media, including cinema.
Propaganda and mobilization were the core of the Soviet regime, from Vladimir Lenin to Mikhail Gorbachev, even if their magnitude varied greatly over time.
Under Khrushchev, the “Thaw” meant not the “liberalization” of the regime but the reinforcement of its contradictions.
The latter reºected a conscious and explicit disagreement with the party dogma.
Those dissonances existed between the Komsomol leaders and the party line, between the Komsomol “performers” and the Komsomol leaders, and between the audience’s reactions and the Komsomol’s wishes.
As the Izvestiya example demonstrates, dissonances also arose inside the same media, especially in periodicals, which sometimes featured contradictory texts in the same issue.
Because such incongruities can be seen as the absence of consonance, silent voices were also considered dissonances of a sort, particularly in the context of mobilization, which presupposed fusion of all the components of the propaganda machine.
Komsomol leaders were aware of some of these dissonances, but the Komsomol’s propagandists failed to adapt their tactics to the Cuban crisis.
As during the Stalinist period, youth mobilization was hindered by the contradictory signals sent to the public, whose consumption of these signals resulted in the sundry contradictions.
To ferret out these dissonances and to understand their probable causes, it is not enough to study different voices during the crisis.
The “Cuban lesson” ended on a positive note with the signature of the Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty in 1963.
In this article I deªne Soviet youth as individuals approximately age 7 to 30; they were seen as malleable by the state and hence attracted particular attention.
The fact that both the Oktyabryata and the Pioneers were part of the youth league under the Komsomol’s direct supervision is another reason not to differentiate between the three categories.
Davies was among the ªrst historians to stress the necessity of studying the “consumption” of propaganda by Soviet citizens, looking at the way they assimilated propaganda and made it their own.
The Soviet leader said, “there was a risk of a confrontation over Berlin,” and the Soviet media prepared the population for that eventuality.
The study of those dissonant voices is particularly important today, more than 50 years after the Cuban missile crisis.
Reºecting a general trend in Cold War historiography in which international relations has usually mattered more than domestic issues and in which United States policy has attracted the lion’s share of scholarly research, the Soviet side of the story has usually been relegated to the margins.
The social dimension of the Cold War on the Soviet side has often been ignored altogether, though some notable studies of this topic have begun to appear in recent years.
What is more or less accepted today, drawn from myriad opinions during and after the crisis, is twofold.
By “the spirit of the Thaw” I mean the possibility of publicly discussing the Stalinist past and, more broadly, the possibility of expressing oneself with greater freedom.
The publication of One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich in 1962 was an important event in that transition.
Khrushchev’s visit to the Manezhnaya painting exhibition in December 1962 and his meeting with the “creative intelligentsia” in March 1963 were manifest attempts to curtail the liberalization.
As for the economy, after the social protest against increasing prices in June 1961, and in the face of a bad harvest, Khrushchev decided to import large quantities of grain from the West in 1963 and 1964.
The traditional Cold War narrative from the Soviet side sees the Cuban missile crisis as Khrushchev’s “ultimate exercise in nuclear brinkmanship” after the second Berlin crisis , which set a precedent.
At the same time, the impact of the crisis in the United States is well known.
This “romantic” perception of Cuba was reinforced by the poetry of Evtushenko, who was Fidel Castro’s personal friend.
However, after the standoff of 1962, the “love affair” with Cuba began to falter, and the “freedom island” came to be seen as a burden and a laughingstock.
In many ways, the Cuban crisis alienated a large part of Soviet society from the CPSU’s message and dictates.
This article assesses the impact of the Cuban missile crisis on Soviet youth, both Pioneers and Komsomol members, as a prime category for Soviet propaganda in the context of political mobilization from 1961 to 1963.
The evidence presented here relates only to a part of the mobilization campaign, offering a glimpse into the reactions of geographically and sociologically heterogeneous Soviet youth.
According to Aksyutin, 38. percent and 52. percent of the persons polled in 1998 and 1999 felt the world had been on the brink of a new world war.
Although Aksyutin’s book is invaluable for the study of public opinion under Khrushchev, the poll is difªcult to interpret because it does not, among other things, distinguish between generations.
For a testimony of the “love affair” with Cuba, see Raleigh, Soviet Baby Boomers, 150.
According to Mervyn J Bain, “Soviet support for the Cuban revolution continued and expanded” in the 1970s.
Soviet society had to remain mobilized for defense of the country against “imperialists” who were preparing a new war, and all the country’s resources were to be marshaled for the construction of Communism.
Iosif Stalin’s embalmed corpse was removed from the Red Square mausoleum, and his name was excised from the 1961 document, like something belonging to the past.
The “class struggle” between societies was to continue, and the Soviet Union would aim 16.
For an example of such rhetoric, see Lavrentii Beria’s address to the Moscow Soviet on 6 November 1951 in commemoration of the anniversary of the October Revolution, published in all major national newspapers.
As the war in Korea was raging on, Beria announced that “hese are the facts, comrades.
Building “Communism,” something that Khrushchev had been talking about since the early 1930s, was the ultimate justiªcation for all the sacriªces Soviet society was making to attain that goal.
The failure of the U.S.-sponsored Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba in April 1961 convinced Soviet leaders that Kennedy was a weak president easily inºuenced by hardliners.
Bombarded with State Security intelligence reports describing United States plans for a nuclear strike, Khrushchev anticipated a severe reaction after the construction of the Berlin Wall and expected another determined attempt to overthrow Castro.
On 7 August 1961, he publicly demanded that surveillance of the USSR’s western borders be stepped up.
Young generations were seen as key for the success of those plans—just as they were for the campaign of the “Virgin Lands conquest” launched in 1954.
Absolute dedication to work, ideological awareness, and physical ªtness were among the prime elements of this program.
See Kuznetsov, “Materials for the Report on Preparation of Youth for Military Service,” 10 June 1963, in Rossiiskii Gosudarstvennyi Arkhiv Sotsial’no-Politicheskoi Istorii , Fond M-1s , Opis’ 1, Delo 141, List 66.
After Castro proclaimed his devotion to Marxism-Leninism, Cuba became a perfect destination for such an exercise.
Khrushchev, Stroitel’stvo kommunizma v SSSR i razvitie sel’skogo khozyaistva, 7 vols.
A Nation’s Constructors and Constructed (London: Routledge, 1994), 122.
The tensions surrounding the crisis were quickly succeeded by a détente.
On 5 August, representatives of the Soviet Union, the United States, and the United Kingdom convened in Moscow to sign the LTBT amid speculation about a new summit in 1964.
On 7 November, the anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution, Soviet Defense 28.
See also Internal note , 8 September 1962, in RGASPI, F 1, Op., D 489, L 128.
A similar reaction could be observed in the United States, where the Cuban missile crisis induced many people to advocate further development of nuclear weapons and to carry on with nuclear tests.
According to the directive, the “security interests” of the Soviet Union made it necessary for the armed forces to remain on constant alert in order to strike a fatal blow in case of an attack.
The military became more involved in state decision-making and in the youth mobilization campaign.
The latter began in earnest in 1961 with the transfer of Soviet Civil Defense Forces from the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Internal Affairs to the Ministry of Defense—just as the United States government moved the previously independent Ofªce of Civil Defense (the Ofªce of Civil and Defense Mobilization) under the command of the United States Department of Defense.
Soon thereafter, the Soviet military indirectly beneªted from Kennedy’s assassination.
Facing a national drama and frustrated by the murder of the principal suspect, Lee Harvey Oswald, Americans looked for a scapegoat and found it in the Soviet Union.
After all, Oswald had been a defector to the USSR and had married a Russian woman.
He was the leader of an activist group, the Fair Play for Cuba Committee, which supported the new Communist regime in Cuba.
Anti-Soviet feelings in the United States increased, and this, in turn, fueled anti-Americanism in the Soviet media, which presented Kennedy as a victim of a “right-wing” conspiracy, with Oswald being a mere tool, murdered to cover up the tracks.
Anti-Americanism in the USSR, as in other countries, was a complex phenomenon rooted in the Tsarist past and reinforced by Cold War antagonism affecting political, social, and cultural issues.
By “antiAmericanism” I mean the public images and discourses that denigrated United States foreign policy, U.S. policymakers, and American culture and values.
On the surge of anti-Americanism in the USSR, see Dobrynin, Sugubo doveritel’no, 96.
Contrary to a general perception of the Cuban missile crisis as a “lesson” for the superpowers, the Komsomol, like the military, used the crisis to instill fear of more ominous things to come.
The United States government prepares its citizens for the inevitability of thermonuclear war with the Soviet Union.
As recent events in the Caribbean have shown, American imperialists and their partners from the aggressive blocs continue to build up tensions on the international scene and push the world to the brink of nuclear war.
During meetings and conferences organized to “reinforce the military and patriotic education of youth,” Komsomol agitators constantly reminded their audiences of the threat from the United States.
Military preparedness, they argued, was the key to counter a threat that could come from anywhere, including from space.
During one such meeting, a Komsomol speaker quoted prominent Soviet ofªcials who supported the military-ideological imperatives of the youth league.
Defense Minister Malinovskii, for his part, mocked Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara’s declaration that “the United States has the nuclear capacity to destroy the Soviet Union without risking a counterstrike” 37.
When discussing the possibility of nuclear war, Komsomol ideologues invoked the Clausewitzian idea of war as an “instrument of policy,” adapting it to new circumstances.
Mirroring the United States fears of a Soviet military buildup, the Soviet ideologues misinterpreted McNamara’s “assured destruction” theory calling for reinforcement capacities, as laid out in his “No cities” speech of 9 June 1962 at Ann Arbor.
Komsomol Activists and the Voice of Authority At ªrst glance, a consensus among Komsomol ofªcials prevailed before, during, and after the Cuban missile crisis.
The league continued in its role as the primary educator of youth, a detractor of imperialism, and an agent of solidarity with Cuba.
The Komsomol made sure the leaders of the CPSU knew the party line was understood and correctly followed.
For instance, in a December 1962 report, the editor of the Kazakh children’s magazine Druzhnye rebyata declared, for today’s Pioneers, the most important mission is to build Communism and live under Communism in the near future.
Thus the inculcation of a worldview, of Communist values, of a deep understanding of our society’s needs is the fundamental goal of our work.
In publications, our journal has made it clear that the Communist ethics are the most fair and the noblest in the world.
Many children reportedly transferred their savings to a “Peace Fund” 23 September 1963, in RGASPI, F 1, Op., D 141v, Ll., 44.
As with Clausewitz, paraphrasing Sun Tzu was common in Soviet ofªcial discourse, a fact noted by United States military experts.
The summer 1962 issue of the journal Sovetskii pogranichnik (Soviet Border Guard) warned young people about the “dark plans of American imperialists” who had committed “enormous amounts of money on espionage” as a prelude to a nuclear strike.
Soviet society had to be prepared for such a war, looking to the military to lend a helping hand.
In the summer, many children also took part in “war games,” which sometimes involved hundreds of participants.
Sovetskii pogranichnik, 31 July 1962, 3, in RGASPI, F 1, Op., D 34, L 27.
Performers “from the periphery” of the Soviet empire were apparently especially prone to this sin.
A March 1963 radio broadcast from Khabarovsk describing United States military bases in the Paciªc was a verbatim repetition of an article that had appeared in the Far East Military District periodical Suvorovskii natisk .55 Another radio broadcast, this time of Kyrgyz origin, “Vasya Reporterkin Travels across the World,” received poor reviews for its “naive” treatment of political issues and its “unoriginal” sources about the United States.
Apparently, the broadcast unashamedly used The Americans, a travelogue published in 1960 by the CPSU favorite and Stalin Prize winner Nikolai Mikhailov.
Secondary school textbooks dealing with post-1945 world history were saturated with wording from Pravda.
Although the extent of this “copy-pasting” is not always clear, the phenomenon should not be underestimated.
It certainly had a dangerous sideeffect for coverage of the Cuban crisis.
Plagiarism, coupled with the secrecy surrounding the event, resulted in inertia.
Unable and possibly unwilling to adapt their message to the radically new situation, Komsomol activists continued to cultivate empathy and anti-American sentiment along the old patterns.
Even Pioner’skaya pravda publications appeared dissonant with the new imperatives.
Although the Cuban missile crisis was an event without precedent, it got lost in the paper’s traditional anti-American rhetoric.
Thus, its 19 October issue told a story of two boys who lost their father in the Bay of Pigs operation, and on 26 October it informed an imaginary Cuban child that the bay 54.
The United States in Soviet and Russian History Textbooks” in Victoria I Zhuravleva and Ivan I Kurilla, eds., Rossia i SShA na stranitsakh uchebnikov: Opyt vzaimnykh representatsyi (Volgograd: Izdatel’stvo Volgogradskogo Gosudarstvennogo Universiteta, 2009), 239.
The publications made no mention of the very real possibility of a new world war.
Conspicuously absent was the “barbarians’” willingness to go to war with the Soviet Union.
This also meant that Soviet and Cuban youth solidarity during the crisis was given priority over world peace.
The press also often used the old pattern of comparing the two systems, United States and Soviet.
Such depictions were deemed “low in ideological and political content” even by Komsomol inspectors.
Despite the criticism, such manifestations of inertia, or “formalism” in the agents’ parlance, were still accepted, sometimes even stimulated after the crisis.
Other media—radio, television, cinema, oral propaganda, art, and even tourism—were to become part of this major propaganda effort.
Whereas “formalism” was impeding the party message in a relatively mild fashion, “paciªst” dissonance was much more of an obstacle to the Komsomol 58.
See also, “Our Globe,” Pioner’skaya pravda, 9 October 1962, 2; and “Our Globe,” Pioner’skaya pravda, 12 October 1962, 2.
Manichaean comparisons between the “good” world of Communism and the “bad” world of capitalism had appeared before the war in the context of industrialization, but they became a prime staple of Stalin’s Cold War propaganda.
Report on Pioner issues 10 and 11 , 27 January 1963, in RGASPI, F 1, Op., D 1091, Ll.–51.
Frequently, media coverage of the Cuban missile crisis negated the idea of a “holy war” with statements that thermonuclear war had to be avoided at all costs.
Even though the situation from the Komsomol’s perspective “improved” somewhat in 1963, youth activists remained cautious, insisting that to speak of any “real change” was still premature for the journal.
Komsomol ideologues also found traces of “paciªsm” in depictions of the United States, which were often too fuzzy to make the Americans seem threatening and culpable in the Cuban missile crisis.
For instance, Pioner attempted to run what turned out to be a controversial story called “A Man without a Motherland,” based on a letter from a Bashkir, Mukhametsharif Makhmutov.
Drafted into the Red Army in 1942, he had been captured by the Germans, later freed by the Americans, and carried across the ocean.
Komsomol censors were unimpressed, particularly by the seven years the former Soviet prisoner of war had quietly spent outside the Soviet Union, not to mention the United States involvement in his liberation.
To them, the man’s story had too many “blank spots” to be used without caution.
Whereas in the case of Makhmutov’s story, Komsomol ideologues could censor the text before its publication, on other occasions they had to accept a fait accompli.
Such was the case of Noch’ bez miloserdiya (A Night without Mercy), a motion picture adapted from a 1958 novel by the German science ªction writer Kurt Sandner and directed by Stalin Prize recipient Alexander Fainzimmer.
Despite being produced in 1961, it was not premiered until 17 March 1962 and was not actually released until 22 October 1962, the day before the Cuban missile crisis hit the Soviet press.
Erroneously assuming the ªlm was made during the “memorable Cuban events,” the critic declared that the release of such a “paciªst” feature—during a crisis that, in the context of “a savage arms race and a propaganda campaign against the socialist camp,” warranted a much more demonizing representation of the enemy—was a mistake.
Another deadly threat to Komsomol ideologues, perhaps even more than inertia and “paciªsm,” was silence.
The reasons for these “sounds of silence” are difªcult to determine—especially if one excludes lack of available information as the main reason for the silence— because each agent was probably acting at the behest of his or her institution or even for personal motives.
For instance, Soviet youth periodicals might have been reluctant to sacriªce their entertainment value to fulªll the regime’s ideological objectives.
For instance, in 1962, there was almost no trace of the Cold War in Murzilka.
Theses of the speech at the sixth plenum of the Soviet Committee of the Union of Cinema Workers, 1963, in RGASPI, F 1, Op., D 1135, L 58.
The Soviet Ministry of Foreign Affairs was particularly annoyed about the resolution of the crisis.
MID’s new Diplomatic Dictionary, as well as the ofªcial course on Soviet diplomatic history, allotted less than a page to the crisis, reducing its impact on Soviet foreign policy to the absolute minimum.
Judging from Gromyko’s ambivalent position on the question, this was rather predictable.
Silence was a way to avoid explaining sensitive issues to the audience; it was also the best way to erase Soviet humiliation from popular memory.
The strategy, however, stirred up unwanted reactions from the youth, as did other dissonances.
Several 1963 issues of this publication featured a story by Vitalii Korzhikov about Soviet merchant sailors visiting Cuba.
Note on Druzhnye rebyata, 1 February 1963, in RGASPI, F 1, Op., D 1126, L 136.
On the one hand, there is no evidence that Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko opposed the Cuban operation.
On the other hand, he does not mention Khrushchev’s name when recalling the conclusion of the crisis.
Defending against all odds the ofªcial “missiles for protection only” line while eschewing praise of Khrushchev’s “wise policy” ªnds its reºection in the editorial line of the dictionary.
See for example the editorial “Narod i partiya—ediny,” Ogoniok, 12 February 1956, 2.
Although slogans about the unity of “workers and the party” existed during Stalin’s time, they disappeared after 1947.
This slogan was in a way typical of the de-Stalinization process, as “the party” now replaced the traditional presence of Stalin.
Komsomol activists were supposed to elicit the same reaction of anger from youth.
A typical report, written in early 1963, reads, When Cuba was once again threatened, Soviet people and our youth stood up in solidarity with the Cuban people.
During those tragic days, Cuba became especially close to every Soviet citizen.
Thousands of men and women across the country gathered in demonstrations and rallies in support of the Cuban republic.
Soviet youth swore to remain entirely on the side of the Cuban people and the Cuban revolutionary government; it covered with shame the adventurism of American imperialists.
The effect of the mobilization effort on the young builders of Communism was apparent.
Similar resolutions to “counter the imperialists’ plot” came from the builders of the hydroelectric power plant at Uch-Kurgansk.
Even as the working youth were taking public oaths, the younger audience expressed their feelings in written form.
The December 1962 article on Cuban children published by Druzhnye rebyata reportedly stirred a “ºow of responses” from young readers.
Material for reports, 1 February 1963, in RGASPI, F 1, Op., D 1008, L 49.
Internal note, January–December 1962, “Report on a phone conversation,” 26 October 1962, in RGASPI, F 1, Op., D 1070, Ll.7–248.
From a structural point of view, the reactions appear sincere but are lacking in genuine motivation.
The CPSU and its representatives were invested with “divine” functions through a complex ensemble of rituals, such as the mass celebrations on Red Square.
Letter-writing to authorities was a ritual less codiªed than an oath, and its purposes varied, ranging from expressions of allegiance and praise to requests for personal favors, denunciations, and complaints.
For the party organs, these actions were instruments of social control that would both measure the degree of allegiance to the system and facilitate the emergence of the “New Man” through the uniªcation of various cultures.
Even if such letters were genuine, they were not representative of the entire Soviet youth of the 1960s.
Only a minority took up the pen and wrote to the press, and many of those who did were motivated more by a desire to escape “boredom” and reach out to Cuban exotics, whom they had never seen in real life.
Moreover, not all Komsomol members were factory workers or kolkhozniki.
Some belonged to the intelligentsia and strove for cultural and intellec78.
For children’s public letter-writing in a Cold War context, see Andrei Kozovoi, “Pour ou contre l’Amérique.
The practice of oath-taking, despite its evident lack of possible improvisation, remains a fascinating subject, and Catriona Kelly only scratches the surface in her “Defending Children’s Rights,” 723.
Even if Western travelogues must be used with caution, they are nevertheless a precious source on Soviet attitudes of that time.
On Soviet youth mistaking Africans for Cubans, see the memoir of a student from Ghana who lived in Moscow in 1960 and 1961, William Anti-Taylor, Moscow Diary , 105.
Alongside the hard-working believers in Communist values were semi-deviant meshchane , who were more interested in Western clothing and music than in reading Komsomolskaya pravda.
Even the different categories of “deviances” had been created by the authorities themselves in order to enforce social control, the very existence of categories such as meshchane and hooligans underscores the broad spectrum of attitudes toward politics among youth.
On this issue, concrete evidence is still scarce and scattered, which makes generalizations problematic.
As is often the case with the study of public opinion in a Soviet context, the historian must become an interpreter of silences.
For example, judging from the letters received by the Komsomol in 1962, the effect of the Cuban missile crisis campaign was nowhere near as strong as Druzhnye rebyata’s editor suggested.
According to summary reports, not a single one of the 17,000 total letters received made any mention of Cuba.
Of almost 13,000 letters received that year, only 11. percent were from volunteers eager to enroll in new building projects or asking to be sent abroad, including to Cuba, in order to fulªll the party’s mission.
More than 19,000 letters were received by Komsomol’skaya pravda for this survey, from January to March—far more than the total received by Pioner’skaya pravda for the same year.
Report on the Activities of the VLKSM General Department for 1963, 19 February 1964, in RGASPI, F 1, Op., D 124, Ll.–8.
Being on the front line, young servicemen were supposed to be particularly aware of the risk of war.
During the crisis, they were even put on a stand-by regime in large cities such as Moscow and Leningrad.
But it is likely that some servicemen had no idea why they were being mobilized, either because they were largely uneducated or because they were from Central Asia and did not know Russian well.
According to reports from the Leningrad military district, only 37. percent of the conscripts had a full secondary education , and every ªfth soldier failed to complete his eight mandatory grades.
An increasing number of enlisted youngsters came from the southeastern periphery of the Soviet Union, notably the Caucasus and Central Asia.
According to the military instructors, conditions of life in the northern regions were hardly conducive to the conscripts’ “combat readiness” and motivation.
One of these, from a private to his parents, describes a drill but does not mention the general context of mobilization—that is, the risk of war.
The young soldier was forced to run with a machine gun, wearing a gas mask and bearing a heavy load on his back.
The youth had a heart condition, which his commanders apparently ignored, so health issues were more important to him than the risk of a United States attack.
On 24 October 1962, Pravda published an order given by Defense Minister Malinovskii concerning “the reinforcement of military preparedness,” “the reinforcement of combat capacity,” and the cancellation of leave for certain categories of servicemen.
In his memoirs, Khrushchev acknowledges having “mobilized the armed forces to the best of their capacity,” but he claims “from the bottom of heart,” that it was only a “propaganda trick” intended for the “American aggressors,” insofar as he did not believe war would break out.
Low literacy levels were an old problem for a largely peasant and multiethnic Soviet army.
However, he does not mention one key reason for the army literacy campaign; namely, ideological indoctrination.
Among the much more carefully selected KGB Border Troops from the Caucasus region, who were supposedly wholeheartedly devoted to the Communist cause, the risk of war was seen as possible, but the only reason some wanted war to begin is so that they “could surrender to the enemy” or “escape to Turkey” while on sentry duty.
Although such accounts must be taken with a pinch of salt, the preeminence of personal issues over collective ones, manifestations of defeatist feelings, and the desire for desertion were not new among the Border Troops.
More revealing in the testimonies—on the assumption they were at least partly representative—is the absence of words that could be interpreted as traces of a “war scare” or traces of the fear of thermonuclear war.
The soldiers’ main cultural reference was the Great Patriotic War, which had had a profound impact on Soviet society.
The youth of 1962 were often fatherless, and the war had had a profound psychological and physical impact on their kith and kin.
Letter from Private S Grachan, 15 December 1963, in RGASPI, F 1, Op., D 141, L 14.
Note to the VLKSM Central Committee by the Chief of the Political Department of KGB Border Troops, 4 March 1963, in RGASPI, F 1, Op., D 141, Ll.–21.
According to military literature, these factors contributed to the absenteeism and desertion during World War II See ibid., 231.
To Chuikov, whose wartime role at Stalingrad earned him lasting respect, the bomb shelters were a heavy burden for the economy.
International relations concerned them less than domestic issues in which they had a greater stake and over which they could exercise greater inºuence.
This compartmentalization of internal and external issues was reinforced by the climate of secrecy surrounding civil defense measures.
In the United States, public debates pertaining to the possibility of surviving nuclear war and the respective utility of urban dispersal and bomb shelters had been under way since the 1950s, but in the Soviet Union any debates about such matters were strictly censored.
The same shroud of secrecy hung over the construction of fallout shelters, in contrast to the publicity the program received under President Johnson in the United States.
The cinema is even more helpful in understanding this lack of awareness.
Although ªlms about the Great Patriotic War were not yet as numerous as they became under Leonid Brezhnev, they nevertheless were contributing to the “cultural dialogue” and inºuencing imaginations.
Chuikov’s article was reissued as a pamphlet, 8 May 1962, in RGASPI, F 1, Op., D 19, Ll.– 16.
Soviet viewers had to wait until 1986 for their own cinematic version of a thermonuclear apocalypse, Letters of a Dead Man , 24 years after the release of Stanley Kubrick’s Dr.
Strangelove (and the lesser-known Fail-Safe directed by Sidney Lumet).99 The absence of “nuclear ªlms” was a missing voice in the chorus of mobilization, because it meant that no “images” were available to support the Komsomol argument on the probability of a United States nuclear attack.
To assess the social impact of the October 1962 campaign, one should also consider the capacity of propaganda to sustain its effect after the crisis.
In November 1962, Pioner’skaya pravda celebrated the “anniversary” of the crisis by reminding its young readers how close the world had come to thermonuclear war.
Domestically, the economic situation had considerably deteriorated, with bread shortages gripping even Moscow.
Internationally, after the Sino-Soviet split, the risk of war seemed mainly to be from China, at least in the near term.
The closest example of a similar Soviet ªlm prior to Lopushanskii’s movie is Molchanie Doktora Ivensa (dir.
This was the ªrst item about Cuba to have appeared since late October 1962.
Fifty-two percent of the group polled in 1999 said they had suffered from food supply problems in 1963.
Such surveys were becoming more frequent in the Soviet Union as sociology was progressively rehabilitated.
Komsomolskaya pravda had even taken the initiative to create an “Institute of Public Opinion” in May 1960.
However, the main objective of these surveys was not to study youth as an independent social group but to improve propaganda efªciency.
The late-1963 survey was more of a lecture-survey mission, as 67 agitators embarked on a two-week trip around 62 regions and republics to give lectures to almost 100,000 people.4 Judging from the audience’s responses, Cuba was no longer (assuming it ever had been) at the center of popular attention.
This can be interpreted as adherence to the ofªcial version of events, which described the Cuban missile crisis as one in a series of American encroachments on Cuban independence.
But then, one wonders why these people did not believe Kennedy’s promise not to invade Cuba, clearly mentioned in ofªcial propaganda as Khrushchev’s achievement.
Although Cuba was eligible to sign the treaty and declined to do so, the lack of its signature was not all that meaningful.
Even though the Soviet authorities tried to keep the Novocherkassk massacre secret, rumors quickly began to spread, fueled in part by foreign radio broadcasts.
As a Pravda correspondent to Cuba, he published several poems about the island that were widely read.
See, for example, “The Cuban Mother,” about a widow who lost her son in battle against “people from beyond the seas,” “the sea where murderers come from / I know—they still can reappear.” published in Pravda, 14 October 1962, 4.
This misconception probably originated from rumors, a direct consequence of the secrecy surrounding the deployment of Soviet missiles on the island.
Another rumor that cast Cuba in a less-than-positive light held that bread shortages were directly related to grain shipments to Cuba in exchange for its sugar.7 Finally, the survey revealed that Soviet youth perceived the United States not as an enemy but as an object of great interest.
Although this was not surprising for the older generations, who remembered the wartime alliance and hoped for peaceful coexistence, the youth’s preoccupation with the United States was of a different quality.
They were more interested in the American way of life and how it compared with their own.
According to the reports, this was particularly the case in the provinces.
After all, they were the ones who had encouraged such comparative perspectives—before, during, and after the Cuban missile 106.
Rumors had been carefully studied by the Soviet secret police since the 1920s to ferret out “negative tendencies” among the populace and to take suitable “prophylactic” measures.
CPSU agitators knew about the broadcasts not only from listening to the radios themselves but also from seeing KGB digests.
Judging from what we know today, Kennedy’s murder undoubtedly increased the ambivalent feelings in the Soviet Union toward the United States and further weakened the message the Komsomol wanted to convey about the Cuban missile crisis.
Upon seeing their parents grieve, children certainly asked questions, and young adults were saddened by the loss of a ªgure who looked like their “ideal” leader—young, goodlooking, even Russian-like.
According to several eyewitness accounts, “mourning” on such a scale for a foreign leader had not happened in the USSR since Franklin Roosevelt’s death in April 1945.
Having been exposed to Soviet media theories of a “reactionary” plot involving Cuban maªa (who supposedly “did not forgive for his promise not to invade Cuba” again), many Soviet citizens came to believed that Kennedy’s assassination must have resulted from a conspiracy.0 Conclusion In November 1964 the Soviet-Cuban production Ya—Kuba was released on the Soviet big screen.
The director, Mikhail Kalatozov, renowned in the West for The Cranes Are Flying , worked once again with master photographer Sergei Urusevskii.
Unimpressed, hardline ideologues panned it for its seductive depiction of the 110.
The ªlm was initially intended as an ode to the revolutionary spirit of 1959 and an echo of 1917.
It was also meant an accolade to the Castro regime, intended to boost Soviet-Cuban friendship from its low point.
Yet when I Am Cuba came out, its romantic depiction of the Cuban Revolution was already outdated, and its silence on the Cuban missile crisis was striking—especially when one considers the concurrent release in the United States of two features inºuenced by the crisis, Dr.
For the I Am Cuba creators, it was a cinematographic tour de force, yet it was full of simplistic and painfully familiar images of the American enemy.
Pretending to offer a “truthful” version of history, the ªlm failed to address post-revolutionary events.
Neither did they praise the ability of Soviet cinematographers to compete with their United States counterparts.
The ªlm targeted a mass audience, yet it was shot in black and white and used a special ªlm, privileging images over dialogue and thus bearing the hallmarks of an auteur ªlm.
The ambiguities of I Am Cuba reºected the ªlmmakers’ (and the Soviet public’s) dissonant or ambivalent attitudes toward the Cuban revolution and the United States.
As a result, the ªlm was panned not only by ideologues but also by cinemagoers and was ranked among the worst dozen ªlms of the year according to a survey conducted by the “artsy” cinema journal Iskusstvo kino.3 111.
The ªlm premiered on 26 October 1964 in Havana and on 2 November in Moscow, possibly to mark the anniversary of the crisis.
In his interview, Evtushenko admits that the creators did not want to depict “current politics” because they wanted to present the only indisputable thing—the rebellion against Batista’s regime.
The Cubans criticized the ªlm’s stereotypical representation of their country.
Even though members of the younger generation were proud of their country’s achievements in various spheres (including world peace), the combination of secrecy and improvisation from above with inertia and the desire for personal gain from below trivialized the crisis in their eyes.
Oktyabryata and Pionery might have felt sorry for their Cuban peers, but they had no reason to be afraid for their own safety.
They did not understand why there could have been a global war, and why it might have happened at that particular time.
After all, rumors of war had been circulating for almost as far back as they could remember.
Although curiosity got the better of them and they later asked their teachers to explain the situation, they most likely had to seek truthful information themselves.
By the 1970s, the crisis had become a veritable “blank spot” in Soviet history.
Some history textbooks continued to present the ofªcial version of events, whereas others remained conspicuously silent.4 By that time, recent school graduates, university students, young workers, and military servicemen were more preoccupied with their own problems and often saw the world through their parents’ eyes.
Those who passively accepted the ofªcial line, or were too “busy with other stuff,” generally displayed a low level of understanding of the issues involved in the crisis and foreign policy in general.
Even though they could recite what “imperialism” was, they ignored basic features of nuclear warfare and took for granted what the CPSU, the military, and the Komsomol told them.
In fact, there was no real dialogue between the Komsomol and young people, who perceived the eventuality of a nuclear war through the lens of the Great Patriotic War—a testimony to the magnitude of that war’s impact on the Soviet mindset.
The absence of visual representation of the new, much more destructive kind of war did not help matters either.
As early as 1963, memory of the “October days” faded away, and two radical metamorphoses confused things further.
The onetime Soviet ally Mao Zedong became the USSR’s main enemy, and the once-menacing foe, Kennedy, became a friend.
Eventually, with a little help from false rumors, the dissonant voices backªred and Castro came to be seen as the culprit 114.
It was presented as one of the reasons for Khrushchev’s downfall in October 1964 and thus became an argument used by the opposition for his removal.
Some ten years later, having learned from experience, Brezhnev and the Soviet propaganda machine better understood the beneªts of consonance in the implementation of foreign policy propaganda, as the public campaign for détente and the instrumentalization of Nixon’s visit to Moscow in 1972 aptly demonstrated.
Revealingly, in Aksyutin’s account of the popular reaction to Khrushchev’s dismissal, Khrushchevskaya “ottepel’,” 583, only one person mentions the Cuban operation in a positive light.
Aleksandr Shelepin, one of the speakers at the CPSU Presidium meeting on 13 October 1964, said Khrushchev “juggled with people’s lives” during the crisis.
The anonymous reviewers for this journal, to whom I am grateful, convinced me to focus on Soviet youth.
