In addition to informing the United States of his decision to dismantle the weapons in Cuba, Khrushchev opened the door for future negotiations with the United States about nuclear weapons.
By opening this door, Khrushchev led the Soviet Union into a negotiations the following year with the United States culminating in the Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty.
In addition to reaching out to President Kennedy, Chairman Khrushchev informed Prime Minister Castro that the missiles would be removed from his country and asked him to not provoke the American pilots that would continue reconnaissance flights until the missiles were removed.
Few Americans would disagree that these tense days in October of 1962 represented the best diplomatic moments of both Khrushchev and Kennedy's political careers.
After assembling the members of Ex-Comm , President Kennedy responded to Chairman Khrushchev's radio message as the telegram had not yet arrived.
While the day's biggest victory came in Khrushchev's promise to remove the missiles in Cuba, the importance of the discussion about disarmament cannot be overlooked or underestimated.
Secretary General U ThantThe proposal agreed upon by the United States and Soviet Union was welcomed by United Nations Secretary General U Thant.
The UN would be responsible for supervising the removal of the missiles in Cuba.
A large responsibility that fell to U Thant was negotiating with Castro who felt the Soviets were being weak in their removal of the missiles.
Castro invited U Thant to Cuba and U Thant felt the opportunity would allow him to discuss with Castro how the process and supervision of the missile removal would occur.
In response to news that Khrushchev had acquiesed, Castro sent letters to both Khrushchev and U Thant outlining his many objections to the agreement.
This appeared, along with the issue of American's violating the Cuban airspace, a major concern of Castro.
Secretary Rusk delivered the message of Khrushchev and the agreement between the two super powers to the Organization of American States.
It was essential that the Latin American countries understand that the quarantine would remain in place until the United Nations could confirm that the missiles had been dismantled and removed from Cuba.
Though victory had been secured, President Kennedy warned the members of Ex-Comm to refrain from celebration.
After meeting with Ex-Comm Sunday morning and early afternoon, Kennedy did not take time away from the oval office.
Day Twelve October 27, 1962, is the closest the world has ever been to nuclear war.
The United States had before it two conflicting messages from Chairman Khrushchev, each proposing different ends.
Yet, despite the conflicting messages, the moment of greatest danger came when the United States learned that a U-2 pilot had been shot down while on a reconnaissance mission over Cuba.
Khrushchev's second letter, received Saturday morning, did not mention his previous letter and instead referenced the United States' missiles in Turkey.
Khrushchev's proposal in the second letter was an exchange of sorts-United States missiles in Turkey removed in exchange for the dismantling of missiles in Cuba.
This proposal, like that in the first, asked the United States to promise not to attack or invade Cuba.
However, unlike the first letter, the second said the Soviet Union would also promise not to invade or attack the United States missile sites in Turkey.
President Kennedy and the members of Ex-Comm were understandably baffled by the change of tone in the second letter and the divergence from the proposal presented in the first letter.
Major Rudolph Anderson, Jr., USAFAs the members of Ex-Comm were considering the possibilities of the second letter, word came that Major Rudolph Anderson had been shot down over Cuba by one of the missile sites while conducting what was now a routine surveillance flight over the sites.
First, the United States would have to respond to the downed American pilot, and second, any action on their part might result in a Soviet invasion of Turkey.
Both the shooting down of the pilot and Khrushchev's second letter were now dangerously intertwined.
I personally believe that this is almost certain to lead to an invasion.
Unless you get a cease-fire around the worldRobert McNamara: That's the second proposition.
The third proposition is that we do this, and leave those missiles in Turkey, the Soviet Union may, and I think probably will, attack the Turkish missiles.
Since the discovery of the missile sites in Cuba, President Kennedy was well aware of the threat to American pilots who would be conducting reconnaissance flights.
This was, without question, the worst case scenario and the timing came at the worst possible moment of the crisis.
He insisted that no response occur until the Air Force could determine that there was not a mechanical failure or pilot error that caused the death of Major Anderson.
This reaction, rather than listening to the immediacy voiced by his Joint Chiefs, gave the United States the added hours needed to secure a deal with Chairman Khrushchev.
Had Kennedy reacted differently, the course of human history might have been radically different.
As the meeting of Ex-Comm wore on, the State Department submitted a draft of a letter responding to Chairman Khrushchev's second letter.
Bobby Kennedy then suggested, and President Kennedy agreed, that they could go forward ignoring the second letter and responding to the first.
Letter from President Kennedy to Chairman Khrushchev October 27, 1962, I have read your letter of October 26th with great care and welcome the statement of your desire to seek a prompt solution to the problem.
The first things that needs to be done, however, is for work to cease on offensive missile bases in Cuba and for all weapons systems in Cuba capable of offensive use to be rendered inoperable, under effective United Nations arrangements.
If you give your representatives similar instructions, there is no reason why we should not be able to complete these arrangements and announce them to the world within a couple of days.
John F Kennedy While the crisis, even the fate of the world, hinged on Nikita Khrushchev's response, Bobby Kennedy met with Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin to express his concern that the threat was worsening and that they had arrived at the final chance for diplomacy.
President Kennedy and the members of Ex-Comm went to bed on night of the 27th not knowing what the world would look like the next day.
While the quarantine was holding, there was a suspicion that the Soviets would test the line.
Friday morning, the United States received a lengthy, disjointed and emotionally charged letter from Chairman Khrushchev.
The letter, delivered to the United States embassy in Moscow and then sent via telegram to the United States State Department, offered a proposal to dismantle the missiles in Cuba in exchange for a promise from the United States that neither it nor its allies would invade Cuba.
Khrushchev would then offer 2 proposals, the first being that the United States agree to, like the Soviets, the proposal from Secretary General U Thant.
This, of course, was the position of Khrushchev and the Soviet government, not the position of Castro and the Cuban government.
Letter from Prime Minister Castro to Chairman Khrushchev October 26, 1962 Dear Comrade Khrushchev: Given the analysis of the situation and the reports which have reached us, consider an attack to be almost imminent -within the next 24 to 72 hours.
Fraternally, Fidel Castro Castro and Khrushchev disagreed on how to proceed.
However, it was clear to the Soviets and the United States that if the United States did invade Cuba, Cuba would respond and that response would be both unpredictable and deadly.
While Ex-Comm worked to have Khrushchev's letter translated and then a response mapped out, the Secretary General reached out to Castro.
Meanwhile, President Kennedy remained the leader of the free world and had to attend to other world issues including an ongoing dispute between India and China.
The recording begins with Kennedy's meeting with Indian Ambassador Nehru and concludes with the Ex-Comm meeting.
However, the proposal was neither accepted nor rejected by the United States, hoping to keep control of the situation in American hands.
Simultaneously, the United States sent Ambassador Adlai Stevenson to the meeting of the Security Council to present the evidence.
Mr Stevenson: I want to say to you, Mr Zorin, that I do not have your talent for obfuscation, for distortion, for confusing language, and for doubletalk.
But if I understood what you said, you said that my position had changed, that today I was defensive because we didn't have the evidence to prove our assertions, that your Government had installed long-range missiles in Cuba.
And next, let me say to you that, if I understood you, with a trespass on credulity that excels your best, you said that our position had changed since I spoke here the other day because of the pressures of world opinion and the majority of the United Nations.
We came in here today to indicate our willingness to discuss Mr U Thant’s proposals, and that is the only change that has taken place.
You—the Soviet Union has created this new danger, not the United States.
And you ask with a fine show of indignation why the President did not tell Mr Gromyko on last Thursday about our evidence, at the very time that Mr Gromyko was blandly denying to the President that the USSR was placing such weapons on sites in the new world.
Well, I'll tell you why—because we were assembling the evidence, and perhaps it would be instructive to the world to see how a Soviet official—how far he would go in perfidy.
Perhaps we wanted to know if this country faced another example of nuclear deceit like that one a year ago, when in stealth, the Soviet Union broke the nuclear test moratorium.
And while we are asking questions, let me ask you why your Government—your Foreign Minister—deliberately, cynically deceived us about the nuclear build-up in Cuba.
And, finally, the other day, Mr Zorin, I remind you that you didn't deny the existence of these weapons.
But today, again if I heard you correctly, you now say that they do not exist, or that we haven’t proved they exist, with another fine flood of rhetorical scorn.
This exchange would go down in history as Adlai Stevenson's finest diplomatic moment.
He would, for many years after, take considerable criticism for his position earlier in the crisis of advocating the United States trade the removal of their missiles in Turkey and Italy in addition to their naval base at Guantanamo Bay for the removal of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
It was not lost on Adlai that his time in politics was coming to an end.
He earned the respect of the members of Ex-Comm with his performance at the United Nations.
While the moment would be one of Stevenson's finest, the same could not be said for his Soviet counterpart.
One of the critical voices of Zorin's performance was none other than Prime Minister Castro.
Stevenson made a spectacular presentation to the United Nations Security Council in which he showed large aerial photographs of the strategic missile bases.
The Soviet ambassador denied the evidence, denied that the proof was authentic.
He didn't attack, didn't denounce, didn't explain the powerful reasons that Cuba a small country under constant threats both explicit and implicit from the superpower, under assault had for requesting aid, and the USSR, faithful to its principles and internationalist duties, for providing it, and he got himself all tangles up in mediocre argument that stemmed, ultimately, from the vacillations and public mishandling of the issue by Khrushchev in the months leading up to the crisis.
He made the mistake of rejecting the real debate, which should been over the sovereignty of Cuba, its right to defend itself, to protect itself.
Meanwhile, the United States knew that work was going forward on readying the missiles in Cuba.
Daily U-2 flyovers were bringing the White House up-to-date images of the missile sites.
Film from the day before the Security Council meeting showed construction was continuing.
USS Joseph P Kennedy By this time, the United States had quite a fleet of ships in the Caribbean maintaining the quarantine.
There were no fewer than two cruisers, twenty-five destroyers , several carriers and submarines, and numerous support ships.
The Navy had allowed the Bucharest, a Soviet tanker, to proceed through the quarantine line.
The Bucharest was the first tanker to reach the line with the intent to continue.
It was decided that a ship of its kind would not be able to hold missiles below deck and as such posed no threat to continuing the mission on the island.
That night, Kennedy approved adding missile fuel to the list of items that would not be allowed to proceed through the quarantine.
With success in convincing the world community that missiles were being installed in Cuba by the Soviets, the United States still sought success in convincing the Soviet Union that it was in the best interest of the world for their missiles to be dismantled.
Unfortunately, the Soviets were going in the opposite direction as they worked to make their missiles operational.
The text of Kennedy's message to Stevenson is found in the essay ""Adlai's Integrity and Credibility Were Impressive National Resources"" by Carl McGowan.
I highly recommend you watch it--it's available online--to understand precisely what was going on out in the Caribbean when the quarantine went into effect.
Having signed the quarantine order the day before, President Kennedy received word from Chairman Khrushchev via an unconventional message broadcast by the Soviet news agency and a telegram responding to Kennedy's message of October 23rd.
Khrushchev wanted to ensure President Kennedy that the Soviet government would do everything in their power to prevent any sort of standoff from occuring in the Caribbean.
He did not, however, shy away from stating his disgust with the course of the United States and the illegitimacy of the Organization of American States' vote for the quarantine.
Letter from Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy October 24, 1962 Dear Mr President: I have received your letter of October 23, have studied it, and am answering you.
But in this case the question in no way one of quarantine, but rather of far more serious things, and you yourself understand this.
Unfortunately, such folly can bring grave suffering to peoples if all countries, and to no lesser degree to the American people themselves, since the United States has completely lost its former isolation with the advent of modern types of armament.
Therefore, the Soviet Government cannot instruct the captains of sea vessels bound for Cuba to observe the orders of American naval forces blockading that Island.
Khrushchev It came as no surprise that the Soviets did not respect the decision of the Organization of American States, an organization they were not a part of and their ally Cuba boycotted when the decision was made, but the following day they would have to accept the decision of the United Nations Security Council.
The Russian ships were proceeding, they were nearing the five-hundred-mile barrier, and we either had to intercept them or announce we were withdrawing.
In addition to meeting with the Executive Committee of the National Security Council, Kennedy met again with congressional leadership to update them on the quarantine.
While the diplomatic rhetoric continued, the quarantine went into effect.
As the quarantine went into effect, eighteen cargo ships were headed toward the American ships maintaining the quarantine.
The previous night, Bobby Kennedy met with the Ambassador Dobrynin about whether or not the captains of oncoming ships had been made aware of the quarantine and been given orders to cooperate.
Bobby Kennedy was unsuccessful in determining of the ship captains had any idea what was going on.
While the members of Ex-Comm sat on the edge of their seats awaiting the first two ships to reach the quarantine line, the United States increased their state of readiness to DEFCON 2.
The Soviet ships nearest Cuba had apparently stopped or altered their course.
Though the reversal of some of the ships felt like a victory, it was not lost on the members of Ex-Comm that the Soviets were rapidly nearing completion of the missiles in Cuba.
Also, there were still many ships heading for the quarantine line that might need boarding.
The following day the United States would get the opportunity to take their case to the courtroom of world opinion.
The following day Ambassador Stevenson would make one of the most important speeches of his career before the United Nations Security Council.
Day Eight Tuesday, October 23, 1962, brought the first direct communication between President Kennedy and Chairman Khrushchev as well as a response from Prime Minister Fidel Castro.
Chairman Khruschev's message, by means of a State Department telegram, came at approximately 11m.
Letter from Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy October 23, 1962 Mr President, I have just received your letter, and have also acquainted myself with the text of your speech of October 22 regarding Cuba.
The United States has openly taken the path of grossly violating the United Nations Charter, the path of violating international norms of freedom of navigation on the high seas, the path of aggressive actions both against Cuba and against the Soviet Union.
The viewpoint of the Soviet Government with regard to your statement of October 22 is set forth in a Statement of the Soviet Government, which is being transmitted to you through your Ambassador at Moscow.
N Kruschev While Khrushchev did admit that there were missiles on the island of Cuba, he continued to push the line that the missiles were merely for Cuba's protection from an eventual invasion by the United States.
The audio of those meetings are available in parts here, here, here and here.
Response to Chairman Khrushchev from President Kennedy October 23,1962 Dear Mr Chairman: I have received your letter of October twenty-third.
Sincerely, JFK Secretary Rusk had, in one of his brighter shining moments of the crisis, secured the overwhelming vote of the Organization of American States in favor of the quarantine measures.
And Ambassador Stevenson called for an emergency meeting of the United Nations Security Council.
The Security Council would reconvene on Thursday the 25th, a date forever associated with Adlai Stevenson's finest moment.
The correspondence between Kennedy and Khrushchev and statements of Stevenson and Zorin would not be the only rhetoric of the day.
Prime Minister Castro's response to the previous evening's address by President Kennedy was less measured than that of Chairman Khrushchev.
Referring to the United States as both imperialists and warmongers, Castro's interview was defensive of both their current position with the missiles in their country and their relationship, or lack thereof, with the United States since their revolution.
Castro's comment, though inflammatory, would be of less importance throughout the crisis than those of the Soviet government.
With the support of our allies and the Organization of American States, the United States now looked ahead to the hour the quarantine would go into effect.
The administration would take their case to their allies, their diplomats, members of congress and, most importantly, the American people.
With the address to the nation scheduled for seven o'clock Monday evening, the White House had much to do.
Former Secretary of State Dean Acheson briefed President de Gualle and NATO on the missiles and the blockade.
Ambassador David Bruce, the United States ambassador to the United Kingdom, briefed Prime Minister Macmillan.
Ambassador Walter C Dowling, United States ambassador to West Germany, briefed Chancellor Adenauer.
And the United States Information Agency went to work on a plan to deliver the message to the people of Cuba.
The task of notifying an elite group of men fell to the president himself.
President Kennedy would personally notify the three former presidents--Hoover, Truman and Eisenhower--of the existence of the missiles as well as the military blockade that would be put in place.
If this thing is such a serious thing, here on our flank, that we're going to be uneasy and we know what thing is happening now, all right, you've got to use something.
Perhaps the most interesting aspect of this exchange is how Eisenhower's inclinations are the exact opposite of those of Kennedy's Joint Chiefs.
While Sorensen and the speech writers made last minute changes to the speech , Dean Rusk, Bobby Kennedy and Arthur Schlesinger met to go over the draft that Ambassador Stevenson would present to the United Nations Security Council on Thursday.
The team was constantly looking a step ahead, plotting each step carefully.
There continued to be a sense of disbelief among members of Ex-Comm that the Soviets had so deliberately and stealthily placed the missiles in Cuba.
There was nothing routine about the situation the United States government faced.
Preparations were underway in the Oval Office for the evening's speech; removal of furniture was necessary to make way for the cameras.
Arrangements had to be made for the White House staff, including some members of Ex-Comm, to sleep in the White House bomb shelter.Holding off a request for airtime for as long as possible to prevent panic, Press Secretary Pierre Salinger waited until noon Monday to request airtime on each of the networks for President Kennedy's speech.
An hour later, cabinet members were assembled to be briefed on the situation in Cuba and the plan moving forward.
Up until this time, only Secretaries McNamara, Rusk and Dillon and Attorney General Kennedy knew of the crisis.
Secretary Rusk served as a buffer between Kennedy and congressional leaders who did not feel a blockade was a strong enough response to the situation at hand.
At six o'clock, the United States ambassador to the Soviet Union, Foy Kohler, delivered a message to Chairman Khrushchev informing him of the speech and blockade.
Coinciding with Kohler's action, Dean Rusk was tasked with the delivery of a similar message to Soviet Ambassador Dobyrnin.
At seven o'clock, Kennedy went on air to deliver his speech to the American people and the world community.
President Kennedy's speech was as much a message to the American people as it was a conversation with Chairman Khrushchev and hard line Soviets.
It fully informed the American people and the world of what appeared to be the greatest danger to our country in history, without creating a national panic, despair, or a cry for either surrender or war.
The Associated Press reported today that Fidel Castro met with former Venezuelan Vice President Elias Jaua.
In recent years there have been various rumors about Castro ranging from him being gravely ill, possibly dead or having suffered a stroke.
The Cuban Revolution tore many families apart and continues to impact the Cuban-American community.
Once President Kennedy settled on a blockade of Cuba, there was a great deal of work to be done.
McNamara's notes from 10/21/62 The majority of what needed to be done rested on the shoulders of Kennedy's speechwriters, particularly Ted Sorensen.
By 11m., Sorensen was on his fourth draft of the speech Kennedy would give on national television the following evening.
In addition to the speech, a letter to Chairman Khrushchev was being penned to notify him of the United States' action prior to the televised speech.
While the speech and letter were being written, the White House began tailoring a resolution for the upcoming meeting of the United Nations Security Council.
The statement Ambassador Stevenson would give in that meeting was being written by Arthur Schlesinger, Jr.
Kennedy's Sunday schedule included meetings with National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy, Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara and Bobby Kennedy.
Additionally, Kennedy was briefed by Admiral George Anderson of the Joint Chiefs on the specifics of the blockade.
Sunday also presented the added obstacle of dealing with a now suspicious press.
The State Department Public Affairs Bureau got word that Robert Allen and Paul Scott, columnists, were about to run a story stating that the United States was preparing to invade Cuba.
Additionally, the Chicago Sun-Times had information on military preparations that signaled to them that the United States was in fact preparing for an invasion.
The movement of troops, planes, and ships to Florida and the Caribbean, the unavailability of high officials, the summoning of Congressional leaders, the Saturday night and Sunday activity, the cancellation of the Presidential and Vice Presidential campaign trips and the necessity of informing a much larger circle of officials meant that our cherished hours of secrecy were numbered.
One newspaper obtained the story Sunday evening and patriotically agreed at the personal request of the President not to print it.
Those dealing on the front line of keeping the press from revealing what was actually happened included Press Secretary Pierre Salinger, Special Counsel Ted Sorensen, to whom the preceding quote is attributed, and Special Assistant Ken O'Donnell.
It was generally agreed upon that the press had to remain in the dark about the ongoing discussions and that the focus of Ex-Comm had to be on the logistics of the blockade.
While what the United States would be undertaking was strategically a blockade of Cuba, it became apparent that calling it a blockade was problematic.
It was decided that instead of blockade, the administration would refer to the action as a quarantine of Cuba.
It was also decided that the blockade would not keep all ships and materials from reaching Cuba.
The language of the various speeches and letters being prepared was only one facet of the preparations for Monday night's address.
Press Secretary Pierre Salinger was finally told of the situation in Cuba and asked to make arrangements with the networks for the Monday night televised speech.
To prevent speculation and the possibility of the Soviets ratcheting up the timeline of making the missiles operational, the White House wanted to wait until the last possible moment to request time from the networks.
Dean Acheson, former Secretary of State, had been participating in Ex-Comm meetings at Kennedy's request and was asked to speak to President de Gualle of France.
It would take every minute between the blockade decision and the Monday night speech to notify all necessary parties.
Preliminary arrangements with the Organization of American States and United Nations were also being plotted.
Monday would be both diplomatically sensitive and logistically demanding.
Ex-Comm met most of Friday afternoon and again Friday night at the State Department.
Friday night, Kennedy landed at O'Hare International in Chicago after a few campaign stops in the Midwest.
Though Kennedy was keeping his campaign appearances, the Cuba issue was never far from his thoughts.
On the trip with Kennedy in Chicago was White House Press Secretary Pierre Salinger.
The press secretary had not been informed of the discovery of offensive weapons in Cuba.
It was, as many later said, a way of keeping Salinger from having to inform the press.
While Salinger took many questions from the press on the campaign trip, his lack of information on Cuba prevented him from answering them.
Salinger finally approached Kennedy's special assistant Kenny O'Donnell and asked what was happening.
Saturday morning, O'Donnell's warning came to fruition and the press was told that President Kennedy had developed a respiratory infection and would be returning to the White House.
Salinger spoke with President Kennedy as they developed the language to give to the press about the cold.
What had really happened was Kennedy received a phone call from Bobby informing him that Ex-Comm was ready to meet with him to present their recommendations.
On Kennedy's return trip to D.C., the nation's military was put on alert.
Tactical air squadrons were prepared and Secretary McNamara was making arrangements for the naval blockade.
Ex-Comm was convened upon Kennedy's return to the White House Saturday afternoon.
Kennedy, Vice President Johnson and United Nations Ambassador Stevenson all returned to Washington for this meeting.
In the meeting, the positions for air strike and blockade were both laid before Kennedy.
McNamara, Sorensen and Bobby Kennedy remained supportive of a blockade.
Most importantly, like others, I could not accept the idea that the United States would rain bombs on Cuba, killing thousands and thousands of civilians in a surprise attack.
One additional approach was mentioned in the Saturday meeting of Ex-Comm, a particularly courageous suggestion.
Ambassador Adlai Stevenson, who had promoted diplomacy from the get-go, had stated his objection to the air strike.
He then suggested that the United States make a deal with the Soviet Union that would essentially end with the missiles in Cuba removed in exchange for the United States removing their missiles in Turkey and Italy.
Stevenson also included in his recommendation that the United States surrender their base at Guantanamo to the Cubans.
When the meeting had concluded, President Kennedy had made the decision to go forward with the blockade.
Though he was inclined to seek television time to address the nation Sunday night, it was determined that Monday night would be more acceptable as it would give the administration time to approach congressional leadership, America's allies and diplomats about the existence of the missiles and the plan of action.
This would give Kennedy's speechwriters time to complete the draft Sorensen had already started for the televised address.
Late Saturday--as the President abruptly returned from the campaign and as Rusk cancelled a speech--a sense of excitement and anticipation began to flood Washington.
That night at Jim Rowe's dance there was a great speculation as to what was up.
The next 48 hours would frame the administration's plan and how that plan would be presented to the American people and the world community.
Salinger would not be brought into the loop until Sunday morning in a 9m. meeting with McGeorge Bundy in the Situation Room.
Salinger then sat in on many meetings with Kennedy advisors from that point forward.
Posts ( Atom ) About Me Tara A Rowe I am an independent historian, a native Idahoan, an avid reader, a lifelong fan of baseball, and a Democrat.
