It demonstrates how these newly opened British sources illuminate many aspects of the Cuban missile crisis by offering some new details and new perspectives.
The first half of the article provides a chronological discussion of Britain's role in the crisis.
The second half analyses particular aspects, such as the legality of the American blockade, and assesses the importance of Britain's role, arguing that the fundamental solidarity of British support was of crucial importance to the United States in the resolution of the crisis.
The opening of new material on the Cuban missile in recent years in the Soviet Union, the United States and Cuba resulted in the publication of a spate of new books on the subject by American authors.
The opening of British government papers for 1962 in January 1993 made possible a fuller appreciation of the British government's view of the crisis.
As a result, significant contributions to the debate on various aspects of the Cuban missile crisis have now been made by British authors, such as Len Scott, Steve Smith, Mark White and Gary Rawnsley.
The present article is a further contribution by a British author using newly opened UK sources.
It has two main objectives, namely, to utilise interesting new details and perspectives from British sources which add some further light on the issues relating to American policy during the crisis and, secondly, to add to the ongoing debate on Britain's own role in the crisis.
On the second of these two matters, this article offers, at least in emphasis, a somewhat different interpretation to the views expressed by Gary Rawnsley in his recent article in this journal.
British suspicions regarding an impending crisis in Cuba grew steadily in the summer and early autumn of 1962.
But British involvement did not formally begin until Sunday 21 October.
Ormsby-Gore became a Conservative Member of Parliament and was appointed Minister of State in the Foreign Office in the late 1950s.
After the 1960 American election, Kennedy suggested to Ormsby-Gore that he should be sent as British Ambassador to the United States.
Prime Minister Harold Macmillan took up the suggestion, and as ambassador in Washington from the spring of 1962 Ormsby-Gore became a remarkably close informal adviser to Kennedy.
On 21 October Kennedy asked Ormsby-Gore to the White House in order to bounce off him the ideas and conclusions which had been discussed in the intense meetings in the inner circles of the United States government over the previous few days.
Kennedy told Ormsby-Gore that on the previous Sunday, 14 October, an American U-2 aeroplane had flown over Cuba and brought back photographs of Soviet nuclear missiles.
The photographs were clear evidence that the USSR government had been persistently deceptive in its statements that there were no Soviet missiles in Cuba.
From Tuesday, 16 October, to Saturday, 20 October, daily meetings had taken place of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council , consisting of the leading figures in the US government involved with national security — Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy, Attorney-General Robert Kennedy, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Maxwell Taylor and others.
Kennedy asked for Ormsby-Gore's views on the four possible courses which had been considered at EXCOMM meetings, namely, an air strike, an invasion, acceptance of the Soviet emplacements, a blockade.
As for an invasion, Ormbsy-Gore said that An invasion at this time would be most unwise.
I had seen no evidence that the conditions in Cuba were such that the Americans could affect any widespread popular support for this action and history indicated that an invasion without internal popular support led to endless trouble.
The idea of a puppet regime kept in power by 24 CONTEMPORARY BRITISH HISTORY American marines was not a happy prospect.
In any case, this could provide the Soviets with the opportunity to take over West Berlin at a moment when American political stock would be at a very low ebb and the Americans could be blamed for triggering off this exchange of pawns in the most reckless manner.
Ormsby-Gore appreciated that American acquiescence in the Soviet emplacement was unacceptable.
Our traditional attitude with regard to freedom of the seas would put us in an awkward position.
Despite the legal difficulties, Ormsby-Gore concluded that a blockade was the best option.
Kennedy informed him that this was the course which the United States government had decided to pursue, although, instead of the word blockade, the Americans used the euphemism quarantine, which had first been coined by Franklin Roosevelt in 1937 and which sounded less belligerent than blockade.
It was agreed that Kennedy should send a message to Macmillan direct to Admiralty House, where the Prime Minister was residing while 10 Downing Street was under repairs.
Macmillan received this message informing him of the situation in Cuba and of the American response at 11.30m. on Sunday, 21 October, and he was told that United States Ambassador David Bruce would give him a fuller briefing the next day and provide him with an advance copy of the television address which Kennedy would deliver on the evening of Monday, 22 October.
When Macmillan met Bruce at noon on Monday, 22 October, Macmillan assured him of British support for the United States, particularly for the resolution in the United Nations Security Council calling for the Soviet withdrawal of the missiles.
When Bruce displayed the photographs which had been taken by the U-2, Macmillan remarked that 'Now the Americans will realise what we in England have been through for the past many years'.8 But Macmillan hastened to assure Bruce that this did not imply any lack of sympathy or full support for the Americans over Cuba.
Above all, Macmillan was emphasising that public support in Britain and in Europe might be weak, and Macmillan made the specific suggestion that, in order to win wider public support, the photographs taken by the U-2 should be published and that the published photographs should be easy to identify THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS 25 rather than the more technical photographs which Bruce had shown to Macmillan which required expert commentary and interpretation.
Macmillan feared that unless there was an immediate attack, Kennedy might '""miss the bus"" he may never get rid of Cuban rockets except by trading them for Turkish, Italian or other bases.
Moreover, Macmillan warned with regard to Berlin that Khrushchev might 'answer one blockade by declaring another'.11 Macmillan did not mention any such reservations, however, in the messages which he sent to European and Commonwealth leaders throughout the crisis urging support for the American position.
After his television broadcast Kennedy telephoned Macmillan, at 11.30 p.m.
This was the first of a series of telephone conversations which took place throughout the crisis, on almost every day at 11.30m. and on some days at other times also.
Kennedy talked for most of the time, with Macmillan offering sympathy and support.
The Foreign Office instructed Sir Patrick Dean, British representative to the United Nations, to try to persuade the Americans to change the word quarantine in their resolution.
Kennedy then telephoned McNamara and discovered from him that one of the reasons why the Pentagon wished to intercept at least five hundred miles from Cuba was because of concern over intervention of aircraft from Cuba which had a radius of that order.
At a meeting between Macmillan and leaders of the Labour party, Hugh Gaitskell, George Brown and Harold Wilson, the idea was floated of a visit by the Prime Minister to Washington.
Macmillan, however, felt that 'so long as the position revolved around Cuba alone the American people would view a visit from the British Prime Minister with the gravest suspicion.
The night of Tuesday, 23 October, and the morning of Wednesday, 24 October, constituted the period of the most acute tension in the crisis.
The Foreign Office sought an initiative beyond a mere demand for a Soviet climb-down.
On Wednesday, 24 October, there was the first indication that Soviet ships were altering course, and by the morning of Thursday, 25 October, 12 of the Soviet ships had turned back.
However, work on the missiles which were already in Cuba continued at a feverish pace in order to increase the number of operational missile sites.
Pressure continued, therefore, from hawks within the United States administration for an air strike or invasion.
In a telephone conversation at 11m. on Wednesday, 24 October, Kennedy said to Macmillan that The question I would like to have you think about, Prime Minister, is this one.
If they respect the quarantine, then we get to the second stage of this problem and work continues on the missiles.
He will then say if we invade Cuba that there's going to be a general nuclear assault and he will in any case grab Berlin.
Or do we just let the nuclear work go on, figuring he won't ever fire them and when he tries to grab Berlin, we then go into Cuba.
Macmillan replied that he would consider this, but he said that 'we ought not to do anything in a hurry.
I would suggest that in the reply which you make to U Thant today ... you should concentrate on the point that there must be some system of inspection by the United Nations ... to stop the work on the major installations as long as the negotiations last.
This would enable you to say that you had in fact obtained your objectives.
On Friday, 26 October, Kennedy received a letter from Khrushchev which seemed to offer an agreement to withdraw the Soviet missiles from 28 CONTEMPORARY BRITISH HISTORY Cuba in exchange for an American guarantee not to invade Cuba.
This led Macmillan to make a highly significant suggestion, namely, that if Khrushchev was willing to immobilise the Soviet missiles in Cuba while negotiations took place, Britain would be prepared to immobilise for the period of the negotiations Britain's Thor missiles, which were intermediate-range nuclear missiles stationed in Britain and jointly controlled by the United States and Britain.
In fact, the British government had already decided, in August, 1962, to withdraw Thor missiles, which were considered to be obsolete following the deployment of Polaris submarines, and Thor missiles were withdrawn between November 1962, and April 1963.
Nevertheless, symbolically immobilisation of 60 Thor missiles on the soil of America's key ally, Britain, was of very major significance, arguably of greater significance than the dismantling of the 15 American Jupiter missiles in Turkey.
Kennedy received a second letter from Khrushchev, which was much more hostile in tone than the first letter.
The second letter was broadcast over the radio at the time that it was delivered through diplomatic channels, and it included an explicit quid pro quo of the removal of American missiles from Turkey as a condition for Soviet withdrawal of its missiles from Cuba.
On the same day, a U-2 was shot down over Cuba and the pilot killed, increasing the demand from the Joint Chiefs of Staff for American military action.
Macmillan pursued his initiative regarding immobilisation of the THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS 29 missiles to the full.
He drafted a letter which he proposed to send to Khrushchev on the matter and he sent a copy of the draft to Ormsby-Gore and to Sir Patrick Dean to obtain American comment.
He suggested to Kennedy that 'If Khrushchev agrees, you will have got a standstill which gets the missiles immobilised.
He dismissed a somewhat devious approach to the Foreign Office through the Soviet embassy asking the British government to call for a summit conference on Cuba.
Consequently, in the early hours of Sunday morning Macmillan concluded that his best course was to send a message to Khrushchev which indicated clear British support for the American position, reminding Khrushchev of his responsibilities for world peace and urging Khrushchev to withdraw the Soviet missiles from Cuba and to proceed from there to the next stages of disarmament.
Unknown to Macmillan, while the British were concluding that their best approach was solidarity with the Americans in order to pressure Khrushchev into submission, Kennedy decided to make a significant concession on the matter of American missiles in Turkey.
The British felt that Khrushchev's proposal of a trade of America's missiles in Turkey for Soviet missiles in Cuba was unacceptable.
I should never have consented, in spite of the arguments which might be urged about the obsolescence of the missile base in Turkey, to this as a permanent deal.
All America's allies would feel that to avoid the Cuba threat the United States government had bargained away their protection.
Kennedy, in spite of some pressure among his advisors, never wavered on this issue.
The evidence is now clear that Kennedy most certainly did waver on this issue.
Roberts had difficulty in locating Khrushchev on THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS 31 a Sunday morning, which the Soviet leader normally spent at his country dacha.
Driving through Moscow, Roberts asked his chauffeur to turn on the radio.
Before he was able to deliver Macmillan's note, Moscow Radio broadcast a message from Khrushchev, agreeing to withdraw the Soviet missiles from Cuba in exchange for an American pledge not to attack Cuba.
In London, Macmillan, Home and their advisers, who had stayed up most of the night on the Friday and Saturday, felt immense relief.
Macmillan wrote to Kennedy that 'It was indeed a trial of wills and yours has prevailed.
Your heartening support publicly expressed and our daily conversations have been of inestimable value in these past days.
Both sides had been looking into the mouth of the cannon and the Soviets blinked first.
Ormsby-Gore was fulsome in his praise of Kennedy's handling of the crisis.
He wrote that I saw the President four times during the course of the week of the 21st October, and on three of those occasions for long periods.
It has been suggested that he showed little or no sign of the pressures that were weighing upon him at this time, but this is inaccurate and foolish.
He is an intelligent man with a deep understanding of his immense responsibilities, not just to the people of the United States alone but to the whole human race and he knew from the start that the decisions he was called upon to make might lead to global nuclear war.
Although outwardly calm and although his characteristic quick flashes of humour never deserted him, he was in fact extremely tense and preoccupied.
He acted very much in the way a captain is supposed to act when his ship is in danger.
This Czarist tradition, like many others, was taken over by Soviet diplomacy, with the additional argument that it was legitimate and indeed a bounden duty to use all such methods to protect the Soviet state against capitalists and imperialists.
I have always assumed that Soviet diplomacy will use deceit whenever it can get away with it.
Hence, Roberts concluded that Khrushchev had calculated that if the missiles were discovered, The United States could not depend on the support of their allies who, especially the United Kingdom, would be expected to chafe at any maritime measures or trading boycotts, nor on support in Latin America or the United Nations.
He had, I believe, considerable confidence in the legal strength of his case that Cuba had every right to the weapons of its choice, that the United States of America had no right to object to Soviet bases in Cuba without abandoning American bases in Europe and Asia, and that any form of counter-measures such as blockade would be illegal.
On the further legal issue, the American commitment not to invade Cuba, the British viewed this as an empty concession in international law.
Hence, Macmillan regarded the Soviet withdrawal of missiles from Cuba in exchange for the American promise not to invade as 'complete capitulation' on the Soviet side.
Yet the 34 CONTEMPORARY BRITISH HISTORY British realised that, especially to American public opinion, Kennedy was seen to have made a significant concession in promising not to invade Cuba.
This may also give the President a good deal of domestic political trouble, and he freely admitted it when I put it to him yesterday.
The Americans responded to British suggestions only on relatively minor matters, such as the publication of clear photographic evidence of the missiles and willingness to be more flexible on the distance of the quarantine line from Cuba.
On the major issues, the Americans did not pursue the British suggestions of trying to persuade Khrushchev to accept Soviet withdrawal of the missiles from Cuba as the first phase of disarmament, nor did the Americans give much support to U Thant's initiative to try to immobilise the missiles in Cuba, which Macmillan regarded as the most hopeful path to a peaceful settlement and in support of which Macmillan made his offer to immobilise Britain's Thor missiles an offer which Kennedy did not accept.
Instead, the Americans negotiated bilaterally with the Soviets and made a crucial concession on American missiles in Turkey which was kept secret from the British and which did not have British approval.
On the vital issue of the solidarity of British support for the American position, the evidence from British sources suggests that the support of the British government was basically solid and that this was crucial for American success.
As Macmillan wrote to Commonwealth prime ministers, We should learn the lesson of the pre-war period and not become so alarmed by a particular crisis that we settle it at the expense of being a point down in the larger struggle.
The result was to produce a feeling of hubris in the aggressor and depression among the democracies which finally led to a mood of desperation.
Thus a weak settlement may easily do more harm than good to the long-term prospects of peace.
The British were, of course, unaware, as were the Americans, of the fact which was not revealed until 1992 that the Soviets had short-range nuclear weapons in Cuba which were capable of destroying an American invading fleet.
Totally rejecting appeasement, they concluded that Khrushchev would yield in the face of a credible threat of military action, so that it was vital that Khrushchev was convinced that military action would be resorted to and without much delay.
Like Kennedy, however, Macmillan sought flexibility in the application of this policy in order to avoid the actual need to engage in military force.
It is significant that Kennedy, in the position of taking the ultimate decision rather than in Macmillan's position of playing a supporting role, proved to be the more flexible of the two, on the crucial issue of the missiles in Turkey.
Macmillan appears to have been, like Kennedy, grasping for a suitable concession which would not undermine the perception of the other side that climbdown was essential in order to escape otherwise certain military action.
Yet, in his supporting role, Macmillan at the end of the crisis adhered to a more unflinching position than Kennedy, and although Macmillan's final message to Khrushchev arrived too late to affect the outcome, Britain's solid public support for the United States throughout the crisis undoubtedly contributed to Khrushchev's decision to yield.
None of the documents which had been closed in January 1993, and which were opened in July 1993, were of great significance.
The significance of the 15 documents in the Prime Minister's papers and the 37 documents in the Foreign Office papers which remain closed is a matter of speculation.
The reference is to intermediate range missiles which the United States had deployed in Italy and Turkey.
Parliamentary Debates , House of Commons, 5th Series, Vol.4, col., 25 Oct., 1962.
