It came about after the United States discovered that the Soviet Union was building missile bases in Cuba, which is very close to America.
President Kennedy was forced to react to stop the threat of missile attack.
Kennedy had to tread carefully because any overzealous assaults could have led to a Soviet attack from the fully functional Cuban bases.During the Cold War, so strained were the relationships between the Soviet Union and the United States that all diplomatic correspondence had to be very guarded and cautious.
It was for this reason that on October 22 1962 America and most of the world held its breath.
If he invaded, the Soviet Union would fire their missiles; starting World War III and probably causing human extinction.
Neither wanted to start the war but it was very hard for one to back down without a promise from the other.One option for Kennedy was a missile attack on the bases themselves.
This possibility was later dismissed because missiles could be launched from Cuba before the American ones hit, thereby starting World War III and destroying both nations.
Soviet strategic arsenal and provide a real deterrent to a potential United States attack against the Soviet Union or Cuba.
The fate of millions literally hinged upon the ability of two men, President John F Kennedy ... 6 pages 93 May/2003 3.8Blaming Khrushchev for the Cuban missile crisis is wrong, for it is Kennedy who precipitated the crisis and no one else. ... missile crisis, where the nuclear arms race threatened the existence of the entire world.
Kennedy ordered a quarantine put on Cuba and a naval blockade to be implemented, he announced the discovery of the missiles to the public.
This caused the Americans to become very scared as the United States was already involved in an arms war with Russia at the time.
Missile Crisis the United States had an opportunity to enter Cuba with the blockade still withstanding and eliminate Castro once and for all.
House of Un-American Activities Committee came to Hollywood to expose communist influence ... 6 pages 14 Feb/2008 0.0u-2 spy plane ... negative impact.
