As will be demonstrated, their reaction was one of strong support for the government’s decisions, in spite of the high risks involved and the harsh ongoing domestic struggle for civil rights.
Evidence of this support will include examples of personal reactions by prominent black leaders and intellectuals.
Also, an episode of segregation which occurred during the crisis will be used to show how in those days of emergency their struggle for equality persisted.
The interconnections between domestic civil rights and foreign policy issues will be highlighted.
In 2012 he received a research grant from the John F Kennedy Institute for North American Studies of the Freie Universität, Berlin.
The reaction to the crisis of United States African American communities is one example.
Even the book by Alice George, the only one focused on public national reactions to the crisis, overlooked this point.
Over the last twenty years, a comprehensive literature has developed on the mutual influence and dynamic between domestic issues related to civil rights and United States foreign policy.
Recent studies have analysed the negative effects of racial issues on the international image of the US; the keen interest of several leading race reformers in global affairs; and the political attitudes and military contributions offered by African Americans during major events of the Cold War, such as the Vietnam War.
Thus, this article seeks to provide an initial assessment of this aspect, by considering the reactions of the general public, the press, and prominent African Americans.
It will be argued that their response was one of strong and solid support for President John F Kennedy’s policy, although there were a few voices of dissent.
On the growing involvement of African Americans in international affairs and the ways this intertwined with their domestic struggle for freedom, see Brenda Gayle Plummer, In Search of Power.
On a consequent aspect of this growing influence of race on United States foreign policy, i.e.
JFK’s new, stronger approach to Africa, see Philip Muehlenbeck, Betting on the Africans.
The latter stresses JFK’s political use of Africa in the 1960 campaign to appeal to black voters without committing too much on civil rights issues that risked alienating him pivotal Southern whites votes.
Cold War History 51 support on foreign policy matters, however, did not halt the domestic battle for civil rights, as racial discrimination continued unabated.
On the contrary, domestic and international aspects intertwined, confirming the existence of interconnections as highlighted by recent historiography.
Reactions were also consistent with stands taken by African Americans in past moments of international crises.
Thus, the response that ensued was coherent with the ongoing domestic struggle, historical precedents, and general American public reaction to the Cuban situation.
At 10. percent of the United States population, they represented a numerically relevant sector of society.
Moreover, in those years the civil rights movement was campaigning vigorously to grant equality to black Americans and was gaining momentum.
While achievements were progressively being reached,6 strong opposition to change and persistent daily discriminations continued, creating a situation of lacerating conflict.
In late September 1962, on the eve of the Cuban missile crisis, one key event in the civil rights movement took place in Oxford, Mississippi.
The State’s main university refused to enrol African American student James Meredith, despite the fact that he met all admission requirements.
Mississippi Governor, Ross Barnett, was determined to maintain ‘Ole Miss’ as a whites-only athenaeum.
The President and his brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, responded by sending in more than 10,000 troop units to ensure Meredith’s admission.
After a night of chaos, Meredith was physically escorted onto the campus amongst the violent demonstrations of segregationist students and local citizens.
It is to this episode that Robert Kennedy ironically referred in his comment , when he was first briefed on the discovery of nuclear missiles in Cuba.
However, the timing and the quality of the support it offered to the civil rights cause was more controversial.
According to most historians, President Kennedy’s support was relatively belated, provided only when circumstances made it impossible for it to be postponed further, after going through more lukewarm phases.
Clearly, the understanding that the government was not doing enough on the issue was rather common among African American observers and leaders of the movement.
The impression at the time was that Washington was not proceeding with enough readiness and conviction, while oppression continued and became more intolerable with each day.
However, in those days many Americans considered the beginning of a nuclear war possible at any moment.
Panic buying started, with many people stockpiling food and water in the basements of their homes, in case of a Soviet nuclear attack.
A survey reported that one American out of three had discussed with their family what to do in case of war, while only one in twenty had considered leaving their homes.
Apart from this remark, the Ex-Comm tapes appear to contain no evidence of African American issues being discussed in those days of crisis, as priority was obviously being given to decision making, rather than to analyse segments of popular reactions.
After the first year of his administration passed with no such order signed, activists started sending ‘thousands of pens to the White House’ to remind Kennedy of his promise.
In short, during that week, the intense fear that the end of the world was nigh was widely felt.
In spite of this, the decision announced by Kennedy on October 22, 1962 was met with broad support in United States public opinion.
A special Gallup survey carried out nationally just hours after the President’s televised speech showed that, among those who listened to it, 84% approved of his decision, 12% refused to express an opinion, and only 4% disapproved.
This cohesion was even more impressive in light of the risks these kinds of decisions involved.
In fact, at the same time, approximately 20% of Americans believed that the quarantine would lead to a World War III.14 Yet, among the many thousands of messages that United States citizens sent to the White House, the ratio was 1 against to 22 in favour.
Given the situation of strong racial contrast, this could not be taken for granted.
Besides, black people also found themselves facing the fact that their lives were being put at serious risk by an entirely white leadership.
Given this deficit of representation, in such an extreme scenario African Americans could have vented their frustration towards the government.
We’ll take care of the front, Joe, but from the back, he’ll never know what hit him.
You dig who they want you to fight and kill?’).19 At the core of his remarks on the crisis, as his papers show, there was a view that the recent United States actions against Cuba were simply another act of racism from a racist country, worthy of the Ku Klux Klan.
Evidence shows that the African American communities expressed as much, if not more, support for the Presidential policy towards Cuba as the rest of American society.
Relevant accounts of this emerge from the black press, which had also played an important role in shaping awareness of the civil rights issue.
The new manager of Hotel Teresa, we learn from the article, had a different attitude.
In this manner, King seemed to adopt a cautious approach, supportive, while unwilling to take a clear position on the risky path Kennedy had taken.
This appears even more telling in light of his clear condemnation of Kennedy’s actions in 1961 with regard to the attempted Bay of Pigs invasion.
The public declarations on the missile crisis that King released, while it was still in course, were in fact brief and without hints of dissent.
Of course, this absence of criticism was not caused by any attempt at courting the administrations, as confirmed by his previous condemnation of the Bay of Pigs invasion and his later protest of the Vietnam War, famously expressed in his speech of April 4, 1967.
Apparently, he was simply convinced that the government did not deserve to be openly criticised in this case.
Incidentally, this comment was also quoted later by Robert Williams in his newsletter, with the word ‘military’ put in capital letters, in criticism of King’s supposed non-violent attitude.
Clearly, these are relevant and lucid words, all the more so in light of the fact that they went against the prevailing trend of triumphant lessons being drawn from the outcome of the crisis.
According to those views, the Soviets had ended up backing down unconditionally as soon as the United States had raised their voice, making clear they meant business.
Moreover, he appeared to have been a good prophet, since an international treaty on nuclear tests was effectively signed a few months later, and détente was the path the two superpowers chose in 1963.
Martin Luther King’s college teacher, Benjamin Mays, a Baptist minister in Atlanta and a character of great stature himself, intervened with an editorial conspicuously entitled ‘I support the President’.30 Lester Granger, another leading figure in the civil rights movement, had more doubts, but patriotism and prayer were felt to somewhat mitigate them.
Firmer in his support was Philip Randolph, one of the most influential activists of the civil rights movement.
His papers show that on October 23 he sent a telegram to Kennedy, ‘in the name of the officers and members of the Negro American Labor Council’ over which he presided, to passionately express appreciation.
Such explicit parallel between domestic and foreign crises strongly expressed the feeling among African Americans.
Whether this was ‘shrewd or foolhardy remains to be seen; meanwhile the country gangs up behind him whether we want to or not.
Cold War History 57 Further evidence of public support emerged from the black press, in articles such as ‘President Had To Do It’, or local surveys carried out by The Pittsburgh Courier or the Chicago Defender35.
Such support, which was clearly emerging in different parts of the country, also extended to student circles, usually more inclined to protest.
While the question may seem surreal today, in 1962 it was a real consideration.
The Director of Civil Defense activities in New Orleans (a public bureau which had recently contained a ‘Negro Division’) announced there would be no racial discrimination in public nuclear shelters.
Just as other Americans, for instance, some African Americans tried to escape to safer places.
King, the renowned African American lawyer, moved her whole family from Albany, Georgia, to a nearby countryside farm, fearing that the United States bases near that city might become a target.
In the same way that fear transcended the racial divisions of American society, so too did the sense of pride in a nation that had survived the crisis.
It proudly depicts the role played by the African American pilot Thomas Hennagan in providing photographs of the missile sites in construction with his ‘unarmed sorties in enemy territory’ carried out among the ranks of United States Air Force.
At the same time, however, in the aftermath of the crisis, an editorial in the Chicago Defender advised its readers to indulge in ‘neither bluster nor braggadocio’, following Kennedy’s good example.
This article went along the same line of thought as the above-mentioned article by King.
Hennagan would later be awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross, the nation’s second highest decoration for combat, as another black magazine, the ‘Negro Digest’, would later proudly note.
Having become famous in the Twenties as part of the ‘Harlem renaissance’ cultural movement, by the Forties he was writing a regular column set around a fictional character he had invented named Simple.
Simple was an ordinary guy from Harlem with whom the narrator discussed the various issues of the day, usually about racial matters.
No more segregation at Ole Miss then – Oxford would be gone – stone wiped out.
If Langston Hughes was at the time an established voice of African Americans in literature, one of their greatest icons in sports was Jackie Robinson.
In 1959, he had also begun a syndicated column on sport and social issues, as he became increasingly interested in politics.
In the 1960 presidential campaign, he had endorsed Nixon instead of Kennedy.
Dissent Naturally, however, there were also voices of dissent among African Americans.
One such voice was George S Schuyler, journalist and satirical writer, known for his strongly conservative views.
Within a few days he was able to bring together twenty different organisations (such as the anti-nuclear group SANE) and assemble more than ten thousand people in front of the UN headquarters.
This event took place on the morning of Sunday, October 28, becoming ‘America’s largest open air demonstration for peace up to that time’.45 While Rustin’s initiative is not surprising, considering his long involvement in pacifist movements,46 his leading role in organising this important demonstration, when seen together with his later role in the March on Washington, underlines once more the important contribution given by African Americans to the United States political debate, on both a domestic and foreign level.
In other words, political awareness and commitment of black activists often concerned both spheres, usually with no contradictions between their approach to the civil rights problems and their other personal political stands.
In the view of this newly organised Harlem Anti-Colonial Committee, the courageous country of Cuba, having tried to break the long-standing chains of white exploitation, was suffering a neo-colonial aggression on behalf of ‘US business interests’ wanting to regain profits and ‘to restore Jim Crow practices’ there.
Here the Harlemite protesters were denied an audience with United States officials at the United Nations, so they used a little political blackmail that proved effective.
Initially, they had been told that delegates were ‘too busy’ to meet with them.
A History of the World Nuclear Disarmament Movement, 1954 – 1970 , 259.
This is clear proof of the fact that avoiding international embarrassment on race matters carried top priority within the United States mission to the United Nations (particularly during such a delicate moment of international showdown).48 Nor could it be denied that such problems were real.
Another significant voice of dissent during the crisis was that of James Baldwin, one of the most acclaimed African American intellectuals of the last century.
His views on the civil rights struggle contained elements of both Martin Luther King and Malcolm X, although he never explicitly renounced non-violence.
Clearly, this was different from the statements of most of the other prominent black figures who had spoken on the crisis.
Reasons underlying opinions may differ even among dissenters, as one can see comparing for instance Schuyler’s conjectures of electoral tricks in domestic politics with Baldwin’s dissent originating from an internationalist, socio-cultural perspective.
The same internationalist perspective was also at the core of Angela Davis’s dissent.
When asked if he intended to adopt an ‘extreme reaction’ to the 53 ‘Baldwin Connects Race Relations in United States to International Affairs’, Crimson, October 26 1962.
Just as with the domestic situation, King stressed the need for a ‘moral offensive’, whereas Malcolm X assumed a more militant posture.
Another relevant example of radical dissent is to be found at Merritt College, West Oakland, California.
Then 26-year-old Bobby Seale, who was among the hundreds of listeners, decided to challenge them by walking over and asking a question.
Newton replied to him that ‘he was wrong to support the government and the civil rights organizations’, using arguments he had heard by Malcolm X and the AfroAmerican Association.
As both of them would later recall, he was able to convince 57 Malcolm X, Malcolm X Speaks; Selected Speeches and Statements , 183.
A slightly different account of this episode can be found in Bobby Seale, A Lonely Rage.
Apart from these cases, however, the radical side appeared relatively mute on the situation.
The performer and civil right activist was in London at the time, struggling with health problems and undergoing a new series of serious treatments during the very week of the crisis,65 while the 94-year-old intellectual and founder of NAACP was living in Ghana by then, and in that month of October had been visiting Communist China with his wife.
Thus, circumstances and distance – both physical and political – from the United States and the Kennedy administration may well explain their silence.
More generally speaking, three other factors may help explain the relative silence of radical voices on the crisis.
Firstly, raising criticisms against the government in such an atmosphere of national emergency and patriotic upsurge presented high risks of being labelled as an anti-American, if not a traitor.
Such a label would then remain, and damage one’s position in subsequent stands on domestic issues.
Secondly, a naval blockade was a firm reaction, but also one that hinted at possible negotiations and peaceful resolution.
This too may have encouraged waiting a few days before expressing protests, whereas a sudden air-strike or invasion would surely have prompted radical voices to speak out.
Finally, the crisis itself ended so quickly that its 63 This concept is at the core of Rosenberg, How Far the Promised Land.
B Du Bois and the Afro-American Response to the Cold War, 1944 – 1963, , 328.
Many thanks to Anne L Moore, special collections librarian, for her kind help.
This, however, is not surprising, considering that the radical movements would only come to prominence later in the sixties.
Fighting on two fronts Yet, widespread support for the President on the crisis did not imply that the civil rights movement simply abandoned their campaign.
Thus, the request by mayors of some major cities for campaigners to put these issues of equality aside for the time being was met with a resounding no.
After all, the crisis had not stopped the episodes of segregation either.
On October 26, a New Orleans newspaper published a story flatly declaring that Jack O’Dell was a ‘Communist who has infiltrated to the top administrative post in the Rev.
Citing ‘a highly authoritative source’, the unsigned article identified O’Dell as a ‘concealed member’ of the party’s national committee who for years had been ‘carrying out his Communist party assignments’ in civil-rights work.
In other words, the article stated that a crypto-communist had infiltrated the top72 of the civil rights organisation led by King, and had thus, over a number of years, influenced King’s work.
Such allegations were clearly dangerous, as they risked 69 Jet, November 8 1962, 15.
Chicago mayor had recalled that in the days of Theodore Roosevelt, white and black troops had fought together for the independence of Cuba.
Similar instances were also filtered from officials in the White House, concerned that episodes might cause international embarrassment to the United States in the middle of the crisis.
A search through the papers of the NAACP did not reveal evidence of these matters having been discussed.
In the America of those days, any hint of proximity to communism amounted to a burden capable of destroying anyone’s public credibility.
King knew this all too well; and, after talking privately with O’Dell on November 1, decided to prepare a statement of defence.
Relying ‘on the discreet collaboration of trusted press contacts’, Taylor Branch says, FBI agents had planted the unsigned New Orleans article, along with virtually identical ones in four other newspapers.
Hoover shrewdly seized his chance to give both orders during the week when the whole country was huddling in fear of extinction by Soviet missiles.
The missile crisis inspired and justified emergency measures such as the newspaper attacks on King for employing O’Dell.
The case, reported by the Chicago Defender, occurred in Tampa – in those days a stage of massive military preparations for a possible invasion of Cuba.
Commander Barney L Johnson of MacDill Field denied any discrimination in the assignment of personnel but interviews with Negro servicemen refuted this statement.
The discovery of ‘mimeographed copies of hotel and motel accommodations . . . divided into ‘white’ and ‘colored’ categories’ within the premises of that military base had provided further evidence for the intention of military authorities to keep troops segregated.
Louis Globe-Democrat; New Orleans TimesPicayune; and Long Island Star-Journal.
For confirmation that the FBI was behind this, see also Schlesinger, Jr., Robert Kennedy and His Times, 355; and Thomas, Robert Kennedy, 251.
On the FBI use of the King – O’Dell connection, also see Gerald Horne, Black Revolutionary.
William Patterson and the Globalization of the African American Freedom Struggle , 184.
A year later, Hoover would also manage to obtain from Robert Kennedy the notorious wiretap authorisation, installing bugs inside King’s apartment.
The harder we fight and win, the more we prove to the nations of Africa and Asia that Democracy works.
He proposed 77 ‘Halt Segregation of Troops Called for Cuba’, Chicago Defender, November 3, 1962, 1.
What the report did not mention, however, perhaps in order to convince audiences of the unfruitfulness of such efforts, was that the NACCP intervention had succeeded in bringing that case of segregation to a halt.
With a clear reference to Cuba, he observed that wars had in fact always been used as a pretext to postpone action on the issue of African Americans rights.
In the days ahead, we are going to need all the friends and allies we can get.
If we can’t see that it is moral and decent to treat the Negro as a human being, we had better get ready to realize that we shall have to do so as a matter of selfpreservation.
However, Bates added, ‘Democracy is being challenged today from within America too’, and the United States will ‘have to do something about the 80 ‘Quarantine on Segregated States Urged’, The Los Angeles Times , November 10 1962, 12 81 ‘Baldwin Connects Race Relations in United States to International Affairs’, Crimson, October 26 1962.
The two battles – domestic and foreign – proceeded together, he explained.
Perhaps in these important remarks he had also been inspired by the reports that the USIA had provided to his brother earlier that month.
These analyses covered the international reactions to the Ole Miss crisis, clearly showing how ‘racial prejudice mars American image’, in the words of the title of one of those reports.
Thus we must accelerate our efforts to banish religious prejudice, racial discrimination and any intolerance which denies to any American the rights guaranteed them by the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution.
Robert Williams’s radio remarks provide a clear example of how differently those events may have been considered by blacks, in light of the ongoing discriminations.
But on the whole, the attitude of African Americans (both common people and activists) was one of clear support.
One explanation seems to lie in the so-called ‘rally around the flag’ effect.
This, as is known, can be described as the instinctive coming together of United States public opinion towards their government in moments of international crisis, overriding domestic differences.
What is most striking about this particular case, however, 86 ‘Daisy Bates Praises Kennedy’s Cuba Stand’ and ‘Daisy Bates Finds Race Proud of Kennedy’s Firm Stand on Cuba’, Chicago Defender, November 3 1962, 1.
Such a statement of support was featured as the headline on the newspaper’s front page.
Cold War History 69 is the extreme nature of the delicate internal and external situation.
The country was on the brink of nuclear war with Russia, and in the midst of agonising internal disputes within its borders.
It is no coincidence, then, that the very expression ‘rally around’ was used in the editorials of both the Baltimore and Harlem black newspapers.
It is worth noting that this ‘rally around’ effect appears not to have been borne out of logic, instruction, or sacrifice, but was in fact a largely instinctive reaction.
Aside from criticism over his initial cautiousness in supporting the civil rights movement, President Kennedy was on the whole perceived as a friend of their cause by the African Americans.
This, one hastens to point out, was perhaps more the case for African American public opinion, rather than civil rights leaders.
The latter tended to be much more leery of Kennedy’s political commitment to the southern Democrats, and his consequent reluctance to act boldly on civil rights.
However, it is worth noting that in the presidential elections of 1960, 80% of black American votes had been cast in favour of Kennedy, and were indeed crucial for his election.
Had the exact same policy been announced by a different leader who was perceived as being less supportive of their cause, it is probable that they may have felt greater concern about the potentially risky decisions taken with regard to Cuba.
It is difficult, however, to imagine that these greater doubts would have resulted in a radical opposition to the government.
Such a stand would have required too many other concurring factors, among which a strong difference in the general Cold War mentality, which clearly was not yet in sight at the time.
On the contrary, looking at previous cases in twentieth century history, one finds that African Americans have usually supported their nation in moments of international crisis.
It may be worth recalling their decision to ‘close ranks’ with white fellow citizens during the First World War,94 the ‘Double-V’ campaign launched in World War II,95 or the support given to the Korean War, even though discriminations persisted both at home and on the battlefield.
In contrast to the concession of a temporary truce in 1918, both World War II97 and the Korean War98 had seen blacks’ patriotism matched with a clear commitment to continue the domestic struggle for equality.
Thus, by 1962, African Americans were already used to fighting a two-front war.
The reciprocal influences existing between the domestic sphere of the civil rights struggle and the international sphere of United States foreign policy are also worth highlighting.
On the one hand, as Mary Dudziak99 and others scholars have argued, foreign policy was seen to influence domestic issues, because in the long run the damage on the international image of the country of persistent racial discrimination made it impossible for the leaderships to postpone serious commitment to addressing these issues.
On the other hand, commitment to the resolution of domestic issues was seen to have a positive influence on foreign policy.
DuBois, writing on the July 1918 issue of the association’s magazine, invited his black compatriots not to hesitate.
This commitment prompted the NAACP to send the lawyer Thurgood Marshall to Korea in 1951, in order to investigate charges of racism in the Army.
This also corroborates the interest of a historical approach more aware of the potential presence of such interconnections and ready to include non-traditional angles, such as race, within the study of the Cold War.3 A final aspect that seems important to emphasize is the fact that, in these reactions by African Americans, we have seen how the support for Kennedy’s stand was often accompanied by the expression of a strong wish for peace.
In this sense, the attitude of African Americans perfectly reflected the general attitude of national public opinion.
It was a clear mirror of a nation that was ready to risk nuclear war, while praying hard that it was still possible to preserve peace.
Members of such communities were indeed able to keep the two matters separate, not allowing the rage they felt for the ongoing racial discriminations they suffered to influence their judgment on foreign policy decisions.
Brinkmanship is not as awesome for the American Negro as it is for his fair-faced brother.
Scholars who are in a position to access the archives of those African countries may verify if the evidence matches Schlesinger’s causal link.
A Global Perspective , an anthology of essays highlighting how race was a transnational factor in the Cold war, at work in several world countries, and both influencing, and influenced by, that confrontation.
No matter who is responsible for his lowly status, his destiny and his survival are inexorably tied to that of his country.
From this same editorial, there also emerges the same sense of clarity and ‘wisdom’ referred to above.
Late in October . . . the world teetered upon the brink of disaster. . . . three billion people helplessly awaited obliteration.
Few, if any of history’s 16 now dead civilizations had an opportunity to step back from oblivion or were given a second chance.
