Things either are what they appear to be; or they neither are, nor appear to be; or they are, and do not appear to be; or they are not, and yet appear to be.
Epictetus1 Both sides could thus emerge from the crisis claiming victory, but there was little doubt as to who the real winners and losers were.
The evidence suggests that few objective criteria are actually used in such evaluations.
Indeed, examination of the specific terms of crisis settlements can prove to be less important than a range of factors that do not conform to traditional rational actor assumptions.
This analysis has significant implications for policymakers who have to deal with the aftermath of a crisis, and also for the wider public and media, if governments are to be held accountable for their foreign policy.
In contrast, this paper examines the role of perceptions in evaluating the outcomes of crises.
It is not so much perception and misperception in international politics which concerns us, but perception and misperception of international politics.
These perceptions matter a great deal because there are significant political, social and security implications contingent upon who it is that people think have won.
Policymakers are especially concerned with perceptions of their success because they must deal with the international and domestic political aftermath of crises.
Leaders often care about international issues to a large degree because of the conclusions that other states will draw about them, regardless of whether these conclusions are well founded.
A politician’s political survival may also depend on having been perceived to win, whether or not they did, in fact, achieve significant tangible gains.
For the public and the media, perceptions are also important, since they can exert pressure on policy and ultimately determine the outcome of elections.
A sophisticated understanding of the basis for their, and our, evaluations would produce more accurate criteria with which to hold policymakers accountable.
UNDERSTANDING INTERNATIONAL SETTLEMENTS CCORDING TO Michael Brecher and Jonathan Wilkenfeld, crises are characA terized by the perception of an increased probability of war, the existence of a threat to basic values, and an awareness of the finite time which exists to resolve matters.
Such settlements produce judgments about which side won and which side lost, or whether the result was a draw.
Initially, of course, the terms of the agreement which settled each of these crises would appear to be an appropriate criterion with which to establish victory and defeat.
If one was to follow this approach, such an analysis would, firstly, be based on a balance sheet of tangible gains and losses, which might include territory, other material exchanges, and future military and diplomatic commitments, as well as their resultant effects on the status of participant countries.
Secondly, one could consider the relationship between these material 4.
INFORMATION FROM THE SETTLEMENT TERMS IS USED TO EVALUATE THE VICTOR AND THE DEFEATED ON THE BASIS OF MATERIAL GAINS AND LOSSES, AND THE SATISFACTION OF THE AIMS OF PARTICIPANTS changes and the aims of participants.
Actors may prioritize certain outcomes over others, and may have multiple aims of varying importance.
Both of these sets of criteria (material changes, and the satisfaction of the aims of participants) need to be separately considered.
A situation where the decisionmakers of a country had achieved their principal aims in the crisis, yet emerged with substantial material losses, could only be described as an ambiguous victory.
Similarly, achieving even substantial material gains, but failing to realize one’s primary aims would only, at best, represent an unclear result.
Often, however, material gains and the satisfaction of aims converge to provide the same conclusions about which side has won and lost, since it is these material changes which tend to be the principal issues at stake.
Using Framework 1, for example, Hitler could be said to have won at Munich in 1938 because he was given the Sudetenland, which represented a clear material gain compared to the pre-crisis strategic position.
It should be noted, however, that this type of analysis is complicated by what an objective observer might expect participants to gain.
A neutral balance sheet does not account for the fact that some players may enter the game with prior advantages and therefore might reasonably expect some gains.
When states are concerned only about absolute gains, then both sides could win in terms of achieving positive benefits, or both lose in terms of incurring costs.
States, however, are sometimes more concerned about whether the overall balance of gains or losses puts them into an advantageous or disadvantageous position vis-à-vis the opponent.
This concern is compounded if incremental advantages can be translated into further exploitation of the disadvantaged state (for example, by using an improved military stance to extract further concessions later on).7 It is striking that a range of alternative factors can outweigh a Framework 1 balance sheet approach, leading to interpretations that bear surprisingly little relation to the original terms of the deal.
In spite of Hitler’s material gains at Munich in 1938, the settlement led to a variety of contrasting assessments and reassessments of who had won and lost.
The notion that war had been averted as a result of a negotiated agreement led British prime minister Neville Chamberlain to declare the settlement a diplomatic coup, producing 6.
Absolute gains are the total value of the gains to oneself, without regard to the opponent.
Relative gains are the comparative gains, or lesser losses, made over and above the opponent.
Within a few weeks, however, criticism mounted that Germany had been strengthened and would soon make additional demands.
In contrast, Hitler in 1945 looked back on the settlement as a defeat for Germany and suggested that he should have made war in 1938, when German military advantage was arguably at its greatest.
Despite this, in the years since 1945, Munich has been widely seen as a reverse for the non-fascist states, and is commonly utilized as categorical evidence that dictators should never be appeased.
Similarly, using a Framework 1 analysis, the victor of the 1923 FrancoGerman Ruhr Crisis would appear to be ambiguous.
The French ultimately withdrew from the Ruhr representing the accomplishment of a clear German aim.
On the other hand, German finance had been temporarily ruined, the new German government led by Gustav Stesemann called off passive resistance against the French occupation, and the subsequent Dawes Plan led to renewed payments of reparations to France.
Despite an apparently ambiguous result, the Ruhr Crisis settlement became widely seen as a French defeat, bowing to the pressure of Britain and the United States.
These examples serve to show that the evaluation of victory and defeat can depend on who the observer was, and when and where they evaluated the settlement, the particular chronology of events, and how it was reported to them.
In addition, though initially ambiguous, one particular view tended to become solidified over the long-term.
Although as observers, we may believe ourselves to be judging the outcome fairly and objectively, we often cannot help but see such settlements through a series of subconscious lenses.
The three sets of influences in Framework 2 follow the formation of perceptions in chronological order.
Prior biases exist before the crisis begins, and may derive from national culture, world-view, bureaucratic or organizational position, or individual belief.
These biases represent the lenses through which information about the crisis is received and distorted.
Finally, perception manipulation represents the deliberate attempts by governments and other groups to influence and shape observer’s perceptions of victory and defeat both during and after the crisis.
Focusing on one case allows the level of detail required to adequately demonstrate the role of multiple biases in evaluating success.
TRADITIONAL INTERPRETATIONS OF VICTORY AND DEFEAT IN THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS Crisis has probably received more scholarly attention T HE CUBAN MISSILE than any other comparable crisis.
The Soviet missile installations in Cuba were discovered on 15 October 1962.
By deploying missiles in Cuba, Khrushchev had broken an earlier promise, as well as several official agreements, that he would not do so.
An executive committee was quickly assembled in Washington to deal with the crisis.
On Monday 22 October, Kennedy, in an address to the nation, publicly announced both the discovery of the missiles in Cuba and Washington’s imposition of a quarantine on shipments to the island.
After a period of major tension, the crisis ended on 28 October when Khrushchev announced that he had ordered the weapons dismantled and returned to the 11.
In addition, in secret talks between Attorney-General Robert Kennedy and Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin, the United States asserted that American Jupiter missiles in Turkey would be gone within five months.
One is struck by the extent to which contemporaries on all sides were convinced that the United States had emerged victorious from the crisis, with its prestige considerably enhanced.
Many important Russians came to perceive Khrushchev as having lost the crisis, and partly as a result, his political career came to a rapid end.
Not having any other way out we had to accept every demand and condition 14.
The Economist, 2 February 2002, 41; Reeves, A Question of Character, 388.
Fidel Castro was outraged by the deal, feeling that he had been treated as a vassal by the Soviets.
In the years since 1962, these same perceptions of the victor and the defeated have endured.
The ships were turned back and the Soviet regime was humbled in the eyes of 20.
Richard Lebow and Janice Stein, for example, argue that Kennedy was ultimately as willing to compromise as Khrushchev.
Along the same lines, there were a handful of critics of U.S. policy at the time of the crisis in 1962.
From the left wing came suggestions that JFK had gambled with mankind’s future.
From the right wing, Nixon later argued that the administration had been too lenient.
On several occasions, Khrushchev attempted to portray himself as the victor.
Cuba remains a beacon of MarxistLeninist ideas in the Western Hemisphere.
Richard Ned Lebow finds that in addition to the traditional interpretation which “views Cuba as a notable American victory with long-term 29.
Here, we test the extent to which Framework 1, the settlement terms themselves, can explain the perceptions of victory and defeat in 1962.
First, we can examine the alterations in the relative security position of the superpowers.
This allows us to ascertain the material gains and losses which were effectively traded in the final settlement.
Second, we can identify how these security alterations related to the aims of participants.
This will confirm whether the material gains were genuine goals of each side that, as a result of the settlement, they were able to achieve, or whether they were incidental by-products.
Following a settlement, politicians tend to claim that any material gains made represented the achievement of primary aims, and any potential gains which were not made had always been secondary objectives.
Comparing different numbers of material gains and aims achieved (the usual result of a complex crisis settlement) also presents a major hurdle, since the value of each may vary considerably.
These criteria, and the relationship between them, are therefore inherently subjective.
This fact makes our study more difficult, but it also reinforces the main argument that subjective perceptions or misperceptions shape evaluations of victory rather than an objective reading of the settlement terms.
With this in mind, we try to offer a judicious summary of material gains and aims based on the evidence.
The following suggests that Framework 1 does not support the widespread perceptions of a major United States victory, nor of a major Soviet defeat.
Kennedy achieved the removal of the Cuban missiles, which would have had a shorter flight time, and possibly greater accuracy, to targets in the south and east of the United States.
The overall strategic effect of their deployment has been questioned, however, for two reasons.
First, because a number of nuclear weapons were already available for launch from Soviet soil, and from Soviet long-range bombers and submarines.
Second, because it was understood to be only a matter of time before the Soviets developed a comprehensive arsenal of ICBMs in the Soviet Union.
Initially, McNamara saw little point in risking war over a nuclear threat that the United States would soon face in any case.
Nevertheless, the Cuban missiles were removed and Khrushchev accepted that the Soviet Union would never again place nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Kennedy made clear than the pledge did not ban covert action, or an economic blockade.
In February 1963 Castro told the Soviets that as a result of the Cuban Missile 39.
The Soviet Union repeatedly demanded that America did not attack Cuba in the months before the crisis, for example on 11 September 1962.
If Kennedy were reelected, there would not be another invasion until at least 1969.43 Overall, the menu of United States options for Cuban policy had become more constrained.
The United States had also agreed to the removal of strategic missiles from Turkey.
The significance of the Turkish missiles has been criticized because they were widely seen as obsolete within the United States administration and were due to be replaced in the near future.
The missiles, however, appeared far from obsolete in the eyes of the Turks, other NATO allies, and especially the Soviet Union.
Kennedy was well aware that Turkey was averse to losing the missiles, yet they would now have to be removed whatever the Turks thought about the matter.
As Philip Nash has recently argued, the concern for American credibility with respect to its allies explains why this part of the Cuban settlement remained a secret known only to a small group within the ExComm.
The United States, however, would appear to have sharply altered its policy toward Cuba.
After sponsoring an invasion in 1961, planning a new one, and having never accepted the validity of the communist regime, they had now made a public non-invasion pledge.
If the astronaut were aware of the deal to remove missiles in Turkey as well, that would add to his surprise.
It is not that the astronaut’s evaluation would be fairer than that of another observer; rather it is that his view, based solely on material changes, might well be strikingly different from that of contemporaries who, crucially, observed the crisis unfolding.
A balance sheet approach based on material changes resulting from the settlement terms cannot, it seems, justify the virtually unanimous view that the United States won a major victory in 1962.
Although this condition was necessary for any meaningful victory to be achieved, it was not in itself sufficient because both sides sought goals beyond simply peace.
Recent literature emphasizes the American focus on credibility, and a range of Soviet motives, including defending against a United States attack on Cuba, strategic parity, facilitating détente and bargaining for gains in Europe.
Missiles in Cuba would offer a qualified increase in Soviet strategic power and make more problematic any American first strike.
However, the evidence is that Khrushchev was after something more than just installation of missiles in Cuba.
Bruce Kuklick argues that the Cuban missiles were a gamble to resolve the U.S.-Soviet diplomatic deadlock over Germany.
Khrushchev’s missile move may well have been a gamble to extract the maximum possible gains from the United States.
In addition, as the crisis escalated, Khrushchev was increasingly fearful that events were getting out of control, and it became one of his aims simply to defuse the crisis.
The view that the defense of Cuba was an important reason for installation of the missiles is 47.
Lebow, Between Peace and War, 82; Allison and Zelikow, Essence of Decision.
The Turkish missile proposal was made by Khrushchev publicly on 27 October 1962, without having heard a response from the Friday letter.
Khrushchev saw Cuba as a potential model for Third World revolution, strategically crucial for communist advancement in Latin America.
Kennedy’s core political aim in the crisis was to remove the missiles from Cuba and this aim was successfully achieved.
The political status of Cuba, however, was considered to be a significant criterion for evaluating success in wider Latin American policy, and indeed in the global struggle against communism.
Kennedy described the ultimate objective of United States policy as “the overthrow of the Castro regime” and sought throughout his time in office to find an acceptable way to change the regime, involving covert operations and secret projects.
Although United States decisionmakers tended to perceive Soviet aims in the crisis as being a rectification 52.
The intention of defending Cuba also explains the deployment of tactical nuclear weapons to the island.
Freedman, Kennedy’s Wars, 225; Fursenko and Naftali, One Hell of a Gamble, 355.
On 19 September the Office of National Estimates published its view of the Soviet build up on Cuba.
JFK was personally reluctant to support a second invasion and in early 1962, he told Cuban exiles that he would not back a revolt against Castro with troops.
Nevertheless, detailed plans existed for such a contingency and important figures were in favor of direct military action.
On 3 October Congress passed a joint resolution sanctioning the use of force against Cuba if this was required.
In 1989, McNamara argued that there had been no intention to invade Cuba, but he admitted that the evidence at the time pointed strongly toward such an invasion.
In 1963 the United States did renew its secret campaign to assassinate Castro, and Kennedy sometimes talked tough, but United States policy in regard to Cuba was subsequently much more cautious, authorizing a ransom payment of $53m in food and medicines, for example, for the release of those captured during the Bay of Pigs operation.
There was considerable skepticism within the United States administration over the worth of the Turkish missiles.
As mentioned before, however, the fact that the United States agreed to the terms for their removal on the strict condition they remained secret, both within the inner ExComm and the Kremlin, betrays the fact that a public trade would have been considered by elements in the White House (not to mention the Department of Defense, Turkey and other NATO 60.
Kennedy also told Soviet foreign minister Andrei Gromyko on 18 October that there would not be a second invasion and Kennedy offered to give additional assurances to Khrushchev.
Aware that the choice could be a missile swap or air strikes, he preferred the former.
Rusk recalled later that Kennedy would have been receptive to a UN brokered public missile trade, but this never became necessary.
In terms of aims, the United States achieved its core objective of removing the missiles, whilst to some extent narrowing its room for maneuver in the pursuance of its wider Latin American policy.
The Soviet leader would later claim that the preservation of Cuba only cost the equivalent of the round-trip expenses for the missiles and troops.
This is true up to a point, although Khrushchev did not originally intend such a quick entry and exit.
Examining the material changes to the security environment suggests an even more ambiguous outcome.
A “before” and “after” snapshot of the crisis reveals a neutral settlement or even changes favorable for the Soviets.
In the following sections, we argue that a more convincing answer is offered by a Framework 2 approach, which incorporates the role of prior perceptions, crisis evolution and the deliberate manipulation of opinion.
PRIOR BIASES Observers, including the media, politicians, and the public, may have prior biases in perceptions of their leaders or of foreign nations, which can lead to systematic prejudice in the interpretation of crises.
The Chinese, for example, perceived the Cuban missile agreement from a viewpoint heavily influenced by the developing Sino-Soviet split and tended to show particular sensitivity toward evidence that the Soviets were selling out to the capitalist states.
The Soviets refused to back Chinese attempts to force a favorable resolution of the Taiwan issue, and the Chinese strongly opposed the notion of peaceful coexistence with capitalism.
In this context, Mao Zedong interpreted Khrushchev’s actions in 1962 as validation of China’s anti-Soviet stance and the removal of the missiles led to a new low in relations between the two countries.
Castro and the Cuban regime also approached the crisis with a set of prior biases which predisposed them to a critical view of the settlement.
James Blight and Philip Brenner’s detailed research on the history of Cuba’s relations with the two superpowers highlights the crucial role of cultural differences.
The ‘Operational Code’ Belief System,” in Psychological Models in International Politics, ed.
This stemmed, amongst other things, from rifts with the military over drastic defense cuts in 1960, and rapid rises in food prices.
All of these facts predisposed many important Soviets toward a critical reaction to the 1962 settlement.
Not all viewpoints, however, were predisposed to see Khrushchev as defeated.
For example, it is not clear whether observers within the United States itself held any systematic biases that may have predisposed them to interpret events as an American victory.
Among non-aligned nations, the missile withdrawal was initially popular, although many later became critical of why the Soviets had apparently yielded so quickly.
All the major European leaders backed a firm stance and were deeply skeptical of any missile trade at the expense of European security.
Adenauer, for example, regarded the Russian missiles in Cuba as a major challenge to 73.
This cut went very deep; the Cubans would never fully trust the Soviets again for the security of their island.
This was the first psychological scar left in Cuban memory by the missile crisis.
European vulnerability did increase caution about a United States invasion of Cuba or extensive air strikes to remove the missiles.
The Europeans tended to see the avoidance of general war as overwhelmingly the most important result of the crisis and were therefore less likely to perceive one superpower as the decisive victor and another as defeated.
Indeed, perceived Soviet restraint arguably proved beneficial to future European-Soviet relations.
CRISIS EVOLUTION Perceptions of victory and defeat are also dependent upon what we have termed the “crisis evolution,” which represents the particular way in which crisis events and the subsequent settlement unfold, and the resulting impact on the framing of the crisis.
The importance of framing effects is well established theoretically, and has acquired growing support from empirical research.
Crisis evolution can influence the framing of a settlement in a wide number of ways.
Since the crisis evolution in reality only happens in one particular way, it is helpful for understanding its effects to consider alternative frames which would be encouraged or generated by a counterfactual crisis evolution.
Crises tend to be simplified by observers into basic types, for example, a negotiated settlement model, or a stand-off model in which one actor blinks first.
These simplifications are important because the negotiated settlement model predisposes observers to see outcomes as a draw, whilst the stand-off model predisposes observers to see whoever it is that backs down first as the defeated party, without necessarily basing this evaluation on the actual settlement terms.
The material settlement could be similar in both cases; the only variable that changes is the particular crisis evolution by which the deal comes about.
In the case of Cuba, the crisis became widely visualized as a stand-off, in which one superpower would ultimately back down.
As Soviet ships sailed toward the United States naval blockade, one side apparently had to yield or there would be war.
After a period of extreme tension, on 23 October orders finally went out from Moscow to the Soviet ships to change course, and fourteen eventually turned back.
Historians, for example, have tended to frame the crisis in these stand-off terms.
According to Lebow and Stein, most Americans believe that the Cuban crisis ended because the Soviets retreated.
It became very difficult to divorce this mental picture of the crisis as a stand-off, with the Soviets blinking first, from the actual terms of the deal, carefully negotiated behind closed doors in Washington and Moscow.
In a counterfactual, one can imagine the Cuban crisis having been settled with the exact same terms, but by negotiated agreement at an international conference.
In contrast to the dramatic apparent retreat by the Soviets, had JFK and Khrushchev flown to Geneva to hammer out the very same deal, the immediate impression would have been a balanced agreement.
Observers would then have been much more likely to emerge from 1962 thinking back on the same terms as a negotiated draw rather than as an American victory.
Evaluations of crisis settlements require a before and after comparison to identify what has been gained or lost, and by whom, over the relevant period.
Despite this, a UN sponsored negotiation remained a very real possibility given the involvement of SecretaryGeneral U Thant in the crisis.
When this is compared to a second time point—Cuba without missiles—one naturally inclines toward perceiving a United States victory.
This latter comparison would suggest, instead, that Khrushchev gambled aggressively and won a concession in return for a promise never again to place missiles in Cuba.
The Soviets moved missiles in and then out of Cuba, but not before extracting something in return.
Therefore, decisions about which date represents the first comparative time point are crucial.
Once again, a counter-factual shows that a different crisis evolution would very likely have produced different comparative time-points with which to evaluate victory.
In reality, the United States discovered the plan to place missiles in Cuba by revealing the existence of missile bases already in an advanced state of readiness on the island.
Imagine, however, that the discovery had been earlier, with the United States finding offensive missiles on Russian ships sailing westwards across the Atlantic, with no evidence that any weapons had already reached Cuba.
In this latter case, the likely United States response would have been a quarantine against these ships, and it is very unlikely that Kennedy would have been willing to offer any concessions in return for the ships turning around.
In reality, with the first point of reference including missile sites already being constructed in Cuba, the missile’s removal appeared to be a gain.
In the first case, concessions may be an acceptable means of achieving a successful outcome, whilst in the second case, a return to the status quo demands that the ships turn around without any quid pro quo.
In part, the decision to make October 1962 the first reference point of the crisis resulted from the timing of the missile’s discovery, thus being due to the crisis evolution.
This perception, however, also reflected part of a deliberate strategy by the United States administration to exploit the timing of events in order to frame the crisis in such a way that the removal of the missiles would appear to be a major gain.
This introduces the final type of bias influencing perceptions, which we consider in the following section.
This can be demonstrated by comparing public and private pronouncements.
For example, the secret tapes of the ExComm meetings reveal that during the crisis itself, Kennedy was comparatively dovish and cautious.
Kennedy and his political associates, however, assiduously nurtured the image of a cool president under pressure, strong but gracious, determined to take whatever action was necessary to remove the missiles from Cuba.
JFK’s image was in part protected by labeling Adlai Stevenson as the appeaser within the United States administration.
Two of President Kennedy’s journalist friends, Charles Bartlett and Stewart Alsop, wrote an article in the Saturday Evening Post which claimed that Adlai Stevenson had sought to appease the Soviets, that he “wanted a Munich,” involving a deal over Turkish missiles, which the president had rejected.
Kennedy deliberately gave policymaking responsibility to bipartisan officials in order to engender the strong support he would need for his choice of a risky showdown with Khrushchev.
Kennedy’s adroit if not fully conscious manipulation of group dynamics helped to create that political backing.
Allowing the ExCom to debate the pros and cons of the major action-oriented options encouraged them to believe that they were instrumental in making policy, as indeed to a certain extent they were.
The group solidarity that developed in the course of these proceedings helped to transform individuals with different political outlooks and bureaucratic loyalties into staunch supporters of the blockade and the other initiatives that accompanied it.
The united front they presented impressed other government officials and congressmen and helped to widen the scope of support for the president.
Ironically, Adlai Stevenson did much to generate worldwide support for the United States with his theatrical performance in the United Nations Security Council on 25 October 1962.
The importance of the non-invasion pledge was minimized by describing it as a mere gesture to allow Khrushchev to save face among his own constituencies.
Framed in this way, Kennedy was able to make the non-invasion pledge a politically acceptable means to realize Soviet withdrawal.
In another context, the same actions could easily have been branded as appeasement.
Consciously or not, the public may have assimilated a way of seeing the crisis that was fed to them.
The media largely accepted the notion that during the crisis, the administration had the right to control information.
Once JFK announced a national emergency, there was virtually unanimous press compliance, and an acceptance at face value of the administration line.
One clear example of perception manipulation was the secrecy attached to the Turkish missile agreement.
The deal was reached privately in a conversation between Robert Kennedy and Ambassador Dobrynin.
Khrushchev stuck to his promise despite the obvious propaganda value to him should the arrangement become widely known.
Khrushchev’s motives in keeping it secret were apparently to avoid Cuban anger at a superpower deal behind 91.
Kennedy regularly used the tactic of combining a major concession, for example ending his demand for on-site inspections of missile sites in Cuba, with a hard line ultimatum, for example in regard to removing IL-28 bomber aircraft, to give the impression of firm leadership.
Havana’s back, and also to boost Kennedy’s chances of staying in power and thereby improving Soviet relations with the United States.
Robert Kennedy and John F Kennedy both benefited politically from this secrecy.
Ironically, the Turkish government offered profuse thanks for the United States refusal to do a cozy superpower deal.
Many leaders, and their followers, are at least tempted to use behavior in an international crisis to bolster their domestic positions against critics and competitors.
However, the Kennedy tapes reveal that he favored military action at the start of the crisis and then changed his mind later.
Robert Jervis suggests that when actors retreat, they can utilize a range of strategies to mitigate the possibility that the adversary will perceive the retreat as indicating a lack of resolve.
These include explaining the retreat as the result of special circumstances; as being the first move with an expectation of reciprocation from the other side; by downplaying the importance of the issue; or by claiming that the retreat was designed to satisfy the adversary’s final demand.
Framework 1 focused on material gains, and their correspondence to the aims of participants, as criteria for evaluations.
In contrast, Framework 2 examined the role of prior biases, the particular evolution of the crisis and the deliberate manipulation of opinion.
Framework 2, however, was more effective in explaining the almost unanimous perception of United States victory in 1962.
Even if one had no knowledge of the Turkish missile deal, there was a strong case to be made that the Soviets had achieved real gains.
Moreover, both leaders would apparently have been willing to offer more if pressed, suggesting that neither felt himself to be in a commanding position.
We have aimed to show why these prestige gains emerged, what processes were at work to shape how they emerged, as well as their fundamental subjectivity and ambiguity.
We have sought to demonstrate how with alternative prior biases, crisis evolutions or manipulation, there could have been radically different perceptions of victory, and radically different subsequent gains in prestige.
When the crisis began, the cards were already stacked against Khrushchev.
Any apparent retreat would be pounced upon by critics in China, the Soviet Union and Cuba as a dramatic failure.
The timing of the discovery of the missiles meant that their removal would appear to be a significant loss.
The American quarantine strategy created the image of a stand-off, in which it would be difficult to avoid at least a symbolic retreat without fighting a war in the American backyard.
Finally, Khrushchev was dealing with a United States administration skilled at managing opinion both within the 102.
William C Wohlforth, “The Stability of a Unipolar World,” International Security 24, no.
If Khrushchev had known all this and still sought to avoid losing, he should have invested his energy not in the details of the settlement terms, but in shaping the way in which the settlement came about, prioritizing above all the image of a negotiated balanced agreement—an image which so spectacularly failed to arise.
A meaningful definition of victory in international crises must include the longer-term consequences for participating states and policy-makers.
Crucially, if a particular perception of victory and defeat becomes sufficiently widespread it can prove to be self-fulfilling, even if it bears limited relation to the original terms of the deal.
Beliefs about a U.S. victory after 1962, however unrelated to the agreement that had been reached, subsequently influenced international behavior such that a United States victory became the reality.
The balance sheet began to acquire a whole array of negative payoffs for the Soviet Union that came to be associated with the crisis.
Khrushchev was removed from office, the Chinese-Soviet split was exacerbated, and Castro’s relations with the Soviet Union were temporarily jeopardized.
These negative effects produced a very real Soviet defeat, closing the gap, post-hoc, between perception and reality.7 In the interests of untangling the complex web of perceptions, a number of interactions can be identified between the two frameworks and also between the three elements within Framework 2.
We can briefly illustrate some examples, although the list is by no means exhaustive.
In terms of the interactions between the aims and gains of Framework 1 and the lenses created by Framework 2, we can postulate that prior biases, crisis evolution and deliberate manipulation are more likely to shape perceptions of the relative satisfaction 104.
Because they won, however, none of these criticisms surfaced significantly.
Failure tends to engender a cascade of repercussions which reinforce the perception of defeat, but with victory, however marginal, near misses are forgotten or translated into memory as courageous leadership decisions, reinforcing the perception of a major triumph.
In general, whilst material gains may be subject to various errors of assessment, observers should nevertheless make broadly similar evaluations of tangible factors such as territorial alterations and future diplomatic commitments.
The relative satisfaction of aims, on the other hand, is much more likely to remain highly ambiguous, being inherently open to interpretation.
For example, Robert Jervis noted that in-groups tend to perceive out-groups as having devious intentions.
Thus, in assessing the satisfaction of aims, prior biases may lead opponents to systematically perceive the aims of their adversary as more threatening than they really are.
In addition, the deliberate manipulation of opinion is also more likely to target aims rather than material changes, because they are more susceptible to spin, whilst material gains are often self-evident.
Complex interactions also occur between the three elements of Framework 2.
For example, prior biases increase or decrease the sensitivity of observers toward certain framing effects provided by the crisis evolution or deliberate manipulation.
This interaction is evident with the Chinese sensitivity toward the Soviets blinking first.
Similarly, the particular way in which a crisis plays itself out shapes the time-frame within which actors can manipulate opinion, as well as the nature of that manipulation.
Kennedy could frame the crisis solely in terms of the missiles, in part because of the fact that the missile sites were discovered in Cuba under partial construction.
For example, by ensuring that relevant information is absent from the public domain, actors can compound or utilize pre-existing prejudices and alter conceptions of which actions would be appropriate.9 What is striking is the extent to which aims and material gains from crises can be obscured by biased perceptions.
This is of most immediate concern for policymakers because perceived victory in international crises is likely to have a major impact on political survival.
The ability to manipulate opinion suggests a capacity to draw victory from the jaws of defeat, particularly a political victory from a military defeat.
In game theory, incomplete information radically alters expected behavior in games even if there are no other differences.
In fact, it was the most significant victory the United States Army ever achieved over the Viet Cong in Vietnam—a victory that (had it been realized at the time) could have led to a decisive defeat of the Viet Cong.
From a political point of view, however, the Tet offensive came as a surprise and was in the end a Viet Cong victory.
The blurred relationship between settlement terms and the subsequent perceptions of those terms could produce a number of dangers, including an unpredicted collapse in political support, and difficulties in signaling the same information to all observers.
One speculative example of how an awareness of Framework 2 effects can matter for policymakers today is the case of North Korea and the development of nuclear weapons.
On this latter point, the United States, for example, is likely to make great efforts to avoid any security guarantees to North Korea being seen as a major concession, a retreat by Washington, or a reward for blackmail.
Tactics will probably include a framing of the guarantees in multilateral terms, as the collective will of America’s regional partners, and appeals to historical precedent.
In comparison to these framing effects, the actual terms of whatever deal is reached with North Korea may be surprisingly unimportant.
For example, there is disagreement in the United States over the 1994 deal between Bill Clinton and North Korea, in which the Yongbyon nuclear site was closed in exchange for two light water reactors and fuel supplies.
Some Republicans have argued that this was a successful attempt by the North Koreans to blackmail Washington.
The Yom Kippur War in 1973 can also be seen as a political victory for the Egyptians, despite a military defeat by Israel in the final Sinai campaign.
Biased perceptions of victory and defeat matter for policymakers because the recalled history of crises can have remarkably potent effects in shaping subsequent foreign policy.
Observers generally believe themselves to be making judgments about settlements using fair criteria, in particular the relationship between the settlement terms and the national interest.
Yet, if these judgments are substantially influenced by the biases described in this paper, one can expect a considerable degree of misperception to occur, with potentially serious political consequences.
It may be difficult to avoid the influence of prior biases and crisis evolution, beyond stressing awareness of the phenomena.
More problematic still, the deliberate manipulation of perception by governments requires critical thinking at precisely the time that the media and public opinion tend to rally around their leaders.
Historians evaluating victory and defeat in retrospect are in some ways most resistant to the influence of framing effects, given their relative detachment and a natural tendency toward revision of established viewpoints.
Historians, however—including the present authors—approach the past with their own set of biases which may influence perceptions of victory and defeat.
Where one side reaps clear material gains, or accepts a substantial material loss , victory and defeat are unlikely to be significantly clouded by prior biases, crisis evolution or propaganda.
People not only assimilate incoming information to their pre-existing beliefs . . . but do not know they are doing so.
Instead, they incorrectly attribute their interpretations of events to the events themselves; they do not realize that their beliefs and expectations play a dominant role.
They therefore become too confident because they see many events as providing independent confirmation of their beliefs when, in fact, the events would be seen differently by someone who started with different ideas.
Ambiguous or even discrepant information is ignored, misperceived, or reinterpreted.3 Biases in perception are also particularly likely to occur within policy domains where the public has minimal direct information flow, or where the press is under tight control, because misperceptions are less likely to be corrected by rival sources of information.
Even modern western societies, however, continue to be prone to framing effects.
Wolfsfeld examined the role of media generated framing of the United States decision to intervene in Bosnia in 1993.
Following a major media focus on Serb atrocities, Wolfsfeld found that Americans perceived a very one-sided conflict.
For example, it is unclear to what extent the Cuban case is exceptional.
There may also be additional influences which ought to be added to Framework 2.
There is, therefore, a range of possible future research avenues that could explore in more detail how these effects explain variance in perceptions of rather than in international crises.
Framework 2 criteria may also be useful for understanding the evaluation of settlements that follow wars as well as settlements that avoid them.
