Fifty years ago yesterday, an American U-2 reconnaissance flight snapped a series of damning photographs of offensive Soviet nuclear missile sites being installed on the island of Cuba, some 90 miles from Florida.
Visit Website At any point during those 13 days in October 1962, events could have careened wildly out of control.
If just one round of ammunition had been fired in anger, and if news of this aggression had leaked out, it could have rapidly escalated into the unthinkable.
Visit Website In fact, we only learned in the last ten years how dangerously close we came to such a scenario.
In 2002, it was revealed that the warship USS Beale, participating in President Kennedy's ""quarantine"" of Cuba, dropped depth charges near a Soviet submarine.
It turns out, the sub carried a nuclear warhead and the Soviet captain, Valentin Savitsky, ordered the torpedo combat-readied in response to the Beale's depth charges.
Fortunately, the submarine was running low on air, and because Savitsky failed to attain a mandatory consensus among his top commanders to fire the nuclear torpedo, the sub had no choice but to surface.
The consequences of such attacks would've led to the end of the existence as we know it.
My Dad was a sergeant in the Army at the time and was deployed with a MASH unit to Miami as part of a potential invasion force.
By applying valuable lessons from the unchecked, textbook military escalation during World War I, and virtually on the fly, the Kennedys and their EXCOMM task force were essentially creating a new form of SovietUnited States diplomacy -a new language -that was both tough, face-saving and pacifistic.
With the blockade, the Kennedys signaled to Moscow that it was being tough on the installation of nuclear weapons -a mandatory posture so as to not seem weak in the eyes of the American people, not to mention international allies -but that it also wanted to avoid a war.
If Soviet Premier Khrushchev had even the slightest brain in his head, and he did, he would interpret the actions accordingly and respond with similar care and caution, especially after the United States opted not to retaliate against Cuba for shooting down Major Rudolf Anderson's U-2 flight in the belly of the crisis.
Khrushchev, like the Kennedys, was clearly aware of the same potential for an unstoppable chain reaction and, after the most intense two weeks of both the Cold War and human existence, a deal was reached and the Soviet missiles were removed.
It can't be overstated how close we came to the most terrifying military conflict in history.
And it can't be overstated how it was prevented by leaders who were thoughtful, rational, reasonable, cool under pressure and not easily bullied by intense internal and external pressure.
I can't help but to think about what might've happened if Richard Nixon had been president at the time.
We can never know for sure, but considering that Nixon was more bellicose than Kennedy, it's very likely that Nixon would have capitulated and accepted the advice of the Joint Chiefs, which would have included a more hawkish General Lyman Lemnitzer as chairman, and invaded Cuba to both destroy the nukes and to remove Castro.
In 2012, there are several flashpoints in the Middle East, and, once again, nuclear weapons are centerpieces.
Not only that, but Russia is a player in each, and not on our side of the line.
As events in Syria and Iran heat up, we're faced with a choice between President Obama, whose coolness, discipline, wonky intelligence and rationality under pressure is well-known.
And, on the other hand, there's Mitt Romney whose lack of personal conviction or firm posture leaves him vulnerable to the motives of radical foreign policy actors, including many of the same neoconservative advisers who surrounded George W Bush for eight years.
President Obama and his team, including Hillary Clinton and Leon Panetta, have shown many of the same leadership qualities required to make similar choices as the Kennedy EXCOMM team made exactly 50 years ago.
It's clear that he's susceptible to personal whimsy and erratic, unpredictable behavior.
Imagine for a moment how these men would've comported our affairs during those 13 days in October and seriously decide for yourself.
