NATIONAL SENIOR CERTIFICATE GRADE 12 JUNE 2019 HISTORY P1 ADDENDUM *JHISTE3* This addendum consists of 13 pages.
I send you this message in an hour of alarm, fraught with danger for the peace of the whole world.
It is a secret to no one that the armed bands invading this country were trained, equipped and armed in the United States of America.
The planes which are bombing Cuban cities belong to the United States of America, the bombs they are dropping are being supplied by the American Government … Your statement a few days ago that the USA would not participate in military activities against Cuba created the impression that the top leaders of the United States were taking into account the consequences for general peace and for the USA itself which aggression against Cuba could have … As far as the Soviet Union is concerned, there should be no mistake about our position.
For months there has been evident and growing resistance to the Castro dictatorship.
Where people are denied the right of choice (the ability to choose a different form of government besides communism), recourse to such struggle is the only means of achieving their liberties … You should recognise that free peoples in all parts of the world do not accept the claim of the historical inevitability of the communist revolution.
What your government believes is its own business; what it does in the world is the world’s business.
The great revolution in the history of man, past, present and future, is the revolution of those determined to be free.
The United States had already surrounded the Soviet Union with its own bomber bases and missiles.
We knew that American missiles were aimed against us in Turkey and Italy, to say nothing of West Germany.
It was during my visit to Bulgaria that I had the idea of installing missiles with nuclear warheads in Cuba without letting the United States find out they were there until it was too late to do anything about them.
Everyone agreed that America would not leave Cuba alone unless we did something.
The Americans had surrounded our country with military bases and threatened us with nuclear weapons and now they would learn just what it feels like to have enemy missiles pointing at you; we'd be doing nothing more than giving them a little of their own medicine.
SOURCE 2A This extract is taken from an interview by David Deutschmann with Jorge Risquet, a member of the Cuban government.
Risquet is being questioned about the Cuban involvement in the Angolan Civil War.
It is said that the Cuban presence in Angola had expansionist aims, and that Cuba was acting as a puppet of the Soviet Union.
It would make no sense for us, a small country to think about expanding to Angola.
Proof of that is that when our presence is no longer needed, we will withdraw.
As for material interests, the only thing we have taken from Angola has been the remains of our soldiers who died there.
Those riches are for the people of Angola to use for their development, to provide a pleasant life for those heroic people we love so much, a people for whom we have shed our blood, and alongside whom we have fought for so many years.
It was a sovereign decision made in response to a request for aid from Agostinho Neto.
There was a communication with the Soviet Union, after our troops were on their way.
We asked for and received extensive collaboration from the Soviet Union.
It stands on the side of people fighting racism and colonialism, and it supports the cause of their independence.
We’re brothers and sisters of the people of Africa and we’re ready to fight on their behalf.
And Yankee imperialism, without scruples of any kind, has launched South African mercenary troops in an attempt to crush Angola’s independence and is now outraged by our help to Angola, our support for Africa and our defence of Africa.
President Kaunda of Zambia described the Soviet and the Cuban intervention in Angola.
Yes, because here you haven’t got an independent black African country coming into existence on South African borders.
You have a Cuban force of thousands – estimated at this stage between 10 and 13 thousand – taking part in a civil war in Southern Africa and if that was the end of it, one could have shrugged one’s shoulders and said, okay, they will go back tomorrow.
But knowing the communists, knowing the Cubans, there is nobody who can tell you at this stage that they are going home, once they have put the MPLA in the saddle.
I think it must be accepted that they are here to stay and I think it must be accepted that just as much as they subverted or at least, as much as they are trying to subvert Angola, they will try to subvert other Southern African countries.
Because, make no mistake about it … world domination has always been and to this very day, is still the aim of the communists.
Look at their conventional armaments compared to those of the free world, of the Western countries … if they can control the southern tip of Africa, they have a tremendous advantage in any conventional war; apart from the raw materials that they can get from Angola and other Southern African countries, they will control the Cape sea route which is the lifeline of Europe.
SOURCE 3A This is an extract of a speech by Huey Newton on the 2nd May, 1967.
He explains the reasons why Blacks should arm themselves for self-protection.
At the same time that the American government is waging a racist war of genocide in Vietnam, the concentration camps in which Japanese Americans were interned during World War II are being renovated and expanded.
Since America has historically reserved the most barbaric treatment for non-white people, we are forced to conclude that these concentration camps are being prepared for black people who are determined to gain their freedom by any means necessary.
Black people have begged, prayed, petitioned, demonstrated, and everything else to get the racist power structure of America to right the wrongs which have historically been perpetrated against black people.
All of these efforts have been answered by more repression, deceit and hypocrisy.
As the aggression of the racist American government escalates in Vietnam, the police agencies of America escalate the repression of black people throughout the ghettoes of America.
A people who have suffered so much for so long at the hands of a racist society, must draw the line somewhere.
We believe that the black communities of America must rise up as one man to halt the progression of a trend that leads inevitably to their total destruction.
With Martin Luther King's death, by June, my party was jumping by leaps and bounds.
We started those working coalitions with other organisations at the beginning of 1968.
Students for a Democratic Society, all the anti-war movement people; numerous other organisations.
In late 1968, we had a working coalition with the Poor People’s March through Rev.
American and Indian Movement; Young Puerto Rican Brothers, the Young Lords – we coalesced with everybody, you see.
So, with the Breakfast for Children Program spreading across the country, getting a lot of media play, the Preventative Medical Health Care Clinics, the doctors, the medics – I mean, this is authentic medicine, preventative medical health care clinics, the people donating their time.
Because when you find out what it is, you’ll get back in the alley, you’ll get out of the way.
You bleed for white people, but when it comes to seeing your own churches being bombed and little black girls murdered, you haven’t got any blood.
You bleed when the white man says bleed; you bite when the white man says bite; and you bark when the white man says bark.
If it is wrong to be violent defending black women and black children and black babies and black men, then it is wrong for America to draft us and make us violent abroad in defence of her.
And if it is right for America to draft us and teach us how to be violent in defence of her, then it is right for you and me to do whatever is necessary to defend our own people right here in this country.
So I cite these various revolutions, brothers and sisters, to show you that you don’t have a peaceful revolution.
The only kind of revolution that is non-violent is the Negro revolution.
The only revolution in which the goal is loving your enemy is the Negro revolution.
It's the only revolution in which the goal is a desegregated lunch counter, a desegregated theatre, a desegregated park, and a desegregated public toilet; you can sit down next to white folks – on the toilet.
