In addition to berating the Soviets in private, in public he made an effort to elevate Cuba to a player in the settlement negotiations.
Shortly after that pledge was announced, Radio Havana broadcast Castro’s own conditions which he said the United States must meet in order to validate a non-invasion pledge.
They were:2 cessation of all commercial and economic pressure against Cuba.
This included the United States trade embargo as well as efforts to get other countries to restrict or stop trade with Cuba, particularly those in the Organization of American States. an end to all “subversive activities” carried out against the Castro regime from the territory of the United States and other “accomplice territories”. cessation of “pirate attacks” on Cuba. an end to United States aircraft and ships entering Cuban airspace and naval space uninvited. evacuation of the United States Naval Base at Guantanamo.
United States policymakers came to refer to them as Castro’s Five Points.
And then Castro’s Five Points, which he put up in November, indeed as early as late October, were unacceptable from our point of view.
The principle ones being that we would abandon economic pressures, that we would abandon overflights, that we would give up Guantánamo.
Our inability and unwillingness to even discuss those five points was another element in these discussions.
Kennedy had drafted veteran fixer John McCloy to lead the United States effort in partnership with United States Ambassador to the Soviet Union Adlai Stevenson.
Neither side saw it beneficial to complicate the negotiations further by giving Castro a seat at the table.
For another, the demands were never ones that the United States could ever agree to or even publicly acknowledge.
In the ensuing weeks, Castro repeatedly restated his five conditions, including directly to Acting Secretary General of the United Nations U Thant.
And from time to time, Soviet officials tried to add them to the discussions.
The conciliatory tone convinced Castro to greet Mikoyan personally when he arrived.
Mikoyan tried again when he returned from Havana over three weeks later.
