The Peace Movement AIM OVERVIEW To consider the influence of the In this lesson students will learn about the history of the peace movement peace movement during the and some of the activities conducted.
Students will examine the success Cuban missile crisis. and failure of the peace movement and consider how it could improve its message for the future.
Students will take part in a time capsule activity LESSON OUTCOMES looking to the future through peace.
CONCEPTS TO EXAMINE ROOM LAYOUT Peace, reconciliation, mutually Individual and pair work assured destruction , time capsule.
In columns on the board they have one minute each to write as many activities and things that the peace movement could do to continue to promote peace.
This is a race, with the winning group writing the most words in the time given.
Students pick one activity each – each group must allocate different activities to its group members.
Each individual student write a plan, or a piece of prose, a comic, draw a cartoon, or an image to demonstrate their method to promote peace.
DIFFERENTIATION Give some answers in advance of the peace symbols activity. Assign one activity per student, and the skill that they have to develop eg drawing, writing to create the activity. Conduct an anonymous vote.
EXTENSION Students make their own peace symbols with annotations to add to the time capsule Get students to ask questions to their future self relating to peace to put in the time capsule. Create a test for students’ future self that they could complete on the opening of the time capsule.
ENRICHMENT Take part in a whole school time capsule event, bury the time capsule in the school grounds and reopen in 5 years’ time. Invite a local celebrity, or politician to take part in the event Invite a peace movement member to come and share their stories and experiences with the class/school. Watch a film about the peace movement and discuss key aspects of the film.
The Peace Movement The Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament The United States bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki heralded a new, nuclear age, with countries such as the UK and the Soviet Union quickly following the USA’s lead in developing nuclear weapons.
In 1958, building on the work of earlier peace movements, the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament was launched with a massive public meeting in London.
CND called for Britain to disarm its nuclear weapons, regardless of the actions of other states.
It also backed multilateral disarmament, urging the UK to lead the way, encouraging others to do the same towards the eventual global abolition of nuclear weapons.
The campaign and its goals gained prominence in the late 1950s and early 1960s as international negotiations on reducing the numbers of nuclear weapons in the world made little progress.
Antinuclear campaigners took to the streets in annual marches between London and Aldermaston, which to this day is the location of the manufacture of the UK's nuclear weapons.
By October 1962 Cold War fears of a nuclear war reached their peak as the US, which already had missiles capable of reaching the Soviet Union based in Europe, discovered Soviet missiles being based in Cuba, a mere 90 miles from Florida.
During the crisis, communications between the Kremlin and the White House took hours to reach their recipients.
As a consequence, the Soviet Union and the USA established a ‘hotline’ that would reduce the chances of a nuclear war being started accidentally, allowing direct communication between the superpowers.
The next year a ban on nuclear testing in the atmosphere was agreed between the US, Soviet Union and Britain.
International tension relaxed as the immediate threat of nuclear war faded away.
Nevertheless, the build up of nuclear weapons continued and Britain became home to US-made nuclear-carrying Polaris missiles, and protests were ongoing.
By 1979, the threat of nuclear war was again heightened and the peace movement in Britain grew as plans were put in place to station United States cruise missiles on UK soil and across Europe too.
At this time the Soviet Union had also placed missiles in Eastern Europe.
This era saw some of the most iconic anti-nuclear demonstrations, massive demonstrations in London as well as the development of peace camps at missile bases, including the women’sonly peace camp established at Greenham common in 1981.
With the end of the Cold War in 1989, there was a significant reduction in global tension, treaties were signed and cruise missiles were removed from Europe.
The Peace Movement in the 21st century Hopes were high for the abolition of nuclear weapons after the Cold War, but although there have been major bilateral reductions between the United States and Russia , new systems have been introduced and expenditure increased.
The new century has also seen a wave of wars in the Middle East, the expansion of NATO and the US-led 'War on Terror' against which the UK peace movement has been active.
CND has continued its role as a mobiliser of mass public opinion in 2003, co-organising the largest ever march in UK history – against the war on Iraq – and continues with its campaign to scrap Trident.
Time Capsule A time capsule is a method of storing artefacts and information that could be of use to future generations in analysing the social, cultural, political, technological and economic situations of those who buried the capsule.
They are often laid in the ground or in the corner stones of buildings with the intention that they will be retrieved and opened at a future date.
It contained photographs and letters describing Detroit life at the time and predicting what the future held for the city.
During the Cold War many time capsules in the Soviet Union contained messages for a future communist society, as the Soviet system of government was seen as a step on the path to a stateless, classless society with full, democratic workers’ control.
One capsule, discovered in 2012 buried beneath a statue of the Bolshevik revolutionary leader Lenin, contained a message to the socialist world of 2024 from a Komsomol (Communist Youth) unit in Kamchatka, in the Soviet Union from 1979.
In 2013 environment workers working on the demolition of a nuclear reactor in Washington USA, once a part of the Manhattan project, discovered a small, make-shift time capsule constructed from a coffee tin.
Within it those working on the site in 1955 had placed newspaper clippings as well as a small note signed by those that put the capsule together.
It became commonly used after the former Belgian minister of Justice suggested it be used as a rallying emblem in World War Two.
In 1960s America it came to be used by the peace movement to represent peace, and is used in Japan frequently as a gesture and greeting of peace.
The dove and the olive branch are often attributed to the story of Noah’s ark.
Noah sent the dove to look for land, one day it came back with an olive branch.
A dove has come to represent peace and is used throughout the peace movement.
The colours come from other flags for the nuclear disarmament movement and also from a flag made by the artist Picasso who included a dove.
The PACE sign is often confused with the flag for the Lesbian, Bisexual, Gay and Transgender movement, however the rainbow colours are different.
In Japan there is a legend that tells that everyone who makes 1000 origami cranes will be granted a wish.
The lines represent the semaphore letters of N and D for Nuclear Disarmament.
The broken rifle traces its roots to the 1900s and was adopted by War Resisters International as their symbol.
I am therefore determined not to support any kind of war, and to strive for the removal of all causes of war' In 1933 the Women’s Co-operative Guild started distributing White Poppies.
In 1934 the Peace Pledge Union made wreaths of the white poppy as an alternative to the red poppy ‘as a pledge to peace that war must not happen again’ and a way to remember victims of war without glorifying militarism.
Photo Ed Barber Images above and below: Peter Kennard 78 Images from the peace movement 1982: No to United States Cruise weapons at Greenham Common: Photos Ed Barber 79 Images from the peace movement 2003: Message to President Bush on his visit to London 2007: No Trident Replacement projection onto Houses of Parliament on Trident Vote Day 2003: Led by Ken Livingstone and Jesse Jackson, the largest ever demonstration in the UK: Don’t Attack Iraq 2012: CND banner drop at ‘A Future that Works’ demo.
