Brian Snyder / Reuters Sign in and save to read later Share Print this article Save Share on Twitter Share on Facebook Send by email Get a link Request Reprint Permissions Download Article Fifty years ago, the Cuban missile crisis brought the world to the brink of nuclear disaster.
In October 1962, a United States spy plane caught the Soviet Union attempting to sneak nuclear-tipped missiles into Cuba, 90 miles off the United States' coast.
After a week of secret deliberations with his most trusted advisers, he announced the discovery to the world and imposed a naval blockade on further shipments of armaments to Cuba.
The blockade prevented additional materiel from coming in but did nothing to stop the Soviets from operationalizing the missiles already there.
And a tense second week followed during which Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev stood ""eyeball to eyeball,"" neither side backing down.
Thanks to secret tapes Kennedy made of the deliberations, we can be flies on the wall, listening to the members of the president's ad hoc Executive Committee of the National Security Council, or ExComm, debate choices they knew could lead to nuclear Armageddon.
At the last minute, the crisis was resolved without war, as Khrushchev accepted a final United States offer pledging not to invade Cuba in exchange for the withdrawal of the Soviet missiles.
Every president since Kennedy has tried to learn from what happened in that confrontation.
Ironically, half a century later, with the Soviet Union itself only a distant memory, the lessons of the crisis for current policy have never been greater.
Today, it can help United States policymakers understand what to do -and what not to do -about Iran, North Korea, China, and presidential decision-making in general.
Events are moving, seemingly inexorably, toward a showdown in which the United States president will be forced to choose between ordering a military attack and acquiescing to a nuclear-armed Iran.
The sweetener was kept so secret that even most members of the ExComm deliberating with Kennedy on the final evening were in the dark, unaware that during the dinner break, the president had sent his brother Bobby to deliver this message to the Soviet ambassador.
Looking at the choice between acquiescence and air strikes today, both are unattractive.
An Iranian bomb could trigger a cascade of proliferation, making more likely a devastating conflict in one of the world's most economically and strategically critical regions.
A preventive air strike could delay Iran's nuclear progress at identified sites but could not erase the knowledge and skills ingrained in many Iranian heads.
The best hope for a Kennedyesque third option today is a combination of agreed-on constraints on Iran's nuclear activities that would lengthen the fuse on the development of a bomb, transparency measures that would maximize the likelihood of discovering any cheating, unambiguous threats of a regime-changing attack should the agreement be violated, and a pledge not to attack otherwise.
Such a combination would keep Iran as far away from a bomb as possible for as long as possible.
The Israeli factor makes the Iranian nuclear situation an even more complex challenge for American policymakers than the Cuban missile crisis was.
Cuban Prime Minister Fidel Castro sought to become the third, and had he succeeded, the crisis would have become significantly more dangerous.
But precisely because the White House recognized that the Cubans could become a wild card, it cut them out of the game.
Kennedy informed the Kremlin that it would be held accountable for any attack against the United States emanating from Cuba, however it started.
Today, the threat of an Israeli air strike strengthens United States President Barack Obama's hand in squeezing Iran to persuade it to make concessions.
But the possibility that Israel might actually carry out a unilateral air strike without United States approval must make Washington nervous, since it makes the crisis much harder to manage.
Should the domestic situation in Israel reduce the likelihood of an independent Israeli attack, United States policymakers will not be unhappy.
CARROTS GO BETTER WITH STICKS Presented with intelligence showing Soviet missiles in Cuba, Kennedy confronted the Soviet Union publicly and demanded their withdrawal, recognizing that a confrontation risked war.
Responding to North Korea's provocations over the years, in contrast, United States presidents have spoken loudly but carried a small stick.
This is one reason the Cuban crisis was not repeated whereas the North Korean ones have been, repeatedly. googletag.cmd.push { googletag.display; }); In confronting Khrushchev, Kennedy ordered actions that he knew would increase the risk not only of conventional war but also of nuclear war.
He raised the United States nuclear alert status to DEFCON 2, aware that this would loosen control over the country's nuclear weapons and increase the likelihood that actions by other individuals could trigger a cascade beyond his control.
For example, NATO aircraft with Turkish pilots loaded active nuclear bombs and advanced to an alert status in which individual pilots could have chosen to take off, fly to Moscow, and drop a bomb.
Kennedy thought it necessary to increase the risks of war in the short run in order to decrease them over the longer term.
He was thinking not only about Cuba but also about the next confrontation, which would most likely come over West Berlin, a free enclave inside the East German puppet state.
Success in Cuba would embolden Khrushchev to resolve the Berlin situation on his own terms, forcing Kennedy to choose between accepting Soviet domination of the city and using nuclear weapons to try to save it.
During almost two dozen face-offs with North Korea over the past three decades, meanwhile, United States and South Korean policymakers have shied away from such risks, demonstrating that they are deterred by North Korea's threat to destroy Seoul in a second Korean war.
North Korean leaders have taken advantage of this fear to develop an effective strategy for blackmail.
After tensions have risen, a third party, usually China, steps in to propose that ""all sides"" step back and cool down.
Soon thereafter, side payments to North Korea are made by South Korea or Japan or the United States, leading to a resumption of talks.
After months of negotiations, Pyongyang agrees to accept still more payments in return for promises to abandon its nuclear program.
Some months after that, North Korea violates the agreement, Washington and Seoul express shock, and they vow never to be duped again.
If the worst consequence of this charade were simply the frustration of being bested by one of the poorest, most isolated states on earth, then the repeated Korean crises would be a sideshow.
North Korea then proceeded to sell Syria a plutonium-producing reactor that, had Israel not destroyed it, would by now have produced enough plutonium for Syria's first nuclear bomb.
Washington's response was to ignore the incident and resume talks three weeks later.
One lesson of the Cuban missile crisis is that if you are not prepared to risk war, even nuclear war, an adroit adversary can get you to back down in successive confrontations.
If you do have redlines that would lead to war if crossed, then you have to communicate them credibly to your adversary and back them up or risk having your threats dismissed.
North Korea's sale of a nuclear bomb to terrorists who then used it against an American target would trigger a devastating American retaliation.
THE RULES A similar dynamic may have emerged in the United States economic relationship with China.
The response from the political and economic establishment has been a nearly unanimous rejection of such statements as reckless rhetoric that risks a catastrophic trade war.
Economics and security are separate realms, but lessons learned in one can be carried over into the other.
The defining geopolitical challenge of the next half century will be managing the relationship between the United States as a ruling superpower and China as a rising one.
During the Cuban missile crisis, Kennedy judged that Khrushchev's adventurism violated what Kennedy called the ""rules of the precarious status quo"" in relations between two nuclear superpowers.
These rules had evolved during previous crises, and the resolution of the standoff in Cuba helped restore and reinforce them, allowing the Cold War to end with a whimper rather than a bang.
The United States and China will have to develop their own rules of the road in order to escape Thucydides' trap.
These will need to accommodate both parties' core interests, threading a path between conflict and appeasement.
Overreacting to perceived threats would be a mistake, but so would ignoring or papering over unacceptable misbehavior in the hope that it will not recur.
In 1996, after some steps by Taipei that Beijing considered provocative, China launched a series of missiles over Taiwan, prompting the United States to send two aircraft carrier battle groups into harm's way.
The eventual result was a clearer understanding of both sides' redlines on the Taiwan issue and a calmer region.
The relationship may need additional such clarifying moments in order to manage a precarious transition as China's continued economic rise and new status are reflected in expanded military capabilities and a more robust foreign posture.
DO PROCESS googletag.cmd.push { googletag.display; }); A final lesson the crisis teaches has to do not with policy but with process.
Unless the commander in chief has sufficient time and privacy to understand a situation, examine the evidence, explore various options, and reflect before choosing among them, poor decisions are likely.
McGeorge Bundy, his national security adviser, thought it would be a week at most.
Obama learned this painfully during his first year in office, when he found the administration's deliberations over its Afghanistan policy playing out in public, removing much of his flexibility to select or even consider unconventional options.
This experience led him to demand a new national security decision-making process led by a new national security adviser.
One of the fruits of the revised approach was a much more tightly controlled flow of information, made possible by an unprecedented narrowing of the inner decision-making circle.
This allowed discussions over how to handle the discovery of Osama bin Laden's whereabouts to play out slowly and sensibly, with the sexiest story in Washington kept entirely secret for five months, until the administration itself revealed it after the raid on bin Laden's Abbottabad compound.
It has been said that history does not repeat itself, but it does sometimes rhyme.
Five decades later, the Cuban missile crisis stands not just as a pivotal moment in the history of the Cold War but also as a guide for how to defuse conflicts, manage great-power relationships, and make sound decisions about foreign policy in general.
Hindsight and Foresight Roberta Wohlstetter googletag.cmd.push { googletag.display; }); Stay informed.
Sign Up Email Thank you for signing up.Stay tuned for the latest from Foreign Affairs.
