Not even Ian Fleming dared dream an archvillain capable of hijacking America's government.
To chronicle some of their criminality, depravations, and treason is the aim of Know your Bush Family Evil Empire.
The anti-Castro Cuban people would rise up and greet the invaders as “liberators” with flowers and kisses.
Charles Cabell, E Howard Hunt and the rest of the right-wingers would call JFK “traitor” for not calling in the air strikes in support of the invaders.
I call such bastards “hypocritical sons-of-bitches” for saying so.No one knew it at the time, but things in Cuba were even worse than imagined.
By Norman Boucher EXCERPT…Over the past decade or so, it has become increasingly clear that the grown-ups may not have had much of an idea what was going on either.
Orchestrated by Professor James Blight and Adjunct Associate Professor Janet Lang, both of the Watson Institute for International Studies, these conferences—along with two related ones on the disastrous April 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion—have revealed that we were much closer to nuclear annihilation four decades ago than anyone had previously thought, and that the management of the crisis in Washington and Moscow was blessed with a far higher level of sheer dumb luck than analysts and historians had earlier been able to accept.
SNIP…The alternative interpretation of those October 1962 events is messier.
As McNamara explained to the students in the Blight-Lang class, no one in the White House in 1962 knew the number of nuclear warheads already in Cuba at the time of the crisis; nor did they know that the Soviets and Cubans had tactical nuclear warheads they were ready to use against United States troops.
Had Khrushchev not agreed to withdraw the missiles on October 28, a military conflict might have easily broken out, with consequences no one in Washington had sufficient information to foresee, far less control.
This document, titled “Justification for United States Military Intervention in Cuba” was provided by the JCS to Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara on March 13, 1962, as the key component of Northwoods.
Written in response to a request from the Chief of the Cuba Project, Col.
Edward Lansdale, the Top Secret memorandum describes United States plans to covertly engineer various pretexts that would justify a United States invasion of Cuba.
These proposals part of a secret anti-Castro program known as Operation Mongoose included staging the assassinations of Cubans living in the United States, developing a fake “Communist Cuban terror campaign in the Miami area, in other Florida cities and even in Washington,” including “sink a boatload of Cuban refugees ,” faking a Cuban airforce attack on a civilian jetliner, and concocting a “Remember the Maine” incident by blowing up a United States ship in Cuban waters and then blaming the incident on Cuban sabotage.
They told JFK the missiles were a danger and the only way to get rid of them was an immediate air attack, followed by an invasion.
Air Force commander Curtis LeMay even tried to instigate war, ordering jets to intrude into Soviet airspace, hoping one would be shot down and form a pretext for all-out war.Spy Flights of the Cold War Review by Capt.
Spy Flights of the Cold War offers an intriguing yet controversial historical record of United States and British aerial reconnaissance against the communist bloc from 1946 to 1963.
Overlaying this operational history is a political account that indicts the United States Air Force and, specifically, Gen Curtis E LeMay for exceeding presidential authority, manipulating intelligence estimates, and using the spy flights in an attempt to instigate another world war.
Although it is a tribute to individual airmen, the text openly criticizes USAF leadership.
In addition to questionable evidence that LeMay encouraged unauthorized overflight missions, Lashmar devotes an entire chapter to SAC’s aggressive use of reconnaissance missions as a political tool intent on provoking nuclear war.
If successfully implemented, Project Control overflights would “demonstrate the Russians’ military impotency” and possibly create the conditions for a preventive war.
Although estimates by the intelligence community later proved high, evidence for a duplicitous USAF agenda is suspect.
Unlike the selected current occupant of the Oval Office, John F Kennedy truly understood what it means to serve as President and Commander in Chief.
Case in point, Vietnam.Kennedy saw the situation on the ground to be a loser for America and had ordered Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara to begin the withdrawal of American forces with the withdrawal of 1,000 advisors by the end of 1963.
JFK planned to have ALL American troops out of Vietnam by the end of 1964.
That was in writing:Exit StrategyIn 1963, JFK ordered a complete withdrawal from VietnamBy James K Galbraith Forty years have passed since November 22, 1963, yet painful mysteries remain.
It’s one of the big questions, alternately evaded and disputed over four decades of historical writing.
It bears on Kennedy’s reputation, of course, though not in an unambiguous way.
And today, larger issues are at stake as the United States faces another indefinite military commitment that might have been avoided and that, perhaps, also cannot be won.
The story of Vietnam in 1963 illustrates for us the struggle with policy failure.
More deeply, appreciating those distant events tests our capacity as a country to look the reality of our own history in the eye.
SNIP…A more thorough treatment appeared in 1992, with the publication of John M Newman’s JFK and Vietnam.
Until his retirement in 1994 Newman was a major in the United States Army, an intelligence officer last stationed at Fort Meade, headquarters of the National Security Agency.
As an historian, his specialty is deciphering declassified records—a talent he later applied to the CIA’s long-hidden archives on Lee Harvey Oswald.
Newman’s argument was not a case of “counterfactual historical reasoning,” as Larry Berman described it in an early response.
Kennedy, he claims, had decided to begin a phased withdrawal from Vietnam, that he had ordered this withdrawal to begin.
At Kennedy’s instruction, Press Secretary Pierre Salinger made a public announcement that evening of McNamara’s recommended timetable for withdrawal.
The President also said that our decision to remove 1,000 United States advisors by December of this year should not be raised formally with Diem.
Instead the action should be carried out routinely as part of our general posture of withdrawing people when they are no longer needed.
In other words, the withdrawal recommended by McNamara on October 2 was embraced in secret by Kennedy on October 5 and implemented by his order on October 11, also in secret.
Newman argues that the secrecy after October 2 can be explained by a diplomatic reason.
JFK had not decided whether he could get away with claiming that the withdrawal was a result of progress toward the goal of a self-sufficient South Vietnam.
A week later, the orders were signed committing the United States to support the government of South Vietnam.
A few months later, the Gulf of Tonkin incident was created and the United States had their fig leaf for war.
Hi knowyourbfee I just checked out your blog on Nutritional Support Supplements.
We use only the highest grade Whole Food Vitamins, Chelated Minerals, Probiotics, and Vegetable Enzymes.
Start treating it right, and give your body the nutrients needed to support optimal health.
