We are flying to Miami en route to Havana for a conference, with Fidel Castro, on the Cuban missile crisis.
We are flying to Miami en route to Havana for a conference, with Fidel Castro, on the Cuban missile crisis.This is the fifth conference in a series that began in 1987, in Hawk’s Cay, Florida, as an all-American affair, in which Kennedy administration veterans were asked questions about the crisis by political scientists and historians.
Then Cubans complained that everyone called it the Cuban missile crisis but no one ever asked them.
So the third meeting, held in Moscow in 1989, included Cubans, as did a fourth meeting a year ago in Antigua.The Cubans then proposed a fifth meeting in Havana.
Where the Americans and the Soviets had divulged internal debates and declassified relevant documents, the Cubans had gone on about the iniquities of the CIA, long since exposed in the US, and revealed nothing about their own decisions and actions.After all, Castro had his own CIA; and Cuba’s clandestine war in the early 1960s against other Latin American states, especially against Rómulo Betancourt’s progressive democratic regime in Venezuela, was an essential part of the story.
The Kennedy administration had seen the future of Latin America as essentially a contest between the Castro way and the Betancourt way.
Robert McNamara and I both have forebodings and agreed last weekend that, if the conference degenerates into a propaganda barrage by Castro and his team, we will walk out.Wednesday, January 8.
After much waiting, a crowded plane takes off on the forty-minute flight to Havana.
I first visited Havana in 1950, for a meeting of the Inter-American Association for Democracy and Freedom, when I met Betancourt and other democratic leaders like José Figueres of Costa Rica, Juan Bosch of the Dominican Republic, Eduardo Frei and Salvador Allende of Chile.
I next visited Havana thirty-five years later—in May 1985 and again in October, this time on human rights missions with Robert White, a former ambassador to El Salvador, and a champion of Latin American democracy.
We had frank, and not uncordial, sessions with Castro on each occasion.Human rights are obviously not on the agenda of the impending conference, and the primary purpose of the present trip is to clarify the historical record of the supreme crisis of the nuclear age.
However, some of us, especially Wayne Smith, former head of the United States Interest Section—the de facto embassy—in Havana, and Robert Pastor, McNamara’s son-in-law and a Latin American expert on Jimmy Carter’s National Security Council, are also concerned to see what we can of the human rights situation.That situation has recently been growing worse.
On November 19, the poet María Elena Cruz Varela was brutally treated by government demonstrators and forced to swallow a moving declaration of principles she had written for the small human rights group Criterio Alternativo.
She was subsequently sentenced to two years in prison, and some in the exile community fear that she has been given psychotropic drugs in preparation for a public appearance at a Havana trial.
On December 20 Yndamaro Restano, head of the Movimiento Armonía, a social democratic group, was arrested.
All these people and their organizations call for political freedom and peaceful reform.
All are opposed to violence.On December 27 Carlos Aldana, the leading ideologue on the Politburo, delivered a vicious attack on the human rights movement.
AdvertisementWith such wretched events in mind, we ride from the airport into Havana.
Returning after half a dozen years, I am struck by the silence of the streets.
The oil shortage has left very few private automobiles and not many buses on the road.
We pull up at a red light next to one filled with shiny new bicycles imported from China.
Castro is engaged in an extensive effort to convert Cuba into a nation of bicycle riders.
Signs point to the Teatro Karl Marx.We are installed in official guest houses in El Lagito , a pretty estate with rolling green lawns and a placid pond populated by pink water lilies and three brilliant orange flamingos.
The Russian group, which includes the sons of Nikita Khrushchev and Anastas Mikoyan, is housed in a neighboring villa.
In the afternoon we all—Americans and Russians—drive through the empty streets for a ceremony of welcome around a SS-4 missile standing in a historical park by the sea.
The “Conferencia Tripartita Sobre La Crisis de Octobre de 1962” opens at 3 PM in the Palace of Conferences.
Castro arrives promptly, looking extremely fit in well-tailored fatigues.
No one had reminded him, he disarmingly but unconvincingly says, that the conference was beginning today, so he has not had time to read all the documents.
He will therefore defer his major presentation, he says, until he has done his homework.
He assures us that he has no animosity toward anyone, adversaries or allies.
He finishes in eleven minutes, probably the shortest Castro speech on record.McNamara’s opening statement masterfully distributes blame for “misinformation, miscalculation, and misjudgment” impartially among all three countries.
To avoid future crises, potential adversaries must try to understand how others will interpret their actions.
With the cold war now over, he concludes, the United States no longer has security concerns about Cuba.
General Anatoly Gribkov, a grim-faced military man who had been in Cuba during the crisis, provides an authoritative account of Soviet military deployment.
Moreover, the Soviet force had nuclear warheads —and not only for strategic but for tactical missiles.This last statement startles, and appalls, the Americans present.
The Soviet force, Gribkov continues, had six tactical missile launchers with nine nuclear warheads—and Soviet field commanders had authority to use tactical nuclear weapons against an American invasion, without clearance from Moscow.
I had earlier believed that we had overestimated the dangers of the crisis—that Khrushchev, well aware of United States overall nuclear superiority as well as of United States conventional superiority in the Caribbean, would never have risked war.
But Soviet forces, we are now told, were ready to fire tactical nuclear missiles at an invading force.McNamara later observes that he had rejected Admiral Dennison’s request that the United States troops be equipped with tactical nuclear weapons.
The son of the first Soviet ambassador to Washington, a former student at Sidwell Friends School and Swarthmore, later ambassador to Japan, China, and the United Nations, he was a special assistant to Khrushchev during the crisis.
In October Khrushchev told Troyanovsky that the missiles were now going in and would likely cause a storm.
Troyanovsky recounts the reaction at the Kremlin when Kennedy announced the discovery of the missiles.
Vasily Kuznetsov proposed that Khrushchev respond by bringing further pressure on Berlin.
The grimmest day, Troyanovsky recalls, was Saturday October 27, when word arrived that an American U2 had been shot down over Cuba and when a letter from Castro appeared to call for a preemptive nuclear strike against the United States.
These developments accelerated the decision to withdraw the missiles.Aleksandr Alekseev, who had been Soviet ambassador to Cuba in 1962, remembers his shock when Khrushchev told him of the decision to send missiles.
Finally I said, ‘I don’t think Castro will agree because the Cubans regard solidarity with other Latin American countries as their best protection.
He told Alekseev that, after the midterm American election in November, “I will travel to Cuba and tell the world about the operation.
When we had an opinion, we offered it, but we thought they knew better than we did.
Castro smiles and adds with an affable nod to the Americans, “Today I would put it differently.
It would have required elaborate legal reasoning to justify recourse to the Rio Treaty of 1947 and its provisions against extra-continental threats to the Americas.Friday, January 10.
We discuss the grimmest day of the crisis, the shooting down of the U2.
General Gribkov says that the order to shoot had not come from Moscow; in fact, Moscow had rejected requests from the commanders in Cuba for authority to fire at the U2s.
The Soviet units were under Soviet command; the Cuban units under Cuban command.
The U2, the general says, was shot down by a Soviet battery on an order from the Soviet commander in the field.Castro’s hands, with their long, white, tapering fingers, are in constant motion, pointing, making fists, squares, supplicative praying gestures, as he talks.
It is still a mystery, he observes, what led the Soviets to shoot down the U2.
His own interpretation is that when the Cubans started firing against low-level American over-flights, the Soviet command decided out of comradely solidarity to go after the U2s.
I don’t know whether he thought that we had brought it down directly or that our example had led the Soviets to do it.
Khrushchev, Castro continues, also was confused about “my letter”—the letter he wrote on October 26, which Krushchev read as recommending a preventive nuclear strike.
As for the letter itself, Castro says, “I knew Nikita well and was sure he was extremely anxious about the situation.
My aim was to encourage him, to strengthen his position from a moral viewpoint.
I remembered how Stalin had refused to believe that the Nazis were planning to attack in 1941.
I was convinced that an invasion of Cuba would lead on to nuclear war against the Soviet Union.
My recommendation for a preventive strike was not in case of an American air attack but in case of invasion and occupation.
By the time it arrived Khrushchev and Kennedy were already moving toward a solution.
General Fabian Escalante, vice minister of the interior and a top man in the secret police, responds by reciting, as he had at Antigua, a litany of the awful things that the CIA had done or contemplated in its notorious Operation Mongoose—the hit-and-run raids, the sabotage teams, the attempts to contaminate the sugar crop and to burn down mills and to spread rumors that Castro was the antichrist and the Second Coming was imminent.
During the luncheon interval we consider what to do if the Cubans won’t go beyond their Antigua fulminations about the sins of the CIA, We discuss walking out—and do so loudly enough for microphones to pick this up.
We want the Cubans to understand that they face a choice as to whether or not they wish the conference to succeed.After lunch Castro joins the argument.
He is on the attack, but, as he goes on, he seems somewhat responsive to the aims of the conference.
But Cuba, Castro insists, was not exporting revolution; it was supporting revolution, often against governments that were joining in the effort to destroy the Cuban Revolution.
But, “if those countries become destabilized, we are not going to promote the destabilization.
We are not going to take advantage of the objective conditions to promote anything.
There are no beggars in Cuba, no poverty, no starvation, no racial discrimination, no discrimination against women, no prostitution.
Concluding that Castro was determined to get such views on the record before the conference went any further, McNamara says his statement that Cuba has abandoned the support of revolution is welcome and we should move on to other matters.
He was a man with new ideas, some brilliant, like the Alliance for Progress, a policy with a content, with a social direction.
With his authority consolidated after the October crisis, Kennedy could have been the president who would have rectified United States policy toward Cuba.
Here Castro tells the story of the visit from the French journalist Jean Daniel, who carried a message from Kennedy raising the possibility of normalizing relations.
He had the constitutional authority to stop it, but not the moral and political authority.
I won’t talk about sabotage, assassination ; but he wanted to end the Cuban Revolution.
If it had been just a matter of our own defense, we would not have accepted the missiles.
The presence of Soviet missiles would damage our image in Latin America by turning Cuba into a Soviet military base.
But, if it would strengthen the entire socialist camp and improve the global balance of power, we felt we had to go along.
Had we known then what we know now about the balance of power, we would have realized that the emplacement changed intermediate range missiles into strategic weapons.
In the light of what we know today, this must have been the real Soviet motive—not the defense of Cuba.
If I had known the real ratio, I would have advised Nikita to be prudent.
A Soviet military pact would have sufficed—a declaration that aggression against Cuba would be aggression against the Soviet Union.
The secrecy of the operation was both a political and a practical disadvantage for us.
One reason why Khrushchev wanted secrecy was that he did not wish to affect the elections.
As for the Soviet decision to withdraw the missiles, “There was no consultation, no notification.
When the news arrived, we realized that Cuba was, in the end, only a bargaining chip.
Had we known that Khrushchev was preparing to withdraw the missiles, we would not have been opposed.
His readiness to trade his missiles in Cuba for the American missiles in Turkey proves that the defense of Cuba was subordinate to the defense of the Soviet Union.
Khrushchev began by offering him the missiles on the ground that they would protect Cuba.
When Cuban missiles were traded for Turkish missiles, Castro and Khrushchev exchanged positions.
Khrushchev was now acting to strengthen the socialist camp, while Castro now resented the deal because it had nothing to do with the defense of Cuba.
The most important thing is to affirm the rights of national sovereignty.
In the evening we go to a reception at the opulent presidential palace, with green trees and ferns planted on patches of ground among the marble floors and large abstract paintings on the walls.
While we drink frozen daiquiris and cluster around an elaborate buffet, Fidel holds court, bantering with Ray Cline of the CIA and other Americans and rather conspicuously turning his back on the Russians, except for the sons of Khrushchev and Mikoyan.
I ask him how he looks on the impending quincentennial of Christopher Columbus.
When I had met Raúl Castro in 1985, he seemed gloomy and withdrawn; but tonight he is unexpectedly friendly and engages in animated conversation with McNamara.
He says that sometime he would like to show McNamara the training film they use to teach Cuban draftees how to repel an American invasion.
He accepts the sons of Khrushchev and Mikoyan.We walk to the Ministry of Defense, five minutes away.
Then he takes us to what he calls “the hall of the Russian generals,” where photographs of a dozen Soviet marshals surround a large photograph of Lenin.
Then the film, a version prepared for visitors, in which the narration is in English.
The theme is the arming and mobilization of all Cubans for protracted war.
We see a network of tunnels, laboriously built over eight years to the length of two hundred kilometers.
This morning we go to Finca Vigía , Hemingway’s house on top of a hill about fifteen miles from Havana, now a museum.
We see it all through open windows; visitors are not permitted to enter the house.
McNamara repeats his hope that, in a world fundamentally changed by the end of the cold war, differences between Cuba and the United States can be handled through normal diplomatic channels.
I believe that the right to live a productive life is fundamental to all other rights.
As for the conference, “I say with absolute sincerity that I have learned a great deal at this meeting.
The Americans agree that Castro has indeed been more candid and illuminating than some of us expected and that he has more than fulfilled the assurance that he would contribute to historical knowledge.
We have said little about current issues, however, and we feel more strongly than ever the need to bring up the question of human rights, especially since we have become aware of developments that will likely intensify the crackdown already in progress.
At the end of December, three exiles fresh from Miami were caught landing on Cuban shores with guns and explosives.
A few days later, according to the Cuban government, people trying to flee Cuba by boat killed three young policemen who were about to arrest them.
Speaking at the funeral of the policemen, Raúl Castro threatened to bring back the Revolutionary Tribunal notorious for its summary execution of Batistianos after the revolution of 1959.
Wayne Smith saw Elizardo Sánchez this morning and told him that I hoped to call on him this evening.
At lunch the head of the Cuban delegation told Smith that his visit had been most imprudent; there was great popular indignation against Sánchez, and there might have been trouble.
Evidently an “act of repudiation” by the Rapid Response Brigades is scheduled.After adjournment, the three delegations hold a press conference.
Fidel vanishes, but he has invited McNamara and me to meet privately with him afterward.
The press conference opens with a long wrangle over the no-invasion guarantee that Kennedy offered shortly after the resolution of the missile crisis.
Kennedy’s offer, however, was conditioned on Castro’s acceptance of UN inspection to assure the removal of the missiles.
Since Castro rejected UN inspection, the guarantee never went into effect7—or at least not until Henry Kissinger proclaimed a unilateral guarantee in 1970.
The Cubans insist that there was a moral if not a legal guarantee from 1963 on.
The whole argument is pointless because no American administration has planned to invade Cuba.McNamara again expresses his hope for normalization of relations.
A Cuban responds that Cuba is all for rapprochement; the problem is the lack of “political will” in the United States.
I am against the embargo; I am for the restoration of diplomatic relations.
I do not believe that the United States government should subject Cuba to more severe human rights tests than those it has applied to other countries—China, for example, or Turkey, or Pinochet’s Chile.
I subscribe to the traditional doctrine that diplomatic recognition does not imply moral approval of a country’s internal arrangements.But speaking practically , there is strong opposition to normalizing relations.
One reason for this is that Cuba does not observe civilized standards with regard to political and intellectual and artistic freedom.
Every time a human rights activist is arrested or harassed, it strengthens the opposition to normalization.
It would greatly facilitate the task of those who favor rapprochement if Cuba pursued a more generous and honorable course with regard to human rights.These words provoke an outburst from Carlos Lechuga, who, as Cuban ambassador to the United Nations in 1963, had worked with William Attwood in exploring rapprochement.
Lechuga is a seemingly urbane fellow, and I am surprised by the crudity of his response.
I supposed that after my remarks Castro might cancel my invitation to the private meeting.
But we—McNamara, Bob Pastor, Jim Blight, and I—are ushered into a room where Fidel, flanked by Carlos Aldana, José Antonio Arbesu, chief of the Cuban Interest Section in Washington, and two other Cubans, greets us cordially.
He talks about his only meeting with Hemingway when, during the spring of 1960, in his second year as premier, he won a marlin fishing contest and Hemingway presented the prize.
He then tells about a wonder drug called PPG that has been devised in Cuba’s biotechnology laboratories.
According to Castro, PPG lowers cholesterol, lowers blood pressure, relieves circulatory troubles, improves memory, and accounts for his apparently unlimited energy.About the future of Cuba, he says that Cuba’s oil supply in 1992 will be one third of what it was in 1989.
He emphasizes self-reliance as the means by which Cuba will overcome its troubles.
If we don’t meet our test, then we will blow up”—said with a broad smile.
I observe that it is surely essential to distinguish between non-violent and violent dissent.
It is a great error to equate human rights activists with terrorists from Alpha 66.
The human rights groups are in contradiction with the basic interests of the country.
Because they prepare the way for the terrorists, they are in effect partners of the terrorists.
After all,” he continues, gesturing toward me, “you have slandered our country.
But we haven’t arrested you!”—again the laugh.I point out that his hard line exacts severe political costs in Europe as well as in the United States.
I urge him to help the friends of Cuba abroad by being more tolerant of dissenters at home.
He says coldly, “I will take your views under consideration,” cutting off that part of the conversation.We part amicably after a couple of hours.
As we leave, Pastor tells Castro that he and I plan to call on Elizardo Sánchez later in the evening.
We take it that if an “act of repudiation” is scheduled, it will be postponed.At about 9:30 PM Bob Pastor, Wayne Smith, Alexandra Schlesinger, and I arrive at Elizardo Sánchez’s tidy, high-ceilinged house on a quiet street in the suburban La Playa section of Havana.
His wife and children are living in Miami, where they are subjected to harassment by the right-wing Cubans of the Cuban American National Foundation.
Elizardo Sánchez and Senator Edward Kennedy, signed by Ted.Soon Sánchez arrives.
He is a sturdy, quiet man in his forties, with a round face and closely cropped black hair.
He recalls the night of November 22, 1991, when the mob broke into the house and terrified his mother.
This house, he tells us, has been raided by the police more often than any other house in Cuba.
He says he admires the Revolution’s achievements in health, education, and housing, but emphasizes that the time has come for political freedom.
He wants a country where many ideas can live side by side, where groups from right to left can have a part in the nation’s political life.
He is a modest man and makes no great claims for his own group; but he detects pluralist tendencies among young people and says many small groups like his are scattered around the island.
He goes on to say that a relaxation of tensions, including a loosening of the embargo, would be of the greatest help.
They think I am a Communist, he ruefully says, and Castro thinks I am an agent of the CIA.We depart, troubled by what may lie in wait for this intelligent, reasonable, very brave man.On the following Thursday, January 16, a Rapid Response Brigade—as many as three hundred people—surrounded, besieged, and battered the house of Elizardo Sánchez.
On February 18, the Miami Herald quoted Sánchez as saying that, while Yndamaro Restano and Sebastian Arcos are “not being treated badly,” María Elena Cruz Varela was serving her sentence “under very adverse conditions.
She is being held in a small cell with three other women who are dangerous common criminals.
Democratic leaders in Latin America, while pressing Castro to undertake reforms, also call for the end of Cuba’s isolation and its read-mission to the Organization of American States.
Caribbean states, including Barbados and Trinidad, also advocate an end to the embargo.
The encouragement of foreign private investment may be of special significance, even though largely confined so far to tourist facilities.
Such subversion of socialism by capitalism would seem much in the United States interest.
Our opportunities for observation were limited, but we did not get the impression of a country on the brink of explosion; and if the melancholy and desperation one found in the Soviet Union and in Eastern Europe in the 1980s are present in Cuba, we did not sense it.
Perhaps a million Cubans—10 percent of the population—have fled the country.
The police are ever ready to suppress public protest and dissidence.Castro’s strength is ultimately rooted not in his doctrinaire socialism but in his passionate nationalism.
Memories of the disparities between rich and poor under Batista linger, at least among the older generation.
Young people—and almost 60 percent of the Cuban population was born after Fidel came to power—resent belt-tightening and censorship and envy the consumer society ninety miles away; they would like freedom of speech and freedom to move in and out of Cuba.
Its self-aggrandizing chairman, Jorge Mas Canosa, who claims the support of the Bush administration, is said to see himself as president of a post-Castro Cuba and has already sponsored a post-Castro constitution.
When Mas Canosa recently attacked the Miami Herald as “Nuevo Granma,” the publisher of the Herald received bomb and death threats from right-wing fanatics.However repressive Castro’s rule is, many Cubans, including dissidents, regard the alternative offered by the Cuban American National Foundation as worse; indeed, dread of the return of the Miami exiles represented by the foundation is a major source of Castro’s continuing strength.
The Bush administration’s supposed support of the foundation, Betancourt says, leads dissidents within Cuba to “perceive Mr Castro’s removal as more threatening to their interests than his staying in power.
It is in the United States interest to encourage the internal solution”—i.e., to support those inside Cuba who are working for political freedom and democracy.In fact, the Cuban American National Foundation is not the only alternative to Castro; nor does it represent all Cuban exiles in the United States.
Among the other exile organizations, for example, is Cubans for Independence and Democracy , which espouses social democracy and is led by Huber Matos, who was with Castro in the Sierra Maestra; after he showed signs of independence, he spent twenty years under horrible conditions in Castro’s jails.
The Democratic Platform Coalition was founded in 1991 by Carlos Alberto Montaner and supports human rights activists inside Cuba.
Liberal Cuban exiles recognize that the succession to Castro will have to come from within Cuba, not out of Miami.A Republican administration haunted by an exaggerated fear of its own right wing is not likely, above all in an election year, to recast its policy toward Cuba.
It lies within the United States government’s power, though, to stop the paramilitary raids undertaken in violation of the neutrality laws by Cuban exiles trained in the environs of Miami by Alpha 66 and other right-wing outfits.
And it lies within Castro’s power to stop the persecution of dissenters, to carry out reforms in the economy, and to move toward political and cultural freedom.Whether Castro is ready to seek rapprochement is not clear.
He remains a puzzle—a tyrant and a bully capable of gloating over one-time comrades he has sent to prison, yet also a leader capable of humor, charm, and limitless energy.
Maurice Halperin Castro’s Cuba: An Exchange May 28, 1992 More by Arthur Schlesinger Jr.
The Turning Point October 11, 2007 issue History and National Stupidity April 27, 2006 issue The Making of a Mess September 23, 2004 issue Arthur Schlesinger Jr.
Fidel Castro, the Missile Crisis and the Collapse of Communism, forthcoming from Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Oleg Troyanovsky, however, said that he had never heard this before; and the delegation of authority to use tactical nuclear weapons is unknown in other Soviet theaters.
If Gribkov is right—and having been in Cuba at the time and having no reason to dissemble, presumably he is right—then it may be that Khrushchev did not know of, or at least did not appreciate the implications of, the arrangement.
The statement in the memoirs is apparently a mistranslation of the original text.
Historically, Castro continued, the United States has been committed to the Latin American oligarchy.
The Cuban government said that the two men murdered the policemen while they and seven others were trying to seize a boat at an East Havana dock, and that Sergeant Pérez Quintosa survived long enough to identify his attackers.
Elizardo Sánchez subsequently authorized Ramon Cernuda of the Cuban Commission on Human Rights and National Reconciliation in Miami to use the Declaration of Good Will as a basis for opposition to the Torricelli bill.
