His task was to specify and obtain prior acceptance of the conditions under which the ICRC was prepared to lend its good offices to the United Nations and the parties involved in the Cuban missile crisis, so as to help ease the tension that had arisen from the secret introduction of Soviet nuclear weapons in the Caribbean.
This article deals with the unusual role the ICRC was ready to play in that crisis and sheds new light on how it came to be engaged in these highly political matters.
New American, Soviet and Cuban sources that have become known since 1990 reveal in great detail the events surrounding the planned ICRC intervention in the missile crisis.
Since the publication of this material, further sources of information about the ICRC’s role in the crisis have come to light and been collected by the National Security Archive.
The material that emerged about the Cuban missile crisis from Russian archives was partly translated and published by the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars in Washington.
This new material, and a series of retrospective conferences between 1987 and 1992 that brought together American, Soviet and Cuban participants in the crisis, have led to a broad re-evaluation of what happened in late October and early November 1962 in the 1 Chadwyck-Healey Inc.
Proceedings of the rial was researched by the author of this article Moscow Conference on the Cuban Missile during a stay in the United States in 1996.
Of the numerous publications on the Cuban crisis since the end of the Cold War, I shall mention only a few.
Beschloss’ bookThe Crisis Years is probably the best account of the missile crisis based on this new body of information.
Equally important is John Lewis Gaddis’ latest work, in which he has reassessed the real moments of danger during it.
Little has been written about the ICRC’s role in the Cuban missile crisis so far.
The former UN Secretary-General, U Thant, deals with it at length in his memoirs but lacks precision with regard to some important facts.
The ICRC itself summarized Rüegger’s mission in two of its own publications.
Two days earlier, two U-2 aircraft had flown over the Caribbean island and taken pictures that proved the existence of Soviet MRBMs in Cuba and the buildup of twenty-four SAM sites on the island.
In the first ExComm meeting on 16 October, a consensus was soon reached that all means had to be used to remove the Soviet missiles from Cuba.
The following discussions within the ExComm centred on the question of the requisite initial response and military preparations.
After five days of analysis and controversial debates, President Kennedy decided on 20 October to impose a naval blockade on the further delivery of all offensive military equipment to Cuba and to insist on the withdrawal of Soviet missiles already in Cuba.The American President was not prepared to run the risk of an air strike or a full-scale invasion to have the missiles removed, as had been originally discussed in the ExComm.
The risk of a nuclear escalation seemed much too high and Kennedy therefore opted for a politically more cautious solution.
On the evening of Monday 22 October, he announced his decision to the nation and the world.
Operation ANADYR,14 as the secret deployment of the Soviet missiles in Cuba that led to the showdown with the United States in October 1962 was code-named, proved to be the most dangerous moment during the Cold War.
The two superpowers were face to face in a dispute over nuclear weapons.
Had either Kennedy or his Soviet counterpart Nikita Khrushchev reacted too sharply, the crisis would have escalated into the Third World War.The United States naval quarantine of Cuba was accompanied by a series of military and diplomatic moves and countermoves which were not all authorized by the political leadership of the two main opponents.
Remarkably enough, Khrushchev panicked and stepped back after a week of taut confrontation.
It is widely agreed today that there were three main reasons for his decision.
First, after a failed attempt by Cuban exiles supported by US intelligence to invade Cuba in the Bay of Pigs in April 1961, both the Cuban leader Fidel Castro and Nikita Khrushchev felt the need to preserve the Cuban revolution and deter a possible United States invasion.
Secondly, from the Soviet point of view the stationing of the missiles in Cuba was a means of closing the “missile gap” with the United States and, in one move, redressing the highly unfavourable strategic balance.
Thirdly, though to a lesser degree, Khrushchev saw it as a tempting possibility for a quid pro quo to expose the United States to a direct threat comparable to that faced by the Soviet Union, owing to the deployment of United States nuclear weapons on its periphery.
But the information now available from Soviet participants in the oral history conferences on the missile crisis has made it clear that these fears were just as much on Khrushchev’s mind as the desire to recreate the strategic balance.
Khrushchev noted in his memoirs that he developed the idea of deploying nuclear missiles in Cuba during a visit to Bulgaria in May 1962, while thinking about the United States missiles in Turkey on the other side of the Black Sea.
In actual fact, he seems to have planned and discussed the whole operation with two of his closest political advisers,Anastas I Mikoyan and Andrei Gromyko, in the weeks before and after his visit to Bulgaria.
Castro was sceptical at first but then gave his assent, whereupon Khrushchev decided to go ahead with the deployment in early June 1962.20 In September and October the missiles were secretly shipped to Cuba and installed with the assistance of Soviet specialists.
Khrushchev’s plan was to announce his “deterrent” to Kennedy only after the November mid-term elections in the United States.The American President was then to be confronted with the fait accompli of nuclear missiles in Cuba.
The Last Testament, translated and agreed for the sake of re-establishing the edited by Strobe Talbott, Little, Brown, strategic balance between East and West.
He ordered his vessels to challenge the quarantine line and to speed up work on the sites in Cuba.
Washington was now trying to change from a bargaining strategy to one of not losing control over events.
This was due mainly to Kennedy’s realization that the risk of an escalation to the nuclear level should be avoided under any circumstances.
In a telephone conversation with one of his main advisers, Under Secretary of State George Ball, he discussed the possibility of U Thant launching a second appeal.
On 25 October, the Secretary-General sent a second message urging the Soviet leader to stop his vessels for a limited time in order to discuss the terms of a possible agreement which could settle the problem peacefully.
To make it look like an impartial third-party initiative, he 21 Fursenko/Naftali, op. cit. , 247.
As late as 26 October Khrushchev, misled by erroneous intelligence reports that a United States invasion of Cuba was imminent and worried that Kennedy was in fact ready to go over the brink, accepted U Thant’s standstill-proposal.
The Kremlin leader, it was now clear, was seeking a way out of the crisis without losing face.
The ICRC’s offer to lend its good offices When the two superpowers accepted U Thant’s standstillproposal, time was gained for negotiations under the auspices of the Secretary-General and the military front line at sea was given a breather.
At that point the ICRC made its first entry in the drama of the Cuban missile crisis.
He had been asked by Mr Boissier, the President of the International Red Cross, to convey to us informally the Committee’s readiness and desire to help the Secretary-General in any way in its power, should the need arise.
Zorin, U Thant announced that the United States government was prepared to suspend the blockade for two to three weeks, with the proviso that measures would be taken to guarantee that ships arriving in Cuba were not supplying any weaponry during this period.
Here U Thant mentioned the possibility of establishing a particular procedure for maritime traffic, or for particular ports of call in Cuba; in this connection, United Nations delegates from neutral countries, selected by agreement, or representatives of the International Committee of the Red 29 Borsinger, op. cit. , 158. — In an American perspective, it looked as though 1965, the 20th International Conference of Khrushchev’s letter was confirming a prothe Red Cross formally proclaimed the posed deal along the same lines that Fundamental Principles.
See Fundamental had leaked out through KGB channels earlier Principles of the International Red Cross and that day.
New information, however, has made Red Crescent Movement, Handbook of the it clear that this informal démarche was International Red Cross and Red Crescent never authorized by the Kremlin.
As the documents clearly indicate, it was the Secretary-General who came up with the proposal to consider the ICRC’s help in this matter.
The numerous speculations by Western journalists and politicians at the time that this was in fact a demand by Khrushchev to make the inspections look like a humanitarian operation are therefore false.
While the ExComm was still contemplating a positive reply to Khrushchev’s telegram of 26 October, Radio Moscow broadcast a new message from the Soviet Chairman.
Soviet and Cuban information that an American attack on Cuba was imminent had turned out to be wrong.
Khrushchev, obviously under the uncomfortable impression of appearing weak in the eyes of his subordinates, decided to make a U-turn.
He now insisted that the United States remove its Jupiter missiles from Turkey in return for the removal of the Soviet missiles from Cuba.
Several times on 27 October the crisis very nearly flared out of control.
The strategic nuclear force of the United States was poised for action, and for the first time in history it was put on DefCon2 .37 In addition, the United States was assembling troops necessary for an invasion of Cuba.
Meanwhile the first Soviet missile sites were reported to be operational, and the Cuban military forces were fully mobilized.
By now Kennedy and Khrushchev both understood that a mere accidental incident could spark a nuclear war, and that therefore a quick end to the crisis had to be found.
As a result of the ExComm meeting of 27 October, Kennedy decided to react only to the first of Khrushchev’s messages of 26 October and simply to ignore the additional demands of the second message.
The reply sent to Khrushchev therefore called for the complete removal of the offensive weapons from Cuba under UN supervision, in exchange for a United States guarantee of non-invasion in Cuba.
In addition, the American President decided to send his brother, Attorney-General Robert F Kennedy, to see the Soviet Ambassador to the United States, Anatoliy Dobrynin, with a private message for Chairman Khrushchev announcing that the missiles in Turkey would be removed once the crisis was resolved.
In times of peace the United States armed forces are usually on DefCon5.
Should Khrushchev turn down this offer, a military attack on Cuba would be the consequence.
Khrushchev immediately accepted Kennedy’s terms of a unilateral withdrawal of “all Soviet offensive arms” from Cuba.
In his answer to President Kennedy the Soviet Chairman did not mention the missiles in Turkey again.
This end to the crisis was publicly announced on the radio, and the Soviet military began to dismantle the missile sites and prepare them for shipping back to the Soviet Union without delay.
During that last and decisive phase of the crisis the exchange between the two superpower leaders was conducted exclusively through direct messages between Moscow and Washington.
These private exchanges were crucial in leading to the peaceful solution of the crisis.
Furthermore, they were to make sure that no new offensive weapons could be shipped to Cuba after the lifting of the blockade by the United States.
In response to these three proposed procedures the new Soviet delegate, Vasili V Kuznetsov, declared that his government would be prepared to allow the boarding of Soviet vessels bound for Cuba by representatives of the Red Cross.
As for cargo checks in certain ports of call, this issue would be for the Cuban government to decide, since the Soviet government could not make any decision in that regard without Cuban consent.
The American side agreed to such a procedure, provided that the personnel used by the ICRC were exclusively Swiss, but said that the United States air reconnaissance over Cuba would continue until on-site inspections of the dismantling were assured.
On that same afternoon of 29 October the President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, Léopold Boissier, agreed in principle.
His organization would be ready to accept such an assignment, but only on condition that there was a formal request by all three parties to the conflict — including Cuba.Also, the approval of the Committee was still needed.
Thus the question was what stand the Cuban government and the ICRC would take.
On 30 October, Secretary-General U Thant flew to Cuba to negotiate with Castro.
Hence it was no surprise that U Thant’s two days of talks with the Cuban leadership failed to produce any substantial understanding.
Castro categorically denied access to a UN supervisory mission that was to verify the dismantling of the missile bases in his country.
He was equally opposed to any inspection in Cuban ports by ICRC personnel.
If the Soviet Union permitted the ICRC to inspect its vessels on the high seas, then it was their business and he would not oppose that.
Contrary to the mention made by U Thant in his memoirs,48 the documents give no proof of him suggesting to Castro the possibility of ICRC involvement in verifying the withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba.
In all U Thant’s talks with Castro, the superpowers and the ICRC there was only the question of using the latter for inspecting incoming ships to Cuba.
The responsibility for verification of the dismantlement always remained with the United Nations.
The only good news he brought with him was the information gathered from the Soviet general of the rocket forces in Cuba that the dismantling of the missiles and their installations was already in progress and would be completed by 2 November.
The other positive result of these talks was Castro’s consent to send back to the United States, under the auspices of the Secretary-General, the dead body of Major Anderson, whose plane was downed over Cuba on 27 October.
Dorticos, Premier Castro and Foreign Minister , and Notes on my second meeting Roa in Havana, October 30, 1962, Cuban with Premier Fidel Castro of Cuba in Havana, Missile Crisis, op. cit.
Dorticos, Premier Castro of Cuba and Foreign 50 U Thant, op. cit. , 186.
In the end, however, the Committee decided to follow President Boissier’s initial favourable response.
Rüegger was to state the conditions of acceptance by the ICRC of the planned assignment to it and once again explain the humanitarian organization’s motives in lending its good offices.
These were in particular the maintaining of international peace and the desire to spare mankind from suffering.
The ICRC’s definite decision would depend upon the result of this mission.
If the inspectors were unable to carry out their task, they would report to the UN headquarters.
U Thant agreed in general and suggested that Rüegger meet with the representatives of the three parties the next day.
In his talks with the American delegates there was a wide consensus on the procedure, and the delegates even presented a list of Swedish ships which might be chartered for inspections by the ICRC.57 During the following meeting with the Soviet side, however, there were clear indications that these inspections would never be carried out.The Soviet delegate stressed that the United States blockade, which was meant to be replaced by ICRC inspections, was illegal in his opinion and should be liquidated once the Soviet rockets were out of Cuba.
He therefore saw no necessity for continuing inspection by ICRC personnel after 10 November, the date at which the Soviet Union intended to finish withdrawing its rockets from Cuba.
In reply Rüegger stated that “a good week” was necessary to put the corps of inspectors into operation and requested a clear indication of when the operation was to begin and how long it was to last.
Once again the Soviet negotiator stressed his point of view that the operation should come to an end with the final removal of the Soviet rockets.
It became clear that if the Soviets insisted on this, the ICRC’s good offices would be obsolete by the time its inspectors were ready for action.
The Cuban delegate gave his consent and did not oppose inspections outside Cuban territory.
Following these meetings, Rüegger reported the day’s events in a long telegram to the ICRC in Geneva.
Meanwhile direct negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union on the settlement of the crisis were pursued.
This plan took shape when the Soviet troubleshooter Anastas Mikoyan, who had been sent to Cuba when the crisis had abated, failed to get Castro to allow UN verification of the dismantling of the missile sites in Cuba.
The Soviet Union and the United States now agreed that American ships would come up close to the Soviet vessels in order to see and photograph the missiles being shipped.
In addition, American helicopters could be sent if conditions at sea did not permit verification from ships brought alongside, and the photographing could be done from them.
The first Soviet transport left Cuba on 6 November, and the United States Navy carried out the first inspection on the high seas on the high seas on 7 November.
Thus a solution for verifying the removal of the Soviet missiles from Cuba was found without UN participation.As the Soviet side insisted that a replacement of the United States blockade for incoming vessels by ICRC inspection on the high seas was justified only until the missiles were removed from Cuba, and as the United States simply continued monitoring the island by air reconnaissance with the Soviets’ tacit consent, Rüegger came to the conclusion that the planned ICRC inspections would never be implemented.
The US sea blockade was lifted and the dispute between the superpowers officially settled.
François-Poncet obviously belonged to those in favour of a wider field of activity for the ICRC in the atomic age — including political missions.As the documents indicate, and from what the present author has been told by the former Swiss ambassador and subsequent member of the Committee, Raymond Probst, it looks as if Léopold Boissier, the ICRC President at that time, was likewise seeking a more active role for his organization.
On the other hand, the Swiss government and the press were sceptical about the ICRC’s determination to extend its field of activity.
The concern of the Swiss Department of Foreign Affairs about the ICRC getting involved in purely political matters is best reflected in an editorial by Willy Bretscher, a Liberal Democrat and Member of Parliament, in the Neue Zürcher Zeitung on 6 November 1962.73 Bretscher wrote that there was no reason for the ICRC to take over a task assigned to the United Nations and which was outside the humanitarian field.There was a danger that, by taking part in an operation of a political nature, the ICRC would compromise its neutrality — an absolute prerequisite to its humanitarian duties.
The Soviets, according to Bretscher, were just seeking a way out of the crisis without losing face; they would therefore try to assign the task of international inspection to the ICRC to make it look like a humanitarian operation.
Therefore the ICRC should turn down the request for its good offices and the United Nations should entrust one or several neutral nations with the inspection. — As we have seen, the ICRC eventually decided differently, but there were also voices within the Committee that questioned this position.
Letter Petitpierre to 7 November 1962, NL Rüegger, Dossier Boissier, 31 October 1963, ibid.
Conclusion A lot of new material and information on the Cuban missile crisis has surfaced during the last ten years.
It has, for the first time, made possible a detailed analysis of the hitherto untold story of the ICRC’s involvement in the crisis.
The documents show that the humanitarian organization was ready to play an extraordinary role by lending its good offices to the United Nations and the parties concerned for a highly political mission.Although the planned inspections of Soviet vessels by ICRC personnel ultimately never took place, the ICRC’s involvement set a precedent for the future engagement of the humanitarian organization in similar circumstances.
It comes as a surprise that it was probably the President of the ICRC, Léopold Boissier himself, who gave the UN SecretaryGeneral the idea of asking the ICRC for help in this unusual task outside the scope of its traditional humanitarian mission.
Persistent rumours that its involvement in the crisis was due to a request by the 76 Borsinger, op. cit. , 162.
The reason that the ICRC inspections were never carried out is twofold.
First, the Cuban leader Fidel Castro was opposed to any form of international inspections on Cuban territory in settling the crisis.
This considerably complicated and delayed the establishment of any inspection procedure.
But in the long run the involvement of the ICRC in the Cuban missile crisis led to a broader discussion of its future role in the atomic age and to the formulation of a new internal policy setting the conditions under which it would be prepared to lend its good offices in a nuclear crisis.
