In international political economy, as some countries climbed back from the financial upheaval of 2008, the European Union fell into a second recession after debt crises in IX Greece, Spain, Portugal, and elsewhere led to massive street protests, bailouts, and austerity budgets.
While militants and governments across the world told their stories on Twitter, Chinese citizens used Twitter-like microblogs to bypass their government and have their say.
For help with military data issues, we thank the late Randall Forsberg, For suggestions, we thank our colleagues, and the students in our world politics classes.
C P xv A Note on Nomenclature In international relations, names are politically sensitive; different actors may call a territory or an event by different names.
Jobs in Government and Diplomacy SUMMARY Jobs in government and diplomacy offer team players the chance to affect policy, but require patience with large bureaucracies.
BENEFITS AND COSTS People follow various paths to an interest in teaching and researching in the field of international relations.
Your own professor or instructor is likely to have a unique story about how he or she became interested in international affairs.
One advantage of an academic and research career, whether at a teaching-oriented institution or a large research university, is intellectual freedom.
One can spend a career approaching a variety of topics that are interesting and constantly evolving, that may involve travel abroad for fieldwork, and that may let you network with hundreds of colleagues interested in similar topics.
First, these jobs often give more direction to an individual in terms of the research to be performed.
Still, for those interested in IR research, such jobs can result in a wider dissemination of one’s work to a broader audience that often includes policy makers.
Masters degree programs often take between one and two years, while a Ph.D. in international relations usually takes a minimum of five years.
Often, students take time off between their undergraduate and graduate educations to travel internationally or get work experience to hone their interests.
Of course, many students never return to extend their education if they find a job that allows them to achieve their personal and career goals.
Finally, in completing most advanced degrees, a large amount of self-direction is necessary.
Writing a thesis requires you to work on your own time schedule, balancing other duties (such as work as a teaching or research assistant) that can easily crowd out your own work.
Many who complete the coursework for an advanced degree do not finish their thesis or take many years to do so.
SKILLS TO HONE Whether one wants to pursue an advanced degree for the purposes of teaching in an academic setting or engaging in applied research, there are important skill sets to develop.
Finally, think about developing a set of applied skills to use as a toolbox while analyzing questions.
The contents of this toolbox might include other languages to facilitate fieldwork abroad.
It could include statistics and data skills to facilitate quantitative analysis.
No matter which tools you emphasize, specialized skills will help you answer research questions, whether as part of the academy or in a private or governmental research organization.
Barents Sea ■» $Z X&tft St ta KAZAKHSTAN Qiraglimd/ MONGOLIA 1 UF3 KM CAPSTAN AFGHANISTAN YEMtN South China See Nicobar MALDIVES INDONESIA ^u-s S United States Bering \ I \ I Sea North P&cm KaunclMlslfiy # Qcedri <f 1.
Millions Collective goods are provided to all members of a group regardless of their individual contributions, just as these migrant workers crossing the Sahara desert in Niger in 2006 all depend on the truck's progress even while perhaps jostling for position among themselves.
Globalization, International Relations, and Daily Life 7 of people contribute to international disaster relief funds after tsunamis, earthquakes, or hurricanes because of a shared identity as members of the community of human beings.
Actors and Influences 17 global banking system, and reach a global audience with videotaped appeals.
IR scholars have proposed various level-of-analysis schemes, most often with three main levels .12 The individual level of analysis concerns the perceptions, choices, and actions of individual human beings.
This Hong Kong container port ships goods to and from all over the world, 2008.
Nine Regions of the World Russia /CIS China Japan / Pacific South Asia 2000 Kilometers 0 2000 Miles Global Geography 23 geographical element at the global level of analysis.
On worlddevel geography, see Kidron, Michael, Ronald Segal, and Angela Wilson.
Nothing like those wars has happened since, and they remain a key reference point for the world in which we live today.
For many people, World War I symbolizes the tragic irrationality of war.
The Two World Wars, 1900-1950 Europe mobilization plans developed Balkan crises World War 1 Sarajevo United States enters war Italy invades Ethiopia Munich Agreement i World War II United States enters war D-Day Germany naval arms race with Britain r Defeat Weimar Republic hyperinflation Hitler invasion Wlns of Poland power occupation rearmaofAustrjai o ment Czech.
United States Defense Department 28 Chapter 1 The Globalization of International Relations accidental.
Contrary to expectations, the war was neither short nor decisive, and certainly not glorious.
In 1950, the Korean War broke out when communist North Korea attacked and overran most of United States -allied South Korea.
Instead, President John F Kennedy imposed a naval blockade to force their removal.
The fall of South Vietnam in 1975 appeared to signal United States weakness, especially combined with United States setbacks in the Middle East — the 1973 Arab oil embargo against the United States and the 1979 overthrow of the United States -backed shah of Iran by Islamic fundamentalists.
Scholars do not agree on the important question of why the Cold War ended.
One view is that United States military strength under President Reagan forced the Soviet Union into bankruptcy as it tried to keep up in the arms race.
Working through the UN, the United States -led coalition applied escalating sanctions against Iraq.
Western relations with Russia and the other republics have been mixed since the 1990s, Because of their own economic problems, and because of a sense that Russia needed internal reform more than external aid, Western countries provided only limited aid for the region’s harsh economic transition, which had drastically reduced living standards, Russia’s brutal suppression of its secessionist province of Chechnya in 1995 and 1999 provoked Western fears of an expansionist, aggressive Russian nationalism.
Meanwhile, Japan and Russia could not resolve a lingering, mostly symbolic, territorial dispute.
Despite these problems, the world’s great powers overall increased their cooperation after the Cold War.
Instead they tried to contain the conflict by assuming a neutral role as peacekeeper and intermediary.
In the end, Serbian forces withdrew from Kosovo and NATO has controlled the province ever since.
In 2008, with the UN Security Council still deadlocked over its status, Kosovo declared independence, bringing protests from Serbia and its allies.
However, when those forces were drawn into the fighting and sustained casualties, the United States abruptly pulled out.
In Rwanda in 1994, the genocide of more than half a million civilians in a matter of weeks was virtually ignored by the international community.
The dispute disrupted the Atlantic alliance for several years and weakened the UN’s role as the United States -led coalition went forward despite its failure to win Security Council authorization for war.
In Afghanistan, fighting worsened beginning in 2007 as the Taliban ran an insurgency campaign from bases in PakistanDisputed elections, corruption, and “insider” attacks by members of Afghan security forces on NATO troops all made the foreigners’ jobs difficultNATO sent in tens of thousands of additional troops in 2009, but then began a withdrawal set to conclude in 2014.
Meanwhile, nuclear weapons programs in North Korea and Iran raised alarmsNorth Korea produced possibly a half-dozen nuclear bombs and tested three in 2006, 2009, and 2013.
Starting in 2004, Iran made and broke several agreements to suspend the enrichment of uranium that could be used to build nuclear weaponsIn response, the UN Security Council passed a series of sanctions against Iran, demanding that it stop its enrichment program.
In 2010, centrifuges key to its enrichment program began mysteriously destroying themselves, and investigation pinned the problem on the sophisticated Stuxnet computer virus, evidently a creation of Israeli and American defense scientistsIt set back Iran’s program by a year or more.
Latin America and Russia/CIS have nearly extinguished wars in their regions, joining a zone of peace already encompassing North America, Europe, Japan/Pacific, and ChinaWarfare is diminishing even in the arc of conflict from Africa through the Middle East to South AsiaSince 1990, long, bloody wars have ended in South Africa, Mozambique, Angola, southern Sudan, and Ethiopia-Eritrea, as did the various conflicts in Central America and the civil war in Sri Lanka.
Chapter 1 The Globalization of International Relations China Sea, but it has not fought a military battle in 25 years.
IR is a field of political science concerned mainly with explaining political outcomes in international security affairs and international political economy.
Realist Theories O Listen to Chapter 2 at MyPoliSciLab French forces intervene in Mali, 2013.
He showed rulers how to use power to advance their interests and protect their survival.
At roughly the same time, in Greece, Thucydides wrote an account of the Peloponnesian War focusing on relative power among the Greek city-states.
NATO ■ Other Alliances ■ Regional Alignments Strategy ■ Statecraft ■ Rationality ■ The Prisoner's Dilemma Study and Review the Pre-Test & Flashcards at MyPoliSciLab Bardin, Terry, and David R Mapel, eds.
Theories of IR Individual Domestic Levels of Analysis Interstate Realism ' Neorealism Global Liberal Theories Democratic Liberal Institutionalism Peace Constructivist Theories Postmodernist Theories Peace Studies Gender Theories Marxism \ % 5Morgenthau, Hans.
International influPower is the ability to influence the behavior of others.
POWER AS INFLUENCE ence is also gained by forming the rules of behavior to change how others see their own national interests.
Although realists emphasize dominance approaches, they acknowledge that 9Nye, Joseph S., Jr.
Here, United States forces enter Iraq, March 2003. capabilities in the Pacific, In the short term, Japan had superior military power and was able to occupy territories in Southeast Asia while driving United States forces from the region.
Military forces are such a capability — perhaps the most important kind.
Consistent with this thinking, United States spending on foreign 10 Sanger, David.
The International System 49 aid has increased dramatically since the attacks of 9/11 , Morality can contribute to power by increasing the will to use power and by attracting allies.
States have long clothed their actions, however aggressive, in rhetoric about their peaceful and defensive intentions.
For instance, the 1989 U.S, invasion of Panama was named “Operation Just Cause,” Of course, if a state uses moralistic rhetoric to cloak self-interest too often, it loses credibility even with its own population.
But China did not make an issue of it (the plane had not gone into service), and a United States -China summit the next month went forward.
Other scholars find the international system quite enduring in its structure and state units.
States may seek to balance threats rather than raw power; United States power was greater than Soviet power but was less threatening to Europe and Japan .22 Furthermore, small states create variations on power-balancing themes when they play off rival great powers 19 Aydinli, Ersel, and James N Rosenau, eds.
For instance, Cuba during the Cold War received massive Soviet subsidies by putting itself in the middle of the United States -Soviet rivalry.
Other small states may, for domestic reasons, fail to mobilize to balance against threats.
It explains patterns of international events in terms of the system structure — the international distribution of power — rather than in terms of the internal makeup of individual states.
Compared to traditional realism, neorealism is more “scientific” in the sense of proposing general laws to explain events, but neorealism has lost some of the richness of traditional realism, which took account of many complex elements (geography, political will, diplomacy, etc.).29 Recently, neoclassical realists have sought to restore some of these lost aspects.
The polarity of an international power distribution refers to the number of independent power centers in the system.
The International System 57 A multipolar system typically has five or six centers of power, which are not grouped into alliances* Each state participates independently and on relatively equal terms with the others.
In the classical multipolar balance of power, the great power system itself was stable but wars occurred frequently to adjust power relations.
Tripolar systems, with three great centers of power, are fairly rare, owing to the tendency for a two-against-one alliance to form.
The United States -Soviet standoff seemed to provide stability and peace to great power relations, but rival blocs in Europe before World War I did not.
If a challenger does not start a war to displace the top power, the latter may provoke a “preventive” war to stop the rise of the challenger before it becomes too great a threat.
Hegemony Hegemony is one state’s holding a preponderance of power in the international system, allowing it to single-handedly dominate the rules and arrangements by which 31Organski, A F K World Politics.
Britain in the 19th century and the United States after World War II* Britain’s predominance followed the defeat of its archrival France in the Napoleonic Wars.
For instance, China chafed under United States -imposed economic sanctions for 20 years after 1949, at the height of United States power, when China was encircled by United States military bases and hostile alliances led by the United States.
It was founded as a breakaway from the European-based international system, and its growth in the 19th century was based on industrialization and expansion within North America.
Recently, though, opposition to the Iraq War, a protracted conflict in Afghanistan, and difficult economic times at home have spurred a new isolationist trend in the United States.
The 2003 United States -led war in Iraq, with few allies and no UN stamp of approval, marked a peak of United States unilateralism.
PRICE OF HEGEMONY The United States is the world's most powerful single actor.
Its ability and willingness to resume a role as hegemon — as after World War II — are important factors that will shape world order, but the United States role is still uncertain.
In the Concert of Europe that dominated the following decades, the five most powerful states tried, with some success, to cooperate on major issues to prevent war — a possible precedent for today’s UN Security Council.
After a 20-year lull, Germany, Italy, and Japan were defeated in World War II by a coalition of the United States, Britain, France, Russia , and China.
Alliances 65 and to Syria and Egypt in the 1970s could result in a disastrous war with the United States.
NATO At present, two important formal alliances dominate the international security scene.
By far the more powerful is the North Atlantic Treaty Organization , which encompasses Western Europe and North America.
Longtime members France and GerThe NATO alliance has been the world's strongest military force since 1949; its mission in the post-Cold War era is somewhat uncertain.
Here, President Kennedy reviews United States forces in Germany, 1963. many strongly opposed the war, and Turkey refused to let United States ground forces cross into Iraq.
However, the 1999 NATO bombing of Serbia heightened Russian fears regarding NATO’s eastward expansion, as has NATO cooperation with Ukraine and Georgia, the latter of which fought a short war against Russia in 2008.51 In response to NATO expansion, Russia has attempted to expand its own military cooperation with states such as Venezuela, a government critical of United States foreign policy, and China, with whom it has conducted dozens of joint military exercises recently.
ALLIANCE OF THE STRONG Other Alliances The second most important alliance is the United States -Japanese Security Treaty, a bilateral alliance.
In the global South, many states joined a nonaligned movement during the Cold War, standing apart from the United States -Soviet rivalry.
The African Union’s first real test came with allegations of genocide in the Darfur region of Sudan in 2004.
In response, the AU deployed 3,000 troops, joined by a much larger force of UN peacekeepers.
The United States tended to favor the Pakistani side as well, but both United States -Indian and United States -Chinese relations have improved since the Cold War ended.
The main conflict dynamic in the Middle East became the opposition of Shi’ite and Sunni countries, centered on Iran and Saudi Arabia, with the civil war in Syria embodying that split.
The United States has close relations with Egypt and cooperates closely with Turkey , Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, and Morocco.
United States -Iranian relations remain chilled 30 years after the 1979 revolution.
But, oddly, Iran, with its Shi’ite population, has close ties with Iraq’s new United States -backed government, which is dominated by Shi’ite religious parties.
United States relations with Libya were also hostile for decades until a 2003 agreement, and became very friendly after Libya’s United States -backed revolution in 2011.
Explore the Simulation ""You are the Prime Minister of India"" at MyPoliSciLab Strategy 73 Statecraft Classical realists emphasize statecraft — the art of managing state affairs and effectively maneuvering in a world of power politics among sovereign states.
If deterrence works, its effects are almost invisible; its success is measured in attacks that did not occur.
A strategy of compellence, sometimes used after deterrence fails, refers to the threat of force to make another actor take some action (rather than refrain from taking an action).58 Generally, it is harder to get another state to change course is to get it to refrain from changing course (the 56Rohter, Larry.
The arms race process was illustrated vividly in the United States -Soviet nuclear arms race, which created arsenals of tens of thousands of nuclear weapons on each side.
A state’s actions seek to advance its interestsMany realists assume that the actor (usually a state) exercising power is a single entity that can “think” about its actions coherently and make choices.
Game theory was first used extensively in IR in the 1950s and 1960s by scholars trying to understand United States -Soviet nuclear war contingencies.
Reciprocity in Israeli-Palestinian Conflict and Cooperation, 1979-1997 I960 1985 1990 1995 some constructivists emphasize that these norms eventually function without states thinking about self-interest at alL) Thus, for neoliberals the emergence of international institutions is key to understanding how states achieve a superior rational outcome that includes long-term self-interest and not just immediate self-interest.
The current revolution in information technologies is strengthening regimes particularly in this aspect. nKrasner, Stephen D., ed.
Liberal Theories 91 Also, with better international communication, states can identify conflicts and negotiate solutions through regimes more effectively.
In international security affairs, the UN and other IOs provide a stable framework for resolving disputes , IPE is even more institutionalized, again because of the heavier volume of activity and the wealth that can be realized from cooperation.
But the great powers split, and a proposed United States -British resolution authorizing military force was withdrawn after France promised to veto it; Germany, Russia, and China had all strongly opposed it and the war.
South Africa, the last white-ruled African country, adopted majority rule in 1994In the late 1990s, democracy replaced long-standing dictatorships in Indonesia and Nigeria, both regional giants.
Yet, just as shoppers may have limits placed on which music player they can afford to buy , constructivists also recognize that power is not absent from international relations.
Here, the morals police close a barber shop in Iran for giving Western-style haircuts, 2008. example — a continent that was the center of two military conflicts in the first half of the 20th century that killed millions.
It would not be hard to consider such behavior terrorism even CONSTRUCTING IDENTITIES though the pirates had no political goals in their violence.
Even if not terrorism, no one would doubt the costs associated with 25Checkel, Jeffrey.
Although realists contend that states make decisions based on a logic of consequences (“What will happen to me if I behave a certain way?”), constructivist scholars note that there is a powerful logic of appropriateness .26 For example, some cases of humanitarian intervention — military intervention by a state or states to protect citizens or subjects of another state — seem difficult to explain in realist or liberal terms.
Thus, constructivists emphasize that identities and norms must be used to explain this seemingly puzzling behavior.
Research in the constructivist tradition has expanded rapidly in recent years.
Scholars have examined the role of the European Union in socializing elites in new member states31 as well as the role of the United Nations in conferring legitimacy on the use of force as a source of its power.
Because of their literary roots, postmodernists pay special attention to texts and to discourses — how people talk and write about their subject .36 Postmodern critiques of realism thus center on analyzing realists’ words and arguments.
A central idea of postmodernism is that there is no single, objective reality but a multiplicity of experiences and perspectives that defy easy categorization.
The hidden meanings not explicitly addressed in the text are often called the subtext.
Omissions are an aspect of subtext, as when realist theories of IR omit women and gender, for example.
One important class in revolutions during the past century (contrary to Marx’s expectations) has been peasants.
The answer largely shapes how one sees North-South relations today,42 Marxists have mostly (but not exclusively) followed a line of argument developed by V I Lenin, founder of the Soviet Union, before the Russian Revolution of 19 17, 42 Russia was then a relatively backward state, as the global South is today, and most Marxists considered a revolution there unlikely , Lenin’s theory of imperialism argued that European capitalists were investing in colonies where they could earn big profits and then using part of these to buy off the working class at home.
In India at the same time, the movement led by Gandhi used a different means to achieve similar ends — national independence from colonialism, Indonesia threw out the Dutch, Lebanon threw out the French, Cuba threw out the Americans, This pattern was repeated, with variations, in dozens of countries.
Eventually they can generate their own self-sustaining cycles of accumulation and lift themselves out of poverty,44 However, such an approach has not worked well.
Trotsky’s archrival Stalin wanted to build “socialism in one country,” and he prevailed .45 Most third world revolutions since then, including China’s, have had a strongly nationalist flavor.
In Nicaragua, the former communist leader whom United States -organized rebels fought in the 1980s won election as president in 2006.
Peace Studies Peace studies challenges fundamental concepts behind both realism and neoliberalismd6 In particular, peace studies seeks to shift the focus of IR away from the interstate level of analysis and toward a broad conception of social relations at the individual, domestic, and global levels of analysis.
Peace studies also seeks peace not in the transactions of state leaders but in the transformation of entire societies and in transnational communities .47 Another way in which peace studies seeks to broaden the focus of inquiry is to reject the supposed objectivity of traditional approaches.
For example, Pakistan secretly passed messages between China and the United States before the breakthrough in United States -Chinese relations in 1971.
In these roles, the mediator is like the translator between the two sides, or a therapist helping them work out psychological problems in their relationship.
Travel and discussion by private individuals and groups can serve as citizen diplomacy , to ease tensions as well.
Here, demonstrators respond to an outbreak of violence in Belfast, Northern Ireland, 2013.
No state today follows such a strategy, but substate actors do,60 Mahatma Gandhi , who led India’s struggle for independence from the British Empire before 1948, emphasized that nonviolence must be active in seeking to prevent violence, to resolve conflicts without violence, and especially to stand up against injustice enforced violently, Gandhi organized Indians to resist the British colonial occupation without resorting to violence, even when British troops shot down unarmed Indian protesters.
As a tool of the powerless standing up against injustices by the powerful, nonviolence is often the most cost-effective approach — because the costs of violent resistance would be prohibitive,61 In the United States, the philosophy of nonviolence spread widely in the 1960s in the civil rights movement, especially through the work of Martin Luther King, Jr.
One list of “fifty key thinkers” in IR includes four women, three of whom it lists as gender scholars, while none of the 46 males are listed as gender scholars.And when a survey in 2005 listed the 25 most influential IR scholars, all 25 were male.
ROLE REVERSAL Feminist scholars emphasize the importance of gender roles in IR, especially the traditional distinction between males in the political-military roles and females in the domestic-family roles.
In this view, men are inherently the more warlike gender, and women the more peaceful.
Thus, although realism may accurately portray the importance of war and military force in IR as we now know it, this merely reflects the male domination of the international sphere to date — not a necessary, eternal, or inescapable logic of relations among states.
The United States military, with one of the highest proportions of women anywhere in the world or in history, is still 85 percent male.
For liberal feminists, the main effect of this gender imbalance on the nature of IR — that is, apart from effects on the status of women — is to waste talent.
Overall, women state leaders, like men, seem capable of leading in war or in peace as circumstances demand.
In the late 1990s, women began serving on some United States A Women soldiers have performed as well as men in military tasks, as predicted by liberal feminists.
Postmodern feminists criticize liberal feminists for trying merely to integrate women into traditional structures of war and foreign policyThey criticize difference feminists as well, for glorifying traditional feminine virtues.
They argue that women are not just passive bystanders or victims in war, but active participants in a system of warfare tied to both gendersWomen act not only as nurses and journalists at the “front” but as mothers, wives, and girlfriends on the “home front-”85 These scholars believe that stories of military forces should not omit the roles of prostitutes at military bases, nor should stories of diplomacy omit the roles of diplomats’ wives.
Postmodern feminists reject not only realism but also some of the alternative approaches that emphasize the protection of women and other noncombatantsJustwar doctrine is considered too abstract — a set of concepts and rules that does not do justice to the richness of each historical context and the varied roles of individual men and women within it.
United States -Canadian relations seem better explained by liberal institutionalism than by realism.
Decision making is a steering process in which adjustments are made as a result of feedback from the outside world.
First, decision makers suffer from misperceptions and selective perceptions (taking in only some kinds of information) when they compile information on the likely consequences of their choices.
Often they simply FASTEN YOUR SEAT BELTS ignore any information that does not fit their expectations.
Foreign policies often deviate from rationality as a result of the misperceptions and biases of decision makers and populations.
Some Psychological Pitfalls of Decision Making consultations in addition to formal meetings* Some leaders create a “kitchen cabinet” — a trusted group of friends who discuss policy issues with the leader even though they have no formal positions in government* For instance, Israel’s Golda Meir held many such discussions at her home, sometimes literally in the kitchen* Russian president Boris Yeltsin relied on the advice of his bodyguard, who was a trusted friend.
Foreign policy is constrained and shaped by substate actors such as government agencies, political interest groups, and industriesDomestic Influences © Watch the Video ""David Cameron on Corporate Social Responsibility"" at MyPoliSciLab The remainder of this chapter considers other liberal theoretical approaches that, like the democratic peace, operate at the domestic level of analysisThese approaches, in contrast to realism, see international outcomes as the result of processes within states rather than just those among states.
More dramatically, when their interests have been threatened — as during a United States -European trade dispute in 1992 — French farmers have turned out in large numbers across the country to block roads, stage violent street demonstrations, and threaten to grind the national economy to a halt unless the government adopts their position.
In democracies, military industries also influence public opinion through advertising that ties their products to patriotic themes, U,S, military industries also give generous campaign contributions to national politicians who vote on military budgets, and sometimes bribes to Pentagon officials as well.
Governments sometimes adopt foreign policies for the specific purpose of generating public approval and hence gaining domestic legitimacy.
Although executives may attend summits and talks, any agreement they sign must be approved by their domestic legislature.
But in general, IR scholars are less interested in specific policies than in the foreign policy process — how policies are arrived at and implemented.
States establish various organizational structures and functional relationships to create and carry out foreign policies.
Unfortunately, no simple rule has been found to predict a state’s warlike tendencies based on these attributes.
Foreign policy outcomes result from multiple forces at various levels of analysis.
The outcomes depend on individual decision makers, on the type of society and government they are working within, and on the international and global context of their actions.
This chapter will focus on the remaining wars and historical cases to explain the causes of international conflicts.
For instance, the United States -led war against Iraq in 1991 retook the territory of Kuwait but did not go on to Baghdad to topple Saddam Hussein’s government.
The Domestic Level The domestic level of analysis draws attention to the characteristics of states or societies that may make them more or less prone to use violence in resolving conflictsDuring the Cold War, Marxists frequently said that the aggressive and greedy capitalist states were prone to use violence in international conflicts, whereas Western leaders claimed that the expansionist, ideological, and totalitarian nature of communist states made them especially prone to using violenceIn truth, both types of society fought wars regularly.
Likewise, rich industrialized states and poor agrarian ones both use war at timesIn fact, anthropologists have found that a wide range of preagricultural hunter-gatherer societies were much more prone to warfare than today’s societies.
For example, power transition theory holds that conflicts generate large wars at times when power is relatively equally distributed and a rising power is threatening to overtake a declining hegemon in overall positionAt this level, too, competing theories exist that seem incompatibleDeterrence, as we have seen, is supposed to stop wars by building up power and threatening its use.
But the theory of arms races holds that wars are caused, not prevented, by such actionsNo general formula has been discovered to tell us in what circumstances each of these principles holds true.
Ethnic Russians living in Ukraine, and ethnic Ukrainians in Russia, experienced conflictThere are also religious differences between Ukrainian and Russian forms of ChristianityIn addition, the two new states had a territorial dispute over the Crimean peninsula, which Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev had transferred to Ukraine in the 1950s.
Today such conflicts are widespread — in Northern Ireland, Quebec, Israel-Palestine, India-Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Tibet, Sudan, and many other places.
The Netherlands helped establish the principle of self-determination when it broke free of Spanish ownership around 1600 and set up a self-governing Dutch republic.
But in _ locations where millions of members of a single ethnic group live as the majority population in their ancestors’ land, they usually think of themselves as a nation.
Territorial control is closely tied to the aspirations of ethnic groups for statehood.
In the 1990s, rival Kurdish guerrilla armies fought both Ethnic conflicts play a role in many international conflicts.
Some scholars believe that ethnocentrism has roots in a biological propensity to protect closely related individuals, though this idea is controversial.
If killings based on age-old hatreds are inevitable, then inaction by the rest of the world might 28Krause, Jill, and Neil Renwick, eds.
The international community’s ineffective response to the mass murders in Darfur, like that in Rwanda in 1994, shows the limited reach of international norms in today’s state-based international system.
In cases of both genocide and less extreme scapegoating, ethnic hatreds do not merely bubble up naturally.
Each of these actions runs counter to the norms of the international system and to the assumptions of realism.
Some have suggested that international conflicts in the coming years may be generated by a “clash of civilizations” — based on the differences among the world’s major 31 Appleby, R Scott.
The idea RELIGIOUS DIFFERENCES has been criticized for being overly general, and for assuming that cultural differences naturally create conflict.
Many international conflicts around this zone involve Muslims on one side and non-Muslims on the Religious intolerance can exacerbate tensions between groups, sometimes increasing violence, with international implications.
The split played out in devastating violence in Iraq around 2007 and now helps fuel the Syrian civil war . other, as a result of geographical and historical circumstances including colonialism and oil.
In the 1990s, Islamic parties gained ground in Turkey — a secular state in which the military has intervened repeatedly to prevent religious politics — and a former Islamist leader has been prime minister since 2003, making Turkey an important model of moderate Islam in the region.
In several countries, Islamists reject Western-oriented secular states in favor of governments more explicitly oriented to Islamic values-36 These movements reflect long-standing anti-Western sentiment in these countries — against the old European colonizers who were Christian — and are in some ways nationalist movements expressed through religious channelsIn some Middle Eastern countries with authoritarian governments, religious institutions have been the only available avenue for political opposition.
Religion has therefore become a means to express opposition to the status quo in politics and cultureThese anti-Western feelings in Islamic countries came to a boil in 2006 after a Danish newspaper published offensive cartoons depicting 36 Binder, Leonard.
Fanatical Spain Germany France Great Britain United States 50% 43%1 83% 78%1 Not respectful of women Muslims think non-Muslims are: Fanatical Jordan Turkey Egypt Indonesia Pakistan Not respectful of women ^53% 52% Source: Pew Global Attitudes Survey, 2005 and 2010.
In Iran, a popular uprising in 1979 overthrew the United States -backed shah and installed an Islamic government in which the top religious leaders can overturn the laws passed by the parliament.
Iran strongly supports — with money, arms, and training — the Hezbollah militia in Lebanon and the government in SyriaHezbollah runs hundreds of schools, hospitals, and other charities, but is also included on the U-Slist of terrorist organizations.
They adhere to some version of Wahhabism, a fundamentalist interpretation of Islamic law with roots in Saudi ArabiaThe most important center of this fundamentalist movement currently is in Afghanistan and the next-door tribal areas of western PakistanMilitants following the same philosophy are also active across Northern Africa in 2013, notably in Nigeria, Mali, Libya, and SomaliaIn Egypt, a nonviolent Salafi party did well in 2012 elections, although they lost the presidential election to an Islamist who follows a less stringent interpretation of Islam.
Centered in the Gaza Strip, Hamas sent suicide bombers who killed hundreds of Israelis after 2000, then won In some Muslim-populated countries, Islam is a political rallying point — especially in authoritarian countries in which the mosque is a rare permitted gathering point.
For realists, ideological differences IDEOLOGICAL SPLIT among states do not matter much, because all members of the international system pursue their national interests in the context of relatively fluid alliances.
But the alliances and miliIdeology plays only a limited role in most international conflicts.
For example, after Israel and Egypt made peace in 38 Walt, Stephen M Revolution and War.
In this way, threats to peace are actively dealt with by the community as a whole.
The Indian-held part of Kashmir is predominantly inhabited by Muslims, a group that is the majority in Pakistan but a minority in India, A Line of Control divides the disputed province, Pakistan accuses India of oppressing Kashmiris and thwarting an international agreement to decide Kashmir’s future by a popular referendum, India accuses Pakistan of aiding and infiltrating Islamic radicals who carry out attacks in Indianoccupied Kashmir.
The pro-Russian incumbent carried the eastern region and was declared the winner after an election that international monitors declared unsound, Russian president Vladimir Putin had personally campaigned with him, and strongly opposed letting Ukraine — a former part of the Soviet Union — come under the influence of the West, Meanwhile, the pro-Western candidate was poisoned during the campaign, but survived.
The Soviet Union did this in Czechoslovakia in 1968; the United States did so in Iraq in 2003, People generally resent having foreigners choose their government for them — even if they did not like the old government — and the international community frowns on such overt violations of national sovereignty.
The theory has been used to help explain both World War I and the expansion of Japan prior to World War II.42 Another kind of economic conflict that affects international security concerns military industry — the capacity to produce military equipment, especially high-technology weapons such as fighter aircraft or missiles.
Soviet founder V I Lenin portrayed World War I as a fight over the imperialists’ division of the world.
In Mexico, a major supplier of illegal drugs to the next-door United States, deadly violence among drug gangs spiraled out of control in the past decades, claiming tens of thousands of lives.
ARGUMENT 1 Overview When the Cold War ended in the years between 1989 and 1991, observers hoped for a new age of United States -Russian cooperation.
Where their interests converge, as in the war against Islamic extremists in Afghanistan, United States -Russian cooperation works smoothly.
Controlling Territory ■ Naval Forces: Controlling the Seas ■ Air Forces: Controlling the Skies ■ Coordinating Forces: Logistics and Intelligence ■ Evolving Technologies Terrorism Weapons of Mass Destruction ■ Nuclear Weapons ■ Ballistic Missiles and Other Delivery Systems ■ Chemical and Biological Weapons ■ Proliferation ■ Nuclear Strategy and Arms Control Conventional Irregular Weapons of Forces Forces Mass Destruction Conventional armed force is the most commonly used military form of leverage.
An army’s supplies must flow from home territory along supply lines to the fieldThus the most fundamental purpose of conventional forces is to take, hold, or defend territory.
Armies are adapted to this purposeMilitary forces with armed foot soldiers can occupy a territory militarily.
Controlling the seas in wartime allows states to move their own goods and military forces by sea while preventing enemies from doing so.
Marines move to battle in ships but fight on land — amphibious warfare.
In cases of low-intensity conflicts and guerrilla wars, especially where forces intermingle with civilians in closed terrain such as Vietnamese jungles or Iraqi cities, bombing is of limited utility — although it was extremely effective in Afghanistan in 2001.
The United States continues to invest heavily in its own air force, creating new technologies to stay ahead of Chinese advancesAnd while air power may be less useful in small-scale warfare, states continue to build their air forces in the event of more largescale conflicts.
Logistics and Intelligence All military operations rely heavily on logistical support such as food, fuel, and ordnance Military logistics is a huge operation, and in most armed forces the majority of soldiers are not combat troops.
Global-reach capabilities combine long-distance logistical support with various power-projection forces.
These capabilities allow a great power to project military power to distant corners of the world and to maintain a military presence in most of the world’s regions simultaneously.
Ballistic missiles, which travel through space briefly, are not generally included in this category.
In 2010, the United States -Israeli Stuxnet virus targeted Iran’s nuclear centrifuges, and in 2012, the Flame virus was found on thousands of computers across the Middle East, mostly in Iran.
The September 2001 attackers used information technology, such as encrypted Internet communications, to coordinate forces while keeping U.S* authorities in the dark* They carried out precision strikes over long distances with very small, dispersed units* As a result, 19 attackers killed nearly 3,000 people, and an expenditure of under $1 million caused tens of billions of dollars in damage* The information revolution is making smaller weapons and smaller dispersed units more potent.
In Chapter 5 we discussed conflicts involving armed Islamist militias and terrorist networks* Here we discuss terrorism itself as a tactic* Since September 2001, governments and ordinary people have paid much more attention to terrorism than ever before* But terrorism itself is not new.
Counterterrorism Just as the methods used by terrorists have become more diverse over the past decades, so have the policies implemented to prevent terrorist incidentsDebates over how to best prevent terrorist attacks are often heated since there are also debates about why individuals engage in terrorist attacks in the first place.
States may undertake smallor large-scale conflicts to counter terrorist organizationsIn 1998, the United States launched cruise missile strikes against a plant in Sudan believed to be producing chemical weapons for al Qaeda, but turned out to be making infant formulaIn addition, the U-S. -led war in Afghanistan was a response to the 9/11 attacks on the United States.
Of course, nearly every state that undertakes counterterrorism policies uses some combination of these methodsIn the United States, for example, foreign aid is often justified in terms of assisting development and economic growth to decrease the possibility that the poor and uneducated can be easily drafted into terrorist organizationsThe FBI and local law enforcement cooperate with many international partners to track and ASYMMETRICAL CONFLICT Terrorist attacks often reflect the weakness of the perpetrators and their lack of access to other means of leverage.
But NUKE IN A BOX North Korea, Iran, Iraq, and Libya all built the infrastructure to do so in Nuclear weapons were invented during World War II and used on two Japanese cities in 1945.
In 2009, Iran alarmed the West by testing a missile that could reach Egypt, Israel, and parts of EuropeIn 2012, North Korea, evidently in cooperation with Iran, successfully tested a long-range missile capable of transcontinental distances.
Chemical and Biological Weapons A chemical weapon releases chemicals that disable and kill people.
The chemicals vary from lethal ones such as nerve gas to merely irritating ones such as tear gas.
In 2001, the United States pulled out of talks to strengthen the 1972 treaty, declaring the proposed modifications unworkable. and Britain) admitted to having secret Civilians are more vulnerable to chemical weapons than soldiers are.
Researchers try to ascertain the military implications of advances in biotechnology,22 Proliferation Proliferation is the spread of weapons of mass destruction — nuclear weapons, ballistic missiles, and chemical or biological weapons — into the hands of more actors.
Nuclear proliferation could occur simply by a state or nonstate actor’s buying (or stealing) one or more nuclear weapons or the components to build one.
As broader political unrest occurs in other nuclear states, notably Pakistan, thoughts often turn toward the safety of nuclear weapons and materials.
Here, larger numbers of weapons are involved and strong potentials exist for arms races in regional conflicts and rivalries.
The relevant regional conflicts are those between Israel and the Arab states, Iran and its Arab neighbors, India and Pakistan,28 the two Koreas, and possibly Taiwan and China.
India and Pakistan each have dozens of nuclear weapons and the missiles to deliver them.
However, the mission soon shifted to defending some United States missiles in a massive Soviet attack.
Japan is spending $1 billion a year to build a United States -designed missile defense system, which it tested successfully in late 2007.
World military spending is a vast flow of money that could, if redirected to other purposes, change the world profoundly and improve major world problems.
Of course, “the world” does not spend this money or choose how to direct it; states do.
In late 2001, United States special forces were traveling with Hamid Karzai, believed at the time to be the only person who could lead a united, United States -allied Afghan government.
CIA covert activities were sharply scaled back after congressional hearings in the 1970s revealed scandals* After September 2001, the executive branch enjoyed greater authority in conducting covert operations with less congressional scrutiny* Overall, states face complex choices regarding the configuration of their military forces in the post-Cold War era* Not only have the immediate contingencies and threats changed drastically, but the nature of threats in the new era is unclear* Perhaps most important, world order itself is evolving even as military technologies do.
The next chapter discusses the evolving structures and norms governing international political relations and how they are changing the nature of world order* 47Feaver, Peter D and Christopher Gelpi.
These institutions have proliferated rapidly in recent decades, and continue to play an increasing role in international affairs* International organizations include intergovernmental organizations such as the UN, and nongovernmental organizations such as the International Committee of the Red Cross.
Both in today’s world and historically, sects of Christianity, Islam, Buddhism, Judaism, Hinduism, and other world religions have organized themselves across state borders, often in the face of hostility from one or more national governments.
Missionaries have deliberately built and nurtured these transnational links.
The Catholic Church historically held a special position in the European international system, especially before the 17th century.
NGOs with broad purposes and geographical scope often maintain observer status in the UN so that they can participate in UN meetings about issues of concern.
A web of international organizations of various sizes and types now connects people in all countries.
The rapid growth of this network, and the increasingly intense communications and interactions that occur within it, indicate rising international interdependence.
The United Nations © Watch the Video ""UN Aid in Somalia"" at MyPoliSciLab The UN System The UN is a relatively new institution, just over 60 years old.
The UN and other international organizations have both strengths and weaknesses in the anarchic international system.
But as newly independent states began to predominate, the United States found itself in the minority on many issues, and by the 1970s and 1980s it had become the main user of the veto.Until 1971, China’s seat on the Security Council was occupied by the nationalist government on the island of Taiwan, which had lost power in mainland China in 1949.
Throughout the Cold War, the UN had few successes in international security because the United States -Soviet conflict prevented consensus.
This United States free riding shows that support of intergovernmental organizations presents a difficult collective goods problem , Finally, after criticism from allies, the United States agreed to pay up, but under renegotiated terms for the future.
When France threatened to veto a UN resolution authorizing war, a United States -British coalition toppled the Iraqi government without explicit UN backing.
To further aggravate United States -UN tensions, documents recovered during the Iraq War showed that high-ranking UN, French, Chinese, and Russian officials (and American oil companies) illegally profited from the UN’s $64 billion oil-for-food program for Iraq, which was supposed to ease the civilian suffering caused by economic sanctions in the 1990s.
Military actions notapproved by the Council — such asthe 1999 bombing of Serbia and the 2003 United States -British invasion of Iraq — tend to be controversial.
As UN peacekeeping has become more intensive in recent years, new missions have expanded the range of what are now called broadly peace operations.
Its regional commissions look at how UN programs work together in a particular region; its functional commissions deal with global topics such as population growth, narcotics trafficking, human rights, and the status of women; and its expert bodies ASSEMBLY OF EQUALS The universal membership of the United Nations is one of its strengths.
HELPING WHERE NEEDED An array of UN programs, operating under the General Assembly, aim to help countries in the global South to overcome social and economic problems.
And gradually the rules are becoming international laws* International Law ^ Watch the Video ""Global Governance and the ICC"" at MyPoliSciLab International law, unlike national laws, derives not from actions of a legislative branch or other central authority, but from tradition and agreements signed by states* It also differs in the difficulty of enforcement, which depends not on the power and authority of central government but on reciprocity, collective action, and international norms.
Although we do not know how much mischief goes on in diplomatic pouches , it is safe to OUT OF REACH International law prohibits attacks on diplomats and embassies.
Just war doctrine has been undermined, even more seriously than have laws of war crimes, by the changing nature of warfare.
Human Rights One of the newest areas of international law concerns human rights — the rights of human beings against certain abuses of their own governments.
Of course, criticisms of these ideas of human rights exist, on both a theoretical and a practical level Theoretically, relativists point out that much of the origin and development of human rights ideas are Western in origin.
Economic-social rights are referred to as “positive rights” and include rights to good living conditions, food, health care, social security, and education.
These rights are often held to be best promoted by the expansion of governments to provide minimal standards to their people.
When the United States criticizes China for prohibiting free speech, using prison labor, and torturing political dissidents , China notes that the United States has 40 million poor people, the highest ratio of prison inmates in the world, and a history of racism and violence .26 During the Cold War, the United States and its allies consistently criticized the Soviet Union and China for violations of civil-political rights, yet refused to endorse treaties championing economic-social rights.
Unlike the UDHR, these treaties are legally binding contracts signed by statesOf course, international law is only as good as the enforcement mechanisms behind it.
The remaining treaties each deal with a particular group that the international community considers vulnerable.
The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women , however, fills this void by banning discrimination against women, CEDAW entered into force in 1981.
Free trade agreements frequently contain provisions that condition trade benefits on the respect for human rights, especially workers’ rights.
Because these treaties provide policies beneficial to the developing states, they create a ready mechanism to punish countries who abuse their citizens.
The leading organization pressing this struggle is Amnesty International, an NGO that operates globally to monitor and try to rectify glaring abuses of human rights.
Amnesty International has a reputation for impartiality and has criticized abuses in many countries, including the United States.
NGOs often provide information and advocacy for UN and other regional organizations.
Through a process some scholars have dubbed “naming and shaming,” supporters of human rights hope that publicity will embarrass the regime and change its behavior.
In addition, the United States has pressured many ICC member states to sign immunity agreements (known as Bilateral Immunity Agreements or BIA) to protect American soldiers serving in those countries from prosecutionIn 2005, after several ICC members refused to sign a BIA, Congress voted to cut foreign aid to those statesUnited States leaders are concerned that American soldiers, serving in peacekeeping missions or in NATO allies, will fall under the jurisdiction of the ICC rather than under the American military’s own justice system.
Under the ICC, individuals can be prosecuted for their roles in violations of human rightsThree mechanisms can trigger an ICC trial.
It is hoped that the ICC, more than prosecuting every individual case of war crimes, will also serve to deter potential violators of these norms under the threat of potential prosecution under the ICC.43 The most important principle in the laws of war is the effort to limit warfare to the combatants and to protect civilians.
Exchanges of POWs are usually negotiated through the ICRC* Armed forces must respect the neutrality of the Red Cross, and usually do so * In the current war on terrorism, the United States does not consider the “enemy combatants” it detains to be POWs, but has granted the ICRC access to most of them.
More controversial is the U*S* policy called “extraordinary rendition,” which lets terrorist suspects captured overseas be transferred to other countries, including some that use torture, for questioning* The laws of warfare impose moral responsibility on individuals in wartime, as well as on states* The Nuremberg Tribunal established that participants can be held accountable for war crimes they commit.
German officers defended their actions as “just following orders,” but this was rejected; the officers were punished, and some executed, for their war crimes* Not all Nuremberg defendants were found guilty, however* For example, laws of war limit the use of force against civilians to what is necessary and proportional to military objectives.
The AU Explore the Simulation ""You are Egypt's Representative to the UN"" at MyPoliSciLab has called for the ICC to suspend all ICC proceedings relating to Darfur, and the Arab League has condemned the indictment of al-Bashir.
They distinguish combatants from civilians, giving each certain rights and responsibilities.
Scholars of international political economy thus study the politics of international economic activities.
One approach, called mercantilism, generally shares with realism the belief that each state must protect its own interests at the expense of others — not relying on international organizations to ^ata in this chapter are calculated from World Trade Organization statistics.
Marxism is often treated as a third theoretical/ideological approach to IPE, along with mercantilism and liberalism * Marxist approaches are attuned to economic exploitation as a force that shapes political relations.
When there are multiple buyers and sellers of a good (or equivalent goods that can be substituted for it), prices are determined by market competition.
In practice, free markets are supposed to produce stable patterns of buying and selling at a fairly uniform price.
Balance of Trade with a crisis or fight a war, the state sits on a pile of money representing potential power.
Historically, mercantilism literally meant stockpiling gold (gained from running a trade surplus) as a fungible form of power , Such a strategy is attuned to realism’s emphasis on relative power and is an example of the dominance principle.
Also, the benefits and costs of trade tend to be unevenly distributed within a state.
By one estimate, a 20 percent steel tariff enacted by the Bush administration in 2002-2003 cost consumers $7 billion and saved 7,300 United States jobs — a pricey $326,000 per job.
Yet those 7,300 workers benefit greatly, whereas the roughly $20 cost per United States citizen goes unnoticed.
No world government owns industries, provides subsidies, or regulates pricesNonetheless, world markets are often affected by politicsWhen states are the principal actors in international economic affairs, the number of participants is often small.
States that have relied on a policy of autarky have indeed lagged behind othersA classic case in recent decades was the small state of Albania in southeast EuropeA communist state that split from both the Soviet Union and China, Albania for decades did not participate in world markets but relied on a centrally planned economy designed for self-sufficiency.
Few foreigners could visit, little trade took place, and Albania pursued autarky to prevent outsiders from gaining power over itWhen this curtain of isolation finally fell in 1991, Albania was as poor as decades earlier and had missed out on the prosperity that came to the rest of Europe.
China’s experience also illustrates the problems with autarkyChina’s economic isolation in the 1950s and 1960s, resulting from an economic embargo imposed by the United States and its allies, deepened during its Cultural Revolution in the late 1960s when it broke ties with the Soviet Union as wellIn that period, China rejected all things foreign.
When China opened up to the world economy in the 1980s, the pattern reversedThe rapid expansion of trade, along with some market-oriented reforms in its domestic economy, resulted in rapid economic growthBy contrast, North Korea maintained a policy of self-reliance and isolation even after the Cold War, and experienced mass starvation in the 1990s.
KING COTTON Protectionism uses various means to keep foreign imports from competing with domestic products.
American manufacturers complain that the subsidies given to the EU-based company make it difficult for them to compete since the subsidies allow the European company to place a lower bid.
Preferences amount to a promise by rich states to allow imports from poor ones under lower tariffs than those imposed under MFN.19 The WTO continues the GATT’s role as a negotiating forum for multilateral trade agreements that lower trade barriers on a fair and reciprocal basis.
Although the rough outlines of a new GATT agreement emerged after a few years, closure eluded five successive G7 summit meetings in 1990-1994.
They have the advantages of reducing the collective goods problem inherent in multilateral negotiations and facilitating reciprocity as a means to achieve cooperation.
When WTO negotiations bog down, bilateral agreements can keep trade momentum going.
But despite these problems, in 2007 the ten ASEAN countries met with China, Japan, India, Australia, and New Zealand to begin negotiating an East Asian free trade area* The group, unlike some other Asia-Pacific IGOs, does not include the United States, but it does include half the world’s population and some of its most dynamic economies* 22 Hakim, Peter, and Robert E Litan, eds.
Ultimately, regional agreements might divide the world into three competing trading blocs, each internally integrated but not very open to the other two blocs* Regional free trade areas in Europe and the Americas, and perhaps in Asia in the future, raise the possibility of trading zones practicing liberalism inwardly and mercantilism outwardly* Cartels A cartel is an association of producers or consumers, or both, of a certain product — formed to manipulate its price on the world market.
It is an unusual but interesting form of trade regime* Most often producers and not consumers form cartels, because there are usually fewer producers than consumers, and it seems possible for them to coordinate to keep prices high.
In many countries, government not only responds to industry influence, but works actively with industries to promote their growth and tailor trade policy to their needs* Such industrial policy is especially common in states where one or two industries are crucial to the entire economy .25 24Rothgeb, John M., Jr.
Several industries are particularly important in trade negotiations currently* Atop the list is the agricultural sector* Traditionally, agriculture has been protected since self-sufficiency in food reduces national vulnerability (especially in time of war)* Although such security concerns have now faded somewhat, farmers are wellorganized and powerful domestic political actors in Europe, the United States, Japan, and other countries* For instance, Japanese farmers argue that Japan’s rice-centered culture demands self-sufficiency in rice production.
It is technically easy and cheap to copy such works and sell them in violation of Agriculture is at the top of the agenda of international trade negotiations, as developing countries push richer onesto end farm subsidies.
If one state protects its industries, or puts tariffs on the goods of other states, or violates the copyright on works produced in other countries, the main resort that other states have is to apply similar measures against the offending state* The use of reciprocity to enforce equal terms of exchange is especially important in international trade, in which states often negotiate complex agreements — commodity by commodity, industry by industry — based on reciprocity.
Overall, despite some loss of state sovereignty as a result of growing interdependence, these efforts have benefited participating states* Stable political rules governing trade allow states to realize the great economic gains that can result from international exchange* Economic Globalization We introduced the process of globalization in Chapter 1 in general terms, and will now consider some specifically economic aspects of globalization.
The expansion of trade is a central aspect of globalization in the international political economy, but hardly the only one* Globalization is transforming not only trade but money, business, integration, communication, environmental management, and the economic development of poor countries — the subjects of the remaining chapters of this book* Today’s accelerating pace of economic activity grows out of a long history of world economic expansion, which serves as the foundation for globalization.
By the outset of the 20th century, however, the world’s largest and most advanced economy was no longer Britain but the United States, The industrialization of the U,S, economy was fueled by territorial expansion throughout the 19th century, adding vast natural resources.
The U,S, economy attracted huge pools of immigrant labor from Europe as well.
Study and Review the Post-Test & Chapter Exam at MyPoliSciLab These examples illustrate the variety of sources of backlash against free trade agreements.
The United States ranked near the bottom in the survey, with 65 percent supporting trade.
The benefits of free trade, as noted earlier, are much more diffuse than the costs.
UNSETTLING CHANGES imported gasoline, claiming that regulations under the Clean Air Act were functioning as nontariff barriers.
It allows for the possibility of better returns on investment for individuals investing for college tuition or retirement, But as we have witnessed in the past two years, financial integration also carries risks.
Such was the case in 2008, As an economic downturn began in the United States, many Americans who had taken out loans on their homes found themselves unable to pay these loans back.
Several large U,S, banks then announced that they were on the verge of failing because they had too much money tied up in these bad home loans.
Several British banks then announced they were near bankruptcy, The U.S, government responded with a rescue package of $800 billion to help shore up failing banks, Britain also created a rescue package of nearly $450 billion.
You Are a Foreign Market Analyst"" at MyPoliSciLab Nearly every state prints its own money.
Most exchange rates are expressed in terms of the world’s most important currencies — the United States dollar, the Japanese yen, and the EU’s euro.
China has kept its currency pegged to the U*S. dollar for years, even as economic conditions in the two countries have diverged and a huge trade imbalance developed.
Such losses reduce the trust people place in the currency* As a result, demand for the currency drops, even at the new lower rate* Investors become wary of future devaluations, and indeed such devaluations often follow one after another in unstable economies.
In the first three weeks of 2009, Russia devalued its ruble six times after the price of its main export, oil, plummeted* A currency may be devalued by being allowed to float freely after a period of fixed exchange rates, often bringing a single sharp drop in values* In general, any sharp or artificial change PRICES SUBJECT TO CHANGE Changes in the value of the dollar — reflecting underlying trends in United States and foreign economies as well as governments' monetary policies — directly affect the prices of imported goods such as gasoline, here dropping in 2012.
The United States has blamed the undervalued yuan for costing Amer0 Explore the Simulation ""You are CEO of a Multinational Corporation"" at MyPoliSciLab ica 1. million jobs, and the 2012 American presidential election featured recurrent ""China bashing,"" further exacerbating political tensions.
The economists and technical experts who run the central bank seek to maintain the value of the state’s currency by limiting the amount of money printed and not allowing high inflation.
The World Bank works to stabilize and develop economies in poor and middle-income countries.
These changes in reserves consist of the state’s purchases and sales of SDRs, gold, and hard currencies other than its own, and changes in its deposits with the IMF, If a state has more money flowing out than in, it gets that money from its reserves.
The net worth of the state or business will decrease* Failure to repay debts makes it hard to borrow in the future, a huge impediment to economic growth* When debts become unpayable, the lenders (banks and governments) have to write them off the books or settle them at a fraction of their official value* In 2001, when Argentina collapsed under more than $100 billion of debt accumulated over the prior decade , creditors had to accept less than onethird of their money in a 2005 restructuring deal.
One major reason is a trade deficit* In the balance of payments, a trade deficit must somehow be made up* It is common to borrow money to pay for a trade deficit* A second reason is the income and consumption pattern among households and businesses.
The credit card they use may be from a local bank, but that bank may be getting the money it lends to them from foreign lenders* A third reason for national debt is government spending relative to taxation* Under the principles of Keynesian economics (named for economist John Maynard Keynes), governments sometimes spend more on programs than they take in from tax revenue — deficit spending — to stimulate economic growth.
In 2004, Russia’s largest oil company was shut down by President Vladimir Putin because of nonpayment of a $10 billion tax bill, only to have its assets purchased by a state-owned business* The state has consolidated its control of major companies and the media again, using its powers to put the “plutocrats” under its control or push them aside.
Since a financial crisis in 1998, Russia has registered strong economic growth and reduced runaway inflation to less than 10 percent a year* In recent years, high oil prices have helped Russia to pay off debts and build large foreign reserves* Incomes are rising and poverty shrinking.
Despite the example of Japan’s financial system, these mistakes were repeated almost exactly in the 1990s by other countries of East and Southeast Asia* Real estate and stocks became overvalued as rapid economic growth led to speculation and ever-rising expectations* Banks made massive bad loans based on the overvalued assets and got away with it because of political corruption and cronyism.
Authorities opened this toy-testing lab in response, 2007. eral of them.
The role of MNCs in international political relations is complex and in some dispute.
Some scholars see MNCs as virtually being agents of their home national governments.
This view resonates with mercantilism, in which economic activity ultimately serves political authorities; thus MNCs have clear national identities and act as members of their national society under state authority.
The head of Dow Chemical once said he dreamed of buying an island beyond any state’s territory and putting Dow’s world headquarters there.
In such a view, MNCs act globally in the interests of their (international) stockholders and owe loyalty to no state.
Investments in the manufacturing sector usually entail the greatest investment in fixed facilities and in training workers and managers* Investments in the service sector tend to be less expensive and easier to walk away from if conditions change.
In developing countries, foreign direct investment often evokes concerns about a loss of sovereignty, because governments may be less powerful than the MNCs that invest in their country* These fears also reflect the historical fact that most foreign investment in the global South once came from colonizers.
For example, if a host government takes an MNC’s property without compensation or arrests its executives, the home government may step in to help the MNC.18 Because host governments can regulate activities on their own territories, an MNC cannot operate in a state against the wishes of its government.
Another source of conflict is the trade policies of the host governmentGovernment restrictions on trade seldom help foreign MNCs; more often they help the host country’s own industries — which often directly compete with foreign MNCsIronically, although they favor global free trade, MNCs may funnel direct investment to states that restrict imports, because MNCs can avoid the import restrictions by producing goods in the host country (rather than exporting from the home country)Trade restrictions are thus another form of leverage that states have in luring foreign direct investment.
Monetary policy also leads to conflicts between MNCs and host governmentsWhen a state’s currency is devalued, imports suddenly become more expensiveA foreign MNC selling an imported product in the host Foreign direct investment is often sought by host governments because it stimulates employment and economic growth, though at wages that home countries would not tolerate.
THE CHILDREN BEHIND THE CHOCOLATE International business prospers in stable political environments in host countries, but the relationship of a host country with an investing MNC can be complex.
In the 1990s, the United States -based Conoco oil company agreed to a billion-dollar oil development project in Iran, just when the United States government was trying to isolate Iran as a rogue state.
Corporate alliances involving MNCs often have international implications.
Such a shift in sovereignty to the supranational level would probably entail some version of federalism, in which states or other political units recognize the sovereignty of a central government while retaining certain powers 1 RisseivKappen, Thomas, ed.
Other modest examples of the integration process have been encountered in previous chapters — for example, NAFTA and the WTO* But these arrangements hardly challenge states’ territorial integrity and usually challenge political sovereignty on only a handful of issues * The most successful example of the process of integration by far — though even that success is only partial — is the European Union.
That Western European states began forming supranational institutions and creating an economic community to promote free trade and coordinate economic policies caught the attention of IR scholars, who used the term integration to describe what they observed* Seemingly, integration challenged the realist assumption that states were strictly autonomous and would never yield power or sovereignty* Integration processes in Europe and elsewhere are making state borders more permeable to people, goods, and ideas — increasing interdependence.
The European experience, however, went beyond the creation of specialized agencies to include the development of more general, more political supranational bodies, such as the European Parliament, Neofunctionalism is a modification of functional theory by IR scholars to explain these developments.
The new wave of integration in Europe and elsewhere encountered limits and setbacks.
Today the European Free Trade Association is an extended free trade area associated with the European Union; its members are Norway, Iceland, Liechtenstein, and Switzerland* In a customs union, participating states adopt a unified set of tariffs with regard to goods coming in from outside the free trade area.
A common market means that in addition to the customs union, member states allow labor and capital (as well as goods) to flow freely across borders.
PLANTING POLITICAL SEEDS Under the free trade area first created by the 1957 Treaty of Rome, goods can move freely across European borders to reach consumers in any member country.
For instance, professionals licensed in one state should be free to practice in another, but Spain’s licensing requirements for, say, physical therapists may have differed from those of BritainThe Commission bureaucrats worked to smooth out such inconsistencies and create a uniform set of standardsEach national government had to pass laws to implement these measures.
The struggle between nationalism and supranationalism seems precariously balanced between the two; the transition to supranationalism has not yet been accomplished in the realms of sovereignty and foreign and military policy.
As the new members joined the EU since 2004, the ability of the EU to reach decisions by consensus became more complicated, a point underscored by Slovakia’s single-handed veto of a massive euro bailout briefly in 2011.
The working time required to make decisions in the Council of the European Union expanded, with potential conflicts and alliances on a particular issue among 28 rather than 15 members.
A new position called the High Commissioner on Foreign Affairs and Security Policy was created IMPERFECT UNION The European Union added 12 members, mostly from Eastern Europe, in 2004 and 2007.
Recently, when France held the EU presidency, it demanded delays of Turkey's accession talks. m -Vj a! 1 -V M M, * ,J H arbeitgeber nrw DOMESTIC CONSIDERATIONS Turkish membership in the EU is not popular domestically.
Telephone and Internet Even more empowering of ordinary citizens are telephones and the InternetThese are two-way media through which users interact among themselves without a centralized information sourceIn 2012, the world had 6 billion cell phone subscriptions, almost as many as people and far outnumbering the 1. billion landlines.
Surprisingly, one of the most politically important features of these technologies turned out to be the cell phone cameraIt has empowered ordinary citizens to create visual records, such as videos of political demonstrations in one country that end up on TV in another countryIn the 2011-2012 Arab Spring revolutions, especially in Syria, cell phone videos played a critical role in winning support by showing governments brutally murdering citizens.
In one notable African success, Kenya has become the world’s leader in using cell phones for bankingThe country has 10 million banking transactions daily , but half the population lacks a bank account, so entrepreneurs developed the M-Pesa mobile payment system.
Russia, China, and others saw the Internet as a system of government-controlled networks, while the United States and others, including Google and various NGOs, saw it as a more amorphous entity to facilitate the free flow of information.
This gap, along with the gap in access to information technologies within countries, is known as the digital divide.
The North-South Digital Divide, 1994-2010 Fixed Phone Lines Cell Phone Subscribers Internet Users As the Internet wires parts of the world into a tight network centered on the United States, Europe, and East Asia — where most Web users live — other regions are largely left out.
Since 2007, the One Laptop Per Child project has been mass-producing an inexpensive Web-capable wireless personal computer, priced at $200.21 The computers, designed 19 Data on information access are from the International Telecommunication Union unless otherwise noted.
In Ghana, very popular talk shows on private FM radio programs — allowed after 1995 — gave voice to ordinary people who then threw out the ruling party in 2000.
One United States group (moveon. org) used a Web site to schedule protesters’ phone calls to their congressional representatives every minute of one day, the kind of coordinated action that would have required a large staff and budget in the past (moveon.org had a staff of four at the time).25 To counteract such uses of information, governments throughout the world try to limit the flow of unfavorable information — especially information from foreign sources.
Later, Google compromised with the Chinese government, angering some United States critics.
United States secretary of state Hillary Clinton has been active at promoting Internet freedom as a core human right on her visits to countries that limit Internet access.
Capabilities such as fiberoptic cables or satellite communications serve governments in conducting their foreign and military policies Nonstate actors such as terrorist organizations have also harbored the power of cellular phones and the Internet to recruit operatives, raise money, and coordinate attacks — even to detonate improvised explosive devices remotely with a cell phone’s ring triggering the bomb when called.
States do not control the global flow of information, which has become a potent force in world politics.
The Olympics (run by the International Olympic Committee, an NGO) is a global event with a worldwide audience.
The United States -Chinese rapprochement of 1971 was so delicate that political cooperation was impossible until the way had first been paved by sports — the United States table tennis team that made the first official United States visit to China.
It is the biggest experiment with money in history and had great success in its first years but hit a crisis in 2010-2013 over members’ debts* A monetary union requires roughly comparable inflation rates and financial stability in participating states.
However, the Council of the European Union representing member states has power over the Commission* ■ The European Parliament has members directly elected by citizens in EU states, but it has few powers and cannot legislate the rules for the community.
Regimes are an important part of the solution , providing rules based on the reciprocity principle to govern bargaining over who gets the benefits and bears the costs of environmental protection.
The first UN conference on the international environment took place in Stockholm, Sweden, in 1972.
The concept applies to both the industrialized regions and the global South.
KlM\ Developing countries such as China rely heavily on coal and other dirty technologies for the energy and raw materials they need.
The greenhouse gases are carbon dioxide , methane gas, chlorofluorocarbons , and nitrous oxide.
United Nations Environment Program Northern Sea Route miles Canal Route 13,000 miles 9 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
A New Climate Treaty BACKGROUND: The prevention of global warming is a collective good that affects the entire world but results from the actions of the world’s states individually* Those affected most actually will be those least responsible for causing it* Weather disasters such as the 2010 catastrophic floods in Pakistan would become more common if the world does not address the problem effectively.
Thus the international community has not yet been able to address the very serious problem of global warming* Major players such as the United States did not ratify the Kyoto Protocol, and the world’s output of greenhouse gases has not slowed.
Countries of the global North and global South differed on their approaches* Agreement proved elusive* A deadline came and went.
Such states can benefit economically from exploiting the forests — freely cutting lumber, clearing land for agriculture, and mining.
Until recently , leaders of rich states have been most interested in encouraging maximum economic growth in poor states so that foreign debts could be paid — with little regard for environmental damage.
You Are an Environmental Consultant"" at MyPoliSciLab 22Polgreen, Lydia, and Marlise Simons.
The importance of oil in the industrialized economies helps explain the political importance of the Middle East in world politics.
Not only is energy a crucial economic sector , but it is also one of the most politically sensitive because of the dependence of the West on energy imported from the Middle East and the rest of the global South.
The United States did not claim colonies or protectorates, but United States MNCs were heavily involved in the development of oil resources in the area from the 1920s through the 1960s — often wielding vast power.
These United States and European oil companies kept the price paid to local states low and their own profits high, yet local rulers depended on the expertise and capital investment of these companies.
Thus, the dominance principle comes into play in resolving conflicts over natural resources.
One side of this relationship is the role of the environment as a source of international conflict.
But in nearly 70 other poor states, death rates kept falling faster than birthrates, leading to accelerating population growth.
China has started to encourage wealthy and more educated families to have two children, and now, in some Chinese cities such as Shanghai, couples are allowed two-child families.
RUB AND TUB Because of the demographic transition, controlling population growth helps economic development and vice versa.
As a result, 60 percent of China’s population has had hepatitis B, compared with 1 percent in the United States and Japan — a danger sign for the future growth of HIV in China.
An international campaign has increased the use of iodized salt from 25 percent of households worldwide in 1990 to 66 percent in 2006.38 Epidemics among animals have major effects as well.
In 2001, tobacco companies with some United States support sought to weaken a new proposed treaty, the Framework Convention on Tobacco Control, but in 2003, the United States dropped its objections and WHO member states adopted the treaty, which entered into force in 2005.
Everyone agrees, however, that much of the global South is poor, and some of it extremely poor.
In all, about a billion people live in abject poverty, without access to basic nutrition or health care.
The bottom line is that every five seconds, somewhere in the world, a child dies as a result of malnutrition.
A person who can read and write can obtain a wealth of information BABY BOOST about farming, health care, birth control, and so forth.
The Nearly a billion people in the global South — most of them in Africa and South Asia — live in abject poverty, lacking safe water, housing, food, and the ability to read.
The 75 percent of the world’s people living in the global South have about 30 percent of the world’s doctors 10Esman, Milton J., and Ronald J Herring, eds.
Safe water is another essential eleDO THE MATH Children are a main focus of efforts to provide basic human needs in the global South.
This math class in Kandahar, Afghanistan, in 2002 followed the Taliban's fall. ment of meeting basic human needs.
Despite the tremendous progress the world has made in improving water and sanitation, with population growth there are still about 1 billion people lacking safe water and more than 2 billion without adequate sanitation.Shelter is another key basic need.
In war zones, economic infrastructure such as transportation is disrupted, as are government services such as health care and education.
States, IGOs, and NGOs rushed food to Pakistan after the floods, hoping to avert a major humanitarian catastrophe.
International food aid itself can sometimes contribute to these problems.
For example, international agencies help women organize small businesses, farms, and other income-producing activitiesUNICEF has helped women get bank loans on favorable terms to start up small businesses in Egypt and Pakistan as well as cooperative farms in Indonesia.
Millions of people from the global South have crossed international borders, often illegally, to reach the North.
In Western Europe, they come largely from North Africa, Turkey, and Eastern Europe.
Some Western European leaders worry that the loosening of border controls under the process of integration will make it harder to keep out illegal immigrants.
This problem came into sharp focus in 2011 when tens of thousands of refugees from Tunisia and Libya poured into Italy, from which they could pass freely into other nearby European countries.
France stopped accepting them, and EU leaders reviewed their freemovement rules.
Remittances are important for states in many regions 27Terry, Donald F., and Steven R Wilson.
In 2010, the United States State Department listed 13 countries making insufficient efforts to stop human trafficking, including friends such as Kuwait, Malaysia, and Saudi Arabia.
There are several very different approaches to these questions; we will concentrate on two contrasting theories of wealth accumulation, based on more liberal and more revolutionary perspectives* Economic Accumulation A view of the problem from the perspective of capitalism is based on liberal economics — stressing overall efficiency in maximizing economic growth.
This view sees the global South as merely lagging behind the industrialized North* More wealth creation in the North is a good thing, as is wealth creation in the South — the two are not in conflict.
A different view of things, from the perspective of socialism, is concerned with the distribution of wealth as much as the absolute creation of wealth* It sees the North-South divide as more of a zero-sum game in which the creation of wealth in the North most often comes at the expense of the South* It also gives politics more of a role in redistributing wealth and managing the economy than does capitalism.
These countries are Venezuela, Bolivia, Ecuador, and Nicaragua* Capitalist and socialist approaches are rather incompatible in their language and assumptions about the problem of poverty and its international implications.
This chapter somewhat favors socialist approaches, focusing on the past history of imperialism as a central cause of the North-South divide, and on revolutionary strategies and massive redistribution of wealth as solutions to it* Chapter 13, in turn, leans toward capitalist approaches.
LOW-TECH The World-System The global system of regional class divisions has been seen by some IR scholars as a world-system or a capitalist world economy.
The most important class struggle today, in this view, is that between the core and the periphery of the world-system.
The concentration of capital and the scale of wages each form a continuum rather than a sharp division into two categories.
In world-system theory, the semiperiphery is an area in which some manufacturing occurs and some capital concentrates, but not to the extent of the most advanced areas in the core.
Even in a middle-income country, Chile, the quadrupling of the price of its main export commodity, copper, in 2003-2006 was a mixed blessing* Protesters demanded that the billions of dollars be spent on social services for the poor, but the president warned against spending what could be a temporary windfall.
Meanwhile the high export earnings strengthened Chile’s currency, making it harder for other industries to export their products*36 Then in late 2008, the global recession caused a crash in copper prices, drastically cutting Chile’s income* Imperialism Both the disparities in wealth between the global North and South and the regions’ export specializations have long histories.
In Chapter 3 we discussed Marxist theories of imperialism, which give a particular kind of explanation for how the North-South gap evolved* Here we review how imperialism affected the South over the centuries and how its aftereffects are still felt around the world.
Ultimately the European conquest of the world brought about a single world civilization, albeit with regional variants and subcultures.
History of Imperialism, 1500-2000 European imperialism got its start in the 15th century with the development of oceangoing sailing ships in which a small crew could transport a sizable cargo over a long distance.
Inside the Chevron compound, however, U*S* workers drive on paved roads, eat American food, and enjoy an 18-hole golf course* They spend 28 days there, working 12-hour days, then fly back to the United States for 28 days of rest.
Traveling the 12 miles to the airport by helicopter, the Americans rarely leave the fenced compound, which Chevron reportedly surrounded with land mines* European colonialism worldwide promoted values and norms implying that the colonizer's culture was superior to the indigenous culture.
They are not unpatriotic, but their interests tend to converge with those of foreign capitalists* For instance, they want to keep local wages as low as possible, to produce cheap goods for consumers in the rich countries.
The local capitalists, in alliance with political authorities, enforce a system of domination that ultimately serves the foreign capitalists* This is another form of dependency* After World War II, a third form of dependency became more common — penetration of national economies by MNCs.
To create local markets for such manufactured goods, income must be concentrated enough to create a middle class that can afford such goods.
Q Study and Review the Post-Test & Chapter Exam at MyPoliSciLab RARE SUCCESS South Africa's former president, Nelson Mandela (here shown at a march of the African National Congress in Boipatong, 1992), had unusual success in making the difficult transition from revolutionary to state leader, and then leaving office peacefully.
MNCs’ foreign investments primed rapid growth in Chinese exports — to $250 billion in 2000 and over $2 trillion in 2012China became the world’s largest exporter in 2010In the coming years, it is poised to join the United States, Japan, and Germany as a major automobile exporterChina’s WTO membership since 2001 is accelerating these trends.
In rural villages, peasants openly protested land seizures, taxes, pollution, and corruption by local officialsPresident Xi declared the battle against corruption a top priority, while continuing to discourage protests and writings that target party officials engaging in corrupt practices.
China’s economic success has given it both more prestige in the international system and a more global perspective on international relations far from China’s bordersIn 2004-2006, President Hu and other Chinese leaders made high-profile visits to resourcerich areas of the global South, notably Africa and Latin America, making large-scale deals for minerals and energy to fuel China’s growth, while boosting China’s foreign aid to these areas.
China is also a key member of the Group of 20 organizationIn 2009, the large Western economies announced that 4Rotberg, Robert I., ed.
Other Experiments Other sizable developing countries have pursued various development strategies, with mixed successes and failures.
Thailand was often suggested as a potential “fifth tiger/’ It received enormous foreign investment in the 1980s and created a sizable middle class.
In the two decades since NAFTA, despite periodic political and economic upheavals, Mexico has seen neither a breakthrough nor a disaster.
Turkey suffered recession in 2000-2001 and received a $30 billion IML bailout.
Lessons ^3 Watch The largest developing countries are following somewhat different strategies with some„„ , ^ theV,deo what different results.
These themes concern trade, Kenya s Developmental ^ Challenge"" the concentration of capital, and corruption. at MyPoliSciLab Import Substitution and Export-Led Growth Throughout the global South, states are trying to use international trade as the basis of accumulation.
Another way to minimize capital needs is to start out in low-capital industries* These industries can begin generating capital, which can then be used to move into somewhat more technologically demanding and capital-intensive kinds of manufacturing* A favorite starter industry is textiles.
Furthermore, in developing countries incomes are often so low that corrupt officials are more tempted to accept payments.
Corruption in the global South presents a collective goods problem for states and MNCs in the Corruption is a major impediment to economic development in both rich and poor countries but is more devastating to economies in the global South and to transitional former communist economies.
These Delhi supporters of hunger-striking anti-corruption activist Anna Hazare hold a ""key"" to corrupt officials' Swiss bank locker, 2012.
Chad promised to use 72 percent of the money to reduce poverty* But in 2005, as the oil money flowed in, Chad’s government — under attack by rebels based in Sudan — pulled out of the deal to use the money for its military, and the World Bank suspended its loans.
Because of past colonial experiences, many governments in the global South have feared the loss of control that comes with foreign investments by MNCs* Sometimes the presence of MNCs was associated with the painful process of concentrating capital and 10 World Bank data.
The lender may be a private bank or company, or a state (both nTomz, Michael.
And, as a political entity rather than a bank, the IMF can make funds available on favorable terms* The IMF scrutinizes developing countries’ economic plans and policies, withholding loans until it is satisfied that the right policies are in place.
Such legal disputes can cost millions of dollars to litigate, requiring expensive lawyers and a large staff at WTO headquarters in Geneva.
A summit meeting of the nonaligned movement in 1973 first called for a New International Economic Order .16 Central to the NIEO was a shift in the terms of trade to favor primary commodities relative to manufactured goods.
And efforts continue to boost cooperation and solidarity in the global South through a variety of groups such as the nonaligned movement and the UN.18 Nonetheless, such efforts have done little to change the South’s reliance on the North.
Explore the Simulation ""You are Managing Director of the IMF"" at MyPoliSciLab however, would like more freedom to invest in these sectors of your economy.
It covers a variety of programs — from individual volunteers lending a hand to Relief in Haiti"" . . at MyPoliSciLab massive government packages.
Crcdits are grants that can be used to buy certain products from the donor state.
HELPING OUT Governments provide more than $50 billion annually in foreign assistance and private donors more than $10 billion in additional aid.
They work at the request and under the direction of the host state but are paid an allowance by the United States government.
Because of disappointment with the political uses of foreign aid in the past, Oxfam has tried to minimize the role in its projects of governments in both the North and South, For instance, Oxfam does not accept government funds, nor does it make grants to governments.
Having a system of disaster relief in place provides the global South with a kind of insurance against sudden losses that could otherwise destabilize economic accumulation* Disasters generally occur quickly and without much warning* Rapid response is difficult to coordinate* International disaster relief has become more organized and better coordinated in the past decade but is still a complex process that varies somewhat from one situation to the next.
In 2006, the UN set up a $500 million fund to enable it to respond quickly to disasters without waiting to raise funds first each time disaster strikes* Typically, international contributions make up no more than about onethird of the total relief effort, the remainder coming from local communities and national governments in the affected states.
Money to Help Poor Children around the World BACKGROUND: The world’s children — 2 billion people under age 18 — have special humanitarian needs* The future depends on them, yet they are among the most vulnerable members of their societies, and are most prone to preventable deaths from disease.
The top four donors to UNICEF after the United States are Norway, the Netherlands, Britain, and Sweden — all countries where humanitarian aid is a strong element of national identity. ntsk-m UNI < Actress Selena Gomez launches the UNICEF Trick-or-Treat drive, 2009.
Instead of becoming selfsufficient, the Turkana people became totally dependent on outside aid.
In the past decade, many scholars have undertaken research to understand whether foreign aid is effective at creating economic growth and alleviating poverty in the global South.
Because the global South cannot reliably sustain capital accumulation, assistance from the North is necessary to jump-start economic growth.
Countering this position, however, is research suggesting that aid does not always help poor countries develop.
They argue that in some African countries, the massive infusion of foreign assistance after decolonization led to increased poverty and dependence on charity, rather than increased wealth and independence.
Sometimes foreign assistance contributes goods to third world economies with little understanding of local needs or long-term strategies.
And while the 2008-2009 recession hurt the global South, growth has begun to return, ■ Evidence does not support a strong association of economic growth either with internal equality of wealth distribution or with internal inequality, ■ The newly industrializing countries in Asia — South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Singapore — show that it is possible to rise out of poverty into sustained economic accumulation, ■ China has registered strong economic growth in the past 30 years of market-oriented economic reforms.
In IPE, we see simultaneous trends toward integration and disintegration among states* People continue to speak their own language, to fly their own flag, and to use their own currency with its pictures and emblems* Nationalism continues to be an important force* At the same time, however, although people identify with their state, they also now hold competing identities based on ethnic ties, gender, and (in the case of Europe) region.
Rather than appease German aspirations, it was followed by further German expansions, which triggered World Warll.
North Atlantic Treaty Organization A United States -led military alliance, formed in 1949 with mainly West European members, to oppose and deter Soviet power in Europe.
United States -Japanese Security Treaty A bilateral alliance between the United States and Japan, created in 1951 against the potential Soviet threat to Japan.
Ann, 105n44, 110n63 Tierney, Michael ]., 1 1 ln65 Tilly, Charles, 160n20, 454n43 Tobias, Sheila, 114n71 Tolba, Mostafa K., 388n3 Tomlinson, John, 380n30 Tomz, Michael, 478nll Toulmin, Camilla, 433n22 Touval, Saadia, 78n64 Trachtenberg, Marc, 29n23 Tracy, James D., 309n32 Trainor, Gen.
