Caused due to the placement of nuclear missiles in Cuba by the Soviet Union, it was the closest the Cold War came to escalating into a full scale nuclear war.
Known as the Bay of Pigs Invasion after a bay in southern Cuba, it was thwarted by the Cuban armed forces in three days.
The failure of Bay of Pigs Invasion strengthened the position of Cuban PM Fidel Castro and was an embarrassment for the United States government led by John F Kennedy.
It also strengthened Cuba’s ties with the Soviet Union and made Castro fear that a United States invasion of Cuba was on the cards.
United States imposed embargo and continued covert operations against Castro’s government.
Location of the Bay of Pigs #2 The operation to place nuclear missiles in Cuba was code named Operation Anadyr The two major superpowers at the time United States and the Soviet Union were involved in a long conflict to dominate world affairs, which is well known as the Cold War.
By 1962 there was presence of American nuclear missiles in Italy and Turkey against the Soviet Union with their capital Moscow within range.
Expecting an invasion of Cuba which if successful would be a blow to the communist cause, Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev and Fidel Castro agreed to place nuclear missiles secretly in Cuba.
Fidel Castro and Nikita Khrushchev #3 Soviet Union used the strategy of Maskirovka for the operation The Soviets employed the strategy of Maskirovka for Operation Anadyr.
Like the name of the operation Anadyr was a river and town in the chilly far-east; soldiers were told that they were heading for a cold region and provided with winter equipment like ski boots; and KGB providing partially correct information to Cuban exile organizations which they knew American intelligence didn’t trust and hence would discount their warning as blatant lies.
Apart from the weapons, Soviets were able to transfer 40,000 troops to Cuba.
Even after the discovery of the nature of the operation by US, CIA’s estimate of the number of troops was 6,000 to 8,000.
Worried that Cuba would shoot down a CIA operated U-2 leading to another international event, United States restricted U-2 flights over Cuban airspace for five weeks starting in September 1962.
It was on October 14 that a U-2 flight piloted by Major Richard S Heyser took photographs while making a high altitude pass over Cuba.
The photos showed clear evidence of medium-range and intermediate-range ballistic missile facilities.
EXCOMM considered various options including full force invasion of Cuba, an air strike primarily on the missile bases and naval blockade to prevent further missiles from entering Cuba.
It was considered a strong but limited military action which was unlikely to provoke a Soviet attack.
On October 24, a crucial moment in the crisis arrived when Soviet ships neared the blockade but military confrontation was avoided.
Soviet Union agreed to dismantle the weapons in Cuba and bring them back while the United States agreed that they would not invade Cuba without provocation and will publicly declare so.
Secretly it was agreed that United States would dismantle and remove their nuclear missiles from Turkey and Italy but will not declare this to the public.
They started to drop explosives to force the submarine to come to the surface for identification not knowing that it was armed with a nuclear-tipped torpedo.
B-59 had not been in contact with Moscow for several days and the crew didn’t know if war had broken out or not.
The captain was adamant on launching the torpedo but such an action required the consent of the three primary officers on board.
Officer Vasili Arkhipov alone opposed the launch and B-59 was forced to surface.
The launch of that torpedo could have possibly started nuclear warfare between the two nations.
This led to criticism of Khrushchev and was in part responsible for his fall from power two years later.
Although Cuba was protected from invasion, Castro was upset from Khrushchev as he hadn’t been consulted before the decision to remove the missiles.
It was a direct communication link between the two countries to prevent future crisis.
A series of agreements after the crisis reduced US-Soviet tensions for a few years.
Robert F Kennedy, brother of President Kennedy, wrote the famous book Thirteen Days giving an account of the crisis.
His performance in the film truly is remarkable, and what’s so amazing is that Greville Wynn was just an ordinary guy who made an extraordinary difference, and so did his friend who was from the Soviet Union who gave his life.
Reply Learnodo Newtonic September 28, 2021 at 11:09 am Thanks for your comment.
