The novel’s departure from its author’s classic style has too often caused it to be dismissed as contrived or banal even by some of Bowen’s most perceptive critics.
I should like to offer an alternative reading of the coldly comic masking of pain and loss which makes The Little Girls both so funny and so disconcerting, and thus to restore it to its rightful place in the Bowen canon.
Above all, it is a comedy—though, from time to time, possibilities of disaster come into view.
The Little Girls has long been undervalued by critics, who often seem actively hostile to the novel’s departure from what is seen as Bowen’s characteristic style.
Miss Bowen in her closing years was trying to achieve by main force the drama and ambiguity and profundity that accrued naturally to her work in her finest days.
A World of Love was a shadow, an anemic imitation of the best of her novels, and The Little Girls and Eva Trout were tours de force which did not succeed.
Though she had completed less than ten pages of the novel she was writing when cancer overtook her in 1973, it seems safe to say that this too would have been a failure under the standards she had established in her major fiction.
So, from a literary point of view, our regret at her going must center on the fact that her autobiography remained largely still unwritten when she died.
To the outside world, the effect and outcome of the struggle is not at once apparent—all that may be observed is a hardening or harshening of the manner, or an unexpected tension between the writer and his accustomed subject—for he has not necessarily forsaken the old scenes; what has happened is that he sees them newly.
Only the rare reader or the perceptive critic is able to detect the transition book.
The Little Girls is just such a ‘transition book’, although, ironically, the very fact that Bowen’s ﬁnal novel, Eva Trout, with its contemporary take on gothic ﬁction and its touchingly grotesque misﬁt of a heroine, is now largely seen as a remarkable achievement has only served to further overshadow the more modestly experimental text which freed her to write it.
For her part, Deirdre Toomey, in her Oxford Dictionary of National Biography article on Bowen’s life, simply ignores The Little Girls altogether.
The motives of the narrative are often obscure: we can never know just why Dinah suddenly needs so urgently to meet her old friends again; we cannot know why the three decide to dig up the coffer; nor do we know entirely why Dinah becomes so ill, or why the huge bruise appears on her forehead.
It was my ﬁrst Elizabeth Bowen novel, and at the age of 18 I was unaware that it was regarded as in any way problematic.
Despite its fascinating complexity, like that of the ‘interlocked puzzle’ of Chinese ivory which the child Clare could never quite solve, it ﬁtted neatly into the context created by my favourite novelists at that time, Iris Murdoch and Muriel Spark, both admired by Bowen herself.
Indeed, Muriel Spark’s The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie (which was passed around almost as samizdat literature by classmates at my Edinburgh girls’ school), may well have been an inﬂuence on Bowen’s novel, given the sharp eye it casts on the closed world of childhood, the deliberately external presentation of its middle-aged title character, and the elegant spareness of its prose.
With its wit and its characteristically brilliant texture, the novel is ingeniously constructed.
It should be read with that attention to detail generally accorded to a detective story.
There is little explanation in The Little Girls, but there are many clues.
Even inanimate objects can be important, and random sayings or seemingly trivial events may acquire, retrospectively, a strange significance.
The 1964 jacket-notes also tell us that ‘Elizabeth Bowen offers her new novel as a comedy.
What initially appears simply to be a comic novel proves instead to be a comedy in the late Shakespearian sense, and although the childhood world conjured up by The Little Girls is indeed anti-nostalgic—despite Lee’s description of it as ‘the most “Proustian” of novels’ , amended by Ellmann to ‘Proust without sex’ —it is also a world which is longed for nearly half a century after it was lost.
As I hope to show, this ‘conventional reading’ is in fact a radical misreading of the end of the book.
While this is indeed true in a literal sense—Bowen wrote to William Plomer, ‘The Little Girls, as I feel that you saw, though others may not, is not autobiographical.
I myself was not one of those 3’ —we will need to invoke her own concept of ‘transposed autobiography’ to clarify how she was nevertheless able to use both Dinah and Clare as masks through which to explore the unbearable impact of her mother’s early death and the ambiguities of her adult sexual identity.
In the preface to a selection of her short stories, Bowen writes, rather defensively, that ‘any fiction is bound to be transposed autobiography.
However, she had first used the term 10 years earlier about a directly personal piece of fiction, the 1923 short story, ‘Coming Home’, in which a 12-year-old girl hysterically imagines that her mother, unexpectedly out when she returns home from school, must in fact have died, perhaps even killed by her own anger at this temporary desertion.
A person might be part of you, almost part of your body, and yet once you went away from them they might utterly cease to be.
That sea of horror ebbing and flowing round the edges of the world, whose tides were charted in the newspapers, might sweep out a long wave over them and they would be gone.
A fearful scarlet ate up the hard spring darkness; indeed, it seemed that an extra day, unreckoned, had come to abortive birth that these things might happen At Danielstown, half-way up the avenue under the beeches, the thin iron gate twanged as the last unlit car slid out with the executioners bland from accomplished duty Above the steps, the door stood open hospitably upon a furnace.
It is the immolation of Danielstown, rather than the death of Gerald, the English subaltern with whom its heroine Lois is half-heartedly in love, which forms the violent culmination of the novel.
Bowen’s Court survived— nevertheless, so often in my mind’s eye did I see it burning that the terrible last event in The Last September is more real than anything I have lived through.
The lived reality which Bowen subordinates here to the imagined burning of Bowen’s Court began with the tearing apart of her childhood world by her father’s ‘“breakdown,” which was in fact the beginning of an agonizing mental illness’, in consequence of which ‘my mother and I were ordered away by the doctors.
I had come out of the tensions and mystery of my father’s illness, the apprehensive silences or chaotic shoutings (while he was still there with us in the Dublin house) with nothing more disastrous than a stammer.
Bowen was to keep the stammer, which Victoria Glendinning tells us ‘caused her agony as a girl’ , for the rest of her life.
Despite the ﬁercely-guarded emotional privacy which made her resistant to psychoanalysis, a telling passage in The Heat of the Day reveals Bowen’s awareness of the traumatic nature of her speech impediment.
The variation, she had discovered, had like that in a stammer a psychic cause—it was a matter of whether he did or did not, that day, feel like a wounded man.
In The Little Girls, Dicey’s nervous blink stands in for Bowen’s stammer, while Mrs Piggott’s pet-name for her daughter (she dislikes Dicey’s given name, Diana, chosen by Cousin Roland and discarded by the adult Dinah) recalls the childhood diminutive, Bitha, which Bowen’s family continued to use even after she had grown up.
Glendinning tells us, ‘Elizabeth was thirteen when her mother died and, in [her cousin] Audrey’s opinion, she never really got over it.
That March handsome clever Constance, the woman doctor, consumptive, had died in a Folkestone nursing home, on her way back from an unavailing Swiss sanatorium.
That April Eddy, the youngest and dearest brother, had gone down with the Titanic.
That summer Florence, my mother, was told by a Dublin doctor, to her delight, that she would be in Heaven six months hence.
Bowen has already told us that, after her mother’s death, she was in a state of emotional suspension in which her only comfort was to cling to the wearing of mourning, of the euphemistic kind permitted for children ‘My black’ was the last I had of my mother.
For I could not remember her, think of her, speak of her or suffer to hear her spoken of.
That September the evenings at Hythe, even up on the hill, were stuffy and bodeful.
The sorts of evenings which later one associated with the thrummings of a bomber, circling, coming brutally nearer each time.
It is interesting to compare Bowen’s stoical relation of what Corcoran, in his illuminating discussion of The House in Paris, calls ‘the psychological and emotional wounding that is parentlessness’ , and her consciously detached and comic conversion of it into the ‘transposed autobiography’ of The Little Girls, with the very different way in which Virginia Woolf’s family story is told, both by herself in To the Lighthouse and by a host of onlookers and commentators.
Woolf also lost her mother at the age of 13, in 1895, her half-sister Stella in 1897, her father in 1904, and her brother Thoby in 1906.
The three part structure of The Little Girls (like the similar structure of The House in Paris) may owe something to Woolf’s novel, but Bowen’s decision to craft an anti-nostalgic comedy from the stuff of pain and loss means that its tone is resolutely and disconcertingly different.
However, both novels relate family deaths to large-scale historical catastrophe.
Twenty or thirty young men were blown up in France, among them Andrew Ramsay, whose death, mercifully, was instantaneous]’ , while Dicey’s mother ‘went down in that plague at the end of the war.
The flashback of the second part to 1914 has a softening, mellowing effect on the novel.
The suppressed romantic feeling between Dicey’s beautiful, unworldly mother (whose husband killed himself before Dicey was born) and Mumbo’s father, the sad, handsome Major, is tenderly touched upon, and the schoolgirl comedy (poetry recitations, swimming lessons, the visit of a suffragette aunt, shopping for a chain to go round the coffer in Southstone’s picturesque old High Street, the end-of-term picnic) is nostalgically idealised.
By contrast, Corcoran, who claims to have ‘nothing of interest to say’ about the novel, writes movingly about its elegiac second section, whose picnic and parting on the eve of the First World War is one of the most haunting scenes in all Bowen, in which three words spoken by a mother to her daughter are inflected with a whole world of grief.
However, the apparently counter-intuitive connection between desolation and frenetic activity is a recurring feature of Bowen’s childhood experience of trauma and loss.
More painfully, the same psychological mechanism is evident in her response to her mother’s death.
In the scene from which Corcoran quotes those three grief-laden words, the finality of the parting between Mrs Piggott and Major Burkin-Jones (whose unspoken love means that we never learn their first names) is expressed in a phrase just as brief, which none the less contains Clare’s father’s foreknowledge of his coming death.
Bowen had learnt at the age of 13, on her dying mother’s last visit to Bowen’s Court, that a blessing could carry precisely that tragic charge of meaning.
The lead-in to this heart-breaking episode is a description of the event which ‘was the first black crack across the surface of exterior things’, the death of her mother’s ‘beloved youngest brother Eddie’ who had gone down on the Titanic.
The blackly comic disjunction between her uncle’s seal impression and his unimaginable death in the icy waters of the North Atlantic must have made his young niece aware that grief itself can be a balancing act made more unendurable by teetering precariously on the edge of laughter.
They went across to the rail, to look out at what the Promenade lamps had now transformed into utter darkness … ’ The plot signiﬁcance of this is that ‘there was nothing but gulf’ where St Agatha’s, the little girls’ school, must be, so Dicey realises that they will be able to bury the coffer in its grounds after dark without fearing detection; the symbolic signiﬁcance is left to be picked up by the reader.
He got in a state about leaving us, when the war’d begun, when it didn’t seem to be going well.
Bowen herself had buried a time capsule with her friends at Harpenden Hall, the school she attended after her mother’s death, although the real-life proceedings were less impressive, more scatterbrained, and had a tinge of facetiousness.
However, the burial of the coffer in the novel is not simply a childish game but a response to the preoccupations of the adult world in the summer of 1914.
A similar episode takes place in Spark’s The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie, in which Sandy and Jenny bury ‘the love correspondence between Miss Brodie and the singing master’ which they have been composing during their last term in the junior school.
They were undecided whether to cast this incriminating document out to sea or to bury it.
The act of casting things out to sea from the shore was, as they knew, more difficult than it sounded.
But Sandy found a damp hole half-hidden by a stone at the back of the cave and they pressed into it the notebook containing the love correspondence of Miss Jean Brodie, and never saw it again.
However, while Sandy and Jenny’s ﬁctive correspondence is an attempt to make sense of the grown-up mysteries of sex and procreation, the three little girls in Bowen’s novel, two of them subliminally and one of them only too consciously aware of the possibility of war, create their own menacing ﬁction by burying a coffer containing a letter written in human blood and hinting at a sinister and unexplained threat to its future readers, unlikely though they are to be able to decode it since it is written in an unknown language.
In addition to the collection of objects intended to substantiate the story—‘glinting fetter-links’ (the dog-chain, which was not purchased ‘to go round the coffer’), ‘an acting-box tiara’, ‘a scatter of the vertebrae of some larger mammal’ —the coffer contains a book of poems by a poet who met a premature death by drowning, a baby’s amputated toe preserved in a bottle, and a gun, conceivably loaded.
The letter, which in translation begins, ‘We are dead, and all our fathers and mothers’ , will prove to be at least partly prophetic.
In digging up the empty coffer nearly 50 years later, the former schoolgirls will uncover memories of the three deaths— Clare’s father, Dinah’s mother, and Sheila’s lover—all in some way connected to the First World War and its aftermath, which have overshadowed their subsequent lives.
The grown-up little girls, 11 in 1914, must now be 59, but it is not simply the approach of her 60th birthday, which will mark the end of middle age, that spurs Dinah into searching for Clare and Sheila.
On 4 September 1962, the White House released a policy statement expressing concern about ‘the recent moves of the Soviet Union to bolster the military power of the Castro regime in Cuba’ , the start of the public sabre-rattling which concealed the far more ominous private discussions about how the USA should retaliate.
The reunion leads us back into the world of 1914, and we return to the present in the second week of October, when Dinah visits Clare in one of her chain of gift shops, then writes her a letter in which she proposes the Thursday of the following week as the date for the attempt to dig up the coffer.
Four days later, Kennedy announced the blockade of Cuba which, if Khrushchev had not backed down, could have led to nuclear war.
All through that week my heart was rent in a hundred bosoms; here an old woman, who in this last year has seen her middle-aged daughter suddenly blossoming in a rapture of first love; there, an enchantingly gifted little boy, who in his boundless trust and expectation of the riches and variety of our hospitality, asked me if I had a dead body in the house; there a rose; there a tree; and wherever I looked, the agonised, dissembling faces of parents … And all the time everything looked so beautiful in its autumn composure.
The scene which follows the unearthing of the coffer takes place on what must be the morning of 30 October, the day when Townsend Warner wrote her letter.
The monthly weather report of the Meteorological Ofﬁce recorded widespread air frost during the ﬁnal nights of October 1962.
Raked into tails by the battle into the jerseys her hair hung round a particularly shining morning face, etherealized rather than clouded by a look of grief.
In the next chapter we learn that Dinah’s mother died just as the First World War came to an end.
By this point in the novel, it is clear that the collection of less than expressive objects in the cave, with which Dinah’s numerous friends and acquaintances have humoured her, represents an attempt by a fundamentally lonely and frightened woman to assuage the sense of loss which she has been suppressing for most of her life.
The day she and my father left for Dublin was very wet, and the gusts shook the Bowen’s Court trees Uncle George’s car, with my mother waving, drove off up the Upper Avenue through the rain.
When, leaving the steps, I returned to the library, I could see from its look that my mother would not come back.
By the time she was writing The Little Girls, Bowen’s Court had itself been lost, demolished by the man to whom she had sold it in 1959 in the mistaken belief that he would bring up his children there.
Lee dismisses the literary allusions in The Little Girls as contrived, claiming that they are ‘mostly to Macbeth, in order that the three “revenants” should seem like the three witches’ , but in fact the banter about weird sisters masks the deeper significance of the play, which only emerges in the final section of the novel.
I don’t think most tragedies are sad, they are only tragic; but Macbeth is.
Transposed autobiography allows feelings to be expressed that straight autobiography might forbid.
She tells the horriﬁed Clare that the gun which she found in her mother’s glove drawer and put into the coffer (partly to substantiate her boast that she knew how to get hold of one and partly for safe-keeping) ‘may, of course, have been Father’s; but if it was he can’t have been keen on it.
Whether or not Bowen was herself bisexual, she was certainly attractive to women, and while it is onto Dinah that she transposes the events of her childhood, she gives the adult Clare the tailored clothes and large pearl earrings with which she carried off her own strong and big-boned good looks.
Although Clare largely keeps her emotional history to herself (unlike the superficially conventional Sheila, who gradually reveals a life-story full of passionate disappointments endured with face-saving stoicism, and ends up teasing Dinah’s sons with the secret of her contribution to the coffer, her sixth toe) she is as preoccupied as Dinah with memories of the summer which ended with her father’s death at Mons.
In the opening section of the novel, she looks out of the staircase window of Dinah’s house at the copper beech tree with the crooked swing, remembering the ‘unevenly-hung swing’ on which they had played at St Agatha’s, and reflecting that ‘pure from the pleasures of the air, any of them could have shot into Kingdom Come.
The physical blow to her head fuses in her mind with the emotional blow dealt her by Clare, leading to the illness which brings together three generations of her family and both of her old school-friends for the final act of the comedy.
Clare, the army child, had rejected Shelley’s belief that tyranny can be countered by passive resistance for the highly-coloured patriotic honour code represented by Sir Francis Hasting Doyle’s poem The Private of the Buffs.
Her anguished rage at Dicey’s failure to understand the unbearable price which that code might soon exact has been frozen into lasting resentment by the memory, preserved ever since, of her own refusal to say goodbye.
At the end of the novel, it is the sight of Mrs Piggott’s carefully repaired china collection, which she had loved as a child and finds again on the chimneypiece of Dinah’s bedroom, that turns resentment into compunction.
She was looking into a fragile representation of a world of honour, which was to say unfailingness.
The pastoral ﬁgures on the chimneypiece, branching their mended arms towards one another like trees, represent Clare’s father and Dinah’s mother, but Clare herself has failed to comfort Dinah, who lies broken and sleeping at the far end of the room, the casualty of a game which has gone too far.
The ‘peaceful landscapes … on the cups and bowls’ offer an unattainable glimpse of the order and beauty from which Clare, who as a child had scornfully dismissed Wordsworth’s idealised vision of both Nature and childhood, believes herself to be for ever exiled.
When estranged friends or lovers finally meet and name each other, the comedy ends.
Mumbo is the name to which Clare had refused to answer as Dicey ran desperately across the Wanchurch sand; Clare, lost and now found again, is the one she loves.
In George Meredith’s The Woods of Westermain, the opening lines of which Clare recites to Sheila, the ‘enchanted woods’ are hostile only to those who distrust or fear them.
Notes on contributor Judith Woolf ’s main research areas are twentieth century Italian-Jewish writers; life writing, especially in relation to the Holocaust; modernism and its predecessors; Victorian and early twentieth century women photographers; and narrative patterns in European literature.
She is currently writing a monograph on Italian Jewish accounts of persecution and survival 1936–1945.
