By examining these visual texts and recognising their contexts, you will be more familiar with the interpretations to answer the source based case study questions effectively.
By Estonian and American cartoonist Edmund S Valtman The cartoon portrays Castro as a towering figure over two petite looking persons representing Cuba and Brazil.
In late August 1961, Cuba was facing food shortages, whereas Brazil was in debt.
The cartoon was possibly meant to depict Brazil’s skepticism towards Castro’s revolution.
By British Magazine, Punch The cartoon depicts both superpower leaders feeling annoyed over their neighbour’s tree branch extended into their own territory.
The cartoonist depicts an ironic illustration of Moscow’s true motives on Cuba.
In Sept 1962, an agreement was signed between Cuba and USSR for the construction of a port in the Bay of Havana, which Castro claimed to be a base for the Soviet fishing fleet in the Atlantic.
By Die Vaderland The cartoon depicts a miniature-sized Castro targeting the Soviet missile at a terrified ‘Uncle Sam’ , while Khrushchev looks on from afar in delight.
By Welsh political cartoonist Leslie G Illingworth – published in British newspaper, The Daily Mail The cartoon illustrates both Kennedy and Khrushchev taking part in an arm wrestling match that neither side was likely to win.
By Hungarian-British cartoonist Victor Weisz – published in London News The cartoon illustrates Kennedy in The White House and Khrushchev in the Kremlin facing each other with nuclear missiles placed outside their buildings.
In context, the cartoon depicts Kennedy as being hypocritical as he questioned Khrushchev about the missiles in Cuba, since there were twice as many American missiles as there are than the Russians.
Third, pay attention to the date of publication and the source origin to consider the motive.
This section will be important when you attempt to derive the provenance of each source.
If you are looking for additional help, why not join our JC History Tuition as we will teach you to organise the content and improve your answering skills.
Additionally, we offer other JC tuition programmes, like GP Tuition, Economics Tuition, JC Chemistry Tuition, JC Math Tuition and China Studies in English Tuition.
For Secondary Tuition, we have Secondary English Tuition, Secondary Math tuition, Secondary Chemistry Tuition and Secondary Economics Tuition.
