Rusk, who died Tuesday night at 85, was the son of a poor Georgia minister-turned-farmer who rose to become the chief foreign policy steward for two presidents, John F Kennedy and Lyndon B Johnson.
Rusk was so loyal to both presidents, he swore never to tell tales or write his memoirs.
But Rusk, who joined the State Department as a junior foreign service officer after World War II Army duty, will be remembered most for his anti-communist fervor and for his skill in managing United States interests in a world threatened by the Soviet Union and China.
He was secretary of state for eight years, from 1961 to 1969, during an era that saw the signing of the first nuclear non-proliferation treaty but that also saw direct challenges to America's national security in Cuba, North Korea, Berlin and, of course, Vietnam.
In the battle to contain communism, Dean Rusk was as effective as any general.
After North Korea invaded South Korea in 1950, it was Rusk then the assistant secretary of state for Far Eastern Affairs who seized an opportunity to have the United Nations Security Council adopt a resolution dispatching United States troops to help South Korea repel the invaders.
That opportunity arose when the Soviets stalked out of the Security Council in anger.
When the Soviets weren't there to veto the resolution, the United States representatives persuaded the other council members to approve the measure.
In a 1972 interview, Rusk defended his views on Vietnam, declaring that if the United States had failed to act, the Soviets would have seen this as a sign of weakness and would have marched on Berlin.
In defending his Vietnam policy, Rusk gave weight to the ""domino theory,"" the belief that if Vietnam ""went"" communist, the nations on Vietnam's border Thailand, Laos and Cambodia would also ""fall"" like dominoes to the red menace.
After Vietnam fell to the communists, Rusk contended it was the failure of American will power that resulted in the collapse of the anti-communist regime in the south.
Rusk was also there in 1961 when Kennedy ordered the ill-fated invasion of Cuba at the Bay of Pigs, when East Germany began building the Berlin Wall and when in 1962 the world was on the brink of nuclear war in the Cuban missile crisis.
Because he chose never to write about what happened in the Kennedy-Johnson era, history may be robbed of the full story of Rusk's involvement in many Cold War crises.
His father was a Presbyterian minister who was forced to work as a teacher and farmer and finally as a mail carrier when he developed throat cancer.
In 1991, assessing the end of the Soviet Union, Rusk said he never thought ""I'd live to see the day"" his communist foes would collapse.
But at one of the most critical moments in our nation's history, the president's ability to lie convincingly proved crucial to preserving peace.
Thirty years ago this week, the world held its breath as a nuclear game of chicken was played out over Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Also, having Maria Shriver, the niece of John and Robert Kennedy, as host of the program is a bizarre casting decision.
Nevertheless, the chilling details of how close the world was to a nuclear holocaust and the personal anecdotes of those involved in the decision-making process make it an engrossing two hours, even if you've already heard a lot of what is said.
The United States wasn't, at least not at first, which is why the disinformation spread by Kennedy and his men was critical.
Several days before JFK went on national TV to issue his demand to the Soviets to get the missiles out or else, the CIA had photos confirming their presence.
It was essential, however, that the Soviet government not be aware of what we knew until our military was prepared to back up the ultimatum.
But as the moment of truth arrived, an explanation had to be devised as to why he was canceling campaign appearances on behalf of Democratic candidates.
It was decided to float a story that the president was suffering from a cold and needed to return to Washington to rest.
The president also had to play an effective game of liar's poker with the other side.
At a point when he had reconnaisance photos of the Soviet missiles at his fingertips, JFK met with Soviet ambassador Andre Gromyko in the Oval office.
As Gromyko maintained that reports of the missiles in Cuba were groundless, JFK shook his head as if accepting this as truth.
So when considering for whom to cast your vote in a couple of weeks, it might be wise to remember that honesty in the Oval office might not be always be the best policy.
Khrushchev, who was ousted from power in the Soviet Union in 1964 and died in 1971, also thanked Julius and Ethel Rosenberg for helping the Soviet Union develop the atomic bomb.
Khrushchev made a series of tapes as he lived out his last seven years under virtual house arrest.
But Khrushchev's friends and relatives withheld some of the tapes, fearing he had been too candid.
In the memoirs, Khrushchev said Josef Stalin was grateful to the Rosenbergs, who were executed in 1953 after being convicted of conspiring to give American atom bomb secrets to the Soviet Union.
I cannot specifically say what kind of help they gave us, but I heard from both Stalin and Molotov, then Minister of Foreign Affairs, that the Rosenbergs provided very significant help in accelerating the production of our atom bomb.
On the Cuban missile crisis, Khrushchev recalled, intelligence reports indicated that the United States was preparing to strike Cuba after Soviet missiles were installed in the country.
And, """"Castro was hotheaded,'' Kruschev said of his reaction to the Soviets' withdrawal of the missiles.
We believed this came from his being young and inexperienced as a statesman,'' Khrushchev said.
Cold War tensions between the United States and the Soviet Union had turned red hot.
And 50 years ago this week, Henry Mack had his finger on the button to launch.
In South Florida and in Cuba, the missile crisis put millions of people on what seemed like the front lines.
At bases in Florida, missiles were raised to the go position and tilted in the direction of Fidel Castro's island.
There, the Kennedy administration had learned from spy plane reconnaissance, the Soviet Union was building what looked like an offensive missile base near San Cristobal.
In south Miami-Dade County, thousands of Army troops moved to and from encampments that sprang up in tomato fields and cow pastures.
Portable Hawk anti-aircraft missiles were set up along beaches from Miami Beach to Key West.
Among the soldiers who arrived in South Florida was Nate Conner, a 19-year-old from Becket, Mass., assigned to the 2nd Missile Battalion of the 52nd Air Defense Artillery at Carol City, Fla.
In Trinidad, Cuba, Maria Teresa Rodriguez was a 21-year-old elementary-school teacher.
Five years later, Rodriguez would leave Cuba on a freedom flight, meet Conner, and fall in love.
Ultimately, the ""eyeball-to-eyeball"" confrontation between President John F Kennedy and Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev was resolved with mutual concessions.
After the United States announced a naval blockade of shipments of arms to Cuba, Khrushchev agreed to a U.S. pledge not to invade the island in exchange for a removal of the missiles.
But for Mack, the 13 days that preceded the agreement stands as ""the loneliest experience imaginable.
Mack's journey to the command of Battery B of the 2nd Missile Battalion, 517th Artillery in Carleton, Mich., is as improbable as the nuclear standoff itself.
Cavalry, the famed Buffalo Soldiers in the still-segregated Army, he served in Korea and Vietnam.
He rose to the rank of major before retiring in 1968 while assigned to the Pentagon.
Mack was to launch a nuclear missile if an incoming aircraft failed to respond properly to a challenge.
Last week, more than 2,700 pages of documents housed at the John F Kennedy Presidential Library in Boston were released.
Among them is a draft of a speech the president would have delivered to the nation.
The documents shed light on how the Kennedys and their closest advisers averted catastrophe in October 1962 after United States spy planes discovered the USSR was secretly constructing nuclear missile bases on Cuba, its ally.
I was an Army private, just 22, who had just graduated from college in June 1962.
I had arrived in Fort Leonard Wood in early August and had just completed basic training.
It was during a warm mid-October evening, if I recall, as we sat around a black-and-white television set in the barracks' day room, watching a tense President Kennedy describe how the Soviet Union secretly had installed nuclear missiles on Cuban soil earlier that year.
The youthful Kennedy described how he would now deal with the crisis even if it meant nuclear war.
On that fateful Tuesday night of Oct., Americans learned that Soviet ships carrying more missiles were steaming toward Cuba.
Kennedy said that if the Soviet ships didn't turn around by the following Monday, atomic missiles could be hurling in both directions.
The 1962 Cuban missile crisis would turn out to be the most serious incident of the Cold War between the United States and the former Soviet Union, nearly bringing both countries to the brink of nuclear war.
Fortunately, many of the details of the crisis wouldn't emerge until later.
The Cuban crisis had been around ever since Fidel Castro sent longtime Cuban dictator Fugencio Batista into exile on Jan., 1959.
Diplomatic relations between the United States and Cuba quickly would sour and would be broken by President Eisenhower.
Then, in the spring of 1961, shortly after Kennedy took office, the Bay of Pigs invasion would sputter and fail.
In the spring of 1962, rather than face the draft, I enlisted for a six-year hitch in the Minnesota National Guard.
After graduation in June 1962, I would report to Fort Leonard Wood for six months of active duty beginning in early August.
By October, basic training was behind me and I was enrolled in light truck-driving school.
The humid, sweltering days of August in southern Missouri had mercifully given way to the cool, golden days of autumn.
The World Series had been grabbing our attention as the Cuban situation began heating up.
During that live Oct. broadcast, Americans learned that Soviet missiles with atomic warheads could reach many of the American cities from Cuba, only 90 miles off the coast of Florida.
American warships were sent out to confront the Soviet vessels, boarding and seizing them if necessary.
Rumors ran amok as we pondered our fate following the gut-wrenching telecast.
The week slowly crept, one day after another, toward the looming deadline; it was hard to concentrate on training.
We would try to watch television in the day room each night or read a newspaper.
The ships from both sides appeared to be on a collision course, and neither side was blinking.
The weekend finally arrived, but no one ventured far from a television set, and as the dreaded Monday deadline loomed, Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev continued to be belligerent and Kennedy remained combative.
After church services, we headed to the Edwards Service Club on base to catch up on what news occurred overnight.
It turned out to be a glorious, bright autumn day, one I never will forget.
The headlines in the Sunday newspapers said the Soviet ships had turned around.
The possibility of an atomic war had been eased for at least this time.
Later, we would find out that an invasion might have occurred Oct.-30 if those Soviet ships hadn't turned back, and we raw recruits would probably have been in the thick of it.
The Soviets would remove their missiles from Cuba in exchange for a promise by the United States that it wouldn't invade Cuba.
The Soviet Union is no more; Khrushchev was forced out of office within a year.
But for many, including myself, we still shudder at the thought of how close we came to nuclear war so long ago.
Visitors listen in as the President and his advisers work furiously to avert a nuclear war.
The exhibit, which is free and open to the public, runs from October 12, 2012, through February 4, 2013, in the Lawrence F O'Brien Gallery of the National Archives Building.
Museum hours are 10 A.M. to 5:30 P.M., daily, except Thanksgiving and December 25.
Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum and made possible in part by the Foundation for the National Archives, the John F Kennedy Library Foundation, and the generous support of Lead Sponsor AT&T with special recognition to the Lawrence F O'Brien Family.
The documents, once classified secret by the government, were released by the State Department under pressure from a Freedom of Information Act lawsuit filed by a public interest group, the National Security Archive.
In a previously 'highly classifield memoranda' dealing with United States 'assurances' against an invasion of Cuba, a State Department official advised the United States ambassador to the United Nations, Adlai Stevenson, to hold fast to negotiation points made by President Kennedy.
The once-secret document at another junction tells Stevenson 'sticking to language of presidential statement' was important not only for winning negotiating points with the Soviets later but also with the American public.
Stevenson was the Kennedy administration 'point man' at the United Nations when negotiations between the two superpowers raged over missiles in Cuba.
The crisis erupted after the Soviets secretly introduced nuclear missiles in Cuba that were capable of hitting the United States with little warning.
The precise wording of whether Kennedy promised 'not to invade Cuba' or would simply work to ensure 'peace in the Caribbean' was critical to negotiations in 1962 that led to a temporary easing of the Cold War.
The Archive is a public interest group that calls itself an 'investigative library' and strives to win release of classified documents for useby scholars, journalists and other interested parties.
The reason is that such a missile ""defense"" reinforces the second strike capability of the deploying nation and could thus increase the likelihood of a pre-emptive first strike by the nation against which the system is deployed.
Robert S McNamara realized this paradox in the 1960s, when he was secretary of defense under U.S. president John F Kennedy and then Lyndon Johnson.
Kennedy was elected to the presidency, partly on concerns of an imaginary ""missile gap"" between the United States and the U.S.S.R., with fears being that the Soviets possessed many more ICBMs than did the Americans.
McNamara was horrified to discover that the United States had nuclear plans to unleash an all-out nuclear retaliatory strike against the ""Sino-Soviet bloc,"" as the two powers were termed in the paranoia of the day, should either take an aggressive step.
Concerning SIOP, Scott D Sagan writes, ""The nuclear superiority of the United States in 1961 was indisputable.
At about the same time in the winter of 1961, the new Discoverer spy satellite provided data on Soviet ICBMs, indicating that the United States outgunned the U.S.S.R. massively—there was a missile gap alright but the reverse of the Pentagon's paranoid thinking.
However, instead of breathing a sigh of relief, war planners, among them Paul Nitze, pushed for a preemptive nuclear strike on the Soviet Union.
McNamara's new strategy was responsible for a further spike in the arms race due to Soviet fears of falling behind the U.S., but both sides seemed to come away from the Cuban missile crisis in October 1962 with renewed resolve to defuse the nuclear confrontation.
In the midst of the United States war on Vietnam, McNamara argued against a missile defense system proposed by Lyndon B Johnson, after realizing that all efforts toward a ""rational"" nuclear arms strategy had done nothing but result in an ever upwardly spiraling arms race.
In short, bilateral paranoia between Moscow and Washington had increased the number of nuclear weapons and decreased security.
McNamara argued that the easiest way to circumvent any missile defense system was to merely increase the number of missiles, thus causing the missile defense system into a state of overload.
Therefore, he explained, any attempt at deploying such a system in the United States would only result in an escalation of the arms race by the Soviets.
Now, the United States Missile Defense Agency has announced a successful test of a Ground-based Midcourse Defense interceptor, which consisted of targeting an ICBM decoy in flight.
The antimissile missile was fired from Vandenberg air base in the United States state of California at the decoy, which was launched from Kwajalein Atoll in the Marshall Islands, some 8,000 km from Los Angeles.
The test targeted North Korea with a strong message that is likely to spark a further escalation of tensions with South Korea and the United States.
As was predicted in 1967 for the Soviet Union, so would it be today with North Korea.
The two viewed documents and letters exchanged between their fathers during the crisis and examined a copy of the 1963 Nuclear Test Ban Treaty signed by their fathers that had been kept by Caroline's mother, Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis.
He compared the defense of Cuba to the American commitment to defend West Berlin.
He said both superpowers needed to assure their allies they were serious in their commitments.
The crisis began when President Kennedy learned that Cuba had Soviet nuclear missiles capable of reaching the United States.
The crisis ended two weeks later when Khrushchev promised to remove the nuclear missiles in exchange for a promise by Kennedy not to invade Cuba.
The United States also agreed to remove U.S. missiles from Turkey, a Soviet neighbor.
Schlessinger said never before had two opposing powers had the technical ability to destroy the world.
Many Florida churches offered special services, and people were streaming in to pray.
Still, even with this ambiance of impending horror, most people were supporting Kennedy's strong stand.
A Gallup Poll showed that 80 percent of Americans supported the president's speech.
Moscow took more than half a day to react to John Kennedy's announcement of a blockade of Cuba.
Khrushchev put the Soviet military on war-alert, but in his letter to Kennedy he made only a vague request for negotiations to resolve the crisis.
He avoided any specific statement about what he intended to do about the blockade.
However, at an embassy reception in Washington, a Soviet military man, Lt.
General Vladimir A Dubovik, appeared to suggest that Soviet ships had orders to defy the blockade.
At the White House, the top-level ExComm group was told that an ``extraordinary number'' of coded messages were being sent to Soviet ships, but the CIA didn't know what the messages contained.
They did know, however, that 25 Soviet ships were in the Atlantic, headed toward Cuba, and that Soviet submarines were being spotted in the Caribbean.
Trying to get more information, the United States military was sending out low-flying Crusader planes to photograph military sites in Cuba.
Meanwhile in Washington, at a meeting of State and CIA officials, it was decided that exile groups should be stopped from carrying out any raids on Cuba during the crisis, and officials discussed whether Operation Mongoose, the covert program against Cuba, should be closed down.
He said Cuban weapons would never be used offensively, to attack another country, but would be used without hesitation to defend the motherland.
We must learn how to live in our allotted times and with the dignity with which we know how to live.
A squadron of 13 submarines and a division of eight warships left the Key West naval base to take part.
Meanwhile, a contingent of 5,000 Marines arrived in Key West to protect the island and prepare for a possible invasion.
Beginning at 10 the next morning, no ship carrying military material would be allowed to go to Cuba.
The Russians had still given no indication about how they would respond.
Harry Harris Jr., commander of United States Pacific Command, said during testimony before the Senate Armed Services Committee.
Harris said he has no doubt that North Korean leader Kim Jong Un intends to fulfill his pursuit of a nuclear-tipped missile capable of striking the United States.
The admiral acknowledged there's uncertainty within United States intelligence agencies over how far along North Korea's nuclear and missile programs are.
The Trump administration has declared that all options, including a targeted military strike, are on the table to block North Korea from carrying out threats against the United States and its allies in the region.
But a pre-emptive attack isn't likely, United States officials have said, and the administration is pursuing a strategy of putting pressure on Pyongyang with assistance from China, North Korea's main trading partner and the country's economic lifeline.
With international support, the Trump administration said Thursday it wants to exert a ""burst"" of economic and diplomatic pressure on North Korea that yields results within months to push the communist government to change course from developing nuclear weapons.
Susan Thornton, the acting top United States diplomat for East Asia, said there's debate about whether Pyongyang is willing to give up its weapons programs.
She said the United States wants ""to test that hypothesis to the maximum extent we can"" for a peaceful resolution.
After weeks of unusually blunt military threats, President Donald Trump's national security team briefed lawmakers Wednesday on North Korea's advancing nuclear capabilities that served to tamp down talk of military action amid alarm over Pyongyang's atomic and missile testing.
A joint statement from the agency heads made no specific mention of military options, though it said the United States would defend itself and friends.
Harris told the committee that the financial sanctions imposed against the North Korean regime by the United States and other countries have done nothing to slow North Korea's quest for weapons of mass destruction.
He also said he's been skeptical of China's willingness to exert its influence over North Korea and convince Pyongyang to pull back from the brink.
But Harris said he's become ""cautiously optimistic"" following recent talks between Trump and Chinese President Xi Jinping.
Harris said North Korea's pursuit of an atomic arsenal and the long-range missiles to deliver nuclear weapons comes at the expense of the North Korean people, who are isolated and forced to live with a lifeless economy.
Despite the depravity, Harris said it's a ""hollow hope"" to think that North Koreans will rise up and topple Kim Jong Un.
Harris said Kim Jong Un is revered and considered a ""god king"" by many North Koreans.
In a show of military might, the United States has sent a massive amount of American weaponry to the region.
A group of American war ships led by the aircraft carrier USS Carl Vinson is in striking range of North Korea ""if the president were to call on it,"" Harris told the committee.
A United States missile defense system called Terminal High-Altitude Area Defense is being installed in South Korea.
Harris said he has adequate forces to ""fight tonight"" against North Korea if that were to become necessary.
But the admiral also said he lacks all the attack submarines he needs and has no capable defense against the thousands of artillery pieces North Korea has assembled near the Demilitarized Zone separating North and South Korea.
There are about 28,500 United States military personnel serving in South Korea.
Risquet also said the Cuban government had armed 270,000 people in the tense days of the Cuban missile crisis and were prepared to fight ""to the last bullet"" if the United States invaded.
His comments came at the close of a conference in Moscow on the 1962 crisis that included former officials of the United States and the Soviet Union and present officials of Cuba who were involved in the events.
Former United States officials, including Robert McNamara, who was secretary of defense in the administration of President John Kennedy, said they had been very surprised to learn about the large number of armed Cubans.
Some United States participants said they doubted that anything like 800,000 people would have died in a U.S. invasion.
Risquet said this total included both civilian and military casualties.
At the time of the crisis there were 42,000 Soviet troops in Cuba, mainly there to guard the 42 nuclear missile batteries that Moscow had built on the island.
The United States estimated previously that only 5,000 to 10,000 Soviets were there at the time.
Washington's discovery of the missiles sparked a confrontation that led the world to the brink of nuclear war.
Biden told two fundraising audiences in Seattle over the weekend that he expected world figures to test Obama early if he wins the election in two weeks.
McCain spent all day Tuesday in Democratic-leaning Pennsylvania, worth 21 Electoral College votes, before heading today into New Hampshire, a formerly reliable Republican state that Obama has made competitive this year.
In a region experiencing World Series fever, McCain underscored his argument by noting Obama had expressed support for both teams playing in the upcoming baseball championship.
Standing just miles north of Philadelphia, whose Phillies will represent the National League starting today against the American League champion Tampa Bay Rays, McCain noted Obama has identified himself with both teams while campaigning in their two politically important home states.
And Cuba in many ways finds itself in a predicament similar to the one it faced in 1962.
In the days after the missile crisis, Cuba felt alone, betrayed by the Soviets who agreed to a U.S. demand to withdraw the missiles without consulting Castro, unsure of where it stood, and still fearful that the United States might attack.
And there is no longer a Soviet protector to buffer it from the United States.
Castro must have felt more than a touch of deja vu last fall when former Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev announced the withdrawal of a training brigade -whose existence dates to the time of the 1962 crisis -from Cuba.
Once again Castro wasn't consulted, and once again it was what the United States wanted.
But Castro remains the Abominable Snowman in the furthest recesses of the Cold War icebox.
United States officials admit that the island is scarely a threat to United States security, but Cuba is still considered the most hostile of enemies.
There are no formal diplomatic relations, and President Bush recently signed legislation to make the trade embargo against Cuba even more stringent -at a time when the island economy is already in crisis.
Thirty years ago -concerned about Cuba's place in the socialist world and fearful that the United States would try a repeat of the 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion -Castro allowed the Soviets to install nuclear missiles on the island.
As Cuba's economy falters, Castro has repeatedly sounded the missile crisis themes of resistance and survival at all costs.
CELIA W DUGGER Herald Staff Writer Section: FRONT 1729 Words Page: 1A OpenURL Link CAMBRIDGE, Mass. -Twenty-five years ago this week, America and the Soviet Union came to the brink of a nuclear catastrophe.
Like Keystone Kops entrusted with nuclear missiles, the two greatest superpowers on Earth almost stumbled into the abyss.
After a quarter-century of study, innumerable books and a high-profile conference here last week at Harvard, most scholars agree that the crisis provides chilling proof of the fatal role accidents and misunderstanding can play in the nuclear era.
In the aftermath of President Kennedy's assassination, his handling of ""the missiles of October"" was often regarded as one of his greatest accomplishments.
He persuaded the Soviets to withdraw their missiles from Cuba and avoided a nuclear confrontation.
Kennedy's presidency,"" Graham T Allison wrote in his 1971 study of the crisis, Essence of Decision.
But in recent years, revisionist scholars have questioned whether the risks Kennedy took were too great and whether his management of the crisis was in fact prudent.
Public admissions Last Tuesday, for the first time, Soviet participants in the affair publicly explained their country's intentions in the crisis -and its bungling.
McGeorge Bundy, Kennedy's national security adviser, also speaking at Harvard's John F Kennedy School of Government last week, said Americans made their share of mistakes.
The crisis began on Oct., 1962, when Americans discovered that the Soviets were placing nuclear missiles in Cuba.
The photographic evidence, gathered by a U-2 spy plane, was conclusive.
Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev, who feared a United States invasion of Cuba and sought a step toward nuclear parity with America, saw the missiles as a way of deterring an invasion and doubling the number of Soviet missiles that could hit the United States.
They had overseen the failed Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961, a secret CIA-directed effort to destabilize Cuba's Fidel Castro, a military buildup in the Caribbean and a tightening of the economic embargo against Cuba, but they did not foresee that fear of invasion would prompt Khrushchev to take a nuclear risk.
On the advice of military leaders who told him that the Soviet Union could have the weapons in Cuba before the United States detected them, Khrushchev took the gamble.
A crucial error But the Russians who went to Cuba to install the missiles lengthened the odds of success.
They built sites that looked exactly like those in the Soviet Union, and then failed to camouflage them.
When the U-2 photographic evidence came in, the executive committee of the National Security Council, known as ExComm, began meeting secretly to plan a response.
Hawkish advisers pressed for a quick military attack on Cuba, taking out the missiles and getting rid of Castro at once.
But that strategy would have meant killing up to 20,000 Soviet troops in Cuba.
Others wanted President Kennedy to negotiate secretly with Khrushchev for removal of the missiles.
On Oct., he made a surprise announcement of the crisis on national television.
He believed that the blockade allowed room for flexible responses short of a military attack.
Where the president saw the blockade as a course of moderation, others have seen it as brinkmanship.
In the week before Kennedy went public on TV, he should have engaged in secret diplomacy with the Soviets, said Fedor Burlatsky, a Khrushchev adviser and speechwriter.
Once the larger strategy was set, smaller, but potentially provocative, mistakes and near-mistakes were made that could have led to disaster.
In the midst of the crisis, the CIA almost sent in a team of commandos as part of its ongoing plan to destabilize Castro.
But the White House learned of the plan by accident and canceled it, said Stanford history professor Barton Bernstein.
Another grave situation arose when Soviet submarines slipped into the area of the blockade.
The Defense Department warned the Soviets that small depth charges would be used to force the subs to surface.
Kennedy feared that the depth charges would lead to an unintentional war.
At least one Navy vessel did in fact drop a depth charge near a Soviet submarine in the area of the blockade, said Sagan, an assistant professor of political science at Stanford.
Sagan said that while Kennedy and his top civilian assistants carefully examined the logistical details on the shipping blockade, they didn't pay close attention to the submarine strategy.
The Soviets now say the shoot-down was a mistake made by a lower-level commander, but to the Americans it appeared then that the Soviet Union was preparing for battle.
Just as strange, that afternoon, an American U-2 accidentally strayed over the Soviet Union.
That evening, acting on the shoot-down of the U-2, the United States gave Khrushchev an ultimatum.
Either accept our pledge not to invade Cuba in exchange for your withdrawal of the missiles from Cuba, or get ready for a full-scale attack on Cuba.
The United States had several hundred thousand men ready to invade Cuba, McNamara told Congress in 1963.
The former secretary published a book on nuclear danger earlier this year, Blundering Into Disaster.
Given the difficulty of managing such a crisis, those who were involved in or studied the events of October 1962 stress the importance of avoiding crises in the first place.
But views about how best to do that are as diverse as approaches to the Cold War.
To Bundy, Kennedy's national security adviser, one of the keys is more honest communication between the superpowers.
In his view, glasnost, the new Soviet policy of greater openness, is a hopeful sign.
He believes the missile crisis was brought on in large part by a misunderstanding.
The Soviet Union secretly installed missiles in Cuba because its leaders expected a United States invasion of the island -but no such invasion was planned.
Others believe the United States and U.S.S.R. understood each other all too well.
It's not a case of miscommunication, it's a case of powers struggling over Cuba,"" Paterson said.
The lesson of the crisis is the importance of compromise on both sides, he said.
