Man‟s reason and spirit have often solved the seemingly unsolvable…There is no single key to peace, no…magic formulas… genuine peace must be a product of many nations, the sum of many acts.
It must be dynamic, not static, changing to meet the challenge of each new generation.
Signing that document [Nuclear Test Ban Treaty] was not a victory of one party over another…but a triumph of peace over war, of negotiation over faith, of faith over fear.
A term used by the United States to refer to her impasse with USSR over the latter‟s missiles deployment in Cuba.
Most of the literatures on Cuban missile crisis treated the negotiation process of the conflicting parties or the actors as “entities in themselves” trying to make good or cut deals appropriate for their respective parties.
Otomar observed that in order to fully grasp the negotiation dynamics with its challenges, an analyst must contextualize and conceptualize the whole process as a complex web of international war of power dynamics.
This means that the negotiation process must be seen as a continuum of balance of power.
This paper focuses on analyzing the negotiation process of this crisis.
Also I will establish the fact that both the distributive (i.e. hard tactics) and integrative negotiation styles operated intandem to avert the missile crisis.
The main objective of this paper was to show the dynamics of crisis management and the need to use „rational-cool-calm-self-belief diplomacy in the face of contending and provocative rhetoric‟s.
According to James , on October 14, 1962, two American reconnaissance planes flying over Cuba identify a construction of lunch sites at “Pinar del Rio in Western Cuba” (Blight, 2002, 9, Garthoff, 1988; Paul-Sampino, 2003; Martin, 2002; Fischer, 2001; Rajagopalan, 2000) for an installation of intermediate-range nuclear missiles capable of reaching United States.
However, due to lack of credible opposition leader, the operation failed.
In October 16, 1962 President Kennedy ordered the „quarantine‟ of Soviet missiles shipment to Cuba, and also demanded that all the missiles should be removed from Cuba.
In October 28, the Soviet dismantled and removed their missiles from Cuba while United States pledged to remove their „Jupiter‟ missiles from Turkey and Italy as well as calling off the invasion of Cuba.
However, during the crisis negotiation, the actors were overtly reduced to two –the US and Soviet Union, with Cuba as the „participant-observer‟ even though their territory was the environment or the context of the crisis.
Clearly, Khrushchev was not defending Cuba as he would have the world to believe.
According to Gilbert & Lauren international negotiations of crisis management is simply not enough to identify the “critical variables” rather to explain which variable is historically constant or changing with time (i.e. the purposes and objectives) by exploring the intellectual capacities of decision-makers to clearly articulate, delineate, and understand management techniques by considering the dynamics of inter-group and within group variations.
Negotiators, therefore, must understand that “the players” in conflicts usually starts off with zero – sum negotiation tactics and most often than not ends up with the collective search for creative alternatives after all options have been weighed.
Thus, in the latter stages of the Cuban missile crisis the integrative negotiation style influenced the “decisions and results eliminating any productive panic” (Gilbert & Lauren, 1980, 654) from the actions and inactions of the major players.
According to Druckman predatory or hard tactics could lead to competitions of both global and specific needs of parties.
However, Fisher & Ury the basic movements that exist in problem-Solving approach of resolving conflicts is moving parties from positions to global interests, that is focusing on the bigger picture not dwelling on parochial needs.
It is hoped that this paper will lend credence to integrative negotiations by helping to control the volatile social, economic, and political volcanoes of the world.
The parties are the actors or players who are involved in the negotiation process.
The primary conflicting parties, in the Cuban missiles crisis were Washington and Havana.
Thus, the Soviet Union became a secondary party to Havana, in the missiles crisis.
From this position therefore, the Soviet Union assumed direct control over the crisis and the subsequent negotiation process.
Thus the negotiation process of the Cuban missile crisis, directly involved the United States and the Soviet Union, with Cuba, becoming “the bargaining-chip” of the Soviet Union.
Negotiation at the early stages of the Cuban missile crisis was characterized by distributive negotiation tactics.
However, in the latter stages, the actors began to use the integrative negotiation style.
As a result most of the literatures treated the negotiation process of the crisis as either distributive or integrative.
This therefore, gives the impression of two separate processes of negotiation.
According to Harvard Business Essentials Series every initial negotiation stage has the tendency of making parties compete, in most cases over the distribution of a fixed sum of value.
This makes the parties to contend, thus any gain to one party was a loss for the other.
William Zartman calls the distributive negotiation process, the unilateral model.
He noted that the model is characterized by power-playing tactics, use of force and also the parties view negotiations through a tunnel vision.
This is a typical „move and countermove‟ between the United States and Soviet Union.
The objectives of the parties in the Cuban missile crisis formed the bases of their contentions.
This might have given the Soviet‟s offensive advantage which might equalized the power differentials between them and the United States.
Khrushchev‟s observation attests to this fact that “USSR does not accept America should be everywhere and to rule everywhere.
Also the evidence of ideological propagation is when McCone (the United States Director of Central Intelligence) articulated the two underlying objectives of United States global position on ideology.
HBES defines “where” to include the context, conditions and constraints under which actors of a negotiation process operated or are operating.
Fisher stated that the face-to-face confrontation between the two superpowers occurred on October 20, 1962 when President Kennedy ordered the naval blockade, whereas the Soviet‟s vessels were still advancing the blockade line.
It is important to note that United States regarded this move as a proposed deal by Moscow.
However, this information had been public in United States through the KGB (i.e. the Soviet‟s intelligence outfit) channels.
It is characterized by lofty and rigid aspirations of both sides with little apparent common ground.
It uses pressure, politics, or trickery in order to achieve party‟s goals.
The ultimate therefore, is to provoke a response from the other party, a more favorable Best Alternative to Negotiated agreement or find a Zones of Possible Agreement to reach a common ground, and compromise.
Another constraint was the two leaders does not want to appear “soft or weak” in the eyes of the hardliners or the conservatives in this hot-round-up negotiation.
For instance, Fisher and Rajagopalan observed that on October 27, 1962; Soviet and Cuban information was that United States was about launching an attack on Cuba; Soviet tankers then began to approach the blockade lines.
Besides, an American U-2 reconnaissance plane was shot down killing the pilot Major Rudolph Anderson Jr.
In addition, the speculation in United States was that, Soviet diplomats were destroying their sensitive documents in anticipation for a full scale war.
President Kennedy then invoked Defcon2 , this means the second-highest alert posture for enemy attack.
It was during this condition and constraint that Khrushchev communiqué to Kennedy for trade of Cuban missiles for Turkish United States Jupiter missiles.
Kennedy met Anatoliy Dobrynin, the Soviet Ambassador to United States to close the deal in camera.
Even though the existing literatures have treated distributive and integrative negotiation processes separately relative to the Cuban missile crisis, as if these processes are separate entities; realistically they are continuum.
To draw from Otomar, the initial stages of the negotiation was purely distributive where contentious tactics such as negotiating from position of strength, threatening and Boulware-ism took the center stage.
Also the negotiation was characterized by high emotions and use of force to achieve negotiated objectives.
For example, Fisher and James had both stated that the United States demanded a complete removal of the offensive weapons from Cuba under UN supervision.
She also established the fact that any attack on her would be considered as an attack by Soviet Union, which would be retaliated.
Furthermore, Fisher noted that the UN, under its Secretary-General U Thant, acted as the third-party by mediating between the three parties in October 26, 1962.
American ships will monitor Soviet vessels entering Cuba; Inspection of Soviet and Cuban vessels would be performed by a neutral country; and International Committee of Red Cross should be used in this regard.
However, Washington added that her air reconnaissance over Cuba will continued until she is assured of the total dismantling of the missile sites, and the removal of weapons of mass destruction.
Furthermore, the negotiation entered into an integrative phase and assumed a bilateral posture involving the two-superpowers.
Fisher noted that “during the last and decisive phase of the crisis the exchange between the two-superpower leaders was conducted exclusively through direct messages between Moscow and Washington.
According to HBES integrative negotiation is also called “win-win” or “collaborative” negotiation.
In this process parties seeks to cooperate to achieve maximum benefits by integrating their interests into an agreement while also competing to divide the value.
William Zartman, in his view calls integrative negotiation a joint solution negotiation model.
He further spells out some of the factors which make parties integrate or come to table.
Thus in the Cuban missile crisis, James noted that the Soviet Union saw the deployment of its missiles in Cuba under the nose of United States will increased their expansion in the Western Hemisphere, increased their power potential and prestige.
In addition, the prominence of balanced of power in present nuclear age could be attributed to the deterrence theory.
The destructive nature of the nuclear weapon and that there is no or limited defense against them, the only way to protect oneself militarily is to threaten to retaliate in the hope of deterring the other side from using these weapons.
Therefore, to prevent any hurting stalemate and nuclear holocaust, integrative negotiation became a „sine qua non‟ in averting the Cuban missile crisis.
In sum, from the above it is abundantly clear that, any peace-loving person in the world would opt for the integrative approach of negotiation to distributive process.
Generally, negotiation starts from distributive phase and ends with integrative phase.
However, it does not mean that the reverse order of this continuum could not occur in some cases of negotiations.
It is also essential to note that the crisis did not last for thirteen days as claimed widelye. from the time Washington discovered the construction of launching facilities for the Soviet medium-range missile in Cuba, to Khrushchev‟s formal agreement to withdraw, and Kennedy‟s pledge not to invade Cuba.
However, a consideration must be given to the second phase of the negotiation process which started from October 28 to November 20, 1962, which invariably culminated in the United States naval quarantine lifted and the special alert status of the military forces of the two countries ended.
Also, it is important to recognize that the perspectives of both United States and Soviet Union were shaped by the dynamics of the negotiation process.
On the other hand, the United States saw the Soviet missiles deployment in Cuba as bolstering their strategic military power and diplomatic-political strength, while at the same time the deterrence of United States attack on Cuba was at most a smoke-screen or secondary objective for the Soviet‟s.
Canadian Journal of Political Science / Revue canadienne de science politique, Vol.
