V.^j | Cuba, Castro and John F Kennedy O April 19, 1959, I met | for the first and only time the man who was to be the major foreignpolicy issue of the i960 Presidential campaign; who was destined to be a hero in the warped mind of Lee Harvey Oswald, President Kennedy’s assassin; and who in 1964 is still a major campaign issue.
It is safe to say that no other individual in the world has created such a conflict of opinion in the United States.
The opposing view, which I share, is that Castro is a dangerous threat to our peace and security— and that we cannot tolerate the presence of his communist regime 90 miles from our shores.
The primary evidence which caused me to reach this conclusion was provided by Castro himself in the conversation I had with him more than five yeass ago.
It was a Sunday afternoon, and there was nothing I wanted less to do than to go down to my Capitol office for a meeting with the new Cuban dictator.
But there were special circumstances which prompted me to schedule the appointment.
Castro had come to power in Cuba a little more than three months before.
He was now in Washington at the invitation of the American Society of Newspaper Editors.
Because his visit was unofficial, and because he had been making violent antiAmerican statements, President Eisenhower had declined to see him.
Since I had had considerable experience in dealing with Latin American problems and because they thought some special treatment might change Castro’s unfriendly attitude, our ambassador to Cuba, Philip Bonsai, and Secretary of State Christian Herter urged me to meet with him.
I agreed, on the condition that the two of us would talk alone, without members of his staff or mine present, and that there should be no photographs taken or other attempts made to exploit our conference for publicity purposes.
It seemed to me that until he demonstrated some intention of modifying his anti-American stand he should not be accorded the same treatment I would give to other visiting foreign officials.
As I told President Eisenhower later, he seemed to have that indefinable quality which, for good or evil, makes a leader of men.
He had a compelling, intense voice, sparkling black eyes, and he radiated vitality.
After 3V2 hours of discussion I summed up my impressions in this way — he looked like a revolutionary, talked like an idealistic college professor and reacted like a communist.
He gave an appearance of sincerity, but what he said followed a pattern all too familiar to me.
I had had conversations with many communist leaders abroad and in the United States.
The answers to questions came back almost parrotlike from them, as they now did from Castro.
A The people of Cuba don’t want free elections; they produce bad government.
I made no headway in attempting to convince him that international communism is more than just an economic and political idea and that its agents are dangerously effective in their ability to grasp power and to set up dictatorships.
At the conclusion of our conference I wrote a four-page secret memorandum, and sent copies to President Eisenhower, Secretary Herter and Allen Dulles, head of the Central Intelligence Agency.
In the weeks immediately after Castro left Washington, several spirited policy discussions on Cuba took place within the Eisenhower administration.
The majority view in the State Department was in sharp disagreement with my appraisal of Castro.
Most of the career foreign-policy experts argued vigorously that C \stro was “liberal” but that, despite some communist associations, he definitely was not a communist.
Their view prevailed over mine at the outset, and their recommendations were followed.
From that day to this, the lack of a firm and consistent policy toward Castro has caused the United States to accept a continuing series of defeats, permitting our avowed enemies to become entrenched in the Western Hemisphere.
He had come to power with the tacit support and encouragement of the majority of the foreign-policy experts in the State Department, as well as with the enthusiastic approval of powerful elements of the American press.
Vv. v;a ...... v%\< $m»‘ v . . *«s> •:•; ■ 2(96 O/fM, CASTRO AND JOHN F KENNEDY of Batista’s misrule, was in need of a revolution.
The mistake made by some of our gullible State Department officials and by certain influential columnists and editorial writers was that they failed to recognize the real problem we faced.
Our choice was not between Batista and somebody better, but between Batista and somebody far worse.
It was not long before President Eisenhower began to realize that the original appraisal of Castro was wrong.
Within months, bloody purges, illegal confiscations of property and Moscow-line attacks on the United States completely unmasked Castro and exposed him for what he really is.
By early i960 President Eisenhower reached the conclusion that Castro was an agent of international communism and a menace to peace in this hemisphere.
In a top-secret meeting in his office, at which I was present, he authorized the CIA to organize and train Cuban exiles for the eventual purpose of freeing their homeland from Castro’s communist rule.
Six months later, on October 21, i960, just four years ago, it was the Castro issue which forced me to make the most difficult and, as it turned out, the most costly decision of my political career.
The subject was to be foreign policy, an area in which most observers considered me to have the advantage because of my wider experience in that field.
But the headlines in the afternoon papers forced me to make a critical decision which put me at a serious disadvantage in discussing the major foreign-policy issue of the i960 campaign.
The issue was then, as it is in 1964, what should be American policy toward Castro’s communist government in Cuba.
For several weeks Kennedy had been criticizing our administration’s policy without making specific recommendations as to how it should be changed.
A few days earlier, in a speech before the American Legion Convention in Miami Beach, I had gained the initiative on the issue by calling for a quarantine of the Castro regime and setting forth a specific program to accomplish that objective.
And now, just before we were to debate this • issue face-to-face on television before 1 70 million voters, Kennedy counter-attacked.
In his statement he declared, “We must attempt to strengthen the non-Batista, democratic, anti-Castro forces in exile and in Cuba itself who offer eventual hope of overthrowing Castro.
At the time of the debate, however, and after checking with the White House, I had to proceed on the assumption that Kennedy had been briefed on the secret program. tne CvUban issue could well have been the decisive factor.
But I have never had any regrets about this decision, or any doubt that it was the only one I could make under the circumstances. pi ^HMtp #JiPw mm’mmm J i 8 H tually no support from our government/* As I finished reading the story, I realized the difficulty of the decision I had to make.
For months I had known that we had been doing exactly what Kennedy seemed to be advocating— supporting and training Cuban exiles so that they could free Cuba from communist control.
I was one of only three members of the President’s cabinet who had been briefed on it, and the irony was that I had been the strongest aacLmostpersi-ste-nt-ad voca£e*fprj;etTHE READERS DIGEST November I was faced with a heads-he-wins, tails-I-lose proposition.
If in the TV debate I were to reveal the existence of the training program and point out that I had been one of its strongest advocates, I would pull the rug out from under Kennedy’s position.
But if I did so, the project would be doomed, and also the lives of brave men, both inside and outside of Cuba, who were receiving training and assistance. ting up and supporting such a prcT gram.
President Eisenhower had instructed Allen Dulles, head of \ the CIA, to brief the Democratic candidate on all operations, including top-secret operations.
Security I I had only one choice^to-^fioLect had to oppose Kennedy on his position of tdvocating that the United States >penly aid anti-Castro forces inside and outside Cuba.
When the television debate was concluded, Kennedy emerged as the man who was advocating a “get-tough policy” toward Castro.
I was the man who was “soft” on Castro— the exact opposite of the truth.
Any number of factors could have made the difference in what was to ity line to ask if these briefings covered Cuba.
I was scheduled to make a foreignpolicy speech in Chicago the following week, and I had written Allen Dulles to ask that he brief me on some of the latest developments.
President Kennedy readily gave his approval; I had an appointment to meet with Dulles at six o’clock on the afternoon of the 19th.
I arrived there from the airport shortly before six, to find a message from the CIA that Dulles would be delayed for at least an hour.
The Bay of Pigs I had known and worked with Allen Dulles since the summer of 1947 when he was one of the advisers to the Herter Committee, of which I was a member.
The minute I saw him I realized that he was under great emotional stress.
Completely out of character for the smooth, cool professional I had seen handle so many difficult situations through the years, he answered, “I certainly would.
I had known, of course, that the invasion was in progress, but it never crossed my mind that it would be allowed to fail.
After the election, before President Kennedy took office in January, Dulles had briefed him completely on the training program.
The President-elect had indicated that he felt the program should go forward, and said he would follow through on it after his inauguration.
But, as had happened in the Eisenhower administration, a sharp difference of opinion about Castro developed among President Kennedy’s advisers.
His liberal advisers from the State Department and on his personal staff took the line that if American support of the invasion became known, world opinion would react unfavorably.
This group advised that the United States should either try to get along with Castro or find some other method for dealing with him.
President Kennedy finally overruled his soft-line advisers and decided to go forward with the plan.
But in the end the soft-liners won their point and, by last-minute compromises, doomed the operation to failure.
M ■ • • ' ' '■ ^ V , ■ ■ v . i* V ( y«.' • > ^ ■\*»v‘,Y w\'*V-V ( j .. iuV,* »* v.,A' , ' ; ‘-‘-1 2Q0 November the Western Hemisphere, they persuaded the President to curtail the original concept of the operation.
Two of the three Free Cuban air strikes designed to knock out Castro’s air force were canceled, depriving the invasion of air support.
We got the blame for intervening; we were denied the credit we would have received for winning; and Castro was more firmly entrenched than ever.
President Kennedy’s Reaction The next day, April 20, when I returned to my home after a visit to the Capitol, I found a note by the telephone, left by my 15-year-old daughter, Patricia.
Any time will be all right I have appointments with Dick Russell and with members of the Cuban Revolutionary Council, but otherwise my calendar is free this afternoon.” 1 told him that I would be at his office at four o’clock and would be available to see him at any time his schedule permitted.
At Last — The Truth About the Bay of Pigs,” The Reader’s Digest, September *64.
I hadn’t been in that historic oval room since I had said good-by to President Eisenhower there on January 19, three months before.
The President was standing at his desk talking with Vice President Johnson.
Shortly thereafter, Johnson left the room, and the President sat down in his famous rocking chair.
Talking to them and seeing the tragic expressions on their faces was the worst experience of my life.
KENNEDY 2 gr Kennedy did not try to hide his frustration, disappointment and fury over the failure of the operation.
Pacing around the room and using his down-to-earth Irish, rather than his Harvard vocabulary, he told me how disappointed he had been in the advice he had received.
Over and over again, he reiterated the fact that these assurances had been given to him.
He did not mention the fatal advice— given him by some of his liberal State Department and White House advisers — to cancel the two air strikes— and, in effect, destroy the plan.
Send American forces in to protect the lives and rights of the several thousand American citizens still living in Cuba.
I emphasized that I felt we must do whatever was necessary to rid Cuba of Castro and communism.
Kennedy heard me out without comment, and then replied, “Both Walter Lippmann (who had recently had an interview with Khrushchev) and Chip Bolden (who had been our ambassador to Moscow) have reported that Khrushchev is in a very cocky mood at this time.
If their appraisal is correct, he may believe this is the time to move against us and he might seize upon any action on our part in Cuba as an excuse for doing so.
Our conversation then turned briefly to Laos, where American support of a neutralist regime seemed to be leading to an eventual communist takeover.
I told President Kennedy I thought that in both Laos and Cuba the important thing was to take some affirmative action, including, if necessary, at least a commitment of American air power.
His next remark underlined how the failure to come to grips with communism in one part of die world has weakened our position in every other part of die world.
I want to tell you that I will publicly support you to the hilt if you make such a decision in regard to either Laos or Cuba, and I will urge all other Republicans to do likewise.
I realize that some political observers say you might risk political defeat in 1964 if either the Cuban or Far East crises involves an American armed forces commitment.
His reply, in the light of what happened three years later, was prophetic, although I do not think he intended it that way.
I assumed that President Kennedy foresaw that he might now have to take risky military action.
And with the Bay of Pigs failure fresh in his mind, he realized that another such defeat could be disastrous for him politically in 1964.
He took me out the side door to one of the White House cars which he had ordered to be sent for me, and which was waiting in the driveway on the South Lawn.
There’s something about being an author which really builds the reputation of a political figure.
As he walked away, his head bowed, his hands jammed characteristically into his pockets, he seemed literally to be carrying the weight of the world on his shoulders.
As I watched his weary, stooped figure, usually so erect and buoyant, disappear into the terrible loneliness of the White House office, I had an overwhelming sense of how depressed and discouraged he must have felt.
I realize that political figures are not supposed to experience ordinary emotions— particularly where their political opponents are concerned.
But I can truthfully say that, in this darkest hour of his political career, my heart went out to my friend, Jack Kennedy, the man who had come to Congress the same year I did, 14 years before.
Because Cuba is a classic example of how not to conduct foreign policy in dealing with the communists, it is essential that we see where we went wrong in the past in order to determine what policy we should adopt in the future.
First, when a decision has been made to commit American prestige, we must be prepared to commit an adequate amount of American power.
The United States should always have a concern for the opinions of our friends in other nations.
But, as the strongest nation in the world, it is our responsibility to lead, not to follow, the forces charged with the defense of freedom.
In the Kremlin, Khrushchev must have watched with interest America’s inept and fainthearted efforts to free Cuba.
Whatever his impression may have been, it is clear from the entire chain of events that our failure at the Bay of Pigs led direcdy to the Soviet decision to move into the Western Hemisphere in force, with both men and missiles.
The history of this infamous and secret action by Khrushchev has been recorded elsewhere,* but it is perhaps instructive to note that once again the powerful State Department clique and the “liberal” members of the White House staff chose to ignore warnings, chiefly by the CIA and by Sen.
Kenneth Keating, who repeatedly stated that Soviet forces of men and missiles were being landed in Cuba.
The CIA laid on the President’s desk photographs of Soviet missiles in place in Cuba.
The photos had been taken by the CIA’s U -2 planes, and the evidence could not be brushed aside.
K C }'.' had sccredy moved medium-range ballistic missiles and jet bombers into Cuba.
He ordered a blockade, and demanded the removal of existing missiles, with on-site inspection to make certain that the job was done.
People, not only in this country but throughout the free world, applauded this forceful commitment of American strength to the defense of freedom and the cause of peace.
By finally calling Khrushchev’s bluff, President Kennedy assured his own place in history as the man who made nuclear blackmail an obsolete form of diplomacy.
But, again, the tragic history of American indecisiveness repeated itself.
The persistent clique of advisers who had stayed Kennedy’s hand at the Bay of Pigs began at once to nibble away at the new strong policy.
They insisted that the whole dispute be turned over to the United Nations for negotiation and settlement.
By convincing the President that he should back away from the strong course of action he had initially outlined, they enabled the United States to pull defeat out of the jaws of victory.
Shiploads of Soviet arms have continued to pour into Cuba — until today, except for the United States and Canada, the island is the strongest military power in the Western Hemisphere.
At an informal news conference, which I held on November 21, the questions were concerned chiefly with the visit of President Kennedy, who was scheduled to arrive in Dallas the following day.
One of the questioners pointed out that considerable opposition had developed to some of the President’s programs and that there might be some demonstrations against him and Vice President Johnson, who would be in the party.
I urged, in a statement to the press which I later repeated on television, that the President and Vice President be shown the respect to which their offices entitled them.
This is the way I learned the news of President Kennedy’s assassination.
I asked the cab driver to take me to my apartment rather than to my office.
I called j JEdgar Hoover, in Washington, and asked him wMf information he had.
He told me that a Lee Harvey Oswald, known to the FBI as a member of the pro-Castro Fair Play for Ctiba Committee, was t he alleged ass a ssin.
Edwin A Walker and had been restrained by his wife from making an attempt on my life as wellj, \Vhat brought him to this con /dition is still unknown.
But certainly one of the major factors which warped his mind and drove him to this terrible deed was his contact with communism generally, and with Castro’s fanatical brand of communism in particular.
Fidel Castro, therefore, proved to ibe the most momentous figure in * John F Kennedy’s life.
It was Castro who provided the major foreignpolicy issue in Kennedy’s campaign for the Presidency; it was Castro who brought him to the lowest point of his career, at the Bay of Pigs; it was Castro who supplied the opportunity for Kennedy’s greatest act of leadership as President, during the blockade; and, finally, Castro was an in direc t caus^Cthejr a gic ’snuffing out cT^J^ji_Kemied a time when, by reason of experience, added to his keen intelligence, his great vision and vitality, he was coming into the most productive period of his leadership of the nation.
Cuba, along with Vietnam, is the major foreignpolicy issue of the 1964 Presidential campaign, as it was in i960.
Precisely because it symbolizes our entire approach to the menace of communism, our entire approach to foreign policy.
The last four years have seen the greatest series of foreign-policy failures of any comparable period in our history.
In Europe, the Grand Alliance is in a shambles, with several of our allies refusing to support the United States in our policy toward Latin America and Asia.
In Germany, the Berlin Wall stands as a grim monument to American weakness and indecision in the face of a flagrant communist challenge.
In Asia, Vietnam is only the most recent and most shocking of a series of foreignpolicy disasters that has reduced American prestige to an all-ume low in that part of the world.
In countries scattered around the world, acts of mobs descending on American embassies, stoning our representatives and tearing down the flag have become commonplace.
We have been humiliated, frustrated, outguessed and outmaneuvered at every turn.
Communism isn’t changing; it isn’t sleeping; it isn’t relaxing; it is, as always, plotting, scheming, working, fighting.
There is strong support in the State Department and in the administration for Senator Fulbright’s view that Castro is not a danger but just a nuisance, and that we should be more flexible and more conciliatory in our policies toward the Soviet Union and other communist countries.
Those who urge a more flexible response to communism point out that there are difficulties in the communist bloc.
There is the trouble that the Soviet Union is having with its satellites in Eastern Europe, whose people are overwhelmingly against their communist government.
And there is the fact that communism, economically, has not been working in Soviet Europe or in Communist China or in Cuba or in the satellite countries.
Putting these developments together, those who formulate our foreign policy say that the world situation has changed in our favor.
Noting the test-ban treaty, the sale of wheat to the Soviet Union and a less belligerent attitude by Khrushchev, they argue that the cold war is thawing and that a new period of accommodation with the communists is in order.
Thousands of young people from non-communist countries are today being trained in the arts of subversion— from the staging of riots to guerrilla tactics.
In the bloodletting in Southeast Asia, Cyprus, the Congo, Yemen, British Guiana and in other areas, communists are direcdy or indirectly involved.
While the danger of destruction by total war has gone down, the danger of defeat without total war has gone up.
Those who urge that we seek an “accommodation” with the communists fail to realize that when the communist leaders talk softly they are increasing their subversive and revolutionary activities.
This is the situation with which the United States is presently confronted.
It is a situation which calls for realistic thinking about communist strategy and tactics, and for a new policy to meet the threat that faces us.
We must understand that the communist threat is worldwide, and if communism takes over in one country the tremors are felt clear around the world.
I completely reject the idea that there are so-called peripheral areas, collateral areas— like Cuba and Vietnam— that are not important.
All the world looks on and sees that we do nothing to help our neighbors who are enslaved by a communist dictator.
At this critical period, we must make up our minds that there cannot be one further retreat any place in the free world.
We must have the military strength, the economic programs and the political-action programs to resist any further retreat.
Rather than a policy of flexibility, of softening, of conciliation, we must have a strong and determined policy.
We must let those in the target nations know that the non-communist world has had enough of this continued encroachment, and that we are now going to stand firm.
It is time for us to put an end to this disgraceful, self-defeating behavior.
It is time to stand firm —and then move forward— in Cuba, in Vietnam and in any other area where freedom is denied or threatened by the forces of world communism.
